GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


P7^ 


P7^ 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


—  4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 


24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


?^7^ 


7^^ 


7^7^ 


7^^ 


7^^ 


75^7^ 


7^^7=^ 


7^^ 


75^^ 


?5i^7^ 


75^ 


7^^ 


^5^ 


^  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  S 

55^ 


^E 


1^ 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  n 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


■ 


f 


4 


'A. 


:  -  iti 


l  i 

'iv/, 

V  ’  n?i 


.  ■*  f*  . 


>  '/..i  4  ;  '.•.lAV/  .V- 

>•.>*!/  trt 


GREAT  BOOKS 
.  "OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


ROBERT  MAYN^^AO^HUTCHINS,  £4?/tTf^  kUtCffm 


»— O^i 


Uii  I  X. 


r6. 


':^j 


0'^  f:  yr  ^OF^BMY’ 
C0^f'.KSICUS 
KSnBS. 


<  V 


S' 


4-4’  -U. 

*  ^  '  t  > 

*H  *  <#  *  ♦  ^  '  % 

‘  » - 


3^ 


\.;  ->'>5 


^  ^  l.int  |l,i,„„„y  !>■»,■  i^inj  . 

ADUa^ 

8440^  «0(jin'tt*ia(((ti^^,  ■ s<  , , 
“-Mcsli  1..  ,AMiui«w<«*Bia8iQ>iir,)ci«^  .ix  ^ 

'  Cis^w^vs-  ^  ^  .f[^  OakHi  jf.  Jt  tl^c>^.  yUfi^  .5 
Bmxxvav,  £»a«Nr 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CH7EF 


i6, 

PTOLEMY 

COPERNICUS 

KEPLER 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskinb, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


2X009  TAHXO 
QJXOW  MiIHT2HW  HHT  90 


vi\  5ioTiQa  ,2Hihdtuh  qxahyam  Txaaox 


YMSIOT^ 


.HHJOA  «3MlTaoM 

;av!aziiH  raiol  .WAHAMoufl  ttooZ  .ahaQ  wojJHHDVusxg  x;xai.Vt\iK  n\4w»i^ 

.viaiioG  haV  .oA^HOg  .|,HTO2o|_,i/iHO\3JaiaM  flaciviAXHiA  ,rauA^  .H  ainajiAjD 

JOoaauM  hetjaW  .zaduJ  . J  X  ,;taAj3  .a  .a  A  •.u«vv»A«wO  WhMi\»a 
xoifta  w\\w»y/a  ,va'»xx)a6  edaojaW 


^1^  ^1^  %|^  %If 


The  Almagest,  by  Ptolemy 

On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  by  Nicolaus  Copernicus 

Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy: 
IV  and  V.  The  Harmonies  of  the 
World:  v,  by  Johannes  Kepler 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNIC  A,  INC. 
CHICAGO  .  LONDON  ■  TORONTO 


«A*  o>  «]>  %]> 


The  Almagest:  I-V 

Copyright,  1938,  1939,  1948,  by  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

On  The  Revolutions  Of  The  Heavenly  Spheres 
Copyright,  1939,  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Epitome  Of  Copernican  Astronomy:  TV  and  V 
Copyright,  1939,  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 


r 


t 


Copyright  in  the  united  states  of  America,  1952, 

BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


Copyright  1952.  Copyright  under  international  copyright  union  by 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.  AlL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER  PAN  AMERICAN 
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 
* 

The  Almagest,  p.  1 
By  Ptolemy  (Claudius  Ptolemaeus) 

Translated  by  R.  Catesby  Taliaferro 

* 

Introduction,  Symbols,  and  Abbreviations,  and  a 
Short  Bibliography  to  Copernicus  and  Kepler,  p.  481 

* 

On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  p.  505 
By  Nicolaus  Copernicus 
Translated  by  Charles  Gleim  Wallis 

* 

Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy:  IV  and  V,  p.  845 
The  Harmonies  of  the  World:  V,  p.  1009 
By  Johannes  Kepler 
Translated  by  Charles  Glenn  Wallis 


rtv  ‘  -  ••»  >c. 


^T^A:iTy.oo  vihsiav.xo 

♦ 


I  .q  ^TaauiLKaA  aiiT 
(3ii9xsr/T9fo)4  BuibuiilO)  '{ni^IotH  ntA 
oiTolflilijT  .H  ^<5 

♦ 

XI  baa  ,arioitxjiv9idcfA  baa  .alodarcH  ^aoDoub(r^iaJ 
I8i^  .q  >i9fq»>l  baa  fUJohnsqoD  oi  yriqxiigoUdia  iioHS 

♦ 


^  , 


60o  .q  ,8aHaxiq8  yjv!3ya3H  anr  ao  szoi'TJjoyaH  slut  zO 
auoiinaqoO  ai/x^Iooi/l 
ailliiV/  flfl  ilO  a^hfiriO  ^  b  \nkuoVt 

* 

5^8  .q  ,V  bnxi  VI  :YMozoaTgA  ZADiMManuO  ao  aMOTiaS 
GOOI  .q  ;ajao7/  sht  ao  aaiz^waAH  anT 
lolqsAl  jbeflflx^ifoL  yil 
ailb;W  eoIix^riO  k>io\iiXtotT 


-  ♦ 


4 


:4V/ 


\  .  .  V.  Ji:  !• 

>>  r  Ri*i 

•  ter  IW3.  Co^v  iN:i  • 

'  aw%^  '=v<«u'v#. 


.M>:«  l?S3, 


rv.t  ?B*nRT  VMOK  HT  ' 
,  wiVKr  i*an  uiJciucAtr 

i-'IA  >i0.^  *• 


Ptolemy 

THE  ALMAGEST 


t  '  ^  - 

'  iJvVf 


V 


(5 


1 


V  * 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Ptolemy,  a.d.  c.100-c.178 


The  life  of  Claudius  Ptolemaeus  is  almost  en¬ 
tirely  unknown  despite  his  fame  as  an  as¬ 
tronomer  and  geographer.  What  little  can  be 
said  of  his  personal  history  has  to  be  pieced  to¬ 
gether  from  indications  in  his  writings,  two 
ancient  scholia,  and  brief  notices  by  much  later 
writers,  some  of  them  Arabian.  From  these  it 
appears  that  Ptolemy  was  born  at  Ptolemais 
Hermii,  a  Grecian  city  of  the  Egyptian  The- 
baid;  even  this  is  not  certain,  since  another 
early  source  gives  his  birth-place  as  Pelusium. 
His  work  is  traditionally  associated  with  Alex¬ 
andria,  but  according  to  one  scholium,  he  de¬ 
voted  his  life  to  astromony  and  lived  for  forty 
years  at  Canopus,  about  fifteen  miles  east  of 
the  capital.  Ptolemy  himself  notes  that  he 
made  his  observations  “in  the  parallel  of  Alex¬ 
andria.^^  The  dates  of  his  birth  and  death  are 
also  uncertain.  His  observations  recorded  in 
the  Almagest  extend  from  a.d.  127  to  151;  the 
Arabic  writers  claim  that  he  lived  to  the  age  of 
seventy-eight;  from  this  evidence  it  is  inferred 
that  Ptolemy^s  life  covered  the  first  three 
quarters  of  the  second  century  and  the  reigns 
of  Trajan,  Hadrian,  Antoninus  Pius,  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Aurelius.  There  seems  to  be  no  basis  for 
the  claim  once  made  that  he  was  related  to  the 
royal  house  of  the  Ptolemies. 

From  his  writings  it  is  evident  that  Ptolemy 
knew  well  the  work  of  his  predecessors,  and 
most  of  what  is  now  known  about  ancient 
astronomy  owes  its  preservation  to  him. 
He  was  particularly  indebted  to  Hipparchus 
(c.  130  B.C.),  “that  enthusiastic  worker  and 
lover  of  truth, whom  Ptolemy  considered 
his  master.  From  his  own  observation  he  was 
able  to  add  to  the  records  compiled  by  prior 
astronomers;  he  increased  by  several  hundred 
stars  the  list  drawn  up  by  Hipparchus.  His 
discoveries  are  said  to  have  been  inscribed  on 
pillars  erected  in  the  temple  of  Serapis  at 
Canopus. 


Ptolemy^s  fame  as  an  astronomer  rests  chief¬ 
ly  upon  the  Almagest.  This  work  was  originally 
Imown  as  The  Mathematical  Composition^  but 
after  it  had  come  to  be  used  as  a  text  in  as¬ 
tronomy,  it  was  called  The  Great  Astronomer  to 
distinguish  it  from  a  collection  known  as  The 
Little  Astronomer.  The  Arabs  called  it  “The 
Greatest,  prefixing  the  article  al  to  the  Greek 
megistej  and  ever  since  it  has  been  known  as 
the  Almagest. 

In  addition  to  his  great  work,  Ptolemy  com¬ 
posed  many  shorter  books  dealing  with  the 
heavens.  In  his  Hypothesis  on  the  Planets  he 
provided  a  summary  of  part  of  the  Almagest 
and  a  brief  statement  of  the  principal  theories 
explaining  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 
He  drew  up  a  list  of  annual  sidereal  phenomena 
and  also  a  chronological  table  of  Assyrian,  Per¬ 
sian,  Greek,  and  Roman  kings  for  use  in  reck¬ 
oning  the  lapse  of  time  between  an  event  and 
a  given  fixed  date.  The  two  astrological  writ¬ 
ings,  the  Tetrabiblon  (or  Quadripartitum)  and 
the  Centiloquium^  are  usually  attributed  to 
Ptolemy,  although  their  authenticity  has 
sometimes  been  doubted.  Of  his  other  mathe¬ 
matical  works,  the  most  important  are  the 
Harmonica,  a  treatise  on  music,  and  the  Optics, 
which  is  apparently  the  first  recorded  attempt 
at  a  theory  of  refraction  of  luminous  rays 
through  media  of  different  densities. 

After  the  Almagest,  Ptolemy’s  most  impor¬ 
tant  work  is  his  Guide  to  Geography,  the  most 
comprehensive  and  scientific  work  of  antiquity 
on  the  subject.  It  consists  largely  of  a  tabula¬ 
tion  of  places  with  their  latitude  and  longitude, 
but  it  also  contains  an  estimate  of  the  size  and 
extent  of  the  “inhabited  world”  and  a  discus¬ 
sion  of  map-making.  The  Guide  came  to  be  for 
geography  what  the  Almagest  was  for  astrono¬ 
my,  and  until  well  into  the  Renaissance,  Ptol¬ 
emy  was  hardly  less  celebrated  as  a  geographer 
than  as  an  astronomer. 


IX 


MTOK  j/smviAmxmi 

STI.o-OOf.o  .a.A  ^YMajoTH 


-With  'ijrnr>firnj>^  n«  >.£  orniil  a^rrreFci^n. 

■  >/;7^  Aio^  >.i{iT  noqi/ yl 

iui-i  ,.\oV.VAOc\tWv)  WvUM«sAVo\f.  fiv/onA 

-br.  iU  i.  ?p.  bf>an  <kI  oi  snioo  bwi  ii 
ol  rvi\\\>x\Ks\\9,k  >>^iVv)  j«\T  |t.»llno  b/iw  ji  ^xnionoi) 
aA'V  ?.i;  iVNonA  fioi1f>')I(oo  «  flidil  Ji 
f)iIT‘*  jj  f)9llij'>  Riijiik  ailT  ,*t3Wtyw)T^^.k  ^UiA 

Aooit)  oifi  ]\\  jloijiji  9di  '\dB4iiis'jiO 

fee  nv/oii^f  Hail  Ji  e-jiiU  love  hria 

-moo  ,2lioY/  inarij^  eiif  a)  aoiJibba  al 

Silt  liiJrv/  ^iiiksl)  esiooef  istiOiiH  Yaexn  bsaoq 
9/1  Bhiu  VI  hM  m>  ai/f  nl  .arisvao/l 

9i(j  to  ititq  lo  -nfi/rr/mja  r.  bsbivuiq 
aoiiosrlj  leql-jifncj  sHt  l<i  tiismstete  lohd  a  bna 
.HJiibod  yfnr/Hsrf  odi  to  nv)itu/n  sdl  j^niaialq/s 

floomo/r^.lq  liiOisbiB  li;anital(}  J?.il  a  qu  wsib  sH 
•ryi  tflmx>cA  ]u  oldaJ  iaoi^jiVoaoido  a  rvela  bna 
•^*>91  Hi  s«ii  lot  Bj^niil  fi/uiiofl  biie  j/iaia 

bfi/*.  Jiisvr*  nh  noewtsd  sffiij  to  o^qal  orfj  }£|nino 
^h//  U-H^wienba  ov/t  silT  .stab  bs/ft  novi^  a 
Ijna  (4«\5V5i'U)q‘nVvr»!50  lo)  not6it\tnh'T  odt  <8311/ 
oj  f>sJijdiiJt/:  ybaiiai/  sift  .iitvs'niv^VibtBO  silJ 
p-iifl  yaivitirMlJuii  lis/fi  /l^uodJlji  .yniolot^ 
-oilJaiii  io*i.io  pjil  to  .boJdiJoL)  as^kI  HsiiiiJsnioft 
Slit  sij;  in/vi lOi'faii  Jrio/fi  sift  ,pdiov7  laaiJ^uii 
,6  o  j<\0  sflj  bna  ^vi^um  no  sftiJr.oii  a  ,aDircom*U)U 
JqAiottii  f)sb*i<i09i  teif)  silt  yijAsiaqcin  ai  iloiri  // 
eyfti  ai/oninnif  to  noiJaintsi  to  yioo/lt  a  ta 
.Bsiti^Asb  tAsisIiih  to  ailioin  jf^woidj 
-loqmi  tao/A  B'y/nsiot^  sift  tsjiA 

Jho/u  S/It  oJ  eirf  ti  Avm  Jnat 

yJiiAwtaa to  ;liow  ojtitifsij>B  bna  sYiHAodoiqrrw^ 
-ftiodat  r.  lo  vls^ial  atp-iHiios  tl  .t*>oidua  silt  no 
,9bnti3;inl  baa  sbutital  li^/lt  dtiw  esoalq  to  nuit 
biift  ssiB  silt  to  stii/riiJas  na  a/iiatiiuo  Ofela  ti  iud 
-ftiisaib  a  l>nft  '’bho77  boticfailni**  oilt  to  tnst/s 
lot  od  oi  s/AftO  s/lT  .3Ar7fftm-(|ani  lo  noia 
-OiioiJP.ft  lot  a:\v  V.s\voin\k  0/lt  tft/l//  X/l<I<rt3f>03 
tSSA/isaiansH  silt  c^iiii  ii  i?/  liJnw  i>fiij  ,vu: 
isnqin^^js:.  .•:  •  : !  stindslss  p.psI  ylbim!  fe«v/  yras 
•i^/nt'/ioiJba  lift  HK  iiii/lt 


-ifs  tpoxiilft  fei  ftjjyj'./nslot^l  ai/ibAidO  to  stil  aiiT 
oa  fife  s/fiiif  sjiqssb  nv/ondnu  yfsiit 
od  HP.')  olttil  tJtflW  .is/fqfei3093  bfiii  ismonoit 
-ot  Ijossiq  sd  ot  pud  y*:'  ■  id  Ifenriinoff  Hid  to  bi/yg 
o7/t  ,83rut;i7/  aid  iii  *^nuiJc>ibni  ruoil  isdtsj 
lojaldoum  yd  asoili^A  isiid  bna  .feil*id'>a  Jnsioiia 
ti  jas/fi  Aioi'^I  ./iridKiA  Aioih  to  sisiiv  ,8TsJhw 
eianislot^  ta  mod  e«v/  vcnsloj*!  taiij  aiasciqa 
-odT  oa/tqv^S  stH  to  ytin  rifei /SiO  ft  ,iiimsH 
isdJonft  ssAiB  ,nrpJiso  ton  ai  tid)  novs  ;biad 
.fnuhuh'l  ea  softlq-rft'iiJ  aid  asvi^  ssiuoa  yhfts 
-zsl  A  ilti?/  bstftisoHife  yllfenoitibint  -•  ;fiov7  aiH 
-ob  sd  .£niiiiod?)«  siiu  i>t  aiiibiv^osa  tird  ^aiibaa 
ytiot  lot  bsvil  biTK  yno/riOijHft  ot  slil  >i/l  bsiov 
to  lafes  Bsli/n  nssJtit  tDuda  ta  ai^y 

sd  tftdt  gotoA  tfsHinid  y/ndot^  .fiiliq/io  sdt 
-zsi/.  to  Islbiiftq  sflt  rfi'*  Hfioitfevis^io  aiil  obani 
sift  dtasf)  baa  rft’iid  aid  to  arUfeb  jdT  ''.ahbaa 
id  bsbioosi  anoik^Yishflo  8/11  niatioonu  oala 
edt ;  Idi  ot  T£*I  .a.  A  jnoit  b/isj/.  *  sdt 

to  s^ft  sdt  ot  bsvil  ed  tedt  cniftls  feisthw  oid/nA 
bsiiotiii  ai  ti  soAslivs  Hbit  moil  ;J/f3ls-ytnsv9a 
ssi/ft  tffi/l  odt  l.'Oisvro  stil  e'y/nsIrt^F  tail! 
feiisisi  snt  bap.  yintnso  bno‘)o<  o/ft  to  aistiawp 
-lid/:  bnfi  '.urJaidn/.  ./udibnli  .n/jhnTto 
lot  aiftftd  on  Sif  ot  e/nssa  oisdT  .aiiilsii/A  auo 
sdt  ot  Lstidsi  aav/  ad  ii’dj  abam  souo  mi /do  arit 
.ftsijiislotd  fi.dt  to  oajo/1  Leyoi 
y/nslot^  tftdt  Jiialdvs  ei  ti  tanitir//  -^iil  men'i 
baa  .aioepsssfisiq  aid  to  allow  odt  ilav/  wo/ui 
tnaioAR  tnodft  nv/ofral  won  ai  tadv/  to  taom 
./ui/l  ot  aoiaavisaoiM.  eti  asv/o  ymo/ioitsft 
^lidsift/jqiH  ot  bstdobni  vIir.liJMiti/xi  feBW  aH 
bnii  isiiov/  DitaftiHudtiis  tiidt'*  ,(.o.a  OTd  .;>) 
bsiahiaiioo  y/nslot^l  /noilv/  '\iJtrnt  to  isvol 
Hftv/  sd  fioitijvisttdo  fiv/o  -id  inoi"i  .istaiMii  aid 
loiiq  yd  bsliq/noi  afno  )*n  sdt  ot  bias  ot  olda 
boibaud  Iftiovaa  y<]  l>oeftsisr!i  sd  ;8iomofloitaii 
pill  .eJiirioiftqqiU  yd  qu  nwaib  tail  adt  Pii^ta 
110  bs<liiS8i:i  li'xxl  ovfefl  ot  bifta  oift  asiiuv^srib 
tii  aiqino^  to  ylq/nst  sdt  ni  iiot^ms  eiftfliq 

.ai/qonftO 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  ix 

Introduction  1 

Abbreviations  4 

Bibliography  4 

BOOK  ONE 

1 .  Preface  5 

2.  On  the  Order  of  the  Theorems  6 

3.  That  the  Heavens  Move  Spherically  7 

4.  That  also  the  Earth,  Taken  as  a  Whole, 

is  Sensibly  Spherical  8 

5.  That  the  Earth  is  in  the  Middle  of  the 

Heavens  9 

6.  That  the  Earth  has  the  Ratio  of  a 

Point  to  the  Heavens  10 

7.  That  the  Earth  Does  Not  in  any  Way 

Move  Locally  10 

8.  That  There  Are  Two  Different  Prime 

Movements  in  the  Heavens  12 

9.  On  the  Particular  Notions  14 

10.  On  the  Size  of  Chords  in  a  Circle  14 

11.  Table  of  Chords  21 

12.  On  the  Arc  Between  the  Tropics  24 

13.  Preliminaries  to  the  Spherical  Proofs  26 

14.  On  the  Arcs  Between  the  Equator  and 

the  Ecliptic  29 

15.  Table  of  Obliquity  31 

16.  On  Ascensions  in  the  Right  Sphere  31 

BOOK  TWO 

1.  On  the  General  Position  of  the  In¬ 
habited  World  34 

2.  Given  the  Magnitude  of  the  Longest 

Day,  How  the  Arcs  on  the  Horizon 
Intercepted  by  the  Equator  and  the 
Ecliptic  are  Given  34 

3.  How,  with  the  Same  Things  Given, 

the  Height  of  the  Pole  is  Given,  and 
Conversely  36 

4.  How  One  is  to  Calculate  at  What 
Places,  When,  and  How  Many  Times, 

the  Sun  Comes  to  the  Zenith  38 

5.  How,  from  Things  Explained,  the  Ra-  ' 

tios  of  the  Gnomons  to  their  Equinoc¬ 
tial  and  Tropic  Shadows  at  Noon  are 
Found  ‘  38 


6.  Exposition  of  the  Properties  of  Each 


Parallel  40 

7.  On  the  Co-ascensions  of  the  Ecliptic 
and  the  Equator  in  the  Oblique  Sphere  44 

8.  Table  of  Ascensions  by  10®  52 

9.  On  Particular  Consequences  of  the 

Ascensions  56 

10.  On  the  Angles  Formed  by  the  Ecliptic 

and  the  Meridian  57 

11.  On  the  Angles  Formed  by  the  Ecliptic 

and  the  Horizon  60 

12.  On  the  Angles  and  Arcs  Made  by  the 

Ecliptic  with,  and  on,  the  Circle 
through  the  Poles  of  the  Horizon  63 

13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by 

Parallels  or  Latitudes  69 

BOOK  THREE 

1.  On  the  Yearns  Magnitude  77 

2.  Table  of  the  Sun’s  Regular  Movement  84 

3.  On  the  Hypotheses  Concerning  Regu¬ 
lar  and  Circular  Movement  86 

4.  On  the  Apparent  Irregularity  or 

Anomaly  of  the  Sun  93 

5.  On  the  Examination  of  Particular  Sec¬ 
tions  of  the  Anomaly  96 

6.  Table  of  the  Sun’s  Anomaly  102 

7.  On  the  Epoch  of  the  Sun’s  Mean 

Course  103 

8.  On  Calculating  the  Sun  104 

9.  On  the  Inequality  of  Solar  Days  104 


BOOK  FOUR 

1.  From  What  Kind  of  Observations  an 

Inquiry  into  the  Moon  Must  be  Con¬ 
ducted  108 

2.  On  the  Moon’s  Periods  of  Time  109 

3.  On  the  Moon’s  Regular  Movements 

in  Detail  112 

4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the 

Moon  114 

5.  That,  in  the  Case  of  the  Simple  Hy¬ 

pothesis  of  the  Moon,  both  the  Hy¬ 
pothesis  of  Eccentricity  and  of  the 
Epicycle  Produce  the  Same  Appear¬ 
ances  120 


CONTENTS 


xii 

6.  Demonstration  of  the  Moon^s  First 

and  Simple  Anomaly  123 

7.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Moon^s  Mean 

Movements  of  Longitude  and  Anom¬ 
aly  134 

8.  On  the  Epoch  of  the  Moon’s  Mean 

Movements  of  Longitude  and  Anom¬ 
aly  134 

9.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Moon’s  Mean 

Latitudinal  Movements  and  their 
Epochs  135 

10.  Table  of  the  Moon’s  First  and  Simple 

Anomaly  139 

11.  That  the  Quantity  of  the  Moon’s  A- 

nomaly  as  Given  by  Hipparchus  did 
not  Differ  because  of  the  Dissimilarity 
in  Hypotheses,  but  because  of  the 
Calculations  139 

BOOK  FIVE 

1.  On  the  Construction  of  the  Astrolabe  143 

2.  On  the  Hypothesis  of  the  Moon’s 

Double  Anomaly  144 

3.  On  the  Size  of  the  Moon’s  Solar 

Anomaly  146 

4.  On  the  Lunar  Circle’s  Ratio  of  Eccen¬ 
tricity  148 

5.  On  the  Inclination  of  the  Moon’s  Epi¬ 
cycle  148 

6.  How  the  Moon’s  True  Course  is  Got¬ 

ten  Geometrically  from  its  Periodic 
Movements  155 

7.  Construction  of  the  Table  of  General 


Lunar  Anomaly  157 

8.  Table  of  the  General  Lunar  Anomaly  160 

9.  On  General  Calculations  of  the  Moon  161 

10.  That  no  Appreciable  Difference  is  Pro¬ 

duced  at  the  Syzygies  by  the  Moon’s 
Eccentric  Circle  162 

11.  On  the  Moon’s  Parallaxes  165 

12.  On  the  Construction  of  an  Instrument 

for  Determining  Parallaxes  166 

13.  Demonstration  of  the  Moon’s  Dis¬ 
tances  167 

14.  On  the  Magnitude  of  the  Apparent 

Diameters  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and 
Shadow  during  the  Syzygies  171 

15.  On  the  Sun’s  Distance  and  Demon¬ 
strations  Related  Thereto  173 

16.  On  the  Magnitudes  of  the  Sun,  Moon, 

and  Earth  175 

17.  On  the  Particular  Parallaxes  of  the 

Sun  and  Moon  176 


18.  Parallactic  Table  182 

19.  On  the  Determination  of  Parallaxes  183 

BOOK  SIX 

1.  On  Conjunctions  and  Full  Moons  189 

2.  Construction  of  the  Tables  of  the 

Mean  Syzygies  189 

3.  Tables:  Of  Conjunctions:  of  Full 

Moons;  Yearly  Surpluses  at  Conjunc¬ 
tions  and  Full  Moons  191 

4.  How  to  Locate  the  Periodic  and  True 

Syzygies  194 

5.  On  the  Ecliptic  Limits  of  the  Sun 

and  Moon  195 

6.  On  the  Interval  of  Ecliptic  Months  198 

7.  Construction  of  Ecliptic  Tables  203 

8.  Tables:  Of  Solar  and  Lunar  Eclipses; 

Table  of  Correction;  Table  of  Sun’s 
and  Moon’s  Magnitude  211 

9.  Determination  of  Lunar  Eclipses  213 

10.  Determination  of  Solar  Eclipses  215 

11.  On  the  Directions  in  the  Eclipses  217 

12.  Exposition  of  the  Diagrams  for  the 

Directions  221 

13.  Determination  of  Directions  221 

BOOK  SEVEN 

1.  That  the  Fixed  Stars  Always  Keep  the 

Same  Position  with  Respect  to  Each 
Other  223 

2.  That  the  Sphere  of  the  Fixed  Stars 

Makes  a  Movement  Eastward  on  the 
Ecliptic  226 

3.  That  the  Eastward  Movement  of  the 

Sphere  of  the  Fixed  Stars  Takes  Place 
About  the  Pole  of  the  Ecliptic  227 

4 .  On  the  Manner  of  Recording  the  Fixed 

Stars  233 

5.  Tabular  Exposition  of  the  Constella¬ 
tions  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere  234 

BOOK  EIGHT 

1.  Tabular  Exposition  of  the  Constella¬ 
tions  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  247 

2.  On  the  Position  of  the  Milky  Way  258 

3.  On  the  Construction  of  the  Solid 

Sphere  261 

4.  On  the  Configurations  Proper  to  the 

Fixed  Stars  263 

5.  On  the  Co-risings,  Co-culminations, 

and  Co-settings  of  the  Fixed  Stars  266 

6.  On  the  Heliacal  Risings  and  Settings 

of  the  Fixed  Stars  267 


CONTENTS 


BOOK  NINE 

1.  Concerning  the  Order  of  the  Spheres 

of  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  Fiv,^  Planets  270 

2.  On  the  Aim  of  the  Planetary  Hypoth¬ 


eses  270 

3.  On  the  Periodic  Returns  of  the  Five 

Planets  273 

4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  in 

Longitude  and  in  Anomaly  of  the  Five 
Stars  276 

5.  Preliminaries  to  the  Hypotheses  of  the 

Five  Planets  291 

6.  On  the  Mode  and  Difference  of  these 

Hypotheses  292 

7.  Demonstration  of  Mercury’s  Apogee 

and  of  its  Shift  296 

8.  That  Mercury  also  Becomes  Twice 

Perigee  in  One  Revolution  299 

9.  On  the  Ratio  and  Magnitude  of  Mer¬ 
cury’s  Anomalies  300 

10.  On  the  Correction  of  Mercury’s  Peri¬ 
odic  Movements  305 

11.  On  the  Epoch  of  its  Periodic  Move¬ 
ments  311 

BOOK  TEN 

1.  Demonstration  of  Venus’  Apogee  312 

2.  On  the  Magnitude  of  its  Epicycle  313 

3.  On  the  Ratios  of  the  Star’s  Eccentric¬ 
ity  314 

4.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Star’s  Peri¬ 
odic  Movements  316 

5.  On  the  Epoch  of  its  Periodic  Move¬ 
ments  321 

6.  Preliminaries  to  the  Demonstrations 

Concerning  the  Other  Stars  322 

7.  Demonstration  of  Mars’  Eccentricity 

and  Apogee  324 

8.  Demonstration  of  the  Magnitude  of 

Mars’  Epicycle  339 

9.  On  the  Correction  of  Mars’  Periodic 

Movements  342 

10.  On  the  Epoch  of  its  Periodic  Move¬ 
ments  345 

BOOK  ELEVEN 

1.  Demonstration  of  Jupiter’s  Eccentric¬ 
ity  346 

2.  Demonstration  of  the  Size  of  Jupiter’s 

Epicycle  358 

3.  On  the  Correction  of  Jupiter’s  Peri¬ 
odic  Movement  361 


xiii 

4.  On  the  Epoch  of  Jupiter’s  Periodic 

Movements  363 

5.  Demonstration  of  Saturn’s  Eccentric¬ 
ity  and  Apogee  364 

6.  Demonstration  of  the  Size  of  Saturn’s 

Epicycle  377 

7.  On  the  Correction  of  Saturn’s  Peri¬ 
odic  Movements  379 

8.  On  the  Epoch  of  Saturn’s  Periodic 

Movements  382 

9.  How  the  True  Passages  are  Gotten 

Geometrically  from  the  Periodic 
Movements  382 

10.  Treatment  of  the  Construction  of 

Tables  for  the  Anomalies  383 

11.  Tables  for  the  Anomalies  386 

12.  On  Calculating  the  Longitudes  of  the 

Five  Planets  385 

BOOK  TWELVE 

1.  On  the  Preliminaries  to  the  Regres¬ 
sions  391 

2.  Demonstration  of  Saturn’s  Regres¬ 
sions  397 

3.  Demonstration  of  Jupiter’s  Regres¬ 
sions  403 

4.  Demonstration  of  Mars’  Regressions  405 

5.  Demonstration  of  Venus’  Regressions  408 

6.  Demonstration  of  Mercury’s  Regres¬ 
sions  411 

7.  Construction  of  a  Table  for  the  Sta¬ 
tions  414 

8.  Numbers  of  Anomaly  Truly  Deter¬ 
mined  418 

9.  Demonstration  of  Venus’  and  Mer¬ 

cury’s  Greatest  Elongations  from  the 
Sun  419 

10.  Greatest  Elongations  with  Respect  to 
the  True  Sun  425 

BOOK  THIRTEEN 

1 .  On  the  Hypotheses  for  the  Latitudinal 

Passages  of  the  Five  Planets  426 

2.  On  the  Manner  of  the  Movement  of 

the  Obliquities  and  Slantings  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Hypotheses  428 

3.  On  the  Size  of  Each  of  the  Obliquities 

and  Slantings  429 

4.  Construction  of  Tables  for  Particular 

Latitudinal  Passages  432 

5.  Exposition  of  the  Tables  of  Latitude  456 

6.  Calculus  of  the  Latitudinal  Deviation 

of  the  Five  Planets  458 


CONTENTS 


7.  On  the  Heliacal  Risings  and  Settings 

of  the  Five  Planets  458 

8.  That  the  Particularities  of  the  Heli¬ 

acal  Risings  and  Settings  of  Venus 
and  Mercury  Agree  with  the  Hypoth¬ 
eses  461 

9.  The  Method  for  the  Particular  Dis¬ 

tances  from  the  Sun  of  the  Risings 
and  Settings  464 

10.  Exposition  of  the  Tables  Containing 

the  Heliacal  Risings  and  Settings  of 
the  Five  Planets  465 

11.  Epilogue  465 


APPENDIX  A 

1.  Ptolemaic  Dates,  the  Era  of  Nabonas- 

sar,  and  the  Christian  Era  466 

2.  Equivalent  Modern  Terms  for  De¬ 
termining  the  Positions  of  Stars,  and 

for  the  Solar  and  Lunar  Cycles  468 

APPENDIX  B 

The  Passage  from  the  Ptolemaic  to 
the  Copernican  System,  and  thence  to 
that  of  Kepler  47 0 

APPENDIX  C  477 


INTRODUCTION 


The  Mathematical  Composition  of  Claudius  Ptolemy  in  thirteen  books,  called 
also  by  an  Arabic  transliteration  of  97  yLtdlcTt)  [avt^Td^Ls]  The  Almagest ^  is  the  only 
completely  comprehensive  treatise  of  Greek  astronomy  to  come  down  to  us,  if 
we  except  Aristarchus’  On  the  Sizes  and  Distances  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  a  com¬ 
plete  and  remarkable  mathematical  treatment  of  a  very  limited  astronomical 
subject.  The  works  of  the  greatest  Greek  astronomers — Eudoxus,  Heraclides 
of  Pontus,  Aristarchus  of  Samos,  Apollonius  of  Perga,  and  Hipparchus — are 
lost  for  the  most  part,  and  we  only  know  their  contents  from  this  treatise  and 
other  very  meagre  sources.  For  detail,  completeness,  and  perfection,  the  Com¬ 
position  of  Ptolemy  might  be  said  to  contain  all  those  which  preceded  it;  its  pre¬ 
diction  of  the  phenomena  is  on  the  whole  as  adequate  as  the  instruments  used — 
they  were  surprisingly  accurate — could  possibly  allow  for.  But  its  perfection  is 
such  that  it  often  covers  up  the  modes  of  discovery,  and  its  geocentric  theory 
is  propounded  with  only  the  barest  references  to  its  heliocentric  opponents. 

The  Composition  more  or  less  dates  itself.  In  Book  xi,  chapter  5,  Ptolemy 
says  he  observed  Saturn,  7  Pachom,  year  11  of  Hadrian;  and  although  he  does 
not  directly  attribute  to  himself  the  observation,  it  is  almost  certain  he  made 
the  observation  of  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  mentioned  in  iv,  9,  which  took  place 
17  Pachom,  Hadrian  9.  This  last  is  the  earliest  he  mentions  of  those  which 
could  have  been  made  by  himself.  The  latest  is  given  in  x,  where  Ptolemy  says 
he  observed  Venus,  11  Thoth,  Antonine  14.  All  the  observations,  therefore, 
mentioned  in  this  book  and  attributable  to  Ptolemy  himself  fall  between 
17  Pachom,  Hadrian  9  and  11  Thoth,  Antonine  14,  and  were  made  in  Alexan¬ 
dria.  It  is  also  stated  in  iii,4,  that  the  spring  equinox  fell  on  7  Pachom,  Antonine 
3.  These  dates  are  in  terms  of  Egyptian  years  and  The  Table  of  the  Kings  which 
are  explained  in  Appendix  A.  In  terms  of  the  Christian  Era  and  Julian  years, 
historians  give  Hadrian’s  accession  as  11  Aug.,  a.d.  117  and  his  death  as  July, 
A.D.  138.  Using  the  rules  given  in  Appendix  A,  one  concludes  that  the  observa¬ 
tions  made  by  Ptolemy  and  mentioned  in  The  Composition  lie  between  a.d.  127 
and  151. 

Book  I  deals  first  with  the  general  assumptions  of  the  science  such  as  the 
sphericity  of  the  earth,  the  earth’s  size  relative  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars, 
and  the  geocentric  hypothesis.  The  arguments  in  favour  of  this  last  are  all  dravm 
from  Aristotelian  physics,  and  this  is  almost  the  only  place  where  physical 
arguments  are  used  since  the  point  of  view  is  usually  purely  mathematical  and 
fairly  sophisticated  about  the  futility  of  dealing  otherwise  vnth  sensible  ap¬ 
pearances. 

The  geocentric  theory  of  Ptolemy  was  not  the  only  theory  known  to  the 
Greeks  nor  even  at  times  the  most  accepted.  The  Pythagoreans,  prior  to  Plato, 
had  theories  involving  a  motion  of  the  earth,  and  we  know  that  Aristarchus  of 
Samos  after  Plato  had  a  heliocentric  theory  which  in  all  essentials  was  that  of 

1 


2 


PTOLEMY 


Copernicus.  We  also  know  that  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  a  contemporary  of  Plato 
and  a  member  of  the  Platonic  Academy,  placed  Venus  and  Mercury  on  epi¬ 
cycles  about  the  sun  and  supposed  the  earth  to  turn  on  its  axis;  and  it  is  even 
likely  that  he  had  either  the  system  of  Copernicus  with  the  sun  as  centre  and 
the  planets  including  the  earth  revolving  about,  or  the  system  of  Tycho  Brahe 
with  the  planets  revolving  about  the  sun  and  the  sun  about  the  earth,  or  both 
systems.  There  is  much  dispute  over  Platons  astronomical  descriptions,  but  it  is 
very  possible  that  the  Timaeus  gives  the  outline  of  a  heliocentric  theory  like 
that  of  Copernicus.^ 

Then  follows  a  vigorous  development  of  those  theorems  in  plane  and  spherical 
trigonometry  necessary  for  the  astronomical  theories  which  follow.  And  Book  i 
ends  with  a  determination  of  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  and  equator. 

Book  II  works  out  the  co-ascensions  of  arcs  on  the  ecliptic  and  equator  for 
the  oblique  sphere,  that  is,  for  the  horizons  in  different  latitudes,  the  shadows 
of  gnomons  in  the  different  latitudes,  and  the  inclinations  of  different  circles 
with  each  other  in  the  latitudes.  The  reader  who  is  out  to  get  the  larger  aspects 
of  the  lunar  and  planetary  theories  can  well  afford  to  skip  most  of  this  Book 
and  only  read  it  when  referred  to  later  on. 

Book  III  presents  the  theory  of  the  sun  and  its  one  anomaly.  It  is  here  that 
the  great  principle  of  all  Greek  planetary  theory  is  laid  down:  all  planetary  ap¬ 
pearances  must  be  accounted  for  by  the  uniform  motion  of  the  planet  in  a  circle  with 
or  without  the  uniform  motion  of  this  circlets  centre  on  another  circle  called  its 
deferent j  and  so  on  to  any  required  complication.  In  this  Book,  however,  Ptolemy 
states  this  principle  in  its  restricted  form,  the  one  used  by  Copernicus: — all 
planetary  appearances  must  be  accounted  for  by  the  uniform  motion  of  the 
planet  on  a  circle  where  the  motion  is  uniform  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  that  circle 
with  or  without  the  uniform  motion  of  this  circle’s  centre  on  another  circle  where 
the  motion  of  the  first  circlets  centre  is  uniform  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the 
second  circle ^  and  so  on  to  any  required  complication. 

The  principle  in  its  restricted  form  is  used  by  Ptolemy  only  for  the  sun.  In 
Books  V,  IX,  and  x,  for  the  moon  and  other  planets,  he  uses  without  preliminary 
warning  the  more  general  form  of  the  principle  which  allows  the  centre  of  a 
circle  to  move  uniformly  about  a  point  not  the  centre  of  the  deferent  circle. 
Such  a  point  is  called  the  centre  of  the  equant. 

This  principle,  which  might  be  called  the  law  of  inertia  of  Greek  celestial 
mechanics,  was  probably  first  suggested  by  Plato  in  a  much  less  dogmatic  form. 
All  that  is  seemingly  implied  in  the  dialogues  is  that  irregular  appearances  of 
the  planets  must  be  supposed  capable  of  rational  explanation,  and  that  the 
circle  and  uniform  motion  are  the  most  likely  tools  for  this.  The  system  of 
Eudoxus,  devised  at  this  time,  is  perhaps  the  most  rigorous  application  of  the 
principle  of  uniform  motion  in  a  circle.  For  here  the  planet’s  motion  is  composed 
of  the  motions  of  concentric  spheres  moving  uniformly  about  one  point,  the 
earth  their  common  centre.  From  the  point  of  view  of  mathematical  ingenuity 
this  was  the  most  brilliant  application  of  the  principle,  but  required  too  much 
to  save  the  more  complicated  appearances;  it  was  not  flexible  enough.  Aristotle 
took  the  principle  literally  and  therefore  was  led,  by  his  theory  of  being  and 
substance  which  preclude  a  purely  mathematical  physics  of  the  Platonic  kind, 
to  make  a  radical  distinction  between  celestial  mechanics  and  terrestrial  me- 

'See  Appendix  C. 


INTRODUCTION  3 

chanics.  In  considering  all  heavenly  bodies  impassible  (except  for  the  fact  they 
could  be  seen),  Aristotle  gave  a  ph3^sical  and  metaphysical  sanction  to  the 
purely  mathematical  principle  of  uniform  motion  in  a  circle.  He  did,  however, 
using  Eudoxus^  system,  extend  his  theory  of  the  transmission  of  motion  by 
contact  to  these  bodies  so  that  he  assumed  the  movement  of  the  outer  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars  is  transmitted  to  the  inner  spheres  moving  the  planets  by 
mechanical  contact.  Since  this  transmission  from  one  planetary  sphere  to 
another  would  involve  also  transmission  of  movements  particular  to  the  planet, 
counteracting  spheres  had  to  be  introduced  to  differentiate  out  the  right  motion. 

Although  this  same  physical  sanction  is  not  explicitly  mentioned  by  Ptolemy 
in  the  Composition,  yet  it  is  stated  in  the  most  direct  and  meaningful  way  by 
Ptolemy  in  Book  II  of  his  Hypothesis  on  the  Planets.  The  heavenly  bodies  suffer 
no  influence  from  without;  they  have  no  relation  to  each  other;  the  particular 
motions  of  each  particular  planet  follow  from  the  essence  of  that  planet  and 
are  like  the  will  and  understanding  in  men.  One  might  almost  say  that  the  law 
of  universal  gravitation  is  expressly  denied,  and  reserved  only  in  a  very  par¬ 
ticular  form  for  bodies  on  the  earth^s  surface  in  such  treatises  as  Archimedes^  On 
Floating  Bodies  and  On  the  Centers  of  Gravity  of  Planes.  For  it  is  assumed  that 
the  earth  or  rather  the  earth's  centre  attracts  only  bodies  below  the  lunar 
sphere.  It  is,  of  course,  Kepler  who,  probably  under  the  influence  of  Gilbert's 
work  on  magnetism,  assumes  for  the  first  time  in  The  Commentaries  on  Mars 
that  all  bodies  attract  each  other.  It  was  reserved  for  Newton  to  state  the 
classical  law  of  inertia  in  the  light  of  Kepler's  assumption:  all  bodies  continue 
in  the  same  straight  line  and  at  uniform  speed  unless  disturbed. 

It  is  also  in  Book  iii  that  the  first  principles  of  the  epicycle  and  eccentric  are 
worked  out. 

Book  IV  begins  the  study  of  the  moon  and  its  first  or  epicyclic  anomaly. 

Book  V  continues  the  study  of  the  moon  with  its  solar  or  eccentric  anomaly, 
equant  anomaly,  and  a  fourth  anomaly  called  the  inclination  of  the  moon's 
epicycle.  There  is  also  a  discussion  of  the  moon's  parallaxes  and  of  the  distances 
of  the  moon  and  sun  from  the  earth  in  terms  of  the  earth's  radius  and  a  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  relative  magnitudes  of  these  bodies. 

Book  VI  continues  the  study  of  the  moon  with  respect  to  its  phases  and 
eclipses. 

Books  VII  and  viii  are  devoted  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and  to  the  pre¬ 
cession  of  the  equinoxes. 

Book  IX  begins  the  study  of  the  planets  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and 
Saturn.  The  order  of  these  planets  is  given.  The  Ptolemaic  geocentric  theory 
furnishes  no  very  sound  principles  for  their  ordering;  only  a  heliocentric  theory 
or  a  geocentric  theory  like  Brahe's  could  give  one.  But  the  ordering  turns  out 
pretty  much  as  the  heliocentric  theory  would  require  except  that  Venus  and 
Mercury  are  placed  between  the  earth  and  the  sun  instead  of  around  it.  A 
general  introduction  is  given  to  their  movements,  and  Mercury  is  treated  in 
detail.  Mercury  is  the  most  complicated  of  the  five:  it  requires  not  only  an  epi¬ 
cycle,  eccentric,  and  equant  as  the  others  do,  but  it  requires  that  the  centre  of 
the  eccentric  move  about  another  circle.  Mercury  remains  just  as  complicated 
in  the  system  of  Copernicus.  It  is  well  known  that  it  was  never  completely  ex¬ 
plained  by  the  principles  of  Newton's  mechanics  and  that  it  is  only  taken  care 
of  in  the  general  theory  of  relativity. 


4  PTOLEMY 

Book  X  contains  the  detailed  discussions  of  Venus  and  Mars,  and  Book  xi  of 
Jupiter  and  Saturn. 

Book  XII  is  the  most  interesting  perhaps  from  the  kinematic  point  of  view. 
It  contains  the  statement  of  an  eccentric  theory  of  the  planets  Mars,  Jupiter, 
and  Saturn,  equivalent  to  the  epicyclic  one  used  by  Ptolemy  and  which  very 
evidently  forms  the  bridge  from  Ptolemy’s  and  Hipparchus’  geocentric  theory 
to  Aristarchus’  heliocentric  theory.  The  theorems  on  station  points  and  re¬ 
gressions,  probably  due  to  Apollonius  of  Perga,  are  remarkable.  These  solve 
the  problem:  given  the  angular  speed  of  a  star  on  its  epicycle  and  the  angular 
speed  of  the  epicycle  on  its  deferent  and  the  ratio  of  the  radii  of  the  epicycle  and 
deferent,  to  find  the  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  that  the  star  will  ap¬ 
pear  to  stop  and  regress  for  an  observer  at  the  centre  of  the  deferent  and  at 
what  points. 

Book  XIII  contains  the  theory  of  the  planets’  lateral  deviations  from  the 
ecliptic. 

The  translator  wishes  to  thank  Dr.  George  Comenetz,  Mr.  John  Kieffer,  Dr. 
Jacob  Klein,  Prof.  Alexandre  Koyre,  and  Mr.  John  Weber  for  their  suggestions 
and  criticisms.  They  are  in  no  way  to  blame  for  any  immoderate  statements. 

R.  C.  T. 

Portsmouth,  Rhode  Island,  1946. 

Abbreviations  Used  in  the  Translation 

ecc.  rad.  =  eccentric’s  radius 

epic.  rad.  =  epicycle’s  radius 

hypt.  =  hypotenuse 

1.  betw.  c.  =  line  between  centers 

rect.  ABj  RC  =  rectangle  contained  by  AB  and  BC 

sect.  =  sector  or  section 

sq.  =  square 

trgl.  =  triangle 

Bibliography  of  Ptolemy^s  Astronomical  Works 

Editio  princeps  of  the  SyntaxiSj  Basle,  1538,  with  the  commentaries  of 
Pappus  and  Theon. 

Composition  maihematique,  2  vols.,  edit.  Halma,  Paris,  1813-16.  Greek  text 
and  French  translation.  Reprinted. 

Syntaxis  mathematical  2  vols.,  edit.  Heiberg,  Leipzig,  1898-1903. 

Opera  astronomica  minora^  edit.  Heiberg,  Leipzig,  1907. 

There  is  a  German  translation  of  the  Heiberg  edition  by  Manitius,  1912- 
1913.  This  English  translation  is  from  the  text  of  Heiberg;  any  deviation  is 
noted. 


BOOK  ONE 


1.  Preface 

Those  who  have  been  true  philosophers,  Syrus,  seem  to  me  to  have  very  wisely 
separated  the  theoretical  part  of  philosophy  from  the  practical.  For  even  if  it 
happens  the  practical  turns  out  to  be  theoretical  prior  to  its  being  practical, 
nevertheless  a  great  difference  would  be  found  in  them;  not  only  because  some 
of  the  moral  virtues  can  belong  to  the  everyday  ignorant  man  and  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  come  by  the  theory  of  whole  sciences  without  learning,  but  also  because 
in  practical  matters  the  greatest  advantage  is  to  be  had  from  a  continued  and 
repeated  operation  upon  the  things  themselves,  while  in  theoretical  knowledge 
it  is  to  be  had  by  a  progress  onward.  We  accordingly  thought  it  up  to  us  so  to 
train  our  actions  even  in  the  application  of  the  imagination  as  not  to  forget  in 
whatever  things  we  happen  upon  the  consideration  of  their  beautiful  and  well- 
ordered  disposition,  and  to  indulge  in  meditation  mostly  for  the  exposition  of 
many  beautiful  theorems  and  especially  of  those  specifically  called  mathematical. 

For  indeed  Aristotle  quite  properly  divides  also  the  theoretical  into  three  im¬ 
mediate  genera:  the  physical,  the  mathematical,  and  the  theological.  For  given 
that  all  beings  have  their  existence  from  matter  and  form  and  motion,  and  that 
none  of  these  can  be  seen,  but  only  thought,  in  its  subject  separately  from  the 
others,  if  one  should  seek  out  in  its  simplicity  the  first  cause  of  the  first  move¬ 
ment  of  the  universe,  he  would  find  God  invisible  and  unchanging.  And  the  kind 
of  science  which  seeks  after  Him  is  the  theological;  for  such  an  act  [evepyeta]  can 
only  be  thought  as  high  above  somewhere  near  the  loftiest  things  of  the  universe 
and  is  absolutely  apart  from  sensible  things.  But  the  kind  of  science  w^hich 
traces  through  the  material  and  ever  moving  quality,  and  has  to  do  with  the 
white,  the  hot,  the  sweet,  the  soft,  and  such  things,  would  be  called  physical; 
and  such  an  essence  [ouo-ta],  since  it  is  only  generally  what  it  is,  is  to  be  found  in 
corruptible  things  and  below  the  lunar  sphere.  And  the  kind  of  science  which 
shows  up  quality  with  respect  to  forms  and  local  motions,  seeking  figure,  num¬ 
ber,  and  magnitude,  and  also  place,  time,  and  similar  things,  would  be  defined 
as  mathematical.  For  such  an  essence  falls,  as  it  were,  between  the  other  two, 
not  only  because  it  can  be  conceived  both  through  the  senses  and  without  the 
senses,  but  also  because  it  is  an  accident  in  absolutely  all  beings  both  mortal  and 
immortal,  changing  with  those  things  that  ever  change,  according  to  their  insep¬ 
arable  form,  and  preserving  unchangeable  the  changelessness  of  fonn  in  things 
eternal  and  of  an  ethereal  nature. 

And  therefore  meditating  that  the  other  two  genera  of  the  theoretical  would 
be  expounded  in  terms  of  conjecture  rather  than  in  terms  of  scientific  under¬ 
standing:  the  theological  because  it  is  in  no  way  phenomenal  and  attainable,  but 
the  physical  because  its  matter  is  unstable  and  obscure,  so  that  for  this  reason 
philosophers  could  never  hope  to  agree  on  them;  and  meditating  that  only  the 
mathematical,  if  approached  enquiringly,  would  give  its  practitioners  certain 

5 


6  PTOLEMY 

and  trustworthy  knowledge  with  demonstration  both  arithmetic  and  geometric 
resulting  from  indisputable  procedures,  we  were  led  to  cultivate  most  particu¬ 
larly  as  far  as  lay  in  our  power  this  theoretical  discipline  [decjpla].  And  especially 
were  we  led  to  cultivate  that  discipline  developed  in  respect  to  divine  and  heav¬ 
enly  things  as  being  the  only  one  concerned  with  the  study  of  things  which  are 
always  what  they  are,  and  therefore  able  itself  to  be  always  what  it  is — which  is 
indeed  the  proper  mark  of  a  science — because  of  its  own  clear  and  ordered  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  yet  to  cooperate  with  the  other  disciplines  no  less  than  they 
themselves.  For  that  special  mathematical  theory  would  most  readily  prepare 
the  way  to  the  theological,  since  it  alone  could  take  good  aim  at  that  unchange¬ 
able  and  separate  act,  so  close  to  that  act  are  the  properties  having  to  do  with 
translations  and  arrangements  of  movements,  belonging  to  those  heavenly  be¬ 
ings  which  are  sensible  and  both  moving  and  moved,  but  eternal  and  impassible. 
Again  as  concerns  the  physical  there  would  not  be  just  chance  correspondances. 
For  the  general  property  of  the  material  essence  is  pretty  well  evident  from  the 
peculiar  fashion  of  its  local  motion — for  example,  the  corruptible  and  incorrupt¬ 
ible  from  straight  and  circular  movements,  and  the  heavy  and  light  or  passive 
and  active  from  movement  to  the  center  and  movement  from  the  center.  And 
indeed  this  same  discipline  would  more  than  any  other  prepare  understanding 
persons  with  respect  to  nobleness  of  actions  and  character  by  means  of  the 
sameness,  good  order,  due  proportion,  and  simple  directness  contemplated  in 
divine  things,  making  its  followers  lovers  of  that  divine  beauty,  and  making 
habitual  in  them,  and  as  it  were  natural,  a  like  condition  of  the  soul. 

And  so  we  ourselves  try  to  increase  continuously  our  love  of  the  discipline  of 
things  which  are  always  what  they  are,  by  learning  what  has  already  been  dis¬ 
covered  in  such  sciences  by  those  really  applying  themselves  to  them,  and  als- 
by  making  a  small  original  contribution  such  as  the  period  of  time  from  them  to 
us  could  well  make  possible.  And  therefore  we  shall  try  and  set  forth  as  briefly 
as  possible  as  many  theorems  as  we  recognize  to  have  come  to  light  up  to  the 
present,  and  in  such  a  way  that  those  who  have  already  been  initiated  somewhat 
may  follow,  arranging  in  proper  order  for  the  completeness  of  the  treatise  all 
matters  useful  to  the  theory  of  heavenly  things.  And  in  order  not  to  make  the 
treatise  too  long  we  shall  only  report  what  was  rigorously  proved  by  the  an¬ 
cients,  perfecting  as  far  as  we  can  what  was  not  fully  proved  or  not  proved  as 
well  as  possible. 

2.  On  the  Order  of  the  Theorems 

A  view,  therefore,  of  the  general  relation  of  the  whole  earth  to  the  whole  of  the 
heavens  will  begin  this  composition  of  ours.  And  next,  of  things  in  particular, 
there  will  first  be  an  account  of  the  ecliptic’s  position  and  of  the  places  of  that 
part  of  the  earth  inhabited  by  us,  and  again  of  the  difference,  in  order,  between 
each  of  them  according  to  the  inclinations  of  their  horizons.  For  the  theory  of 
these,  once  understood,  facilitates  the  examination  of  the  rest.  And,  secondly, 
there  will  be  an  account  of  the  solar  and  lunar  movements  and  of  their  incidents. 
For  without  a  prior  understanding  of  these  one  could  not  profitably  consider 
what  concerns  the  stars.  The  last  part,  in  view  of  this  plan,  will  be  an  account 
of  the  stars.  Those  things  having  to  do  with  the  sphere  of  what  are  called  the 
fixed  stars  would  reasonably  come  first,  and  then  those  having  to  do  with  what 
are  called  the  five  planets.  And  we  shall  try  and  show  each  of  these  things  using 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  7 

as  beginnings  and  foundations  for  what  we  wish  to  find,  the  evident  and  certain 
appearances  from  the  observations  of  the  ancients  and  our  own,  and  applying 
the  consequences  of  these  conceptions  by  means  of  geometrical  demonstrations. 

And  so,  in  general,  we  have  to  state  that  the  heavens  are  spherical  and  move 
spherically;  that  the  earth,  in  figure,  is  sensibly  spherical  also  when  taken  as  a 
whole;  in  position,  lies  right  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  like  a  geometrical 
centre;  in  magnitude  and  distance,  has  the  ratio  of  a  point  with  respect  to  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  having  itself  no  local  motion  at  all.  And  we  shall  go 
through  each  of  these  points  briefly  to  bring  them  to  mind. 

3.  That  the  Heavens  Move  Spherically 

It  is  probable  the  first  notions  of  these  things  came  to  the  ancients  from  some 
such  observation  as  this.  For  they  kept  seeing  the  sun  and  moon  and  other  stars 
always  moving  from  rising  to  setting  in  parallel  circles,  beginning  to  move  up¬ 
ward  from  below  as  if  out  of  the  earth  itself,  rising  httle  by  little  to  the  top,  and 
then  coming  around  again  and  going  down  in  the  same  way  until  at  last  they 
would  disappear  as  if  falling  into  the  earth.  And  then  again  they  would  see  them, 
after  remaining  some  time  invisible,  rising  and  setting  as  if  from  another  begin¬ 
ning;  and  they  saw  that  the  times  and  also  the  places  of  rising  and  setting  gen¬ 
erally  corresponded  in  an  ordered  and  regular  way. 

But  most  of  all  the  observed  circular  orbit  of  those  stars  which  are  always 
visible,  and  their  revolution  about  one  and  the  same  centre,  led  them  to  this 
spherical  notion.  For  necessarily  this  point  became  the  pole  of  the  heavenly 
sphere;  and  the  stars  nearer  to  it  were  those  that  spun  around  in  smaller  circles, 
and  those  farther  away  made  greater  circles  in  their  revolutions  in  proportion  to 
the  distance,  until  a  sufficient  distance  brought  one  to  the  disappearing  stars. 
And  then  they  saw  that  those  near  the  always-visible  stars  disappeared  for  a 
short  time,  and  those  farther  away  for  a  longer  time  proportionately.  And  for 
these  reasons  alone  it  was  sufficient  for  them  to  assume  this  notion  as  a  principle, 
and  forthwith  to  think  through  also  the  other  things  consequent  upon  these 
same  appearances,  in  accordance  with  the  development  of  the  science.  For  abso¬ 
lutely  all  the  appearances  contradict  the  other  opinions. 

If,  for  example,  one  should  assume  the  movement  of  the  stars  to  be  in  a 
straight  line  to  infinity,  as  some  have  opined,  how  could  it  be  explained  that 
each  star  will  be  observed  daily  moving  from  the  same  starting  point?  For  how 
could  the  stars  turn  back  while  rushing  on  to  infinity?  Or  how  could  they  turn 
back  without  appearing  to  do  so?  Or  how  is  it  they  do  not  disappear  with  their 
size  gradually  diminishing,  but  on  the  contrary  seem  larger  when  they  are  about 
to  disappear,  being  covered  little  by  little  as  if  cut  off  by  the  earth’s  surface? 
But  certainly  to  suppose  that  they  light  up  from  the  earth  and  then  again  go  out 
in  it  would  appear  most  absurd.  For  if  anyone  should  agree  that  such  an  order 
in  their  magnitudes  and  number,  and  again  in  the  distances,  places,  and  times 
is  accomplished  in  this  way  at  random  and  by  chance,  and  that  one  whole  part 
of  the  earth  has  an  incandescent  nature  and  another  a  nature  capable  of  extin¬ 
guishing,  or  rather  that  the  same  part  lights  the  stars  up  for  some  people  and 
puts  them  out  for  others,  and  that  the  same  stars  happen  to  appear  to  some 
people  either  lit  up  or  put  out  and  to  others  not  yet  so — even  if  anyone,  I  say, 
should  accept  all  such  absurdities,  what  could  we  say  about  the  always-visible 
stars  which  neither  rise  nor  set?  Or  why  don’t  the  stars  which  light  up  and  go  out 


8  PTOLEMY 

rise  and  set  for  every  part  of  the  earth,  and  why  aren^t  those  which  are  not 
affected  in  this  way  always  above  the  earth  for  every  part  of  the  earth?  For  in 
this  hypothesis  the  same  stars  will  not  always  light  up  and  go  out  for  some 
people,  and  never  for  others.  But  it  is  evident  to  everyone  that  the  same  stars 
rise  and  set  for  some  parts,  and  do  neither  of  these  things  for  others. 

In  a  word,  whatever  figure  other  than  the  spherical  be  assumed  for  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  heavens,  there  must  be  unequal  linear  distances  from  the  earth  to 
parts  of  the  heavens,  wherever  or  however  the  earth  be  situated,  so  that  the 
magnitudes  and  angular  distances  of  the  stars  with  respect  to  each  other  would 
appear  unequal  to  the  same  people  within  each  revolution,  now  larger  now 
smaller.  But  this  is  not  observed  to  happen.  For  it  is  not  a  shorter  linear  distance 
w^hich  makes  them  appear  larger  at  the  horizon,  but  the  steaming  up  of  the 
moisture  surrounding  the  earth  between  them  and  our  eyes,  just  as  things  put 
under  water  appear  larger  the  farther  down  they  are  placed. 

The  following  considerations  also  lead  to  the  spherical  notion:  the  fact  that 
instruments  for  measuring  time  cannot  agree  with  any  hypothesis  save  the 
spherical  one;  that,  since  the  movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ought  to  be  the 
least  impeded  and  most  facile,  the  circle  among  plane  figures  offers  the  easiest 
path  of  motion,  and  the  sphere  among  solids;  likewise  that,  since  of  different 
figures  having  equal  perimeters  those  having  the  more  angles  are  the  greater, 
the  circle  is  the  greatest  of  plane  figures  and  the  sphere  of  solid  figures,  and  the 
heavens  are  greater  than  any  other  body. 

Moreover,  certain  physical  considerations  lead  to  such  a  conjecture.  For 
example,  the  fact  that  of  all  bodies  the  ether  has  the  finest  and  most  homoge¬ 
neous  parts  [6iJLOLOfX€p€(TT€pos] ;  but  the  surfaces  of  homogeneous  parts  must  have 
homogeneous  parts,  and  only  the  circle  is  such  among  plane  figures  and  the 
sphere  among  solids.  And  since  the  ether  is  not  plane  but  solid,  it  can  only  be 
spherical.  Likewise  the  fact  that  nature  has  built  all  earthly  and  corruptible 
bodies  w-holly  out  of  rounded  figures  but  with  heterogeneous  parts,  and  all  di¬ 
vine  bodies  in  the  ether  out  of  spherical  figures  mth  homogeneous  parts,  since 
if  they  were  plane  or  disc-like  they  would  not  appear  circular  to  all  those  w^ho 
see  them  from  different  parts  of  the  earth  at  the  same  time.  Therefore  it  would 
seem  reasonable  that  the  ether  surrounding  them  and  of  a  Uke  nature  be  also 
spherical,  and  that  because  of  the  homogeneity  of  its  parts  it  moves  circularly 
and  regularly. 

4.  That  also  the  Earth,  Taken  as  a  Whole,  Is  Sensibly  Spherical 

Now,  that  also  the  earth  taken  as  a  whole  is  sensibly  spherical,  we  could  most 
likely  think  out  in  this  way.  For  again  it  is  possible  to  see  that  the  sun  and  moon 
and  the  other  stars  do  not  rise  and  set  at  the  same  time  for  every  observer  on  the 
earth,  but  always  earlier  for  those  living  towards  the  orient  and  later  for  those 
living  towards  the  Occident.  For  we  find  that  the  phenomena  of  eclipses  taking 
place  at  the  same  time,  especially  those  of  the  moon,  are  not  recorded  at  the 
same  hours  for  everyone — that  is,  relatively  to  equal  intervals  of  time  from 
noon;  but  we  always  find  later  hours  recorded  for  observers  towards  the  orient 
than  for  those  towards  the  Occident.  And  since  the  differences  in  the  hours  is 
found  to  be  proportional  to  the  distances  between  the  places,  one  would  reason¬ 
ably  suppose  the  surface  of  the  earth  spherical,  ^vith  the  result  that  the  general 
uniformity  of  curvature  would  assure  every  part’s  covering  those  following  it 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  9 

proportionately.  But  this  would  not  happen  if  the  figure  were  any  other,  as  can 
be  seen  from  the  follo\ving  considerations. 

For,  if  it  were  concave,  the  rising  stars  would  appear  first  to  people  towards 
the  Occident;  and  if  it  were  fiat,  the  stars  would  rise  and  set  for  all  people  togeth¬ 
er  and  at  the  same  time;  and  if  it  were  a  pyramid,  a  cube,  or  any  other  polygonal 
figure,  they  would  again  appear  at  the  same  time  for  all  observers  on  the  same 
straight  line.  But  none  of  these  things  appears  to  happen.  It  is  further  clear  that 
it  could  not  be  cylindrical  mth  the  curved  surface  turned  to  the  risings  and  set¬ 
tings  and  the  plane  bases  to  the  poles  of  the  universe,  which  some  think  more 
plausible.  For  then  never  would  any  of  the  stars  be  always  visible  to  any  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  curved  surface,  but  either  all  the  stars  would  both  rise  and  set 
for  observers  or  the  same  stars  for  an  equal  distance  from  either  of  the  poles 
would  always  be  invisible  to  all  observers.  Yet  the  more  we  advance  towards  the 
north  pole,  the  more  the  southern  stars  are  hidden  and  the  northern  stars  ap¬ 
pear.  So  it  is  clear  that  here  the  curv- ature  of  the  earth  covering  parts  uniformly 
in  oblique  directions  proves  its  spherical  form  on  every  side.  Again,  whenever 
we  sail  towards  mountains  or  any  high  places  from  whatever  angle  and  in  what¬ 
ever  direction,  we  see  their  bulk  little  by  little  increasing  as  if  they  were  arising 
from  the  sea,  whereas  before  they  seemed  submerged  because  of  the  curvature 
of  the  water^s  surface. 

5.  That  the  Earth  Is  in  the  Middle  of  the  Heavens 

Now  with  this  done,  if  one  should  next  take  up  the  question  of  the  earth^s 
position,  the  observed  appearances  with  respect  to  it  could  only  be  understood 
if  we  put  it  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  as  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  If  this  were 
not  so,  then  the  earth  would  either  have  to  be  off  the  axis  but  equidistant  from 
the  poles,  or  on  the  axis  but  farther  advanced  towards  one  of  the  poles,  or  nei¬ 
ther  on  the  axis  nor  equidistant  from  the  poles. 

The  follomng  considerations  are  opposed  to  the  first  of  these  three  positions — 
namely,  that  if  the  earth  were  conceived  as  placed  off  the  axis  either  above  or 
below  in  respect  to  certain  parts  of  the  earth,  those  parts,  in  the  right  sphere, 
would  never  have  any  equinox  since  the  section  above  the  earth  and  the  section 
below  the  earth  would  always  be  cut  unequally  by  the  horizon.  Again,  if  the 
sphere  were  inclined  with  respect  to  these  parts,  either  they  would  have  no  equi¬ 
nox  or  else  the  equinox  would  not  take  place  midway  between  the  summer  and 
winter  solstices.  The  distances  would  be  unequal  because  the  equator  which  is 
the  greatest  of  those  parallel  circles  described  about  the  poles  would  not  be  cut 
in  half  by  the  horizon ;  but  one  of  the  circles  parallel  to  it,  either  to  the  north  or 
to  the  south,  would  be  so  cut  in  half.  It  is  absolutely  agreed  by  all,  however,  that 
these  distances  are  everywhere  equal  because  the  increase  from  the  equinox  to 
the  longest  day  at  the  summer  tropic  are  equal  to  the  decreases  to  the  least  days 
at  the  mnter  tropic.  And  if  the  deviation  for  certain  parts  of  the  earth  were 
supposed  either  towards  the  orient  or  the  Occident,  it  would  result  that  for  these 
parts  neither  the  sizes  and  angular  distances  of  the  stars  would  appear  equal  and 
the  same  at  the  eastern  and  western  horizons,  nor  would  the  time  from  rising  to 
the  meridian  be  equal  to  the  time  from  the  meridian  to  setting.  But  these  things 
evidently  are  altogether  contrary  to  the  appearances. 

As  to  the  second  position  where  the  earth  would  be  on  the  axis  but  farther 
advanced  towards  one  of  the  poles,  one  could  again  object  that,  if  this  were  so, 


10  PTOLEMY 

the  plane  of  the  horizon  in  each  latitude  would  always  cut  into  uneven  parts  the 
sections  of  the  heavens  below  the  earth  and  above,  different  with  respect  to  each 
other  and  to  themselves  for  each  different  deviation.  And  the  horizon  could  cut 
into  two  even  parts  only  in  the  right  sphere.  But  in  the  case  of  the  inclined 
sphere  with  the  nearer  pole  ever  visible,  the  horizon  would  always  make  the  part 
above  the  earth  less  and  the  part  below  the  earth  greater  with  the  result  that 
also  the  great  circle  through  the  centre  of  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  [echptic]  would 
be  cut  unequally  by  the  plane  of  the  horizon.  But  this  has  never  been  seen,  for 
six  of  the  twelve  parts  are  always  and  everywhere  visible  above  the  earth,  and 
the  other  six  invisible;  and  again  when  all  these  last  six  are  all  at  once  visible, 
the  others  are  at  the  same  time  invisible.  And  so — from  the  fact  that  the  same 
semicircles  are  cut  off  entirely,  now  above  the  earth,  now  below — it  is  evident 
that  the  sections  of  the  zodiac  are  cut  in  half  by  the  horizon. 

And,  in  general,  if  the  earth  did  not  have  its  position  under  the  equator  but 
lay  either  to  the  north  or  south  nearer  one  of  the  poles,  the  result  would  be  that, 
during  the  equinoxes,  the  shadows  of  the  gnomons  at  sunrise  would  never  per¬ 
ceptibly  be  on  a  straight  line  with  those  at  sunset  in  planes  parallel  to  the  hori¬ 
zon.  But  the  contrary  is  everywhere  seen  to  occur.  And  it  is  immediately  clear 
that  it  is  not  possible  to  advance  the  third  position  since  each  of  the  obstacles 
to  the  first  two  would  be  present  here  also. 

In  brief,  all  the  observed  order  of  the  increases  and  decreases  of  day  and  night 
would  be  thrown  into  utter  confusion  if  the  earth  were  not  in  the  middle.  And 
there  would  be  added  the  fact  that  the  eclipses  of  the  moon  could  not  take  place 
for  all  parts  of  the  heavens  by  a  diametrical  opposition  to  the  sun,  for  the  earth 
would  often  not  be  interposed  between  them  in  their  diametrical  oppositions, 
but  at  distances  less  than  a  semicircle. 

6.  That  the  Earth  Has  the  Ratio  of  a  Point  to  the  Heavens 

Now,  that  the  earth  has  sensibly  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  its  distance  from  the 
sphere  of  the  so-called  fixed  stars  gets  great  support  from  the  fact  that  in  all 
parts  of  the  earth  the  sizes  and  angular  distances  of  the  stars  at  the  same  times 
appear  everywhere  equal  and  alike,  for  the  observations  of  the  same  stars  in  the 
different  latitudes  are  not  found  to  differ  in  the  least. 

Moreover,  this  must  be  added:  that  sundials  placed  in  any  part  of  the  earth 
and  the  centres  of  armillary  spheres  can  play  the  role  of  the  earth^s  true  centre 
for  the  sightings  and  the  rotations  of  the  shadows,  as  much  in  conformity  vAth 
the  hypotheses  of  the  appearances  as  if  they  were  at  the  true  midpoint  of  the 
earth. 

And  the  earth  is  clearly  a  point  also  from  this  fact:  that  every^vhere  the  planes 
drawn  through  the  eye,  which  we  call  horizons,  always  exactly  cut  in  half  the 
whole  sphere  of  the  heavens.  And  this  would  not  happen  if  the  magnitude  of  the 
earth  with  respect  to  its  distance  from  the  heavens  were  perceptible;  but  only 
the  plane  drawn  through  the  point  at  the  earth’s  centre  would  exactly  cut  the 
sphere  in  half,  and  those  drawn  through  any  other  part  of  the  earth’s  surface 
would  make  the  sections  below  the  earth  greater  than  those  above. 

7.  That  the  Earth  Does  Not  in  any  Way  Move  Locally 

By  the  same  arguments  as  the  preceding  it  can  be  shown  that  the  earth  can 
neither  move  in  any  one  of  the  aforesaid  oblique  directions,  nor  ever  change  at 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  11 

all  from  its  place  at  the  centre.  For  the  same  things  would  result  as  if  it  had 
another  position  than  at  the  centre.  And  so  it  also  seems  to  me  superfluous  to 
look  for  the  causes  of  the  motion  to  the  centre  when  it  is  once  for  all  clear  from 
the  very  appearances  that  the  earth  is  in  the  middle  of  the  world  and  all  weights 
move  towards  it.  And  the  easiest  and  only  way  to  understand  this  is  to  see  that, 
once  the  earth  has  been  proved  spherical  considered  as  a  whole  and  in  the  middle 
of  the  universe  as  we  have  said,  then  the  tendencies  and  movements  of  heavy 
bodies  (I  mean  their  proper  movements)^  are  everywhere  and  always  at  right 
angles  to  the  tangent  plane  drawn  through  the  falling  body^s  point  of  contact 
with  the  earth’s  surface.  For  because  of  this  it  is  clear  that,  if  they  were  not 
stopped  by  the  earth’s  surface,  they  too  would  go  all  the  way  to  the  centre  itself, 
since  the  straight  line  dra^vn  to  the  centre  of  a  sphere  is  always  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  tangent  to  the  sphere’s  surface  at  the  intersection  of  that  line. 

All  those  who  think  it  paradoxical  that  so  great  a  weight  as  the  earth  should 
not  waver  or  move  anywhere  seem  to  me  to  go  astray  by  making  their  judgment 
with  an  eye  to  their  own  affects  and  not  to  the  property  of  the  whole.  For  it 
would  not  still  appear  so  extraordinary  to  them,  I  believe,  if  they  stopped  to 
think  that  the  earth’s  magnitude  compared  to  the  whole  body  surrounding  it  is 
in  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  it.  For  thus  it  seems  possible  for  that  which  is  relatively 
least  to  be  supported  and  pressed  against  from  all  sides  equally  and  at  the  same 
angle  by  that  which  is  absolutely  greatest  and  homogeneous.  For  there  is  no 
^^above”  and  “below”  in  the  universe  with  respect  to  the  earth,  just  as  none 
could  be  conceived  of  in  a  sphere.  And  of  the  compound  bodies  in  the  universe, 
to  the  extent  of  their  proper  and  natural  motion,  the  light  and  subtle  ones  are 
scattered  in  flames  to  the  outside  and  to  the  circumference,  and  they  seem  to 
rush  in  the  upward  direction  relative  to  each  one  because  we  too  call  “up”  from 
above  our  heads  to  the  enveloping  surface  of  the  universe;  but  the  heavy  and 
coarse  bodies  move  to  the  middle  and  centre  and  they  seem  to  fall  downwards 
because  again  we  all  call  “down”  the  direction  from  our  feet  to  the  earth’s  cen¬ 
tre.  And  they  properly  subside  about  the  middle  under  the  everywhere-equal 
and  like  resistance  and  impact  against  each  other.  Therefore  the  solid  body  of 
the  earth  is  reasonably  considered  as  being  the  largest  relative  to  those  moving 
against  it  and  as  remaining  unmoved  in  any  direction  by  the  force  of  the  very 
small  weights,  and  as  it  were  absorbing  their  fall.  And  if  it  had  some  one  com¬ 
mon  movement,  the  same  as  that  of  the  other  weights,  it  would  clearly  leave 
them  all  behind  because  of  its  much  greater  magnitude.  And  the  animals  and 
other  weights  would  be  left  hanging  in  the  air,  and  the  earth  would  very  quickly 
fall  out  of  the  heavens.  Merely  to  conceive  such  things  makes  them  appear 
ridiculous. 

^All  local  motions  or  movements  according  to  place  are  divided  by  Aristotle  into  natural  and 
violent  local  motions.  In  the  case  of  compound  bodies  (that  is,  those  bodies  subject  to  gener¬ 
ation  and  corruption  and  consisting  of  aU  those,  and  only  those,  bodies  lying  below  the  lunar 
sphere),  the  natural  local  motions  are  those  of  unimpeded  and  unpropelled  fall;  the  violent 
local  motions  are  any  propelled  or  interrupted  motions.  In  the  case  of  simple  bodies  (that  is, 
the  heavenly  bodies  within  and  above  the  lunar  sphere),  there  are  only  natural  local  motions: 
the  regular  or  uniform  circular  motions.  Ptolemy  here  calls  the  natural  local  motions  of  com¬ 
pound  bodies  their  proper  motions.  This  distinction  between  natural  and  violent  motions  is 
preserved  by  Galileo.  For  in  his  Two  New  Sciences^  natural  motion  is  treated  in  the  ^Third 
Day'^  and  violent  motion  in  the  “Fourth  Day.”  In  the  Newtonian  system,  the  distinction  is 
dissolved  in  a  general  mathematical  treatment,  a  treatment  more  in  line  with  the  Platonic 
myth  of  the  TimaeuSy  and  so  it  loses  all  meaning. 


12  PTOLEMY 

Now  some  people,  although  they  have  nothing  to  oppose  to  these  arguments, 
agree  on  something,  as  they  think,  more  plausible.  And  it  seems  to  them  there 
is  nothing  against  their  supposing,  for  instance,  the  heavens  immobile  and  the 
earth  as  turning  on  the  same  axis  from  west  to  east  very  nearly  one  revolution 
a  day ;  or  that  they  both  should  move  to  some  extent,  but  only  on  the  same  axis 
as  we  said,  and  conformably  to  the  overtaking  of  the  one  by  the  other. 

But  it  has  escaped  their  notice  that,  indeed,  as  far  as  the  appearances  of  the 
stars  are  concerned,  nothing  would  perhaps  keep  things  from  being  in  accord¬ 
ance  mth  this  simpler  conjecture,  but  that  in  the  light  of  what  happens  around 
us  in  the  air  such  a  notion  would  seem  altogether  absurd.  For  in  order  for  us  to 
grant  them  what  is  unnatural  in  itself,  that  the  lightest  and  subtlest  bodies 
either  do  not  move  at  all  or  no  differently  from  those  of  contrary  nature,  while 
those  less  light  and  less  subtle  bodies  in  the  air  are  clearly  more  rapid  than  all 
the  more  terrestrial  ones;  and  to  grant  that  the  heaviest  and  most  compact 
bodies  have  their  proper  svnit  and  regular  motion,  while  again  these  terrestrial 
bodies  are  certainly  at  times  not  easily  moved  by  anything  else — for  us  to  grant 
these  things,  they  would  have  to  admit  that  the  earth^s  turning  is  the  swiftest  of 
absolutely  all  the  movements  about  it  because  of  its  making  so  great  a  revolu¬ 
tion  in  a  short  time,  so  that  all  those  things  that  were  not  at  rest  on  the  earth 
would  seem  to  have  a  movement  contrary  to  it,  and  never  would  a  cloud  be 
seen  to  move  toward  the  east  nor  anything  else  that  flew  or  was  thrown  into 
the  air.  For  the  earth  would  always  outstrip  them  in  its  eastward  motion, 
so  that  all  other  bodies  would  seem  to  be  left  behind  and  to  move  towards 
the  west. 

For  if  they  should  say  that  the  air  is  also  carried  around  with  the  earth  in  the 
same  direction  and  at  the  same  speed,  none  the  less  the  bodies  contained  in  it 
would  always  seem  to  be  outstripped  by  the  movement  of  both.  Or  if  they 
should  be  carried  around  as  if  one  with  the  air,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
would  appear  as  outstripping,  or  being  outstripped  by,  the  other.  But  these 
bodies  would  always  remain  in  the  same  relative  position  and  there  would  be  no 
movement  or  change  either  in  the  case  of  flying  bodies  or  projectiles.  And  yet 
we  shall  clearly  see  all  such  things  taking  place  as  if  their  slowness  or  swiftness 
did  not  follow  at  all  from  the  earth’s  movement. 

8.  That  There  Are  Two  Different  Prime  Movements  in  the  Heavens 

It  will  be  sufficient  for  these  hypotheses,  which  have  to  be  assumed  for  the 
detailed  expositions  following  them,  to  have  been  outlined  here  in  such  a  sum¬ 
mary  way  since  they  will  finally  be  established  and  confirmed  by  the  agreement 
of  the  consequent  proofs  with  the  appearances.  In  addition  to  those  already 
mentioned,  this  general  assumption  would  also  be  rightly  made  that  there  are 
two  different  prime  movements  in  the  heavens.  One  is  that  by  which  everything 
moves  from  east  to  west,  always  in  the  same  way  and  at  the  same  speed  with 
revolutions  in  circles  parallel  to  each  other  and  clearly  described  about  the  poles 
of  the  regularly  revolving  sphere.  Of  these  circles  the  greatest  is  called  the  equa¬ 
tor,  because  it  alone  is  always  cut  exactly  in  half  by  the  horizon  which  is  a  great 
circle  of  the  sphere,  and  because  every\vhere  the  sun’s  revolution  about  it  is 
sensibly  equinoctial.  The  other  movement  is  that  according  to  which  the  spheres 
of  the  stars  make  certain  local  motions  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the 
movement  just  described  and  around  other  poles  than  those  of  that  first  revolu- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  13 

tion.  And  we  assume  that  it  is  so  because,  while,  from  each  day’s  observation, 
all  the  heavenly  bodies  are  seen  to  move  generally  in  paths  sensibly  similar  and 
parallel  to  the  equator  and  to  rise,  culminate,  and  set  (for  such  is  the  property 
of  the  first  movement),  yet  from  subsequent  and  more  continuous  observation, 
even  if  all  the  other  stars  appear  to  preserve  their  angular  distances  with  respect 
to  each  other  and  their  properties  as  regards  their  places  within  the  first  move¬ 
ment,  still  the  sun  and  moon  and  planets  make  certain  complex  movements  un¬ 
equal  to  each  other,  but  all  contrary  to  the  general  movement,  towards  the  east 
opposite  to  the  movement  of  the  fixed  stars  which  preserve  their  respective 
angular  distances  and  are  moved  as  if  by  one  sphere. 

If,  then,  this  movement  of  the  planets  also  took  place  in  circles  parallel  to  the 
equator — ^that  is,  around  the  same  poles  as  those  of  the  first  revolution — ^it 
would  be  suflScient  to  assume  for  them  all  one  and  the  same  revolving  movement 
in  conformity  with  the  first.  For  it  would  then  be  plausible  to  suppose  that  their 
movement  was  the  result  of  a  lag  and  not  of  a  contrary  movement.  But  they 
always  seem,  at  the  same  time  they  move  towards  the  east,  to  deviate  towards 
the  north  and  south  poles  without  any  uniform  magnitude’s  being  observed  in 
this  deviation,  so  that  this  seems  to  befall  them  through  impulsions.  But  al¬ 
though  this  deviation  is  irregular  on  the  hypothesis  of  one  prime  movement,  it 
is  regular  when  effected  by  a  circle  oblique  to  the  equator.  And  so  such  a  circle 
is  conceived  one  and  the  same  for,  and  proper  to,  the  planets,  quite  exactly  ex¬ 
pressed  and  as  it  were  described  by  the  motion  of  the  sun,  but  traveled  also  by 
the  moon  and  planets  which  ever  turn  about  it  with  every  deviation  from  it  on 
the  part  of  any  planet  either  way,  a  deviation  within  a  prescribed  distance  and 
governed  by  rule.  And  since  this  is  seen  to  be  a  great  circle  also  because  of  the 
sun’s  equal  oscillation  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  equator,  and  since  the  east¬ 
ward  movements  of  all  the  planets  (as  we  said)  take  place  on  one  and  the  same 
circle,  it  was  necessary  to  suppose  a  second  movement  different  from  the  general 
one,  a  movement  about  the  poles  of  this  oblique  circle  or  echptic  in  the  direction 
opposite  to  that  of  the  first  movement. 

Then  if  we  think  of  a  great  circle  described  through  the  poles  of  both  the  cir¬ 
cles  just  mentioned,  which  necessarily  cuts  each  of  them — that  is,  the  equator 
and  the  circle  inclined  to  it^-exactly  in  half  and  at  right  angles,  there  will  be 
four  points  on  the  oblique  circle  or  ecliptic:  the  two  made  by  the  equator  dia¬ 
metrically  opposite  each  other  and  called  the  equinoxes  of  which  the  one  guard¬ 
ing  the  northern  approach  is  called  spring,  and  the  opposite  one  autumn.  And 
the  two  made  by  the  circle  drawn  through  both  sets  of  poles,  also  clearly  diamet¬ 
rically  opposite  each  other,  are  called  the  tropics,  of  which  the  one  to  the  south 
of  the  equator  is  called  winter,  and  the  one  to  the  north  summer. 

The  one  first  movement  which  contains  all  the  others  will  be  thought  of  then 
as  described  and  as  if  defined  by  the  great  circle,  through  both  sets  of  poles, 
which  is  carried  around  and  carries  with  it  all  the  rest  from  east  to  west  about 
the  poles  of  the  equator.  And  these  poles  are  as  if  they  were  on  what  is  called  the 
meridian,  which  Offers  from  the  circle  through  both  sets  of  poles  in  this  alone: 
that  it  is  not  always  dra^vn  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  but  is  conceived  as 
continuously  at  right  angles  to  the  horizon  and  therefore  called  the  meridian, 
since  such  a  position  cutting  in  half  as  it  does  each  of  the  two  hemispheres,  that 
below  the  earth  and  that  above,  provides  midday  and  midnight.  But  the  second 
movement,  consisting  of  many  parts  and  contained  by  the  first,  and  embracing 


14 


PTOLEMY 


itself  all  the  planetary  spheres,^  is  carried  by  the  first  as  we  said,  and  revolves 
about  the  poles  of  the  echptic  in  the  opposite  direction.  And  these  poles  of  the 
ecliptic  being  on  the  circle  effecting  the  first  revolution — ^that  is,  on  the  circle 
drawn  through  all  four  poles  together — are  carried  around  with  it  as  one  would 
expect;  and,  moving  therefore  with  a  motion  opposite  to  the  second  prime  move¬ 
ment,  in  this  way  keep  the  position  of  the  great  circle  which  is  the  ecliptic  ever 
the  same  with  respect  to  the  equator. 

9.  On  the  Particular  Notions 

A  summary  and  general  prehminary  explanation  would  contain  some  such 
exposition  as  the  foregoing  of  the  things  to  be  presupposed.  But  now  we  are 
going  to  begin  the  detailed  proofs.  And  we  think  the  first  of  these  is  that  by 
means  of  which  is  calculated  the  length  of  the  arc  between  the  poles  of  the  equa¬ 
tor  and  the  ecliptic,  lying  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  these  poles.  To  this 
end  we  must  first  see  expounded  the  method  of  computing  the  size  of  chords 
inscribed  in  a  circle,  and  we  are  now  going  to  demonstrate  this  geometrically  for 
each  case,  once  for  all. 


10.  On  the  Size  of  Chords  in  a  Circle 

With  an  eye  to  immediate  use,  we  shall  now  make  a  tabular  exposition  of  the 
size  of  these  chords  by  dividing  the  circumference  into  360  parts  and  setting 
side  by  side  the  chords  as  the  arcs  subtended  by  them  increase  by  a  half  part. 
That  is,  the  diameter  of  the  circle  will  be  cut  into  120  parts  for  ease  in  calcula¬ 
tion;  [and  we  shall  take  the  arcs,  considering  them  with  respect  to  the  number 
they  contain  of  the  circumference’s  360  parts,  and  compare  them  with  the  sub¬ 
tending  chords  by  finding  out  the  number  the  chords  contain  of  the  diameter’s 
120  parts.]  But  first  we  shall  show  how,  with  as  few  theorems  as  possible  and  the 
same  ones,  we  make  a  methodical  and  rapid  calculation  of  their  sizes  so  that  we 
may  not  only  have  the  magnitudes  of  the  chords  set  out  without  knowing  the 
why  and  wherefore  but  so  that  we  may  also  easily  manage  a  proof  by  means  of  a 
systematic  geometrical  construction.  In  general  we  shall  use  the  sexagesimal 
system  because  of  the  diflBculty  of  fractions,  and  we  shall  follow  out  the  multi¬ 
plications  and  divisions,  aiming  always  at  such  an  approximation  as  will  leave 
no  error  worth  considering  as  far  as  the  accuracy  of  the  senses  is  concerned. 

Then  first  let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABC  on  the  diameter  ADC  and  around 
centre  D,  and  let  straight  line  DB  be  erected  on 
AC  at  right  angles.  Let  DC  be  bisected  at  £7,  and 
EB  be  joined;  and  let  EF  be  laid  out  equal  to 
EB,  and  let  FB  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  FD  is  the  side  of  a 
regular  inscribed  decagon,  and  BF  that  of  a 
pentagon. 

For  since  the  straight  line  DC  is  bisected  at  E 
and  a  straight  line  DF  is  added  to  it, 

rect.  CF,  FD-\-sq.  ED  =  sq.  EF,  [Eucl.  ii,  6] 

since  ” 

BE^EF. 

^These  are  the  two  movements  of  the  same  and  of  the  other  described  in  Platons  myth  of 
the  Timaeus. 


But 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I 


15 


Therefore 


sq.  ED+sq.  DB  =  sq.  BE,  [Eucl.  i,  47] 


rect.  CFy  FD+sq,  ED  =  sq,  ED+sq,  DB, 

And,  subtracting  the  common  square  on  ED, 

rect.  CF,  FD  =  sq.  DB 
=  sq.  DC. 

Therefore  CF  is  cut  at  D  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  [Eucl.  vi,  def.  3].  Since, 
then,  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  the  side  of  the  decagon  which  are  inscribed 
in  the  same  circle,  when  they  are  in  the  same  straight  line,  cut  that  line  in  ex¬ 
treme  and  mean  ratio  [Eucl.  xiii,  9],  and  since  the  radius  DC  is  equal  to  the  side 
of  the  hexagon  [Eucl.  iv,  15  coroll.],  therefore  FD  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the 
decagon. 

And  likewise,  since  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  together  with  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 
decagon,  all  inscribed  in  the  same  circle  [Eucl.  xiii,  10],  and  since  in  the  right 
triangle  BDF 

sq.  BF =sq.  DB +sq.  FD 

where  DB  is  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  FD  the  side  of  the  decagon,  the  straight 
hne  BF  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon. 

Since,  then,  as  I  said,  we  suppose  the  diameter  divided  into  120  parts,  there¬ 
fore  by  what  we  have  just  established,  being  half  the  circlets  radius, 

ED  =  30  such  parts, 

and 


and 

and 

and 


sq.  ED  =  900; 
rad.  DB  =  00  such  parts, 
sq.  D5  =  3600; 


Then 


sq.  BE  =  sq.  EF  =  ^500. 


^  EE=67p4'55"i 

in  length,  and  by  subtraction 

Ei)=37p4'55". 


Therefore  the  side  of  the  decagon,  subtending  an  arc  of  36®  of  the  whole  circum¬ 
ference’s  360®,  will  have  37p4'55"  of  the  diameter’s  120^. 

Since  again 

FD  =  37H'bb", 
sq,  FD  =  1375H'U", 
sq.  DB  =  3600^ y 

and 


sq.  FD+sq.  DB  =  sq,  BFy 

therefore,  in  length. 


^From  now  on,  we  shall  indicate  ^^parts  such  as  the  diameter^s  120^’  by  a  p-superscript. 
Thus  67P4'55"  means  “67-i-^+3foo  parts  such  as  the  diameter’s  120.”  And  we  shall  indi¬ 
cate  “parts  such  as  the  circumference’s  360”  by  the  ordinary  notation  for  angular  degrees. 
For  the  measures  of  arcs  and  angles  exactly  correspond.  Thus  47°42'40''  means  “474-15 
■bseUTJ  parts  such  as  the  circumference’s  360”  or  “parts  such  as  4  right  angles’  360.” 


16 


PTOLEMY 


BF%70p32'3". 

And  therefore  the  side  of  the  pentagon,  subtending  an  arc  of  72®,  is  70p32'3". 

It  is  immediately  clear  that  the  side  of  the  hexagon,  subtending  an  arc  of  60® 
and  being  equal  to  the  radius,  is  itself  60^.  And  likewise,  since  the  side  of  the 
inscribed  square,  subtending  an  arc  of  90®,  is,  when  squared,  double  the  square 
on  the  radius,  and  since  the  side  of  the  inscribed  equilateral  triangle  is,  when 
squared,  triple  the  square  on  the  radius,  and  since  the  square  on  the  radius  is 
3,600p,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  square  will  add  up  to  7,200^,  and  the  square 
on  the  side  of  the  equilateral  triangle  to  10,800p.  And  so  in  length 

chord  of  arc  90® =84^51' 10", 

and 

chord  of  arc  120®=103p55'23". 

And  so  these  chords  are  easily  gotten  by  themselves.  Thence  it  is  evident  that, 
with  these  chords  given,  it  will  be  easy  to  get  the  chords  which  subtend  the 
supplements,  since  the  squares  on  them  added  together  are  equal  to  the  square 
on  the  diameter.  For  example,  since  it  was  shown 

chord  of  arc  36®  =  37p4'55", 
sq.  chord  of  arc  36®  =  1375p4'15", 

and 

sq.  diameter  =14,400p, 
therefore,  for  the  supplement, 

sq.  chord  of  arc  144®  =  13,024p55'45", 

and,  in  length, 

chord  of  arc  144®  =  114p7'37"; 
and  the  others  in  like  manner. 

And  we  shall  next  show,  by  expounding  a  lemma  very  useful  for  this  present 
business,  how  the  rest  of  the  chords  can  be  derived  successively  from  those  w^e 
already  have. 

For  let  there  be  a  circle  with  any  sort  of  inscribed  quadrilateral  ABCD,  and 
let  AC  and  BD  be  joined. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that 
rect.  ACy  BZ)  =  rect.  ABy  DC+rect.  ADy  BC. 

For  let  it  be  laid  out  such  that 

angle  ABE  —  angle  DBC. 

If  then  we  add  the  common  angle  EBDy 
angle  ABD  =  angle  EBC. 

But  also 

angle  JSDA  =  angle  BCE.  [Eucl.  iii,  21], 
for  they  subtend  the  same  arc.  Then  triangle 
ABD  is  equiangular  with  triangle  Hence 
BC  :CE::  BD  :  AD  [Eucl.  vi,  4]. 

Therefore 


Again  since 
and  also 

therefore  triangle  ABE 


rect.  BCy  AD  =  rect.  BDy  CE.  [Eucl.  vi,  16]. 

angle  ABE  =  angle  CBD 

angle  BAE  =  angle  BDCy 
is  equiangular  \vith  triangle  BCD.  Hence 
AB:AE::BD:  CD. 


Therefore 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I 


17 


rect.  ABj  CD  — red,  BD,  AE, 

But  it  was  also  proved 

rect.  BCf  AZ)  =  rect.  BD,  CE. 

Therefore  also 


rect.  ACf  BZ)  =  rect.  ABj  CD+rect.  BCj  AD,  [Eucl.  ii,  1]. 
^Vhich  was  to  be  proved. 

Now  that  this  has  been  expounded,  let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABCD  on  di¬ 
ameter  AjD,  and  from  the  point  A  let  there  be 
drawn  the  two  straight  lines  ABjAC^  and  let 
the  length  of  each  of  them  have  been  given  in 
terms  of  such  parts  as  the  given  diameter’s  120; 
and  let  BC  be  joined. 

I  say  that  BC  is  also  given. 

For  let  BD  and  CD  be  joined.  Then  clearly 
they  are  also  given  because  they  subtend  the 
supplements.  Since,  then,  the  quadrilateral 
ABCD  is  inscribed  in  a  circle,  therefore 
rect.  AB,  CD+rect.  AD,  BC  =  rect.  AC,  BD 

[p.  16] 

And  rectangle  AC,  BD  is  given,  and  also  rectan¬ 
gle  AB,  CD.  Therefore  the  remaining  rectangle 
AD,  BC  is  also  given.  And  AD  is  the  diameter.  Hence  the  straight  line  BC  is 
also  given.  And  it  is  now  clear  to  us  that,  if  two  arcs  are  given  and  the  two 
chords  subtending  them,  then  also  the  chord  subtending  the  difference  between 
the  two  arcs  will  be  given.  And  it  is  evident  that  by  means  of  this  theorem  we 
can  inscribe  many  other  chords  in  arcs  which  are  the  differences  between  arcs 
directly  given;  for  instance,  the  chord  subtending  an  arc  of  12°,  since  we  have 
the  chords  of  60°  and  72°. 

Again,  given  any  chord  in  a  circle,  let  it  be  proposed  to  find  the  chord  of  half 
the  arc  of  the  given  chord. 

And  let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABC  on  diameter  AC,  and  let  CB  be  the  given 
chord.  And  let  the  arc  be  bisected  at  D,  and  let  AB,  AD,  BD,  and  DC  be  joined. 
And  let  DF  be  dra^vm  from  D  perpendicular  to  AC. 

I  say  that 

CF  =  half  (AC-AB). 

For  let  AE  be  laid  out  such  that 
AE  =  AB, 

and  let  DB  be  joined.  Since 

AB  =  AE, 

and  AD  is  common,  therefore  the  two  sides  AB  and 
AD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  AE  and  AD  respec¬ 
tively.  And 


[Eucl.  Ill,  27] 


therefore  also 


But 


and  therefore 


angle  BAB  =  angle  EAD; 
base  BD  =  base  DE. 
chord  BD  =  chord  CD, 


la 


PTOLEMY 


chord  CD  =  DE. 

Since  then,  in  the  isosceles  triangle  DEC,  DF  has  been  dropped  from  the  vertex 
perpendicular  to  the  base,  therefore 

EF^CF,  [Eucl.  I,  26] 

But  CE=-AC-AB; 

therefore 


CF=half  {AC-AB), 

And  so,  since,  given  the  chord  of  arc  DC,  chord  AE  of  its  supplement  is  also 
given  [p.  16],  therefore  CF,  which  is  half  the  difference  between  AC  and  AB,  is 
given  too.  But  when  the  perpendicular  DF  is  drawn  in  right  triangle  ACD,  as  a 
consequence  right  triangle  ACD  is  equiangular  with  right  triangle  DCF  [Eucl. 
VI,  8],  and 

AC:  CD::  CD:  CF, 


Therefore 

rect.  AC,  CF=sq.  CD. 

But  rectangle  AC,CF  is  given,  therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  given.  And  so 
the  chord  CD  of  half  the  arc  DC  will  also  be  given  in  length. 

And  so  again,  by  means  of  this  theorem,  most  of  the  other  chords  will  be  given 
as  subtending  the  halves  of  arcs  already  found.  For  instance,  from  the  chord  of 
an  arc  of  12°,  there  can  be  gotten  the  chord  subtending  an  arc  of  6°,  and  those 
subtending  arcs  of  3°,  IJ^®,  and  respectively.  And  we  shall  find  from  calcu¬ 
lation  that 

chord  of  arc  13^°=1p34'15", 

and 

chord  of  arc  %°=0p47'8". 

Again  let  there  be  the  circle  ADCD  on  diameter  AD  with  center  at  F.  And 
from  A  let  there  be  cut  off  consecutively  two  given  arcs,  AD  and  DC ;  and  let  the 
given  chords  subtending  them,  AD  and  DC,  be  joined. 

I  say  that,  if  we  join  AC,  then  AC  will  be 
given  also. 

For  let  the  circlets  diameter  BFE  be  drawn 
through  D,  and  let  DD,  DC,  CD,  and  DE  be 
joined.  Then  from  this  it  is  clear  that,  by  means 
of  DC,  chord  CE  is  given;  and,  by  means  of  AD, 
chords  DD  and  DE  are  given  [p.  16].  And  by 
things  we  have  already  proved,  since  BCDE  is 
a  quadrilateral  inscribed  in  a  circle,  and  DD  and 
CE  are  the  diagonals,  the  rectangle  contained  by 
the  diagonals  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rec¬ 
tangles  contained  by  opposite  sides  [p.  16, 17].  And 
so,  since  the  rectangles  DD,  CE  and  DC,  DE  are 
given,  therefore  the  rectangle  DD,  CD  is  given  also.  But  the  diameter  BE  is 
given  too,  and  the  remaining  side  CD  will  be  given.  Therefore  the  chord  AC  of 
the  supplement  will  be  given  also.  And  so,  if  two  arcs  and  their  chords  are  given, 
then  by  means  of  this  theorem  the  chord  of  both  these  arcs  together  will  be 
given. 

And  it  is  evident  that,  by  continually  combining  the  chord  of  an  arc  13^°  with 
those  so  far  set  out  and  calculating  the  sums,  we  shall  inscribe  all  those  chords 
which,  when  doubled,  are  divisible  by  three;  and  only  those  chords  will  still  be 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  19 

skipped  which  fall  within  intervals.  For  there  will  be  two  such  chords 
skipped  in  each  interval,  since  we  are  carrying  out  this  inscribing  of  chords  by 
successive  additions  of  And  so  if  we  could  compute  the  chord  subtending  an 
arc  of  then  this  chord,  by  addition  to,  and  subtraction  from,  the  chords 
which  are  separated  by  intervals  and  have  already  been  given,  will  fill  in 
all  the  rest  of  the  intermediate  chords.  But  since,  given  any  chord  such  as  that 
subtending  an  arc  of  the  chord  of  a  third  of  the  arc  is  in  no  way  geomet¬ 
rically  given  (and  if  it  were  possible,  we  could  then  compute  the  chord  of  an  arc 
of  3^°),  therefore  we  shall  first  look  for  the  chord  of  an  arc  of  1®  by  means  of 
chords  subtending  arcs  of  1J^°  and  ^®.  We  shall  do  this  by  presenting  a  little 
lemma  which,  even  if  it  may  not  suffice  for  determining  their  sizes  in  general, 
can  yet  in  the  case  of  these  very  small  chords  keep  them  indistinguishable  from 
chords  rigorously  determined. 

For  I  say  that,  if  two  unequal  chords  are  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the  greater  has 
to  the  less  a  ratio  less  than  the  arc  on  the  greater  has  to  the  arc  on  the  less. 

For  let  there  be  the  circle  ABCD;  and  let 
unequal  chords  be  inscribed  in  it,  AB  the  less 
and  BC  the  greater. 

I  say  that 

chord  BC  :  chord  AB<arc  BC  :  arc  AB. 

For  let  angle  ABC  be  bisected  by  HD,  and  let 
AEC^  ADy  and  CD  be  joined.  And  since  angle 
ABC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line 
DEB, 

chord  CD  =  chord  AD, 

[Eucl.  Ill,  26,  29] 

and 

CEyAE.  [Eucl.  VI.  3] 

Then  let  DF  be  dropped  from  D  perpendicular  to 

AEC,  Now  since 

AD>DEy 

DE>DFy^ 

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  D  and  radius  DE  cuts  AD  and  falls 
beyond  DF.  Then  let  the  circle  GEH  be  drawn  and  the  straight  line  DFH  be 
produced.  And  since  ^ 

sect.  DDD>trgl.  DEF, 


and 

therefore 


But 


and 

Therefore 


trgl.  DDA>sect.  DEG, 

trgl.  DEF  :  trgl.  DEA  <sect.  DEH  :  sect.  DEG. 
trgl.  DEF  :  trgl.  DEA  :  :  EF  :  AE, 
sect.  DEH  :  sect.  DEG  : :  angle  FDE  :  angle  EDA. 


[Eucl.  V,  8] 
[Eucl.  VI,  1] 


'For  DF  produced  will  bisect  arc  ABC  [Eucl.  in,  3,  26];  hence  it  will  fall  on  the  side  of  B 
towards  C.  Therefore 

[Eucl.  I,  21] 


DE>DFy 

AD>DE. 


20 


PTOLEMY 


Then  componendo 
And  doubling  the 
And  separando 
But 
and 


EF  :  A£< angle  FDE  :  angle  EDA. 

AF  :  A£/< angle  FDA  :  angle  EDA. 
antecedents 

CA  :  A  £7  <  angle  CD  A  :  angle  EDA. 
CE  :  A£?< angle  CDB  :  angle  BDA. 
CE:AE::BC:AB, 


[Eucl.  VI,  3] 


angle  CDB  :  angle  BDA  : :  arc  BC  :  arc  AB.  [Eucl.  vi,  33] 
Therefore  .7 

chord  BC  :  chord  AB<arc  BC  :  arc  AB, 

Now,  then,  with  this  laid  down,  let  there  be  the  circle  ABCj  and  let  the  two 
chords  AB  and  AC  be  inscribed  in  it.  And  first  let  AB  be  given  as  subtending 
an  arc  of  and  AC  an  arc  of  1°. 

Since 

chord  AC  :  chord  AB  <arc  AC  :  arc  AB, 

and 

arc  AC  =  (arc  AB), 

therefore 

chord  AC  <13^  (chord  AB). 

But  it  was  proved  [p.  18] 

chord  AB  =  0P47'8". 

Therefore 

chord  AC  <1p2'50", 
for 

1P2'50"  =  1M  (0p47'8"). 

Again,  with  the  same  figure,  let  chord  AB  be  given  as  subtending  an  arc  of  1®, 
and  chord  AC  an  arc  of 
Likewise  then,  since 

arc  AC  =  (arc  AB), 
chord  AC <1^2  (chord  AB). 

But  we  proved  [p.  18] 

chord  AC  =1P34T5". 

Therefore 

chord  AB>1P2'50", 
for 

1P34T5"=1H  (1P2'50"). 

And  so,  since  it  has  been  proved  that  the  chord  of  an  arc  of  1®  is  both  greater 
and  less  than  the  same  number  of  parts,  clearly  we  shall  have 

chord  of  arc  1®=1p2'50"; 
and  by  means  of  earher  proofs  we  saw 

chord  of  arc  3^®=Op31'25". 

And  the  remaining  intervals  will  be  filled  in  as  we  have  just  said.  For  example, 
in  the  first  interval  we  find  the  chord  subtending  an  arc  of  2®  by  adding  3^®  and 
1J4°,  and  the  chord  subtending  an  arc  of  23^®  by  subtracting  J^®  from  3®,  and 
so  on  for  the  rest. 

So  the  business  of  chords  in  a  circle  can  be  easily  handled  in  this  way,  I  think. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  21 

-And  as  I  said,  in  order  to  have  the  magnitudes  set  out  immediately  to  hand,  we 
shall  draiw  up  tables  of  45  rows  each,  for  symmetry’s  sake.  And  the  first  column 
wiW  contain  the  magnitudes  of  the  arcs  increasing  by  and  the  second  column 
wdll  contain  the  magnitudes  of  the  chords  subtending  them  in  terms  of  the  diam¬ 
eter’s  assumed  120  parts.  The  third  column  will  contain  the  thirtieth  of  the 
increase  of  the  chord  as  the  corresponding  arc  increases  by  3^®,  so  that  we  may 
have  a  mean  addition,  accurate  for  the  senses,  for  each  increase  of  Veo®  in  the 
corresponding  arcs,  and  so  be  able  to  calculate  readily  the  chords  falling  within 
the  3^®  intervals.  And  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  by  means  of  these  same  the¬ 
orems,  if  we  should  suspect  some  typographical  error  in  connection  with,  any  of 
the  chords  computed  here,  we  can  easily  check  and  correct  it  either  by  means 
of  the  chord  of  an  arc  double  the  arc  of  the  chord  which  is  being  examined,  or  by 
means  of  the  difference  of  certain  other  given  chords,  or  by  means  of  the  chord 
subtending  the  supplement.  And  here  is  the  table: 


11.  Table  of  Chords 


Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths^ 

Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

0 

31 

25 

0 

1 

2 

50 

im 

17 

13 

9 

0 

1 

2 

10 

1 

1 

2 

50 

0 

1 

2 

50 

17 

17 

44 

14 

0 

1 

2 

7 

1 

34 

15 

0 

1 

2 

50 

17>^ 

18 

15 

17 

0 

1 

2 

5 

2 

2 

5 

40 

0 

1 

2 

50 

18 

18 

46 

19 

0 

1 

2 

2 

2H 

2 

37 

4 

0 

1 

2 

48 

18M 

19 

17 

21 

0 

1 

2 

0 

3 

3 

8 

28 

0 

1 

2 

48 

19 

19 

48 

21 

0 

1 

1 

57 

3H 

3 

39 

52 

0 

1 

2 

48 

19M 

20 

19 

19 

0 

1 

1 

54 

4 

4 

11 

16 

0 

1 

2 

47 

20 

20 

50 

16 

0 

1 

1 

51 

4 

42 

40 

0 

1 

2 

47 

20H 

21 

21 

11 

0 

1 

1 

48 

5 

5 

14 

4 

0 

1 

2 

46 

21 

21 

52 

6 

0 

1 

1 

45 

m 

5 

45 

27 

0 

1 

2 

45 

211^ 

22 

22 

58 

0 

1 

1 

42 

6 

6 

16 

49 

0 

1 

2 

44 

22 

22 

53 

49 

0 

1 

1 

39 

6H 

6 

48 

11 

0 

1 

2 

43 

22^ 

23 

24 

39 

0 

1 

1 

36 

7 

7 

19 

33 

0 

1 

2 

42 

23 

23 

55 

27 

0 

1 

1 

33 

7^ 

7 

50 

54 

0 

1 

2 

41 

23H 

24 

26 

13 

0 

1 

1 

30 

8 

8 

22 

15 

0 

1 

2 

40 

24 

24 

56 

58 

0 

1 

1 

26 

8K 

8 

53 

35 

0 

1 

2 

39 

24M 

25 

27 

41 

0 

1 

1 

22 

9 

9 

24 

54 

0 

1 

2 

38 

25 

25 

58 

22 

0 

1 

1 

19 

9 

56 

13 

0 

1 

2 

37 

25H 

26 

29 

1 

0 

1 

1 

15 

10 

10 

27 

32 

0 

1 

2 

35 

26 

26 

59 

38 

0 

1 

1 

11 

lOH 

10 

58 

49 

0 

1 

2 

33 

26H 

27 

30 

14 

0 

1 

1 

8 

11 

11 

30 

5 

0 

1 

2 

32 

27 

28 

0 

48 

0 

1 

1 

4 

ny2 

12 

1 

21 

0 

1 

2 

30 

271^ 

28 

31 

20 

0 

1 

1 

0 

12 

12 

32 

36 

0 

1 

2 

28 

28 

29 

1 

50 

0 

1 

0 

56 

12H 

13 

3 

50 

0 

1 

2 

27 

28H 

29 

32 

18 

0 

1 

0 

52 

13 

13 

35 

4 

0 

1 

2 

25 

29 

30 

2 

44 

0 

1 

0 

48 

13H 

14 

6 

16 

0 

1 

2 

23 

29M 

30 

33 

8 

0 

1 

0 

44 

14 

14 

37 

27 

0 

1 

2 

21 

30 

31 

3 

30 

0 

1 

0 

40 

14H 

•  15 

8 

38 

0 

1 

2 

19 

301^ 

31 

33 

50 

0 

1 

0 

35 

15 

15‘ 

39 

47 

0 

1 

2 

17 

31 

32 

4 

7 

0 

1 

0 

31 

15M 

16 

10 

56 

0 

1 

2 

15 

32 

34 

22 

0 

1 

0 

27 

16 

16 

42 

3 

0 

1 

2 

13 

32 

33 

4 

35 

0 

1 

0 

22 

^The  sexagesimal  system  is  carried  out  one  place  further  in  this  column.  Thus  0°1'2"50'  " 
represents  i^+^^+2Tlo6d  which  is  ^  of  the  increase  of  the  second  chord  over  the  first. 


22 


.  i  PTOLEMY 


Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

32M 

33 

34 

46 

0 

1 

0 

17 

58M 

58 

38 

5 

0 

0 

54 

45 

33 

34 

4 

55 

0 

1 

0 

12 

59 

59 

5 

27 

0 

0 

54 

37 

33H 

34 

35 

1 

0 

1 

0 

8 

59H 

59 

32 

45 

0 

0 

54 

29 

34 

35 

5 

5 

0 

1 

0 

3 

60 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 

54 

21 

34M 

35 

35 

6 

0 

0 

59 

57 

601^ 

60 

27 

11 

0 

0 

54 

12 

35 

36 

5 

5 

0 

0 

59 

52 

61 

60 

54 

17 

0 

0 

54 

4 

35H 

36 

35 

1 

0 

0 

59 

48 

eiy2 

61 

21 

19 

0 

0 

53 

56 

36 

37 

4 

55 

0 

0 

59 

43 

62 

61 

48 

17 

0 

0 

53 

47 

36H 

37 

34 

47 

0 

0 

59 

38 

62M 

62 

15 

10 

0 

0 

53 

39 

87 

38 

4 

36 

0 

0 

59 

32 

63 

62 

42 

0 

0 

0 

53 

30 

37H 

38 

34 

22 

0 

0 

59 

27 

63M 

63 

8 

45 

0 

0 

53 

22 

38 

39 

4 

5 

0 

0 

59 

22 

64 

63 

35 

25 

0 

0 

53 

13 

38M 

39 

33 

46 

0 

0 

59 

16 

643^ 

64 

2 

2 

0 

0 

53 

4 

39 

40 

3 

25 

0 

0 

59 

11 

65 

64 

28 

34 

0 

0 

52 

55 

39M 

40 

33 

0 

0 

0 

59 

5 

65y 

64 

55 

1 

0 

0 

52 

46 

40 

41 

2 

33 

0 

0 

59 

0 

66 

65 

21 

24 

0 

0 

52 

37 

4oy2 

41 

32 

3 

0 

0 

58 

54 

663^ 

65 

47 

43 

0 

0 

52 

28 

41 

42 

1 

30 

0 

0 

58 

48 

67 

66 

13 

57 

0 

0 

52 

19 

41^ 

42 

30 

54 

0 

0 

58 

42 

67M 

66 

40 

7 

0 

0 

52 

10 

»  42 

43 

0 

15 

0 

0 

58 

36 

68 

67 

6 

12 

0 

0 

52 

1 

42Ji 

43 

29 

33 

0 

0 

58 

31 

68J^ 

67 

32 

12 

0 

0 

51 

52 

43 

43 

58 

49 

0 

0 

58 

25 

69 

67 

58 

8 

0 

0 

51 

43 

43y 

44 

28 

1 

0 

0 

58 

18 

69y 

68 

23 

59 

0 

0 

51 

33 

44 

44 

57 

10 

0 

0 

58 

12 

70 

68 

49 

45 

0 

0 

51 

23 

44H 

45 

26 

16 

0 

0 

58 

6 

703^ 

69 

15 

27 

0 

0 

51 

14 

45 

45 

55 

19 

0 

0 

58 

0 

71 

69 

41 

4 

0 

0 

51 

4 

45M 

46 

24 

19 

0 

0 

57 

54 

713^ 

70 

6 

36 

0 

0 

50 

55 

46 

46 

53 

16 

0 

0 

57 

47 

72 

70 

32 

4 

0 

0 

50 

45 

46H 

47 

22 

9 

0 

0 

57 

41 

723^ 

70 

57 

26 

0 

0 

50 

35 

47 

47 

51 

0 

0 

0 

57 

34 

73 

71 

22 

44 

0 

0 

50 

26 

47M 

48 

19 

47 

0 

0 

57 

27 

73y2 

71 

47 

56 

0 

0 

50 

16 

48 

48 

48 

30 

0 

0 

57 

21 

74 

72 

13 

4 

0 

0 

50 

6 

48>^ 

49 

17 

11 

0 

0 

57 

14 

74>^ 

72 

38 

7 

0 

0 

49 

56 

49 

49 

45 

48 

0 

0 

57 

7 

75 

73 

3 

5 

0 

0 

49 

46 

49^ 

50 

14 

21 

0 

0 

57 

0 

75M 

73 

27 

58 

0 

0 

49 

36 

50 

50 

42 

51 

0 

0 

56 

53 

76 

73 

52 

46 

0 

0 

49 

26 

50M 

51 

11 

18 

0 

0 

56 

46 

76K 

74 

17 

29 

0 

0 

49 

16 

51 

51 

39 

41 

0 

0 

56 

39 

77 

74 

42 

7 

0 

0 

49 

6 

51^ 

52 

8 

0 

0 

0 

56 

32 

77y 

75 

6 

39 

0 

0 

48 

55 

52 

52 

36 

16 

0 

0 

56 

25 

78 

75 

31 

7 

0 

0 

48 

45 

52H 

53 

4 

29 

0 

0 

56 

18 

783^ 

75 

55 

29 

0 

0 

48 

34 

53 

53 

32 

38 

0 

0 

56 

10 

79 

76 

19 

46 

0 

0 

48 

24 

53M 

54 

0 

43 

0 

0 

56 

3 

793^ 

76 

43 

58 

0 

0 

48 

13 

54 

54 

28 

44 

0 

0 

55 

55 

80 

77 

8 

5 

0 

0 

48 

3 

54M 

54 

56 

42 

0 

0 

55 

48 

803^ 

77 

32 

6 

0 

0 

47 

52 

55 

55 

24 

36 

0 

0 

55 

40 

81 

77 

56 

2 

0 

0 

47 

41 

55M 

55 

52 

26 

0 

0 

55 

33 

813^ 

78 

19 

52 

0 

0 

47 

31 

56 

56 

20 

12 

0 

0 

55 

25 

82 

78 

43 

38 

0 

0 

47 

20 

56}^ 

56 

47 

54 

0 

0 

55 

17 

823^ 

79 

7 

18 

0 

0 

47 

9 

57 

57 

15 

33 

0 

0 

55 

9 

83 

79 

30 

52 

0 

0 

46 

58 

57M 

57 

43 

7 

0 

0 

55 

1 

833^ 

79 

54 

21 

0 

0 

46 

47 

58 

58 

10 

38 

0 

0 

54 

53 

84 

80 

17 

45 

0 

0 

46 

36 

THE  ALMAGEST,  I 


23 


Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

84^ 

80 

41 

3 

0 

0 

46 

25 

85 

81 

4 

15 

0 

0 

46 

14 

85M 

81 

27 

22 

0 

0 

46 

3 

86 

81 

50 

24 

0 

0 

45 

52 

86M 

82 

13 

19 

0 

0 

45 

40 

87 

82 

36 

9 

0 

0 

45 

29 

87M 

82 

58 

54 

0 

0 

45 

18 

88 

83 

21 

33 

0 

0 

45 

6 

88M 

83 

44 

6 

0 

0 

44 

55 

89 

84 

6 

33 

0 

0 

44 

43 

89H 

84 

28 

54 

0 

0 

44 

31 

90 

84 

51 

10 

0 

0 

44 

20 

90}^ 

85 

13 

20 

0 

0 

44 

8 

91 

85 

35 

24 

0 

0 

43 

57 

91M 

85 

57 

23 

0 

0 

43 

45 

92 

86 

19 

15 

0 

0 

43 

33 

92K 

86 

41 

2 

0 

0 

43 

21 

93 

87 

2 

42 

0 

0 

43 

9 

93H 

87 

24 

17 

0 

0 

42 

57 

94 

87 

45 

45 

0 

0 

42 

45 

94)4 

88 

7 

7 

0 

0 

42 

33 

95 

88 

28 

24 

0 

0 

42 

21 

95H 

88 

49 

34 

0 

0 

42 

9 

96 

89 

10 

39 

0 

0 

41 

57 

96J^ 

89 

31 

37 

0 

0 

41 

45 

97 

89 

52 

29 

0 

0 

41 

33 

97y2 

90 

13 

15 

0 

0 

41 

21 

98 

90 

33 

55 

0 

0 

41 

8 

98H 

90 

54 

29 

0 

0 

40 

55 

99 

91 

14 

56 

0 

0 

40 

42 

991^ 

91 

35 

17 

0 

0 

40 

30 

100 

91 

55 

32 

0 

0 

40 

17 

100^ 

92 

15 

40 

0 

0 

40 

4 

101 

92 

35 

42 

0 

0 

39 

52 

loiy 

92 

55 

38 

0 

0 

39 

39 

102 

93 

15 

27 

0 

0 

39 

26 

102>^ 

93 

35 

11 

0 

0 

39 

13 

103 

93 

54 

47 

0 

0 

39 

0 

103K 

94 

14 

17 

0 

0 

38 

47 

104 

94 

33 

41 

0 

0 

38 

34 

1041^ 

94 

52 

58 

0 

0 

38 

21 

105 

95 

12 

9 

0 

0 

38 

8 

105H 

95 

31 

13 

0 

0 

37 

55 

106 

95 

50 

11 

0 

0 

37 

42 

106H 

96 

9 

2 

0 

0 

37 

29 

107 

96 

27 

47 

0 

0 

37 

16 

1073^ 

96 

46 

24 

0 

0 

37 

3 

108 

97 

4 

56 

0 

0 

36 

50 

1083^ 

97 

23 

20 

0 

0 

36 

36 

109 

97 

41 

38 

0 

0 

36 

23 

109J^ 

97 

59 

49 

0 

0 

36 

9 

no 

98 

17 

54 

0 

0 

35 

56 

Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

IlOK 

98 

35 

52 

0 

0 

35 

42 

111 

98 

53 

43 

0 

0 

35 

29 

nvA 

99 

11 

27 

0 

0 

35 

15 

112 

99 

29 

5 

0 

0 

35 

1 

112>^ 

99 

46 

35 

0 

0 

34 

48 

113 

100 

3 

59 

0 

0 

34 

34 

nm 

100 

21 

16 

0 

0 

34 

20 

114 

100 

38 

26 

0 

0 

34 

6 

114>^ 

100 

55 

28 

0 

0 

33 

53 

115 

101 

12 

25 

0 

0 

33 

39 

115H 

101 

29 

15 

0 

0 

33 

25 

116 

101 

45 

57 

0 

0 

33 

11 

116H 

102 

2 

33 

0 

0 

32 

57 

117 

102 

19 

1 

0 

0 

32 

43 

Ii7y2 

102 

35 

22 

0 

0 

32 

29 

118 

102 

51 

37 

0 

0 

32 

15 

USA 

103 

7 

44 

0 

0 

32 

0 

119 

103 

23 

44 

0 

0 

31 

46 

n9A 

103 

39 

37 

0 

0 

31 

32 

120 

103 

55 

23 

0 

0 

31 

18 

120A 

104 

11 

2 

0 

0 

31 

4 

121 

104 

26 

34 

0 

0 

30 

49 

1213^ 

104 

41 

59 

0 

0 

30 

35 

122 

104 

57 

16 

0 

0 

30 

21 

122H 

105 

12 

26 

0 

0 

30 

7 

123 

105 

27 

30 

0 

0 

29 

52 

123A 

105 

42 

26 

0 

0 

29 

37 

124 

105 

57 

14 

0 

0 

29 

23 

mA 

106 

11 

55 

0 

0 

29 

8 

125 

106 

26 

29 

0 

0 

28 

54 

125J^ 

106 

40 

56 

0 

0 

28 

39 

126 

106 

55 

15 

0 

0 

28 

24 

mA 

107 

9 

27 

0 

0 

28 

10 

127 

107 

23 

32 

0 

0 

27 

56 

127A 

107 

37 

30 

0 

0 

27 

40 

128 

107 

51 

20 

0 

0 

27 

25 

128A 

108 

5 

2 

0 

0 

27 

10 

129 

108 

18 

37 

0 

0 

26 

56 

129H 

108 

32 

5 

0 

0 

26 

41 

130 

108 

45 

25 

0 

0 

26 

26 

1303^ 

108 

58 

38 

0 

0 

26 

11 

131 

109 

11 

44 

0 

0 

25 

56 

1313^ 

109 

24 

42 

0 

0 

25 

41 

132 

109 

37 

32 

0 

0 

25 

26 

1323^ 

109 

50 

15 

0 

0 

25 

11 

133 

no 

2 

50 

0 

0 

24 

56 

1333^ 

no 

15 

18 

0 

0 

24 

41 

134 

no 

27 

39 

0 

0 

24 

26 

1343^ 

no 

39 

52 

0 

0 

24 

10 

135 

no 

51 

57 

0 

0 

23 

55 

1353^ 

111 

3 

54 

0 

0 

23 

40 

136 

111 

15 

44 

0 

0 

23 

25 

24 


PTOLEm^ 


Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

Arcs 

Chords 

Sixtieths 

136K 

111 

27 

26 

0 

0 

23 

9 

158H 

117 

53 

39 

0 

0 

11 

35 

137 

111 

39 

1 

0 

0 

22 

54 

159 

117 

59 

27 

0 

0 

11 

19 

137H 

111 

50 

28 

0 

0 

22 

39 

159H 

118 

5 

7 

0 

0 

10 

3 

138 

112 

1 

47 

0 

0 

22 

24 

160 

118 

10 

37 

0 

0 

10 

47 

138H 

112 

12 

59 

0 

0 

22 

8 

160H 

118 

16 

1 

0 

0 

10 

31 

139 

112 

24 

3 

0 

0 

21 

53 

161 

118 

21 

16 

0 

0 

10 

14 

139>i 

112 

35 

0 

0 

0 

21 

37 

161H 

118 

26 

23 

0 

0 

9 

58 

140 

112 

45 

48 

0 

0 

21 

22 

162 

118 

31 

22 

0 

0 

9 

42 

uo^ 

112 

56 

29 

0 

0 

21 

7 

162H 

118 

36 

13 

0 

0 

9 

25 

141 

113 

7 

2 

0 

0 

20 

51 

163 

118 

40 

55 

0 

0 

9 

9 

141K 

113 

17 

26 

0 

0 

20 

36 

1633^ 

118 

45 

30 

0 

0 

8 

53 

142 

113 

27 

44 

0 

0 

20 

20 

164 

118 

49 

56 

0 

0 

8 

37 

U2y2 

113 

37 

54 

0 

0 

20 

4 

1643^ 

118 

54 

15 

0 

0 

8 

20 

143 

113 

47 

56 

0 

0 

19 

49 

165 

118 

58 

25 

0 

0 

8 

4 

143Ji 

113 

57 

50 

0 

0 

19 

33 

165K 

119 

2 

26 

0 

0 

7 

48 

144 

114 

7 

37 

0 

0 

19 

17 

166 

119 

6 

20 

0 

0 

7 

31 

144H 

114 

17 

15 

0 

0 

19 

2 

1663^ 

119 

10 

6 

0 

0 

7 

15 

145 

114 

26 

46 

0 

0 

18 

46 

167 

119 

13 

44 

0 

0 

6 

59 

145M 

114 

36 

9 

0 

0 

18 

30 

167H 

119 

17 

13 

0 

0 

6 

42 

146 

114 

45 

24 

0 

0 

18 

14 

168 

119 

20 

34 

0 

0 

6 

26 

146H 

114 

54 

31 

0 

0 

17 

59 

1683^ 

119 

23 

47 

0 

0 

6 

10 

147 

115 

3 

30 

0 

0 

17 

43 

169 

119 

26 

52 

0 

0 

5 

53 

147K 

115 

12 

22 

0 

0 

17 

27 

169H 

119 

29 

49 

0 

0 

5 

37 

148 

115 

21 

6 

0 

0 

17 

11 

170 

119 

32 

37 

0 

0 

5 

20 

1483^ 

115 

29 

41 

0 

0 

16 

55 

1703^ 

119 

35 

17 

0 

0 

5 

4 

149 

115 

38 

9 

0 

0 

16 

40 

171 

119 

37 

49 

0 

0 

4 

48 

1493^ 

115 

46 

29 

0 

0 

16 

24 

171H 

119 

40 

13 

0 

0 

4 

31 

150 

115 

54 

40 

0 

0 

16 

8 

172 

119 

42 

28 

0 

0 

4 

14 

1501^ 

116 

2 

44 

0 

0 

15 

52 

172H 

119 

44 

35 

0 

0 

3 

58 

151 

116 

10 

40 

0 

0 

15 

36 

173 

119 

46 

35 

0 

0 

3 

42 

151^ 

116 

18 

28’ 

0 

0 

15 

20 

1733^ 

119 

48 

26 

0 

0 

3 

26 

152 

116 

26 

8 

0 

0 

15 

4 

174 

119 

50 

8 

0 

0 

3 

9 

1523^ 

116 

33 

40 

0 

0 

14 

48 

174^ 

119 

51 

43 

0 

0 

2 

53 

153 

116 

41 

4 

0 

0 

14 

32 

175 

119 

53 

10 

0 

0 

2 

36 

153J^ 

116 

48 

20 

0 

0 

14 

16 

175H 

119 

54 

27 

0 

0 

2 

20 

154 

116 

55 

28 

0 

0 

14 

0 

176 

119 

55 

38 

0 

0 

2 

3 

154H 

117 

2 

28 

0 

0 

13 

44 

176M 

119 

56 

39 

0 

0 

1 

47 

155 

117 

9 

20 

0 

0 

13 

28 

177 

119 

57 

32 

0 

0 

1 

30 

1553^ 

117 

16 

4 

0 

0 

13 

12 

1773^ 

119 

58 

18 

0 

0 

1 

14 

156 

117 

22 

40 

0 

0 

12 

56 

178 

119 

58 

55 

0 

0 

0 

57 

156}^ 

117 

29 

8 

0 

0 

12 

40 

1783^ 

119 

59 

24 

0 

0 

0 

41 

157 

117 

35 

28 

0 

0 

12 

24 

179 

119 

59 

44 

0 

0 

0 

25 

1573^ 

117 

41 

40 

0 

0 

12 

7 

my 

119 

59 

56 

0 

0 

0 

9 

158 

117 

47 

43 

0 

0 

11 

51 

180 

120 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

12.  On  the  Arc  Between  the  Tropics 

Now  that  the  question  of  the  value  of  chords  in  a  circle  has  been  treated,  our 
first  task  will  be,  as  we  have  said,  to  show  how  much  the  oblique  circle  through 
the  middle  of  the  zodiac  [the  ecliptic]  is  inclined  to  the  equator — that  is,  what 
ratio  the  great  circle  which  passes  through  both  sets  of  poles  has  to  the  arc  inter¬ 
cepted  on  it  by  these  poles.  This  arc  is  evidently  equal  to  the  arc  from  either  of 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  25 

the  tropic  points  to  the  equator,  along  this  same  circle.  And  we  can  immediately 
get  the  measure  of  this  arc  instrumentally,  with  some  such  simple  construction 
as  the  following. 

We  shall  make  a  brass  circle,  suitable  in  size,  accurately  turned,  with  its  sur¬ 
faces  standing  square.  And  we  shall  use  it  as  a  meridian,  dividing  it  into  the  360 
parts  supposed  for  the  great  circle,  and  each  of  these  into  as  many  parts  as  there 
is  room  for.  Then,  fitting  into  this  circle  another  little  circle,  thinner  than  it,  in 
such  a  way  that  their  sides  remain  in  the  same  plane  and  the  smaller  circle  can 
turn  without  hindrance  within  the  greater  circle  to  the  north  and  south,  always 
in  the  same  plane,  we  shall  place,  on  one  of  the  smaller  circlets  two  sides  at  two 
diametrically  opposite  points,  small  prisms  of  the  same  size  pointing  in  exactly 
the  same  straight  line  with  each  other  and  with  the  centre  of  the  circles.  And  in 
the  middle  of  the  prisms’  width  we  shall  place  fine  pointers  touching  the  side  of 
the  greater  circle  and  its  divisions.  And  then  we  shall  fit  that  circle  securely  on  a 
small  and  convenient  column  for  its  several  uses,  and  stand  the  base  of  the 
column  on  a  pavement  in  the  open  air  exactly  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  hori¬ 
zon.  And  we  shall  take  care  that  the  plane  of  the  circles  is  perpendicular  to  that 
of  the  horizon  and  parallel  to  that  of  the  meridian.  The  first  condition  is  satisfied 
by  means  of  a  plumb  line  which  is  suspended  from  the  highest  point  of  the  circles 
and  which  is  watched  until,  by  correction  of  the  underpinning,  it  is  directed  to 
the  diametrically  opposite  point  below.  And  the  second  condition  is  satisfied  by 
very  visibly  drawing  a  meridian  line  in  the  plane  below  the  column  and  turning 
the  circles  from  side  to  side  until  their  plane  is  sighted  parallel  to  the  line.  And 
after  a  placement  of  this  kind  had  been  made,  we  would  observe  the  sun’s  ad¬ 
vance  to  the  north  and  south,  moving  the  inside  circle  at  middays  until  the  lower 
prism  was  completely  shadowed  by  the  whole  of  the  upper  prism.  And  when 
this  was  done,  the  needle  points  would  show  us  each  time  how  many  degrees 
from  the  zenith  the  sun’s  center  stood  on  the  meridian  line. 

And  we  used  to  make  this  observation  still  more  readily  by  constructing,  in¬ 
stead  of  circles,  a  steady  square  block  of  rock  or  wood  having  one  of  its  faces  reg¬ 
ular  and  accurately  shaped.  And  using  as  a  centre  the  vertex  of  one  of  its  angles, 
we  drew  a  quadrant,  drawing  out  from  the  centre  point  to  the  circumference 
those  straight  lines  which  contain  the  right  angle  of  the  quadrant,  and  likewise 
dividing  the  circumference  into  90  parts,  and  dividing  these  again.  And  after 
this,  on  one  of  the  straight  lines,  the  one  which  was  to  be  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  horizon  and  to  face  south,  we  laid  two  small  right  cylinders  in  every 
way  equal  and  similarly  fashioned,  one  on  the  centre  exactly  at  the  midpoint  of 
the  indicated  circle  and  the  other  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the  straight  line. 
Then,  standing  the  marked  side  of  the  block  along  the  meridian  line  drawn  in 
the  supporting  plane  of  the  horizon  so  that  it  would  also  be  parallel  to  the  plane 
of  the  meridian,  again  making  adjustments  with  fine  splints  in  accord  with  a 
plumb  line  right  across  the  cylinders  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon, 
we  would  observe  as  before  the  midday  shadow  from  the  centre  cylinder,  put¬ 
ting  something  at  the  graduated  circumference  to  show  more  clearly  its  position. 
And  marking  the  middle  of  the  shadow  we  would  note  down  the  division  of  the 
quadrant,  and  this  would  clearly  indicate  the  latitude  of  the  sun’s  path  on  the 
meridian. 

Now  from  such  observations  and  especially  from  those  made  by  us  over  sev¬ 
eral  periods  while  the  sun  was  near  the  tropics,  seeing  the  marker  count  off  from 


26 


PTOLEMY 


the  zenith  always  an  equal  number  of  divisions  on  the  meridian  and  the  same 
ones  both  for  the  winter  tropics  and  for  the  summer  tropics,  we  found  the  arc 
from  the  northernmost  to  the  southernmost  limit,  which  is  the  arc  between  the 
tropic  points,  to  be  always  more  than  47°40'  but  less  than  47°45'.  And  with  this 
there  results  nearly  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  Eratosthenes  and  as  that  which 
Hipparchus  used.  For  the  arc  between  the  tropics  turns  out  to  be  very  nearly  11 
out  of  the  meridian's  83  parts. 

And  immediately  from  this  observation  it  is  easy  to  deduce  the  latitudes  of 
the  places  where  we  make  the  observations,  once  we  have  taken  the  midpoint  of 
the  two  limits,  which  is  on  the  equator,  and  the  arc  betAveen  this  point  and  the 
zenith.  For  the  arc  between  the  poles  and  the  plane  of  the  horizon  is  clearly 
equal  to  this  arc. 


13.  Preliminaries  to  the  Spherical  Proofs 
And  since  it  is  next  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  respective  values  of  the  arcs 
on  great  circles  drawn  through  the  poles  of  the  equator  and  cut  off  between  the 
equator  and  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  explain  very  short  and 
easy  lemmas  by  means  of  which  we  shall  effect  nearly  all 
the  proofs  of  theorems  dealing  with  spheres. 

Now  let  the  two  straight  lines  BE  and  CD,  drawn  to 
two  straight  lines  AB  and  AC,  cut  each  other  at  F, 

I  say  that  AC  :  AE  comp.  CD  :  DF,  BF  :  BE. 

For  let  EG  be  drawn  through  E  parallel  to  CD.  Since 
the  straight  lines  CD  and  EG  are  parallel,  AC  :  AE  :  ; 

CD:  EG  [Eucl.  vi,  4]. 

Then  if  we  supply  the  straight  line  DF, 

CD  :  EG  comp.  CD  :  DF,  DF  :  EG. 

And 

DF  :EG::  BF  :  BE,  [Eucl.  vi,  4]. 
again  because  EG  and  DF  are  parallel.  Therefore 

AC  :  AE  comp.  CD  :  DF,  BF  :  BE. 

Which  it  was  proposed  to  prove. 

And  in  the  same  way  it  can  be  shown,  by  drawing  a  straight  line  through  A 

parallel  to  EF  and  producing  CDG  to  meet  it,  that 
CE  :  AE  comp.  CF  :  DF,  BD  :  AB. 

For  again  since  AG  is  parallel  to  EF 

CF  :  FG  : :  CE  :  AE  [Eucl.  vi,  2]. 
But  if  we  supply  DF, 

CF  :  FG  comp.  CF  :  DF,  DF  :  FG. 

But 

DF  :FG::BD:  AB 

because  AB  and  FG  are  drawn  through  to  the  paral¬ 
lels  AG  and  BF.  Therefore 

CF  :  FG  comp.  CF  :  DF,  BD  :  AB. 


CE:AE::CF:  FG. 


But 
And  therefore 

CE  :  AE  comp.  CF  :  DF,  BD 
Which  was  to  be  proved. 


AB. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I 


27 


Again,  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  Z>;  and  let  there  be  taken  on  its 
circumference  three  points  A,  By  and  C  in  such  a  way  that  each  of  the  arcs  AB 
and  BC  is  less  than  a  semicircle  (and  let  the  same  thing  be  understood  of  the 
arcs  taken  hereafter).  And  let  the  straight  lines  AC  and  DEB  be  joined. 

I  say  that  chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  BC  :  : 
AE  :  CE. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  AF  and  CG  be  drawn 
from  the  points  A  and  C  perpendicular  to  BD. 
Since  AF  is  parallel  to  CG  and  A  EC  crosses  them, 
therefore 

AF  :CG::AE:  CE  [Eucl.  vi,  4]. 
But 

AF  :  CG  :  :  chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  BC, 
For  the  ones  are  the  halves  of  the  others  raspective- 
ly.  And  therefore 

AE  :  CE  :  :  chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  BC. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  it  follows  from  this  that,  if  the  whole  arc  AC 
is  given  and  also  the  ratio  of  the  chord  of  twice  arc  AB  to  the  chord  of  twice  arc 
BC,  then  each  of  the  arcs  AB  and  BC  is  given. 

For  "^dth  the  same  figure  laid  out,  let  AD  he 
joined,  and  from  D  let  DF  be  drawn  perpendicular 
to  ABC.  It  is  clear  then  that,  given  arc  AC,  angle 
ADF  which  subtends  the  half  of  it  is  given,  and  also 
the  whole  triangle  ADF.  Now  with  the  whole  line 
AC  given,  since 

AB  :  CE  :  :  chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  BC, 
therefore  AB  Ls  given^  and  the  remainder  EF  is 
given.  And  for  this  reason  and  since  DF  is  given, 
both  angle  EDF  of  the  right  triangle  EDF  and  the 
whole  angle  ADB  are  given.  And  so  both  arcs  AB 
and  BC  are  given.  Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Again,  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  B,  and  on  its  circumference 

let  there  be  taken  three  points  A,  B,  and  C  in 
such  a  way  that  each  of  the  arcs  AB  and  AC  is 
less  than  a  semicircle  (and  let  this  same  condition 
be  understood  for  the  arcs  to  be  taken  hereafter). 

I  And  let  AD  and  BC  be  joined  and  the  resulting 
straight  lines  be  produced  to  meet  at  B. 

I  say  that 

CE  :  BE  :  :  chord  2  arc  AC  :  chord  2  arc  AB. 
For,  as  in  the  previous  lemma,  if  from  the 
points  B  and  C  we  drop  BF  and  CG  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  AB,  then,  since  they  are  parallel, 

CG:BF::CE:  BE. 

And  so  also 

CE  :  BE  :  :  chord  2  arc  AC  :  chord  2  arc  AB. 


'For  compoTiendo 

AC  :  CE  :  :  chord  2  arc  AB  -h  chord  2  arc  BC  :  chord  2  arc  BC. 


PTOLEMY 


28 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  then  from  this  it  follows  that,  even  if  the  arc  BC  alone  be  given  along 
with  the  ratio  of  the  chord  of  twice  arc  AC  to  the  chord  of  twice  arc  AB,  then 
arc  AB  is  given. 

For  again  in  a  similar  figure,  with  BD  joined 
and  DF  dropped  perpendicular  to  5C,  angle 
BDF  subtending  half  arc  BC  is  given,  and  also 
the  whole  right  triangle  BDF.  And  since  also  the 
ratio  of  CE  to  BE  is  given  and  chord  5C,  there¬ 
fore  BE  is  given  and  the  whole  line  EBF.  And  so, 
since  DF  is  given,  angle  EDF  of  the  same  right 
triangle  is  also  given,  and  by  subtraction  angle 
EDB.  Hence  arc  AB  is  also  given. 

And  with  these  conclusions  in  mind,  let  arcs  of  great  circles  be  described  on 

a  spherical  surface  in  such  a  way  that  two  arcs 
BE  and  CD,  dra^vn  to  two  arcs  AB  and  AC,  in¬ 
tersect  each  other  at  the  point  F.  And  let  each  of 
these  arcs  be  less  than  a  semicircle  (and  let  the 
same  condition  be  understood  in  all  the  figures). 
Then  I  say  that 

chord  2  arc  CE  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp, 
chord  2  arc  CF  :  chord  2  arc  DF, 
chord  2  arc  BD  :  chord  2  arc  AB. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  sphere  be  taken,  and 
let  it  be  G;  and  from  the  point  G  let  the  straight 
lines  BGf  FGj  and  EG  be  drawn  to  the  intersec¬ 
tions  of  the  circles  at  D,  F,  and  E.  And  let  the 
straight  line  joining  AD  be  produced  to  meet  DC  produced  at  point  H.  And 
likewise  let  CD  and  AC  be  joined  and  cut  FG  and  EG  at  K  and  L.  Then  the 
points  D,  K,  and  L  are  on  one  straight  line,  because  they  are  at  once  in  two 
planes:  that  of  the  triangle  A  CD,  and  that  of  the  circle  BFE.  When  these  points 
are  joined,  we  have  two  straight  lines  HL  and  CD  intersecting  at  point  K  and 
cutting  two  other  straight  lines  AH  and  AC.  Therefore 
CL  :  AL  comp.  CK  :  DK,  DH  :  AH. 


But 


and 


CL  :  AL  :  :  chord  2  arc  CE  :  chord  2  arc  AE, 
CK  :  KD  :  :  chord  2  arc  CF  :  chord  2  arc  DF; 

DH  :  AH  :  :  chord  2  arc  BD  :  chord  2  arc  AB. 


[p.  26] 


[p.  27] 
[p.  27] 


And  therefore 

chord  2  arc  CE  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp, 
chord  2  arc  CF  :  chord  2  arc  DF,  chord  2  arc  BD  :  chord  2  arc  AB. 

In  the  same  way,  by  straight  lines  constructed  in  a  plane,  it  is  also  proved 
that 

chord  2  arc  AC  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp, 
chord  2  arc  CD  :  chord  2  arc  DF,  chord  2  arc  BF  :  chord  2  arc  BE.^ 
Which  things  it  was  required  to  prove. 

'This  analogous  theorem  is  proved  thus:  With  the  same  arcs  as  in  the  preceding  figure,  pro¬ 
duce  the  straight  lines  CF,  CF,  and  EF  of  the  four  intersecting  great  circles  of  a  sphere  whose 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I 


29 


14.  On  the  Arcs  Between  the  Equator  and  the  Ecliptic 
Now  that  this  theorem  has  been  expounded,  we  shall  make  the  first  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  arcs  as  worked  out  above,  in  the  following  way: 

For  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  equator  and 

the  poles  of  the  ecliptic;  and  let  A  EC  be  the  semi¬ 
circle  of  the  equator,  and  BED  the  semicircle  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  the  point  E  their  intersection  at  the 
spring  equinox  so  that  point  B  is  the  winter  tropic 
and  D  the  summer  tropic.  And  let  the  pole  of  the 
equator  A  EC  be  taken  on  arc  ABCy  and  let  it  be  the 
point  F.  And  let  the  arc  EG  be  taken  on  the  ecliptic, 
and  suppose  it  to  be  30°,  and  through  the  points  F 
and  G  let  the  arc  FGH  of  a  great  circle  be  drawn. 
And  let  it  be  proposed  to  find  the  arc  GH, 

Let  it  be  understood  now  and  generally  in  all  such 
proofs,  so  we  shall  not  have  to  repeat  the  same  thing 
for  each  one,  that,  whenever  we  say  of  how  many 
parts  or  divisions  the  magnitudes  of  arcs  or  straight  lines  consist,  we  mean,  in 
the  case  of  arcs,  of  such  divisions  as  the  circumference  of  the  great  circle  has 
360;  and,  in  the  case  of  straight  lines,  of  such  as  the  same  circlets  diameter  has 
120. 


Since,  then,  in  the  construction  of  the  great  circles,  the  two  arcs  FH  and  BE 
have  been  drawn  to  the  arcs  AF  and  AF,  intersecting  at  the  point  G,  therefore 
chord  2  arc  AF  :  chord  2  arc  AB  comp, 
chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  GHy  chord  2  arc  EG  :  chord  2  arc  BE.  [p.  28  Fn] 
But 


2  arc  AF=180°, 
chord  2  arc  AF=  120^. 


centre  is  G.  Let  CE  and  AG  meet  at  H,  CF  and  DG  at  L,  and  EF  and  BG  at  K.  Then  the 
points  H,  L,  and  K  He  in  the  same  straight  Hne  since  they  all  He  on  the  intersection  of  the 
same  two  planes:  that  of  circle  BAG,  and  that  of  triangle  FEC. 

Then 


CH  :  EH  comp.  CL  :  FL,  FK  :  EK 


[p.  26] 


But 


CH  :  EH  :  :  chord  2  arc  AC  :  chord  2  arc  AE, 
CL  :  FL  :  :  chord  2  arc  CD  :  chord  2  arc  DF, 


and 

FK  :  EK  :  :  chord  2  arc  BF  :  chord  2  arc  BE.  [p.  27) 

Substituting  in  the  first  expression,  we  have  shown  what  was  required. 


30 


PTOLEMY 


And  according  to  the  ratio  of  83  parts  to  11,  agreed  to  by  us 

2  arc  A5  =  47°42'40", 

and  therefore 
And  again 


[p.  26], 


'  ed' 


and 


chord  2  arc  A5  =  48p31'55". 

2  arc  £'G  =  60°, 
chord  2  arc  ^70  =  60^; 


2arc  J5iB  =  180^ 
chord  2  arc  BE=\20^. 

Therefore 

chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  (777  comp.  120^  :  48p31'55",  120^  :  60^/ 
or 

chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  Gif  :  :  120^  :  24^1 5'57". 

And 

2arci?^iy  =  180^ 
chord  2  arc  FH  =  120^; 


chord  2  arc  G77  =  24p15'57". 

2  arc  GJT  =  23^19'59", 
arc  G^mr40'. 


and  therefore 
And  so 

And  again  let 

arc  £'G  =  60®, 

so  that,  the  others  remaining  the  same, 

2arc£'G=120^ 
chord  2  arc  JS'G=  103p55'23". 

Then  again 

chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  GH  :  :  120^  :  42p1'48". 

And 

•  chord  2  arc  FH 

And  so  also 

chord  2  arc  Gi7  =  42Pl'48". 

And  therefore 

2  arc  G77  =  4rOT8" 
arc  G^f-20°30'9". 

Which  things  were  to  be  proved. 

^Since  the  compounding  of  ratios  is  equivalent  to  our  multiplication  of  fractions,  com¬ 
pounding  with  the  inverse  ratio  is  equivalent  to  our  division  of  fractions.  In  other  words, 
Ptolemy  in  this  paragraph  has  first  proved  that 

chord  2  arc  AF  chord  2  arc  FH  chord  2  arc  EG 


chord  2  arc  AB 
He  then  says  here 

chord  2  arc  AF 


chord  2  arc  GH 
chord  2  arc  EG 


chord  2  arc  BE 
chord  2  arc  FH 


chord  2  arc  AB  ‘  chord  2  arc  BE  chord  2  arc  GH 

For  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  compounding  of  ratios  the  reader  is  referred  to 
Euchd^s  Elements^  Books  V  and  VI.  The  rules  for  the  multipHcation  and  division  of  fractions 
depend  for  their  validity  upon  these  principles  of  Euchd,  unless  one  treats  them  as  operations 
in  a  symbolic  system,  as  in  modern  mathematical  theory. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  31 

And  now  in  the  same  way,  by  calculating  the  values  for  successive  arcs,  we 
shall  lay  out  a  table  for  the  90°  of  a  quadrant,  containing  the  values  of  arcs  like 
those  already  proved.  And  here  is  the  table: 


15.  Table  of  Obliquity 


Arcs  of  the 

Arcs  of 

the 

Arcs  of  the 

Arcs  of  the 

Ecliptic 

Meridian 

Ecliptic 

Meridian 

Ecliptic 

Meridian 

Ecliptic 

Meridian 

1 

0 

24 

16 

25 

9 

50 

29 

46 

16 

54 

47 

70 

22 

20 

11 

2 

0 

48 

31 

26 

10 

12 

46 

47 

17 

12 

16 

71 

22 

28 

57 

3 

1 

12 

46 

27 

10 

34 

57 

48 

17 

29 

27 

72 

22 

37 

17 

4 

1 

37 

0 

28 

10 

56 

44 

49 

17 

46 

20 

73 

22 

45 

11 

5 

2 

1 

12 

29 

11 

18 

25 

50 

18 

2 

53 

74 

22 

52 

39 

6 

2 

25 

22 

30 

11 

39 

59 

51 

18 

19 

15 

75 

22 

59 

41 

7 

2 

49 

30 

31 

12 

1 

20 

52 

18 

35 

5 

76 

23 

6 

17 

8 

3 

13 

35 

32 

12 

22 

30 

53 

18 

50 

41 

77  : 

23 

12 

27 

9 

3 

37 

37 

33 

12 

43 

28 

54 

19 

5 

57 

78 

23 

18 

11 

10 

4 

1 

38 

34 

13 

4 

14 

55 

19 

20 

56 

79 

23 

23 

28 

11 

4 

25 

32 

35 

13 

24 

47 

56 

19 

35 

28 

80 

23 

28 

16 

12 

4 

49 

24 

36 

13 

45 

6 

57 

19 

49 

42 

81 

23 

32 

30 

13 

5 

13 

11 

37 

14 

5 

11 

58 

20 

3 

31 

82 

23 

36 

35 

14 

5 

36 

53 

38 

14 

25 

2 

59 

20 

17 

4 

83 

23 

40 

2 

15 

6 

0 

31 

39 

14 

44 

39 

60 

20 

30 

9 

84 

23 

43 

2 

16 

6 

24 

1 

40 

15 

4 

4 

61 

20 

42 

58 

85 

23 

45 

34 

17 

6 

47 

26 

41 

15 

23 

10 

62 

20 

55 

24 

86 

23 

47 

39 

18 

7 

10 

45 

42 

15 

42 

2 

63 

21 

7 

21 

87 

23 

49 

16 

19 

7 

33 

57 

43 

16 

0 

38 

64 

21 

18 

58 

88 

23 

50 

25 

20 

7 

57 

3 

44 

16 

18 

58 

65 

21 

30 

11 

89 

23 

51 

6 

21 

8 

20 

0 

45 

16 

37 

20 

66 

21 

41 

0 

90 

23 

51 

20 

22 

8 

42 

50 

67 

21 

51 

25 

23 

9 

5 

32 

68 

22 

1 

25 

24 

9 

28 

5 

69 

22 

11 

11 

16.  On  Ascensions  in  the  Right  Sphere 

And  next  it  would  be  proper  to  demonstrate  all  together  the  values  of  the  arcs 
on  the  equator  determined  by  circles  drawn  through  the  poles  of  the  equator  and 
given  divisions  of  the  ecliptic.  For  in  this  way  we  shall  know  corresponding  to 
how  many  equatorial  time-degrees  the  divisions  of  the  ecliptic  cross  the  meridi¬ 
an  for  any  place  and  the  horizon  in  the  right  sphere,  because  it  is  only  in  the 

right  sphere  that  the  horizon  passes  through  the 
poles  of  the  equator. 

Then  let  the  last  figure  be  constructed  again.  And 
again  given  the  arc  EG  of  the  ecliptic,  first  as  30°, 
let  it  be  required  to  find  the  arc  EH  on  the  equator. 
Then  in  the  same  way  as  before 

chord  2  arc  BF  :  chord  2  arc  A R  comp, 
chord  2  arc  FG  :  chord  2  arc  GH^ 
chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE.  [p.  28] 

But 

2  arc  RF=132°17'20", 
chord  2  arc  RF=109p44'53". 

And 


32 

PTOLEMY 

And  again 

2  arc  ^B  =  47°42'40", 
chord  2  arc  ^B=48p31'55". 

2  arc  FG=  156°40'1", 

and 

chord  2  arc  FG=im3l’l5"; 

2  arc  GH  =  2S°W59"  [table,  §14] 

chord  2  arc  (?//  =  24p15'57". 

Therefore 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp. 

109p44'53"  :  48p31'55",  24p15'57"  :  117p31'15"; 

or 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE  :  :  54p52'26"  : 

And 


And 

54P52'26"  :  117p31'15"  :  :  56p1'25"  :  120p. 

2  arc  ^£'=180°, 
chord  2  arc  AE=  120p. 

Therefore 

chord  2  arc  ££  =  56p1'25"; 

and  so 

2  arc  EH=.55%0\ 
arc  £//  =  27°50'. 

Again  let 

arc  EG  =  60°. 

And  so,  the  others  remaining  the  same, 

2  arc  i?^(?=138°59'42" 


and 

chord  2  arc  £(?=  112p23'56"; 

2  arc  G//  =  4r0'16", 
chord  2  arc  GH  =  42nA8". 

Therefore 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp. 

109p44'53"  :  48p31'55",  42p1'48"  :  112p23'56"; 

or 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  :  :  95p2'40"  :  112p23'56". 

And 


But 

95p2'40"  :  112p23'56"  : :  101p28'20"  :  120p. 

chord  2  arc  AE  =120“; 

and  so 

chord  2  arc  £//=  101p28'20". 

And  therefore 

2  arc  £//•=.  115°28', 

arc  ^//  =  57°44'. 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  first  30°from  the  equinoctial  point  on  the  ecliptic 
corresponds  to  27°50'  in  time  on  the  equator;  and  the  second  30°  on  the  ecliptic 
to  29°54'  on  the  equator,  since  they  both  together  were  proved  to  be  57°44'. 
And  it  is  evident  that  the  third  30°  on  the  ecliptic  will  correspond  in  time  to  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  I  33 

remainder  of  the  equator’s  quadrant,  that  is  to  32®16',  since  the  ecliptic’s  quad¬ 
rant  corresponds  in  time  to  the  equator’s  quadrant,  both  being  cut  off  by  the 
same  circles  through  the  poles  of  the  equator. 

In  the  same  way,  following  this  same  method,  we  calculated  the  arcs  of  the 
equator  corresponding  in  time  to  each  10°  of  the  ecliptic  because  arcs  smaller 
than  these  have  practically  equal  differences  as  they  increase.  We  shall  set  them 
out  also,  in  order  to  have  at  hand,  as  we  said,  the  amount  of  time  it  takes  each 
arc  to  cross  the  meridian  for  any  place  and  the  horizon  in  the  right  sphere.  And 
we  take  as  our  starting  place  the  point  10°  from  the  equinox. 

The  first  arc  of  10°  on  the  ecliptic  takes  9°10'  equatorial  time;  the  second, 
9°15';  the  third,  9°25';  so  that  the  first  30°  on  the  ecliptic  totals  27°50'  equatorial 
time.  The  fourth  arc  takes  9°40';  the  fifth,  9°58';  the  sixth,  10°16';  so  that  the 
second  30°  on  the  ecliptic  totals  29°54'  equatorial  time.  The  seventh  arc  takes 
10°34';  the  eighth,  10°47';  the  ninth,  10°55';  so  that  the  third  30°  on  the  ecliptic 
totals  32°16'  equatorial  time,  and  the  whole  quadrant  90°. 

And  from  this  it  is  evident  that  the  order  is  the  same  for  the  other  quadrants, 
everything  being  the  same  in  each  of  them,  because  the  sphere  is  given  as  right; 
that  is,  the  equator  is  not  oblique  to  the  horizon. 


BOOK  TWO 


1.  On  the  General  Position  of  the  Inhabited  World 
Now  that,  in  the  first  book  of  the  Composition,  we  have  gone  through  those 
things  concerning  the  system  of  the  universe  which  had  first  to  be  understood  in 
summary  form,  and  as  many  other  things  concerning  the  right  sphere  as  would 
be  considered  useful  to  an  understanding  of  questions  treated  here,  we  shall  try 
in  the  following  book  to  present  again,  in  the  handiest  possible  way,  the  more 
important  of  those  things  having  to  do  with  the  oblique  sphere. 

And  now  this  we  must  first  understand  in  a  general  way  that,  if  the  earth  is 
supposed  cut  into  four  equal  parts  by  the  equator  and  one  circle  through  its 
poles,  the  extent  of  the  part  inhabited  by  us  is  very  nearly  enclosed  in  one  or  the 
other  of  the  northern  quadrants.  And  this  would  certainly  be  evident  in  the  case 
of  latitude — that  is,  of  the  passage  from  south  to  north — because  every^vhere 
the  noon  shadows  of  gnomons  at  the  equinox  fall  to  the  north  and  never  to  the 
south.  And  also  in  the  case  of  longitude — that  is,  of  the  passage  from  east  to 
west — because  the  same  eclipses,  and  especially  the  lunar  ones,  observed  at  the 
same  time  by  those  inhabiting  the  extreme  eastern  sections  of  that  part  of  the 
earth  inhabited  by  us  and  by  those  inhabiting  the  extreme  western  sections, 
neither  precede  nor  lag  behind  by  more  than  twelve  equatorial  hours.  But  the 
quarter  part  of  the  sphere  in  longitude  embraces  a  twelve-hour  interval  since  it 
is  bounded  by  one  of  the  semicircular  arcs  of  the  equator. 

Of  the  particular  things  which  must  be  understood  for  the  business  at  hand, 
one  should  especially  consider  the  arrangement,  one  by  one,  of  the  circles  north 
of  the  equator  and  parallel  to  it,  according  to  the  particularities  of  the  places 
situated  under  them.  That  is,  how  far  the  poles  of  the  equator  are  from  the 
horizon;  or  how  far  the  zenith  is  from  the  equator  along  the  meridian  circle;  and 
in  what  places  the  sun  reaches  the  zenith,  and  when  and  how  many  times  that 
happens;  what  are  the  ratios  of  the  equinoctial  and  tropical  shadows  cast  at 
noon  to  their  gnomons;  and  what  are  the  differences  of  the  longest  and  shortest 
days  with  respect  to  the  equinoxes;  and  as  many  other  things  as  are  observed 
relative  to  the  increase  and  decrease  of  solar  days,  with  the  correspondances  in 
the  risings  and  settings  of  the  equator  and  ecliptic,  and  with  the  properties  and 
magnitudes  of  the  angles  formed  by  the  principal  great  circles. 

2.  Given  the  Magnitude  of  the  Longest  Day,  How  the  Arcs  on  the 

Horizon  Intercepted  by  the  Equator  and  the  Ecliptic  are  Given 

As  a  general  example,  let  the  circle  drawn  through  Rhodes  parallel  to  the 
equator  be  considered,  where  the  height  of  the  pole  is  36°  and  the  longest  day  is 
14}/2  equatorial  hours.^  And  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  the  meridian;  and  BED  the 

^An  equatorial  hour  is  1^4  of  the  360®  of  the  equator  or  15°.  In  other  words  an  equatorial 
hour  is  H  4  of  a  stellar  day,  a  stellar  day  being  the  time  it  takes  a  fixed  star  to  pass  from  a 
meridian  back  again  to  that  same  meridan,  that  is  one  complete  revolution  of  the  equator. 
For  the  purposes  of  Book  II,  Ptolemy  considers  the  sun  such  a  fixed  star,  although  it  will  be 

34 


THE  ALMAGEST,  11  35 

eastern  semicircle  of  the  horizon;  and  likewise 
AEC  the  semicircle  of  the  equator,  and  Fits  south¬ 
ern  pole.  And  let  the  ecliptic^s  winter-tropic  point 
rise  through  G\  and  let  FGII  be  drawn  iis  the 
quadrant  of  the  gi'eat  circle  through  F  and  G. 

And  first  let  the  magnitude  of  the  longest  day 
be  given;  and  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  arc  EG 
of  the  horizon. 

Now,  since  the  turning  of  the  sphere  takes 
place  around  the  poles  of  the  equator,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  points  G  and  II  will  be  at  the  merid¬ 
ian  ABCD  at  the  same  time.  And  the  time  from 
. rising  of  G  to  its  culmination  at  the  upper 
meridian  is  contained  by  arc  HA  of  the  equator,  and  from  its  crossing  the  lower 
meridian  to  its  rising  by  arc  CH,  It  follows  that  the  length  of  time  of  the  day  is 
double  that  contained  by  arc  HA,  and  the  length  of  time  of  the  night  is  double 
that  contained  by  arc  CH.  For  the  sections  above  and  below  the  earth  of  the 
circles  parallel  to  the  equator  are  exactly  cut  in  half  by  the  meridian. 

Therefore,  since  the  arc  EH  is  half  the  difference  between  the  shortest  or 
longest  day  and  the  equinoctial  day,  it  is  hours  on  the  given  parallel  or 
18°45'  in  time,  and  the  remainder  of  the  quadrant,  arc  HA,  is  71°15'  in  time. 
Since  then,  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  previous  proofs,  the  arcs  EB  and  FH  of 
great  circles  cutting  each  other  at  G  have  been  drawn  to  the  two  arcs  AE  and 
AF  of  great  circles, 

chord  2  arc  HA  :  chord  2  arc  AE  comp,  chord  2  arc  FH  ;  chord  2  arc  FG, 
chord  2  arc  BG  :  chord  2  arc  EB  [p.  28] 

But 


and 


and 


and 


2  arc //A  =  142^30', 
chord  2  arc  HA  =  113p37'54"; 

2arc  AF=180°, 
chord  2  arc  AF  =  120p; 

2  arc  FH=  180^ 
chord  2  arc  F//  =  120^; 

2arcFGi  =  132°17'20" 


^The  arc  FG  is  66®8'40",  since  the  arc  GH  which  marks  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  is 
23°51'20". 

pointed  out  in  detail  in  Book  III  that  this  is  not  the  case,  just  as  it  has  already  been  stated  in 
general  in  Book  I.  Therefore  all  the  calculations  relative  to  the  sun  in  Book  II  are  in  error  by 
the  small  amount  such  neglect  entails. 

In  Book  III,  there  is  introduced  the  notion  of  a  solar  day,  a  solar  day  being  the  time  it 
takes  the  sun  to  pass  from  a  meridian  back  to  that  same  meridian.  The  solar  day,  it  will  be 
seen,  is  very  nearly  59'  [of  arc]  longer  than  the  stellar  day.  Now  in  Book  III  an  hour  is  defined 
as  H4  of  the  solar  day;  and  this  hour  is  used  interchangeably  with  the  equatorial  hour,  al¬ 
though  it  is  very  nearly  23^'  longer  than  it.  But  the  total  error  could  never  come  to  as  much 
as  59',  which  is  less  than  4  minutes  in  time;  and  Ptolemy  declares  that  his  instruments  cannot 
be  accurate  within  less  than  15  minutes  in  time.  Therefore  this  ambiguity  will  have  no  effect 
on  the  accuracy  of  the  calculations. 

The  degrees  on  the  equator  are  often  referred  to  as  ‘degrees  in  time”  or  “time-degrees”  in 
referring  to  their  time-measuring  aspect. 


36 


PTOLExMY 

chord  2  arc  /^G=109p44'53 


Then 

chord  2  arc  BG  :  chord  2  arc  EB  comp.  113p37'54^  :  120^,  109p44'53"  ;  120^ 
or 


chord  2  arc  BG  :  chord  2  arc  EB  :  :  103p55'23"  :  120^ 
And  since  it  is  a  quadrant, 

chord  2  arc  EB=  120^, 


and  therefore 


chord  2  arc  103p55'23". 


And  so 

2  arc  50=120°, 
arc  50  =  60° 

And  therefore  as  remainder 

arc  50  =  30°. 


Which  was  to  be  shown. 


3.  How,  WITH  THE  Same  Things  Given,  the  Height  of  the 
Pole  is  Given,  and  Conversely 

Now  again,  with  this  given,  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  height  of  the  pole; 
that  is,  arc  55  of  the  meridian.  Then,  in  the  same  figure 
chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  HA  comp,  chord  2  arc  EG  :  chord  2  arc  50, 
chord  2  arc  55  :  chord  2  arc  AF,  [p.  28] 

But 

2  arc  55  =  37°30', 
chord  2  arc  55  =  38p34'22"; 

and 

2arc5A  =  142°30', 
chord  2  arc  HA  =  113p37'54"; 

and  again 

2  arc  50  =  60°, 
chord  2  arc  50 =  60^. 

Then 

chord  2  arc  55  :  chord  2  arc  AF  comp.  38p34'22"  :  113p37'54", 
103p55'23"  :  60^ 

or  very  nearly 

chord  2  arc  55  :  chord  2  arc  A5  :  :  70^33'  :  120^. 

And  again 

chord  2  arc  AF=  120^', 

and  therefore 

chord  2  arc  55  =  70^33'. 

And  so 

2  arc  55=72°!', 
arc  BF’=3(j°. 

Again,  conversely,  let  arc  55,  the  height  of  the  pole,  be  given  by  observation 
as  36°;  and  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  difference  between  the  longest  or 
shortest  day  and  the  equinoctial  day,  that  is  twice  arc  EH.  Then 
chord  2  arc  55  :  chord  2  arc  AB  comp,  chord  2  arc  50  :  chord  2  arc  05. 
chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE. 


But 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


37 


2  arc  BF  =  12\ 
chord  2  arc  BF  —  70p32'3''; 

and 

2  arc  AB  =  108°, 
chord  2  arc  AB  =  97H'5d''; 

and  again 

2  arc  F(?=132n7'20'' 
chord  2  arc  FG=  109^44 '53 

and 

2  arc  GH  =  47^42A0'', 
chord  2  arc  ff//  =  48^31 '55". 

Then 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE  corap.  70p32'3"  :  97p4'56", 

48p31'55"  ;  109p44'53'' 


or 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  AE  : :  31p11'23"  :  97p4'56". 
And  since,  ver>^  nearty, 

31P11'23"  :  97p4'56"  :  :  38^34' :  120^, 

and 

chord  2  arc  AJ5=120p, 

therefore  it  is  inferred 

chord  2  arc  EH  =  38^34'. 

And  so 


2  arc  £'77  =  37^30' 
or  2J4  equatorial  hours.  MTiich  was  to  be  showra. 

Likewise  the  arc  EG  of  the  horizon  will  be  given  because  the  given  ratio  of 
the  chord  of  2  arc  AF  to  the  chord  of  2  arc  AB  is  compounded  of  the  given 
ratio  of  the  chord  of  2  arc  FH  to  the  chord  of  2  arc  GH  and  the  ratio  of  the  chord 
of  2  arc  EG  to  the  chord  of  2  arc  BE.  And  so,  since  BE  is  given,  the  magnitude 
of  arc  EG  is  left. 

It  is  e\ddent  that — even  if  we  did  not  suppose  the  point  G  to  be  the  ^\'inter 
tropic,  but  some  point  at  one  of  the  other  di\dsions  of  the  ecliptic — each  of  the 
arcs  EH  and  EG  would  still  be  given  in  the  same  way.  For  we  have  set  up,  by 
means  of  the  Table  of  Obliquity,  the  arcs  on  the  meridian  cut  oflf  by  each 
division  of  the  ecliptic  and  by  the  equator — that  is,  the  arcs  like  GH. 

From  this  it  follows  that  the  divisions  of  the  ecliptic  made  by  the  same  paral¬ 
lels — that  is,  those  equidistant  from  the  same 
tropic  point — make  sections  on  the  horizon  the 
same  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  equator,  and 
the  magnitudes  of  the  days  and  nights  equal  to 
each  other,  like  to  like. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  proved  that  the  points 
produced  by  equal  parallels — that  is,  those  equi¬ 
distant  from  the  same  equinoctial  point — make 
equal  arcs  on  the  horizon  from  either  side  of  the 
equator,  and  make  the  magnitudes  of  the  days 
and  nights  equal  contrari\\ise,  unlike  to  unlike. 
For  if,  in  the  figure  already  set  out,  we  take  also 


PTOLEMY 


38 

the  point  K  as  the  point  where  the  circle  equal  and  parallel  to  that  through  G 
cuts  the  semicircle  of  the  horizon  BED^  and  if  we  fill  in  the  sections  GL  and 
KM  of  the  parallels,  which  are  clearly  contrariwise  and  equal,  and  if  we  draw 
the  quadrant  NKO  through  K  and  the  north  pole,  then  the  arcs  AH  and  OC 
will  be  equal.  For  GL  and  KM  are  equal  as  like  to  like;  and  the  remainder  EH 
will  be  equal  to  the  remainder  EO.  And  the  two  sides  of  the  similar  three-sided 
figures  EGH  and  EKO  will  be  equal  to  each  other,  EH  to  EO  and  GH  to  KO,  and 
each  of  the  angles  at  H  and  0  are  right,  so  that  base  EG  is  equal  to  base  EK. 

4.  How  One  is  to  Calculate  at  What  Places,  When,  and 
How  Many  Times,  the  Sun  Comes  to  the  Zenith 

Now  it  is  easy,  once  given  these  things,  to  calculate  when  and  how  many 
times  the  sun  comes  to  the  zenith.  For  since  it  is  at  once  evident  that  the  sun 
does  not  come  to  the  zenith  at  all  in  those  places  under  parallels  farther  away 
from  the  equator  than  the  approximate  23°51'20"  of  the  distance  of  the  summer 
tropic  point,  and  that  it  does  so  once,  at  the  summer  tropic  itself,  for  those 
places  under  parallels  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  equator,  therefore  it  is  also 
clear  it  comes  to  the  zenith  twice  in  those  places  at  a  distance  less  than  that  just 
given.  And  the  setup  of  the  Table  of  Obliquity  makes  the  answer  to  the  ques¬ 
tion,  “When?^^  an  easy  one.  For  taking  to  the  second  column  the  number  of  de¬ 
grees  by  which  the  parallel  in  question  is  distant  from  the  equator — that  is,  in 
the  case  of  those  parallels  within  the  summer  tropic — we  shall  have,  in  the  first 
column,  the  corresponding  number  of  degrees  of  the  quarter  of  the  ecliptic. 
And  at  the  distance  from  either  equinoctial  point  given  by  this  number  of  de¬ 
grees,  the  sun  comes  to  the  zenith  for  the  places  under  this  parallel  on  the  side  of 
the  summer  tropic. 

5.  How,  FROM  Things  Explained,  the  Ratios  op  the  Gnomons  to  their 
Equinoctial  and  Tropic  Shadows  at  Noon  are  Found 

Now  it  wdll  be  made  clear  in  the  following  manner  that  also  the  proposed  ra¬ 
tios  of  the  shadows  to  the  gnomons  are  obtained  more  simply,  if  the  arc  be¬ 
tween  the  tropics  and  the  arc  between 
the  horizon  and  the  poles  are  given. 

For  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  the 
meridian  around  center  E;  and  with 
A  as  zenith  let  the  diameter  AEG 
be  drawn;  and  let  CKFNy  in  the  plane 
of  the  meridian,  be  perpendicular  to 
it.  CKFN  is  clearly  parallel  to  the  in¬ 
tersection  of  the  meridian-plane  and 
the  horizon-plane.  And  since  the  earth 
as  a  whole  is  sensibly  in  the  ratio  of 
a  point  and  centre  to  the  solar  sphere 
so  that  the  centre  E  does  not  differ 
from  the  top  of  the  gnomon,  therefore 
let  CE  be  thought  of  as  the  gnomon,  and  CKFN  as  the  straight  line  on  which, 
at  noon,  the  ends  of  the  shadows  fall.  And  let  the  equinoctial  and  tropic 
noontide  rays  be  drawn  through  E.  Let  the  equinoctial  ray  be  BEDF,  the  sum- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


39 


mer  tropic  ray  be  GEHK,  and  the  winter  one  LEMN;  so  that  CK  is  the  summer 
shadow,  CF  is  the  equinoctial  shadow^,  and  CN  the  winter  shadow. 

Therefore,  since  the  arc  CZ),  w^hich  is  equal  to  the  height  of  the  pole  above  the 
horizon,  is,  in  the  given  latitude,  36°,  and  the  meridian  ABC  360°,  and  each  of 
the  arcs  HD  and  DM  approximately  23°51'20",  it  is  evident  that,  as  remainder, 

arc  C//  =  12°8'40", 

and,  by  addition. 


arc  CM  =  59°51'20". 


And  so,  of  the  angles  subtending  these  arcs, 

angle  KEC  =12°SA0", 
angle  FEC  =  S6'', 
angle  NEC  =  5r51'20'\ 

And 


angle  J^£'C  =  24°17'20"  to  2  rt., 
angle  F EC  =  72°  to  2  rt., 
angle  A^£'C=119°42'40"  to  2  rt. 

And  then,  on  the  circles  about  the  right  triangles  KEC,  FECy  and  NEC, 

arc  (7A:  =  24°17'20", 
arc  C£  =  155°42'40" 
as  remainder  of  the  semicircle;  and 

arc  CF  =  72°, 
arc  CE  =10S° 


likewise;  and 

arc  Ci\r=119°42'40", 
arc  CJ5'  =  60°17'20" 

again  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle.  And  so,  of  these  chords, 

chord  CA;=117p18'51" 


where 

and 

w^here 

and 


chord  CA:  =  25p14'43"; 
chord  CE  =  97H'56" 
chord  CF  =  70^32^4"; 
chord  CE  =  60n5A2" 


where 

chord  CA  =  103P46'16". 

And  therefore,  w^here  CE  equals  60^,  CK  the  summer  shadow  equals  12p55',  CF 
the  equinoctial  shadow  43^36',  and  CN  the  winter  shadow  very  nearly  103^20'. 

It  is  therefore  clear  that,  conversely,  if  any  tw^o  ratios  alone  of  these  three  of 
the  gnomon  CE  to  its  shadows  are  given,  then  the  height  of  the  pole  and  the  arc 
between  the  tropics  are  given,  since,  if  any  tw^o  of  the  angles  at  E  are  given,  the 
other  is  also  given.  For  the  arcs  HD  and  DM  are  equal.  But  for  the  sake  of  ac¬ 
curacy  in  observations,  the  height  of  the  pole  and  the  arc  between  the  tropics 
should  certainly  be  taken  in  the  w^ay  we  have  already  showm.  For  the  ratios  of 
these  shadow's  to  their  gnomons  do  not  ahvays  agree,  because  the  time  of  the 
equinoctial  shadow's  is  somehow  in  itself  undetermined,  and  the  ends  of  the 
winter  shadow's  are  hard  to  distinguish. 


40 


PTOLEMY 


6.  Exposition  of  the  Properties  of  Each  Pa: 

In  this  same  way  we  shall  consider  the  most  important  ol 
have  expounded  for  the  other  parallels  also.  And  taking  para 
inclination  of  ^  equatorial  hour,  which  is  sufficient,  we  shall 
position  of  their  incidents  before  making  a  detailed  one. 

i.  We  shall  begin  with  the  parallel  under  the  equator 
bounds  the  southern  part  of  the  whole  quarter  of  the  earth  ii 
which  alone  has  all  days  and  nights  equal  to  each  other.  Fo 
the  sphere’s  parallels  to  the  equator  cut  in  half  by  the  horiz( 
sections  above  the  earth  are  similar  to  each  other  and  equal 
ing  sections  under  the  earth.  And  this  is  not  the  case  with  anj 
of  the  sphere.  Again,  only  the  equator  is  everywhere  cut  in  1 
and  makes  the  days  along  it  sensibly  equal  to  the  nights,  sin 
circle.  But  the  others  are  divided  unequally;  and,  in  the  lati 
us,  the  parallels  south  of  the  equator  have  their  sections  ab 
their  sections  below  earth  and  their  days  shorter  than  the 
versely  the  parallels  north  of  the  equator  have  their  sections  i 
and  their  days  longer. 

And  this  parallel  is  also  amphiscian,  since  for  those  living 
twice  at  the  zenith,  at  the  intersections  of  the  equator  and  thi 
those  times  only  are  the  gnomons  shadowless  at  noon.  A 
passes  through  the  northern  hemisphere  the  gnomons’  shadoA 
and  when  it  passes  through  the  southern,  to  the  north.  Then 
and  winter  shadows  are  very  nearly  26^  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

We  say  “the  shadows  at  noon,”  speaking  generally  and 
preciable  difference,  because  the  equinoxes  and  tropics  are  b; 
completed  exactly  at  noon. 

And  all  those  stars  which  revolve  along  the  equator  pass 
for  those  under  this  parallel.  And  they  are  all  seen  to  rise  and 
of  the  sphere  are  on  the  horizon,  none  of  the  parallels  mak 
always  visible  or  invisible,  and  no  meridians  are  cut  short.  I 
lieve  there  are  human  habitations  under  the  equator;  for,  acc( 
very  temperate  because  the  sun  does  not  tarry  about  the 
speed  of  its  passage  through  the  divisions  of  the  equator; 
summer  heat  would  be  temperate.  Nor  is  the  sun  in  the  tropii 
zenith,  so  that  the  winter  would  not  be  severe.  But  we  coul 
conviction  what  sort  of  habitations  they  are;  for  up  until 
mained  inaccessible  to  people  from  the  part  of  the  earth  in 

^  1  T  1^4“  4“  'r-v-v  Vv  ^  1  /“J  ^  y^J  y^  m«yv  yJ  ys,  y^  ^-v  ■«yvy^4*^«-«*yv 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 

and  the  stars  contained  by  it  are  always  visible.  And  the  always- 
is  that  drawn  vith  the  south  pole  ;is  pole  at  the  same  distance 
within  it  are  always  invisible. 

ii-  sec^ond  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  12^^  eqi 
And  it  is  4^  from  the  equator,  and  is  drawn  through  the  i.slaiKj 
[Ceylon].  And  it  is  one  of  the  amphiscian  parallels,  since  the  sun 
zenith  tor  those  living  under  it  and  twice  makes  the  gnomons 
noon  when  it  is  79^°  from  the  summer  tropic  on  either  side.  An( 
its  passage  the  shadows  of  the  gnomons  fall  to  the  south,  and  for 
to  the  north.  Thereupon  the  equinoctial  shadow  is 
shadow  2134,  and  the  winter  32,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

iii.  The  third  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  1234  equatoi 
it  is  8°25'  from  the  equator  and  it  is  drawn  through  the  Aualitic 
Aden].  And  it  is  amphiscian  since  the  sun  is  twice  at  the  zenith  f 
under  it,  and  twice  makes  the  gnomons  shadowless  at  noon,  whei 
the  summer  tropic  on  either  side.  And  so  for  138°  of  its  passage  I 
the  gnomons  fall  to  the  south,  and  for  the  other  222°  to  the  no 
equinoctial  shadow  is  8+34+34,  the  summer  shadow  16+34 
winter  37+34+M+K5)  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

iv.  The  fourth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  12^  equatoi 
it  is  1234°  trorn  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  Adulitic  ( 
Bay].  And  it  is  amphiscian,  since  the  sun  is  twice  at  the  zenith  f 
under  it  and  twice  makes  the  gnomons  shadowless  at  noon,  wl 
from  the  summer  tropic  on  either  side.  And  so  for  11534°  i' 
shadows  of  the  gnomons  fall  to  the  south,  and  for  the  other  244^ 
Thereupon  the  equinoctial  shadow  is  1334)  th®  summer  shado’ 
wdnter  4434)  t®  the  gnomon’s  60. 

V.  The  fifth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  13  equatorial  h 
16°27'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  island  of  Me 
also  amphiscian  since  the  sun  is  twice  at  the  zenith  for  those  wh' 
and  twice  makes  the  gnomons  shadowless  at  noon,  when  it  is  45° 
mer  tropic  on  either  side.  And  so  for  90°  of  its  passage  the  si 
gnomons  fall  to  the  south,  and  for  the  other  270°  to  the  north.  1 
equinoctial  shadow  is  17+34+34)  the  summer  shadow  7+34 
wdnter  51,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

vi.  The  sixth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  1334  equator 
it  is  20°14'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  country  of  t 
And  it  is  also  amphiscian  since  the  sun  is  twice  at  the  zenith  fc 
under  it  and  twice  makes  the  gnomons  shadowle.ss  at  noon,  when 
the  .summer  trooic  on  either  side.  And  so  for  62°  of  its  pa.ssage  t 


42 


PTOLEMY 


point.  And  the  rest  of  the  time  the  shadows  of  the  gnomons  fall  to  the  north. 
Thereupon  the  equinoctial  shadow  is  263^,  the  winter  shadow  65+J^+3^,  to 
the  gnomon^s  60,  and  the  summer  shadowless.  And  all  the  parallels  to  the  north 
of  this  one,  as  far  as  the  one  bounding  our  inhabited  world,  are  heteroscian.  For 
the  gnomons  at  these  parallels  are  never  shadowless  at  noon  and  they  never 
throw  their  shadows  to  the  south  but  always  to  the  north,  because  the  sun  is 
never  at  the  zenith  for  these  people. 

viii.  The  eighth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  13%  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  27^12'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  Ptolemais  in  the  The- 
bais,  also  called  Hermeias.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  3%,  the  equinoc¬ 
tial  shadow  36+%+%,  and  the  winter  74%,  to  the  gnomon^s  60. 

ix.  The  ninth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  14  equatorial  hours.  And 
it  is  30°22'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawm  through  the  low  countries  of  Egypt. 
Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  6+%+%,  the  equinoctial  shadow  35%2; 
and  the  winter  83%2)  lo  the  gnomon’s  60. 

X.  The  tenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  14%  equatorial  hours.  And 
it  is  33°18'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  middle  of  Phoenicia. 
Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  10,  the  equinoctial  shadow  39%,  and  the 
winter  93%2,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xi.  The  eleventh  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  14%  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  36°  from  the  equator  and  is  draAvn  through  Rhodes.  Thereupon  the 
summer  shadow  is  12+%+%+%2,  the  equinoctial  shadow  43+%+%,  and 
the  winter  103%. 

xii.  The  twelfth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  14%  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  38°35'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  Smyrna.  Thereupon  the 
summer  shadow  is  15%,  the  equinoctial  shadow  47+%+%,  and  the  winter 
114+%+%+%2,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xiii.  The  thirteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  15  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  40°56'  from  the  equator  and  is  dra\vn  through  the  Hellespont.  There¬ 
upon  the  summer  shadow  is  18%,  the  equinoctial  shadow  52%,  and  the  winter 
127+%+%,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xiv.  The  fourteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  15%  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  43°4'  from  the  equator  and  is  dra^vn  through  Marseilles.  There¬ 
upon  the  summer  shadow  is  20+%+%,  the  equinoctial  shadow  55+%+%+ 
%2?  the  vdnter  144,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

XV.  The  fifteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  15%  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  45°!'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  middle  of  Pontus. 
Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  23%,  the  equinoctial  shadow  60,  and  the 
winter  155%2,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xvi.  The  sixteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  15%  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  46°51'  from  the  equator  and  is  dra^ra  through  the  source  of  the  river 
Ister  [Danube].  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  25%,  the  equinoctial  shadow 
63+%+%+%2,  and  the  winter  171%,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xvii.  The  seventeenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  16  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  48°32'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  mouth  of  the 
Borysthenes  [Dnieper].  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  27%,  the  equinoctial 
shadow  67+%+%,  and  the  winter  188+%+%2. 

xviii.  The  eighteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  16%  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  50°4'  from  the  equator  and  is  dra^vm  through  the  middle  of 


43 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 

Palus  Alaeotis  [the  Sea  of  Azof].  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  29 +3^ +3/^ 
+K2>  equinoctial  shadow  71^,  and  the  winter  208}^,  to  the  gnomon^s  60. 

xLx.  The  nineteenth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  163^  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  51°40'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  southernmost 
parts  of  Britain.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  31 +3^ +3^2?  the  equinoctial 
shadow  75+3^+3d^2;  l^he  winter  2293^,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

XX.  The  twentieth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  16^  equatorial  hours. 
And  it  is  52°50'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  mouth  of  the  Rhine. 
Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  333^,  the  equinoctial  shadow  793^2?  and  the 
winter  2533^,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xxi.  The  twenty-first  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  17  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  54°30'  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  mouth  of  the 
Tanais  [Don].  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  34+3^+3^+3^2j  the  equi¬ 
noctial  shadow  82+3^+3d'2>  and  the  winter  278+3^+3^,  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xxii.  The  twenty-second  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  1734  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  55®  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  Brigantium  [York] 
of  Great  Britain.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  3634>  the  equinoctial  shadow 
85^,  and  the  winter  30434- 

xxiii.  The  twenty-third  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  1734  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  56®  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  middle  of  Great 
Britain.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  37^,  the  equinoctial  88+34+34? 
and  the  winter  33534?  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xxiv.  The  twenty-fourth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  17^  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  57®  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  Caturactonium  of 
Britain.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  3934?  the  equinoctial  shadow  92+34 
+342?  and  the  winter  372342?  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

XXV.  The  twenty-fifth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  18  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  58®  from  the  equator  and  is  dra^vn  through  the  southern  parts  of 
Little  Britain.  Thereupon  the  summer  shadow  is  40%,  the  equinoctial  shadow 
96,  and  the  winter  419342?  to  the  gnomon’s  60. 

xxvi.  The  twenty-sixth  parallel  is  that  whose  longest  day  is  1834  equatorial 
hours.  And  it  is  5934^  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  middle  of  Little 
Britain. 

We  have  not  here  used  an  increase  of  a  quarter  hour,  because  the  parallels  are 
now  very  close  and  the  difference  between  the  heights  of  the  pole  does  not  come 
to  a  full  degree,  and  because  it  does  not  seem  called  for  to  finish  out  completely, 
in  like  fashion,  the  still  more  northern  parallels.  And  for  this  reason  we  have 
thought  it  superfluous  also  to  set  out  the  ratios  of  the  shadows  to  the  gnomons 
as  in  the  case  of  those  places  already  defined. 

xxvii.  And  further  where  the  longest  day  is  19  equatorial  hours,  there  the 
parallel  is  61®  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  northern  parts  of  Little 
Britain. 

xxviii.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  1934  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel 
is  62®  from  the  equator  and  is  dra\\Ti  through  what  are  called  the  Ebrides  Islands 
[Hebrides]. 

xxix.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  20  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel  is 
63®  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  the  Island  of  Thule. 

XXX.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  21  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel  is 
6434^  from  the  equator  and  is  drawn  through  unknown  Scythian  nations. 


44  PTOLEMY 

xxxi.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  22  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel  is 
653^2°  from  the  equator. 

xxxii.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  23  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel  is 
66°  from  the  equator. 

xxxiii.  And  where  the  longest  day  is  24  equatorial  hours,  there  the  parallel  is 
66°8'40"  from  the  equator.  And  this  is  the  first  of  the  periscian  parallels.  For  since 
the  sun  at  the  summer  tropic  does  not  set  for  that  parallel,  the  shadows  of  the 
gnomons  fall  to  every  side  of  the  horizon.  And  the  parallel  through  the  summer 
tropic  is  there  always  visible,  and  through  the  winter  tropic  always  invisible, 
because  they  both  touch  the  horizon  from  different  directions.  And  the  ecliptic 
coincides  with  the  horizon  whenever  the  point  of  the  spring  equinox  is  just  rising 
from  it. 

XXXIV.  And  if  anyone  for  the  sake  of  knowledge  generally  should  want  some  of 
the  broader  incidents  of  the  still  more  northern  latitudes,  he  would  find,  where 
the  height  of  the  north  pole  is  very  nearly  67°,  there  15°  along  the  ecliptic  on 
either  side  of  the  summer  tropic  do  not  set;  so  that  the  longest  day  and  the  turning 
of  the  shadows  to  all  parts  of  the  horizon  last  for  nearly  a  month.  For  these  things 
can  be  easily  understood  from  the  Table  of  Obliquity,  already  given.  For  by  as 
many  degrees  as  we  find  the  parallel  distant  from  the  equator — as  for  instance 
that  parallel  which  cuts  off  15°  of  the  ecliptic  on  either  side  of  the  summer  tropic 
and  which  is  then  either  always  invisible  or  always  visible  along  the  intercepted 
section  of  the  ecliptic — by  just  so  many  degrees  does  the  height  of  the  north  pole 
lack  being  a  quadrant  or  90°. 

xxxv.  And  then  where  the  height  of  the  pole  is  6934°?  there  it  would  be  found 
that  30°  on  either  side  of  the  summer  tropic  do  not  set;  so  that  the  longest  day 
and  the  periscian  gnomons  last  nearly  two  months. 

xxxvi.  And  where  the  height  of  the  pole  is  733^°,  there  it  would  be  found  that 
45°  on  either  side  of  the  summer  tropic  do  not  set;  so  that  the  longest  day  and 
the  periscian  gnomons  last  nearly  three  months. 

xxxvii.  And  where  the  height  of  the  pole  is  783^°,  there  it  would  be  found  that 
60°  on  either  side  of  the  summer  tropic  do  not  set;  so  that  the  longest  day  and 
the  wheeling  of  the  shadows  are  accomplished  in  nearly  4  months. 

xxxviii.  And  where  the  height  of  the  pole  is  84°,  there  it  would  be  found  that 
75°  on  either  side  of  the  summer  tropic  do  not  set;  so  that  again  the  longest  day 
would  last  for  nearly  5  months  and  the  periscian  gnomons  the  same  length  of  time. 

xxxix.  And  where  the  north  pole  is  raised  from  the  horizon  the  90°  of  the 
whole  quadrant,  there  the  whole  semicircle  of  the  ecliptic  north  of  the  equator  is 
never  below  the  earth,  and  the  whole  southern  semicircle  is  never  above  the 
earth;  so  that  there  is  one  day  and  one  night  in  each  year,  each  nearly  six  months 
long,  and  the  gnomons  are  always  periscian.  And  the  properties  of  this  latitude 
are  that  the  north  pole  is  always  at  the  zenith,  the  equator  occupies  the  position 
of  the  always  visible  and  at  the  same  time  invisible  circle  and  also  of  the  horizon, 
putting  the  whole  hemisphere  north  of  itself  above  the  earth  and  that  south  of  it 
below  the  earth. 

7.  On  the  Co-ascensions  of  the  Ecliptic  and  the  Equator 
IN  the  Oblique  Sphere 

Now  that  the  general  matters  observed  concerning  the  latitudes  have  been 
explained,  the  next  thing  would  be  to  show  how  the  co-ascending  time-arcs  of 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II  45 

the  equator  and  the  ecliptic  can  be  gotten  for  each  latitude.  And  from  these 
all  the  other  particularities  will  be  deduced.  We  shall  use  the  names  of  the 
zodiacal  signs  for  the  dodecatemories  of  the  ecliptic  as  if  they  began  from  the 
equinoctial  and  tropic  points,  calling  the  first  dodecatemory  from  the  spring 
equinox  in  the  direction  opposite  the  movement  of  the  universe  the  Ram,  the 
second  the  Bull,  and  so  on  according  to  the  order  of  the  twelve  signs  handed 
down  to  us. 

And  first  we  shall  show  that  arcs  on  the  ecliptic  equidistant  from  the  same 
equinoctial  point  always  ascend  with  equal  arcs  on  the  equator. 

For  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  the  meridian,  and  BED  the  semicircle  of  the  hori¬ 
zon,  and  AEC  the  semicircle  of  the  equator.  And 
let  FG  and  HK  be  two  sections  of  the  ecliptic,  so 
that  each  of  the  points  F  and  H  is  assumed  to  be 
the  point  of  the  spring  equinox,  and  so  that  the 
ends  of  the  equal  arcs  FG  and  HKj  taken  on 
either  side  of  it,  ascend  through  the  points  K 
and  G. 

I  say  that  the  arcs  of  the  equator  ascending 
with  either  of  them,  that  is  EF  and  EH,  are 
equal. 

For  let  the  points  L  and  M  be  taken  as  the 
poles  of  the  equator,  and  let  the  sections  of  great 
circles,  LEM,  HL,  KL,  FM,  and  GM  be  drawn 

arc  FG  =  arc  HK, 

and  the  parallels  through  K  and  G  are  equidistant  from  the  equator  on  either 
side  so  that 

arc  LK  =  arc  MG 

and 

arc  EX  =  arc  EG,  [p.  37,  38] 

therefore  LKH  and  MGF  have  their  sides  equal  respectively,  and  so  also  do 
LEK  and  MEG.  Therefore 

angle  KLE  =  angle  GM E, 
angle  XLi7  =  angle  GMF, 

so  that,  by  subtraction, 

angle  ELE'  =  angle  EMF. 

And  therefore 

base  EX = base  EF. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  again  we  shall  prove  that  the  arcs  on  the 
equator,  ascending  vAih  equal  arcs  of  the  ecliptic 
equidistant  from  the  same  tropic  point,  are  both 
together  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  corresponding 
two  in  the  right  sphere. 

For  let  the  meridian  ABCD  be  set  out,  and  the 
semicircle  of  the  horizon  BED,  and  the  semicircle 
of  the  equator  AEC.  And  let  two  equal  arcs  on 
the  ecliptic  equidistant  from  the  winter  tropic 
point  be  drawm,  the  arc  FG  vvdth  F  as  the  autumn 


through  them.  Then  since 


46  PTOLEMY 

equinox  and  the  arc  GH  with  H  as  the  spring  equinox,  so  that  the  point  G  is 
the  rising  point  of  both  on  the  horizon  (because  the  arcs  FG  and  GH  are  cut  off 
by  the  same  circle  parallel  to  the  equator),  and  so  that  clearly  arcs  EH  and 
GH  co-ascend  and  also  EF  and  FG. 

It  is  immediately  evident,  then,  that  the  whole  arc  HEF^  is  equal  to  the  as¬ 
censions  in  the  right  sphere  of  the  arcs  FG  and  GH.  For  if  we  suppose  the  south 
pole  of  the  equator  to  be  the  point  and  draw  through  K  and  the  point  G  the 
quadrant  of  a  great  circle  KGL  which  represents  the  horizon  in  the  right  sphere, 
then  arc  HL  ascends  with  arc  GH  in  the  right  sphere,  and  likewise  arc  LF  with 
arc  GF.  And  so  the  two  together,  arcs  HL  and  LF,  are  equal  to  the  other  two  to¬ 
gether,  arcs  HE  and  EF,  and  are  contained  by  the  same  arc  HF.  Which  was  to 
be  proved. 

And  for  these  reasons  it  has  now  become  clear  to  us  that,  if  we  have  calculated 
the  particular  co-ascensions  in  each  latitude  for  a  quadrant  only,  we  shall  have 
those  of  the  other  three  quadrants  already  demonstrated. 

Then  with  these  things  established,  let  the  parallel  through  Rhodes  be  con¬ 
sidered,  where  the  longest  day  is  14)^  equatorial  hours  and  the  north  pole  is 
raised  36°  above  the  horizon.  And  let  the  circle 
ABCD  be  the  meridian;  and  likewise  BED  the 
semicircle  of  the  horizon,  AEG  the  semicircle  of 
the  equator,  and  FGH  the  semicircle  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  so  that  G  is  assumed  to  be  the  spring  equinox. 

And  with  the  north  pole  at  the  point  K,  let  the 
quadrant  of  a  great  circle,  arc  KLM,  be  dra\vn 
through  it  and  L,  the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic 
and  the  horizon. 

And  given  the  arc  GL,  let  it  be  required  to  find 
the  arc  on  the  equator  ascending  with  it,  that  is 
GE.  And  let  GL  first  embrace  the  dodecatemory 
corresponding  to  the  Ram. 

Now,  since  again  in  this  construction  the  arcs  DE  and  KM  of  great  circles, 
cutting  each  other  at  L,  have  been  drawn  to  the  two  arcs  CE  and  CK  of  great 
circles,  therefore 

chord  2  arc  DK  :  chord  2  arc  CD  comp,  chord  2  arc  KL  :  chord  2  arc  LAf, 
chord  2  arc  EM  :  chord  2  arc  CE, 

But 

2  arc  DK  =  72\ 
chord  2  arc  DK  =  70^32A"; 

and 

2  arc  CZ)  =  108°, 
chord  2  arc  CD  =  97^4:^56"; 

and  again 

2  arc  AL=156°41', 
chord  2  arc  AL=  117p31T5"; 

and 

^That  is,  the  sum  of  arcs  EF  and  EH;  for  they  are  not,  of  course,  naturally  the  one  the  con¬ 
tinuation  of  the  other,  but  are  considered  so  for  the  purposes  of  proof. 


47 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 

2  arc  Lilfi  =23n9'59", 
chord  2  arc  LM  =  24p15'57". 


Then 

or 

And 


chord  2  arc  EM  :  chord  2  arc  CE  comp.  70p32'4"  :  97p4'56'^, 
24P15'57"  :  117p31'15", 

chord  2  arc  EM  :  chord  2  arc  CE  : :  IS^O'S"  :  120^. 


therefore 


chord  2  arc  C£^  =  120p, 
chord  2  arc 


And  so 


2  arc  iSilf  m7n6', 
arc  =  8°38' 


But  since  the  whole  arc  GM  ascends  with  arc  GL  in  the  right  sphere,  therefore 
[p.  32] 

arc  Gilf  =  27°50', 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  ^(?=19°12'. 

And  it  is  proved  therewith  that  the  dodecatemory  which  is  the  Fishes  ascends 
in  the  same  time,  19°12';  and  that  of  the  Virgin  and  that  of  the  Balance  is, 
each,  what  is  left  when  this  is  subtracted  from  double  the  ascension  in  the 
right  sphere  [twice  arc  GM\  that  is  36°28'  in  time  [p.  45]. ^  Which  was  to  be 
proved. 

Again,  let  the  arc  GL  embrace  the  60°  of  the  two  dodecatemories  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  the  signs  of  the  Ram  and  the  Bull.  Then,  because  of  this  assumption,  the 
other  things  remaining  the  same, 

2arcifL  =  138°59'42", 
chord  2  arc  AL  =  112p23'56"; 

and 


2  arc  LM  =  41°0T8", 
chord  arc  LAf  =  42p1'48". 

Then  again 

chord  2  arc  EM  :  chord  2  arc  CE  comp.  70p32'4"  :  97p4'56", 
42p1'48"  :  112p23'56", 
or 

chord  2  arc  EM  :  chord  2  arc  CE  :  :  32p36'4"  :  120^. 

And 

chord  2  arc  (7jF=  120^, 

therefore 


And  so 


chord  2  arc  ^Ar  =  32p36'4". 
2  arc  £'A/  =  31°32', 


is  given  as  30°;  hence  LM  is  given  in  the  Table  of  Obliquity,  and  KL  is  the  difference 
between  LM  and  90°. 

*In  other  w'ords,  the  ascensions  on  either  side  of  the  autumn  equinox  are  gotten  by  doubling 
arc  GM  and  subtracting  arc  EG.  For  the  arc  EG  and  the  arc  to  be  found  are  arcs  on  the  equator 
ascending  with  equal  arcs  on  the  ecliptic  equidistant  from  the  winter  tropic,  and  are  therefore 
both  together  equal  to  the  two  equatorial  arcs  ascending  in  the  right  sphere — that  is,  twice 
arc  GM. 


48  PTOLEMY 

arc  £;M  =  15^46'. 

But,  for  the  same  reasons  [p.  32],  it  has  already  been  proved 

arc  GM  =  57°44'; 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  jEJG  =  41°58'. 

Therefore  the  Ram  and  the  Bull  together  ascend  in  41®58'  in  time,  with 
19°12'  of  which  the  Ram  has  just  been  proved  to  ascend.  And  therefore  the 
dodecatemory  which  is  the  Bull  ascends  with  22°46'  in  time. 

And  again,  for  the  same  reasons  as  before,  the  dodecatemory  which  is  the 
Water  Bearer  will  ascend  with  an  equal  22°46'  in  time;  and  the  Lion  and  the 
Scorpion,  each,  with  what  is  left  when  this  is  subtracted  from  double  the  as¬ 
cension  in  the  right  sphere;  that  is,  37°2'  in  time. 

And  since  the  longest  day  is  1^}/^  equatorial  hours  and  the  shortest  day  93^ 
hours,  it  is  evident  that  the  semicircle  from  the  Crab  (Cancer)  to  the  Archer 
will  ascend  with  217°30'  in  equatorial  time,  and  the  semicircle  from  the  Goat 
(Capricorn)  to  the  Twins  with  142°30'.  And  so  each  of  the  quadrants  on  either 
side  of  the  spring  equinox  will  ascend  with  71°15'  in  time,  and  each  of  the  quad¬ 
rants  on  either  side  of  the  autumn  equinox  with  108°45'  in  time.  And  therefore 
there  remain  the  dodecatemories,  the  Twins  and  Goat  (Capricorn),  each  of 
which  will  ascend  with  the  29°17'  in  time  left  over  from  the  71°15'  in  time  of  the 
quadrant;  and  there  remain  the  dodecatemories,  the  Crab  (Cancer)  and  the 
Archer,  each  of  which  wdll  ascend  with  the  35°15'  in  time  left  over  from  the 
108°45'  in  time  of  the  quadrant. 

It  is  clear  that  in  this  same  way  we  could  also  get  the  coascensions  of  the 
ecliptic  for  smaller  divisions. 

But  we  could  also  calculate  them  in  an  easier  and  more  systematic  way,  thus: 

For  first  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  the  meridian,  BED  the  semicircle  of  the 
horizon,  A  EC  that  of  the  equator,  and  FEG  that  of  the  ecliptic,  assuming  the 
intersection  E  to  be  the  spring  equinox.  And  let 
the  arc  EH  on  the  ecliptic  be  taken  at  random, 
and  let  the  section  HK  of  the  parallel  to  the  equa¬ 
tor  through  H  be  drawn.  And  taking  L  as  the 
pole  of  the  equator,  let  there  be  drawn  through 
it  the  quadrants  of  great  circles  LHM^  LKN,  and 
LE. 

It  is  thus  immediately  evident  that  the  section 
EH  of  the  ecliptic  ascends  with  arc  EM  of  the 
equator  in  the  right  sphere,  but  in  the  oblique 
sphere  with  the  arc  equal  to  MN,  since  the  paral¬ 
lel’s  arc  HKy  with  which  section  EH  ascends,  is 
similar  to  arc  MN  of  the  equator  and  the  similar 
arcs  of  parallels  have  everywhere  their  ascensions  in  equal  times.  Therefore  the 
ascension  of  section  EH  in  the  oblique  sphere  is  less  than  that  in  the  right  sphere 
by  arc  EN.  And  it  has  also  now  been  proved  in  general  that,  if  certain  arcs  of 
great  circles  like  LKN  are  thus  drawn,  the  section  EN  will  contain  the  difference 
between  the  ascensions  in  the  right  and  oblique  spheres  of  arcs  on  the  ecliptic 
cut  off  by  E  and  the  parallel  drawn  through  K.  Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Now,  with  this  first  considered,  let  the  figure  be  laid  out  with  only  the  meridi¬ 
an  and  the  semicircles  of  the  horizon  and  the  equator.  And  through  F ,  the  south 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II  49 

pole  of  the  equator,  let  the  quadrants  of  two 
great  circles  be  drawn,  FGH  and  FKL.  And  let  G 
be  assumed  to  be  the  intersection  of  the  horizon 
and  the  parallel  drawn  through  the  winter  tropic; 
and  K  the  intersection  of  the  horizon  and  the 
parallel  drawn  through  the  beginning  of  the 
Fishes,  for  example,  or  any  other  of  the  divisions 
of  the  given  quadrant. 

Now  again  the  arcs  of  great  circles,  FKL  and 
EKG,  intersecting  at  K,  have  been  drawm  to  the 
arcs  of  great  circles  FH  and  EH.  And 

chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  FG  comp, 
chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EL, 
chord  2  arc  KL  :  chord  2  arc  FK. 

But  2  arc  GH  is  given  the  same  in  all  latitudes,  for  it  is  the  distance  between  the 
tropics.  And  for  this  reason  the  remainder,  2  arc  FG,  is  also  given.  And  likewise, 
for  the  same  sections  of  the  ecliptic,  2  arc  KL  is  the  same  for  all  latitudes  and  is 
given  by  the  Table  of  Obliquity;  and  for  this  same  reason  2  arc  FK  is  given.  And 
so  the  ratio 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EL 

is  left  also  as  the  same  in  all  latitudes  for  the  same  divisions  of  the  quadrant. 

If,  then,  these  things  being  true,  we  take  the  increasing  values  of  arc  AL  for 
each  increase  of  10°  on  the  quadrant  from  the  spring  equinox  to  the  winter 
tropic  (for  a  division  into  arcs  of  this  length  \\*ill  be  sufficient  for  our  use),  we 
always  have 

2  arc  (?^  =  47°42'40", 
chord  2  arc  0/7  =  48^31 '55", 

and 

2  arc  FG-132°17'20" 
chord  2  arc  FG  =  109p44'53". 

And  when  K  is  10°  from  the  spring  equinox  in  the  direction  of  the  ^vinter 
tropic,  we  likewise  also  have 

2  arc  iiCL  =  8°3'16", 
chord  2  arc  A"L  =  8p25'39"; 

and 

2  arc  FA  =  171°56'44", 
chord  2  arc  FA  =  119^42' 14". 

And  likewise,  when  it  is  20°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  AL=15°54'6", 
chord  2  arc  AL=  16p35'56"; 

and 

2arcFA=164°5'54", 
chord  2  arc  FA=  118p50'47". 

And  when  it  is  30°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  AL  =  23°19'58", 
chord  2  arc  AL  =  24p15'56"; 

and 

2  arc  FA=156°40'2", 
chord  2  arc  FA=  117p31'15". 


50  PTOLEMY 

And  when  it  is  40°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  XL  =  30°8'8", 

chord  2  arc  KL  =  3lPll'43";  : 

and  !  / 

2arcFi?=149°5r52",  / 

chord  2  arc  FK  =  115p52'19". 

And  when  it  is  50°  away,  we  have  , 

2arci^L  =  36°5'46^  ^ 

chord  2  arc  A:L  =  37p10'39";  / 

and 

2arcFi^=143°54'14", 
chord  2  arc  114p5'44". 

And  when  it  is  60°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  i^L  =  41°0'18", 
chord  2  arc  i^L  =  42^1 '48" 

and 

2arcFA:=138°59'42", 
chord  2  arc  =  112p23'57". 

And  when  it  is  70°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  i^L  =  44°40'22" 
chord  2  arc  i^L  =  45^36' 18"; 

and 

2arcF/iC=135°19'38", 
chord  2  arc  FK^  110p59'47". 

And  when  it  is  80°  away,  we  have 

2  arc  A:L  =  46°56'32", 
chord  2  arc  =  47p47'40"; 

and 

2arcFi^  =  133°3'28", 
chord  2  arc  FA:=  110p4'16". 

And  therefore,  if  we  compound  the  ratio 

chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  FG 
or 

48p31'55"  :  109p44'53" 

with  the  inverse  of 

chord  2  arc  KL  :  chord  2  arc  FK 
for  each  10°  as  just  laid  out,  the  result  is  the  ratio 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EL. 

And  this  is  the  same  for  all  latitudes: — as  60^  to  9^33',  when  K  is  10°  from  the 
equinox;  to  18^57',  when  20°  away;  to  28^1',  when  30°  away;  to  36^33',  when  40° 
away;  to  44p12',  when  50°  away;  to  50^44',  when  60°  away;  to  55^45',  when  70° 
away;  to  58^55',  w^hen  80°  away. 

Therefore  it  is  evident  that,  being  given  2  arc  EH  for  each  latitude  since  it  is 
equal  to  the  difference  between  the  equinoctial  day  and  the  shortest  day  in  time, 
and  being  given  its  chord  and  the  ratio  of  this  chord  to  that  of  2  arc  EL,  we  also 
have  given  2  arc  EL.  And  if  we  subtract  the  half  of  it — that  is,  arc  EL  itself 
containing  the  difference  we  have  spoken  of  before  [p.  48] — from  the  ascensions 
in  the  right  sphere  of  the  given  arc  of  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  find  the  ascension  of 
the  same  arc  in  the  given  latitude. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


51 


For  let  the  latitude  of  the  parallel  of  Rhodes  be  taken  for  an  example,  where 

2  arc  FiY  =  37°30, 
chord  2  arc  Fi^  =  38p34'. 


Then  since 

60P  :  38P34'  :  :  9^33'  :  6^8' 

:  :  18P57'  : 12^11' 

: :  28P1'  :  18^ 

:  :  36P33'  :  23^29' 

:  :  44P12'  :  28^25' 

:  :  50P44'  :  32^37' 

: :  55P45'  :  35^52' 

: :  58P55'  ;  37^52', 

therefore  the  chord  of  2  arc  EL  is  also  available  for  each  of  the  sections  as  they 
increase  in  the  usual  manner  by  10°.  And  the  half  of  the  arc  subtending  this 
chord  (that  is,  EL  itself)  is  2°56'  at  the  first  10°;  5°50'  at  the  second;  8°38'  at  the 
third;  11°17'  at  the  fourth;  13°42'  at  the  fifth;  15°46'  at  the  sixth;  17°24'  at  the 
seventh;  18°24'  at  the  eighth;  and  clearly  18°45'  at  the  ninth.^  And  so,  since  in 
the  right  sphere  the  arc  through  the  first  10°  on  the  ecliptic  ascends  with  9°10' 
in  time;  through  the  second,  with  18°25';  through  the  third,  with  27°50'; 
through  the  fourth,  with  37°30';  through  the  fifth,  with  47°28';  through  the 
sixth,  with  57°44';  through  the  seventh,  with  68°18';  through  the  eighth,  with 
79°5';  and  through  the  ninth,  ^vith  the  90°  in  time  of  the  whole  quadrant;  there¬ 
fore  it  is  evident  that,  if  we  subtract  from  each  of  the  ascensions  in  the  right 
sphere  just  mentioned  the  corresponding  difference  or  arc  FL,  we  shall  have  the 
ascensions  of  those  same  arcs  in  the  given  latitude.  And  so  the  arc  through  the 
first  10°  of  the  ecliptic  will  ascend  with  6°14'  in  time;  through  the  second  10°  of 
the  ecliptic,  with  12°35'  in  time;  through  the  third  10°,  with  19°12';  through  the 
fourth,  with  26°13';  through  the  fifth,  with  33°46';  through  the  sixth,  with 
41°58';  through  the  seventh,  with  50°54';  through  the  eighth,  with  60°41';  and 
through  the  ninth  or  the  whole  quadrant,  with  the  71°15'  taken  from  the  half 
of  the  day.  And  therefore  the  first  10°  of  the  ecliptic  with  6°14'  in  time;  the  sec¬ 
ond  with  6°21';  the  third  with  6°37';  the  fourth  with  7°1';  the  fifth  with  7°33'; 
the  sixth  with  8°12';  the  seventh  with  8°56';  the  eighth  with  9°47';  and  the  ninth 
with  10°34'. 

And  now  with  these  things  demonstrated,  the  ascensions  of  the  other  quad¬ 
rants  are  in  consequence  also  demonstrated  immediately.  And  having  calculated 
in  the  same  way  the  ascensions  of  the  other  parallels  for  each  10°,  which  is  as  far 
as  it  is  possible  to  anticipate  their  use  in  every  case,  we  shall  set  them  out  in  a 
table  for  use  in  the  rest  of  this  treatise,  beginning  with  the  parallel  under  the 
equator  and  going  as  far  as  that  whose  longest  day  is  17  hours,  and  advancing 
by  half-hour  increases  because  of  the  almost  uniform  increases  of  the  periods 
within  the  half-hours.  Then,  placing  first  the  36  divisions  of  10°  each,  we  next 
set  beside  each  one  the  time  of  its  own  ascension  and  then  the  successive  addi¬ 
tions  of  them,  in  the  following  manner: 

'For  when  K  is  at  90®  it  coincides  \vith  H.  Hence  EL  coincides  with  EH. 


52 


PTOLEMY 


Signs 

Ram 

BuU 

Twins 

Crab 

(Cancer) 

Lion 

Virgin 

Balance 

Scorpion 

Archer 

Goat 

(Capricorn) 
Water  Bearer 


8.  Table  of  Ascensions  by  10° 


Through  the 

Right 

Sphere 

Atlantic  Gulf 

Through  Meroe 

Tens 

12  hours 

Lai, 

9°0' 

hours 

Lai.  8 

^^25' 

IS  hours 

Lat.  16°S7' 

time 

total  time 

time 

total  time 

lime 

total  time 

10 

9^ 

10' 

9° 

10' 

8° 

35' 

8° 

35' 

7° 

58' 

7° 

58' 

20 

9° 

15' 

18° 

25' 

8° 

39' 

17° 

14' 

8° 

5' 

16° 

3' 

30 

9*^ 

25' 

27° 

50' 

8° 

52' 

26° 

6' 

8° 

17' 

24° 

20' 

10 

9*= 

40' 

37° 

30' 

9° 

8' 

35° 

14' 

8° 

36' 

32° 

56' 

20 

9° 

58' 

47° 

28' 

9° 

29' 

44° 

43' 

9° 

1' 

41° 

57' 

30 

10*^ 

16' 

57° 

44' 

9° 

51' 

54° 

34' 

9° 

27' 

51° 

24' 

10 

10° 

34' 

68° 

18' 

10° 

15' 

64° 

49' 

9° 

56' 

61° 

20' 

20 

10° 

47' 

79° 

5' 

10° 

35' 

75° 

24' 

10° 

23' 

71° 

43' 

30 

10° 

55' 

90° 

0' 

10° 

51' 

86° 

15' 

10° 

47' 

82° 

30' 

10 

10° 

55' 

100° 

55' 

10° 

59' 

97° 

14' 

11° 

3' 

93° 

33' 

20 

10° 

47' 

111° 

42' 

10° 

59' 

108° 

13' 

11° 

11' 

104° 

44' 

30 

10° 

34' 

122° 

16' 

10° 

53' 

119° 

6' 

11° 

12' 

115° 

56' 

10 

10° 

16' 

132° 

32' 

10° 

41' 

129° 

47' 

11° 

5' 

127° 

1' 

20 

9° 

58' 

142° 

30' 

10° 

27' 

140° 

14' 

10° 

55' 

137° 

56' 

30 

9° 

40' 

152° 

10' 

10° 

12' 

150° 

26' 

10° 

44' 

148° 

40' 

10 

9° 

25' 

161° 

35' 

9° 

58' 

160° 

24' 

10° 

33' 

159° 

13' 

20 

9° 

15' 

170° 

50' 

9° 

51' 

170° 

15' 

10° 

25' 

169° 

38' 

30 

9° 

10' 

180° 

0' 

9° 

45' 

180° 

0' 

10° 

22' 

180° 

0' 

10 

9° 

10' 

189° 

10' 

9° 

45' 

189° 

45' 

10° 

22' 

190° 

22' 

20 

9° 

15' 

198° 

25' 

9° 

51' 

199° 

36' 

10° 

25' 

200° 

47' 

30 

9° 

25' 

207° 

50' 

9° 

58' 

209° 

34' 

10° 

33' 

211° 

20' 

10 

9° 

40' 

217° 

30' 

10° 

12' 

219° 

46' 

10° 

44' 

222° 

4' 

20 

9° 

58' 

227° 

28' 

10° 

27' 

230° 

13' 

10° 

55' 

232° 

59' 

30 

10° 

16' 

237° 

44' 

10° 

41' 

240° 

54' 

11° 

5' 

244° 

4' 

10 

10° 

34' 

248° 

18' 

10° 

53' 

251° 

47' 

11° 

12' 

255° 

16' 

20 

10° 

47' 

259° 

5' 

10° 

59' 

262° 

46' 

11° 

11' 

266° 

27' 

30 

10° 

55' 

270° 

0' 

10° 

59' 

273° 

45' 

11° 

3' 

277° 

30' 

10 

10° 

55' 

280° 

55' 

10° 

51' 

284° 

36' 

10° 

47' 

288° 

17' 

20 

10° 

47' 

291° 

42' 

10° 

35' 

295° 

•11' 

10° 

23' 

298° 

40' 

30 

10° 

34' 

302° 

16' 

10° 

15' 

305° 

26' 

9° 

56' 

308° 

36' 

10 

10° 

16' 

312° 

32' 

9° 

51' 

315° 

17' 

9° 

27' 

318° 

3' 

20 

9° 

58' 

322° 

30' 

9° 

29' 

324° 

46' 

9° 

1' 

327° 

4' 

30 

9° 

40' 

332° 

10' 

9° 

8' 

333° 

54' 

8° 

36' 

335° 

40' 

‘  10 

9° 

25' 

341° 

35' 

8° 

52' 

342° 

46' 

8° 

17' 

343° 

57' 

20 

9° 

15' 

350° 

50' 

8° 

39' 

351° 

25' 

■  8° 

5' 

352° 

2' 

30 

9° 

10' 

360° 

0' 

8° 

35' 

360° 

0' 

7° 

58' 

360° 

0' 

Fishes 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 

8.  Table  of  Ascensions  by  10° — Continued 


53 


Through  Some 

Signs 

Tens 

i3y2 

hours 

Lat.  S3°61‘ 

time 

total  time 

10 

7° 

23' 

70 

23' 

Ram 

20 

7° 

29' 

14° 

52' 

30 

70 

45' 

22° 

37' 

10 

8° 

4' 

30° 

41' 

BuU 

20 

8° 

31' 

39° 

12' 

30 

9° 

3' 

48° 

15' 

10 

9° 

36' 

57° 

51' 

Twins 

20 

10° 

11' 

68° 

2' 

30 

10° 

43' 

78° 

45' 

10 

11° 

7' 

89° 

52' 

Crab 

20 

11° 

23' 

101° 

15' 

(Cancer) 

30 

11° 

32' 

112° 

47' 

10 

11° 

29' 

124° 

16' 

Lion 

20 

11° 

25' 

135° 

41' 

30 

11° 

16' 

146° 

57' 

10 

11° 

5' 

158° 

2' 

Virgin 

20 

11° 

1' 

169° 

3' 

30 

10° 

57' 

180° 

0' 

10 

10° 

57' 

190° 

57' 

Balance 

20 

11° 

1' 

201° 

58' 

30 

11° 

5' 

213° 

3' 

10 

11° 

16' 

224° 

19' 

Scorpion 

20 

11° 

25' 

235° 

44' 

30 

11° 

29' 

247° 

13' 

10 

11° 

32' 

258° 

45' 

Archer 

20 

11° 

23' 

270° 

8' 

30 

11° 

7' 

281° 

15' 

10 

10° 

43' 

291° 

58' 

Goat 

20 

10° 

11' 

302° 

9' 

(Capricorn) 

30 

9° 

36' 

311° 

45' 

10 

9° 

3' 

320° 

48' 

Water  Bearer 

20 

8° 

31' 

329° 

19' 

30 

8° 

4' 

337° 

23' 

10 

7° 

45' 

345° 

8' 

Fishes 

20 

7° 

29' 

352° 

37' 

30 

7° 

23' 

360° 

0' 

Through  the  low 
countries  of  Egijpt 

Through  Rhodes 

14  hours 

Lat.  30°22' 

14}^  hours 

Lat.  36^ 

time 

total  tUne 

time 

total  time 

6°  48' 

6°  48' 

6°  14' 

6°  14' 

6°  55' 

13°  43' 

6°  21' 

12°  35' 

7°  10' 

20°  53' 

6°  37' 

19°  12' 

7°  33' 

28°  26' 

7°  1' 

26°  13' 

8°  2' 

36°  28' 

7°  33' 

33°  46' 

8°  37' 

45°  5' 

8  12' 

41°  58' 

9°  17' 

54°  22' 

8°  56' 

50°  54' 

10°  0' 

64°  22' 

9°  47' 

60°  41' 

10°  38' 

75°  0' 

10°  34' 

71°  15' 

11°  12' 

86°  12' 

11°  16' 

82°  31' 

11°  34' 

97°  46' 

11°  47' 

94°  18' 

11°  51' 

109°  37' 

12°  12' 

106°  30' 

11°  55' 

121°  32' 

12°  20' 

0 

10 

0 

00 

1— 1 

11°  54' 

133°  26' 

12°  23' 

131°  13' 

11°  47' 

145°  13' 

12°  19' 

143°  32' 

11°  40' 

156°  53' 

12°  13' 

155°  45' 

11°  35' 

168°  28' 

12°  9' 

167°  54' 

11°  32' 

180°  0' 

12°  6' 

180°  0' 

11°  32' 

191°  32' 

12°  6' 

192°  6' 

11°  35' 

203°  7' 

12°  9' 

204°  15' 

11°  40' 

214°  47' 

12°  13' 

216°  28' 

11°  47' 

226°  34' 

12°  19' 

0 

00 

(N 

11°  54' 

238°  28' 

12°  23' 

241°  10' 

11°  55' 

250°  23' 

12°  20' 

253°  30' 

11°  51' 

262°  14' 

12°  12' 

265°  42' 

11°  34' 

273°  48' 

11°  47' 

277°  29' 

11°  12' 

285°  0' 

11°  16' 

288°  45' 

10°  38' 

295°  38' 

10°  34' 

299°  19' 

10°  0' 

305°  38' 

9°  47' 

309°  6' 

9°  17' 

314°  55' 

8°  56' 

318°  2' 

8°  37' 

323°  32' 

8°  12' 

326°  14' 

8°  2' 

331°  34' 

7°  33' 

333°  47' 

7°  33' 

339°  7' 

7°  1' 

340°  48' 

7°  10' 

346°  17' 

6°  37' 

347°  25' 

6°  55' 

353°  12' 

6°  21' 

353°  46' 

6°  48' 

360°  0' 

6°  14' 

360°  0' 

64 


PTOLEMY 


Signs 

Ram 

BuU 

Twins 

Crab 

(Cancer) 

Lion 

Virgin 

’1! 

Balance 

Scorpion 

Archer 

Goat 

(Capricorn) 
Water  Bearer 

Fishes 


8.  Table  of  Ascensions  by  10° — Continued 


Through 

Through  the 

Through 

the  mouth 

the  Hellespont 

middle  of  Pontus 

of 

the  Borysihenes 

Tens 

15  hours 

Lat. 

15}^  hours 

Lat.  45°;' 

16  hours 

Lat. 

45° 

time 

total 

lime 

time 

total  i 

lime 

time 

total  j 

lime 

10 

5° 

40' 

5° 

40' 

5° 

8' 

5° 

8' 

4° 

36' 

4° 

36' 

20 

5** 

47' 

11° 

27' 

5° 

14' 

10° 

22' 

4° 

43' 

9° 

19' 

30 

6° 

5' 

17° 

32' 

5° 

33' 

15° 

55' 

5° 

1' 

14° 

20' 

10 

6® 

29' 

24° 

1' 

5° 

58' 

21° 

53' 

5° 

26' 

19° 

46' 

20 

7® 

4' 

31° 

5' 

6° 

34' 

28° 

27' 

6° 

5' 

25° 

51' 

30 

70 

46' 

38° 

51' 

7° 

20' 

35° 

47' 

6° 

52' 

32° 

43' 

10 

8° 

38' 

47° 

29' 

8° 

15' 

44° 

2' 

7° 

53' 

40° 

36' 

20 

9® 

32' 

57° 

1' 

9° 

19' 

53° 

21' 

9° 

5' 

49° 

41' 

30 

lO*’ 

29' 

67° 

30' 

10° 

24' 

63° 

45' 

10° 

19' 

60° 

0' 

10 

11° 

21' 

78° 

51' 

11° 

26' 

75° 

11' 

11° 

31' 

71° 

31' 

20 

12° 

2' 

90° 

53' 

12° 

15' 

87° 

26' 

12° 

29' 

84° 

0' 

30 

12° 

30' 

0 

CO 

0 

23' 

12° 

53' 

100° 

19' 

13° 

15' 

97° 

15' 

10 

12° 

46' 

116° 

9' 

13° 

12' 

113° 

31' 

13° 

40' 

110° 

55' 

20 

12° 

52' 

129° 

1' 

13° 

22' 

126° 

53' 

13° 

51' 

124° 

46' 

30 

12° 

51' 

141° 

52' 

13° 

22' 

140° 

15' 

13° 

54' 

138° 

40' 

10 

12° 

45' 

154° 

37' 

13° 

17' 

153° 

32' 

13° 

49' 

152° 

29' 

20 

12° 

43' 

167° 

20' 

13° 

16' 

166° 

48' 

13° 

47' 

166° 

16' 

30 

12° 

40' 

180° 

0' 

13° 

12' 

180° 

0' 

13° 

44' 

180° 

0' 

10 

12° 

40' 

192° 

40' 

13° 

12' 

193° 

12' 

13° 

44' 

193° 

44' 

20 

12° 

43' 

205° 

23' 

13° 

16' 

206° 

28' 

13° 

47' 

207° 

31' 

30 

12° 

45' 

218° 

8' 

13° 

17' 

219° 

45' 

13° 

49' 

221° 

20' 

10 

12° 

51' 

230° 

59' 

13° 

22' 

233° 

7' 

13° 

54' 

235° 

14' 

20 

12° 

52' 

243° 

51' 

13° 

22' 

246° 

29' 

13° 

51' 

249° 

5' 

30 

12° 

46' 

256° 

37' 

13° 

12' 

259° 

41' 

13° 

40' 

262° 

45' 

10 

12° 

30' 

269° 

7' 

12° 

53' 

272° 

34' 

13° 

15' 

276° 

0' 

20 

12° 

2' 

281° 

9' 

12° 

15' 

284° 

49' 

12° 

29' 

288° 

29' 

30 

11° 

21' 

292° 

30' 

11° 

26' 

296° 

15' 

11° 

31° 

300° 

0' 

10 

10° 

29' 

302° 

59' 

10° 

24' 

306° 

39' 

10° 

19' 

310° 

19' 

20 

9° 

32' 

312° 

31' 

9° 

19' 

315° 

58' 

9° 

5' 

319° 

24' 

30 

8° 

38' 

321° 

9' 

8° 

15' 

324° 

13' 

7° 

53' 

327° 

17' 

10 

7° 

46' 

328° 

55' 

7° 

20' 

331° 

33' 

6° 

52' 

334° 

9' 

20 

7° 

4' 

335° 

59' 

6° 

34' 

338° 

7' 

6° 

5' 

-340° 

14' 

30 

6° 

29' 

342° 

28' 

5° 

58' 

344° 

5' 

5° 

26' 

345° 

40' 

10 

6° 

5' 

348° 

33' 

5° 

33' 

349° 

38' 

5° 

1' 

350° 

41' 

20 

5° 

47' 

354° 

20' 

5° 

14' 

354° 

52' 

4° 

43' 

355° 

24' 

30 

5° 

40' 

360° 

0' 

5° 

8' 

360° 

0' 

4° 

36' 

360° 

0' 

THE  ALMAGEST,  II  55 


8.  Table  of  Ascensions  by  10° — Continued 


Through  the  southernmost 

Through  the  mouth 

parts  of  Britain 

of  the  Tanais 

Signs 

Tens 

161^  hours 

Lat.  srsa 

17  hours 

Lot. 

time 

total  time 

time 

total  time 

10 

4*^  5' 

4”  5' 

3”  36' 

3”  36' 

Ram 

20 

12' 

8”  17' 

3”  43' 

7”  19' 

30 

4®  31' 

12”  48' 

4”  0' 

11”  19' 

10 

4°  56' 

17”  44' 

4”  26' 

15°  45' 

BuU 

20 

5^  34' 

23”  18' 

5”  4' 

20”  49' 

30 

6**  25' 

29”  43' 

5”  56' 

26”  45' 

10 

r  29' 

37°  12' 

7”  5' 

33”  50' 

Twins 

20 

8^*  49' 

46”  1' 

8”  33' 

42”  23' 

30 

10^  14' 

56”  15' 

10”  7' 

52”  30' 

10 

ir  36' 

67”  51' 

11”  43' 

64”  13' 

Crab 

20 

12^*  45' 

80”  36' 

13”  1' 

77”  14' 

(Cancer) 

30 

13’’  39' 

94”  15' 

14”  3' 

91”  17' 

10 

14”  7' 

108°  22' 

14”  36' 

105”  53' 

Lion 

20 

14”  22' 

122”  44' 

14”  52' 

120”  45' 

30 

14”  24' 

o 

CO 

14”  54' 

135”  39' 

10 

14”  19' 

151”  27' 

14”  50' 

150”  29' 

Virgin 

20 

14”  18' 

165”  45' 

14”  47' 

165”  16' 

30 

14”  15' 

180”  0' 

14”  44' 

180”  0' 

10 

14”  15' 

194”  15' 

14”  44' 

194”  44' 

Balance 

20 

14”  18' 

208”  33' 

14”  47' 

209”  31' 

30 

14”  19' 

222”  52' 

14”  50' 

224”  21' 

10 

14”  24' 

237”  16' 

14”  54' 

239”  15' 

Scorpion 

20 

14”  22' 

251”  38' 

14”  52' 

254”  7' 

30 

14”  7' 

265”  45' 

14”  36' 

268”  43' 

10 

13”  39' 

279”  24' 

14”  3' 

282”  46'  ,5 

Archer 

20 

12”  45' 

292”  9' 

13”  1' 

295”  47'  • 

30 

11”  36' 

303”  45' 

CO 

o 

307”  30' 

10 

10”  14' 

313”  59' 

10”  7' 

317”  37' 

Goat 

20 

8”  49' 

322”  48' 

8”  33' 

326”  10' 

(Capricorn) 

30 

7”  29' 

330”  17' 

7”  5' 

333”  15' 

10 

6”  25' 

336”  42' 

5”  56' 

339”  11' 

Water  Bearer 

20 

5”  34' 

342”  16' 

5”  4' 

344”  15' 

30 

4”  56' 

347”  12' 

4”  26' 

348”  41' 

10 

4”  31' 

351”  43' 

4”  0' 

352”  4T 

Fishes 

20 

4”  12' 

355”  55' 

3”  43' 

356”  24' 

30 

4”  5' 

360”  0' 

3”  36' 

360”  0' 

66 


PTOLEMY 


9.  On  Particular  Consequences  of  the  Ascensions 

It  will  be  evident  through  the  systematic  means  given  belo\v  that,  once  the 
times  of  the  ascensions  have  been  set  out  by  us  in  the  foregoing  manner,  all  the 
rest  of  those  things  which  concern  the  particular  will  be  easily  available,  and  we 
shall  neither  need  proofs  with  figures  for  each  of  them,  nor  more  tables. 

For  the  first  the  length  of  the  given  day  or  night  is  gotten  by  calculating  the 
degrees  in  time  of  the  particular  latitude:  (1)  in  the  case  of  the  day  by  adding  up 
the  degrees  in  equatorial  time  from  the  point  of  the  sun  eastward  to  the  point 
exactly  opposite  on  the  ecliptic,  (2)  in  the  case  of  the  night,  from  the  point  op¬ 
posite  to  the  sun.  For  if  we  take  a  fifteenth  of  the  total  time,  we  shall  get  how 
many  equatorial  hours  the  given  distance  is;  but  if  we  take  a  twelfth,  we  shall 
get  how  many  degrees  in  time  the  seasonal  hour  of  the  same  distance  is. 

And  the  magnitude  of  the  hour  is  also  more  easily  found  if,  out  of  the  fore¬ 
going  table,  the  difference  is  taken  laterally  between  the  totals  of  successive 
additions  of  time  in  the  parallel  under  the  equator  and  that  of  the  given  lati¬ 
tude:.  (1)  in  the  case  of  the  day  at  the  point  of  the  sun;  (2)  in  the  case  of  the 
night,  at  the  point  directly  opposite  on  the  ecliptic.  For  taking  3^  of  the  differ¬ 
ence  so  found  and  adding  it  to  the  15°  in  time  of  the  equatorial  hour  when  the 
sun  is  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  and  subtracting  it  when  it  is  in  the  southern, 
we  shall  get  the  number  of  degrees  in  time  of  the  given  seasonal  hour.^ 

And  consequently  we  reduce  the  given  seasonal  hours  to  equatorial  hours  by 
multiplying  the  number  of  such  hours  in  the  day  by  the  number  of  time-degrees 
in  the  hour  for  that  day  in  that  latitude,  and  the  number  in  the  night  by  the 
number  of  degrees  in  the  hour  for  that  night.  For  by  taking  }^5  of  the  total  we 
shall  have  the  number  of  equatorial  hours.  Conversely  we  reduce  the  given 
equatorial  hours  to  seasonal  hours  by  multiplying  by  15  and  dividing  by  the 
given  number  of  time-degrees  for  the  hour  of  that  particular  interval. 

Again,  given  the  time  and  any  seasonal  hour,  we  shall  get  the  degree  of  the 
ecliptic  which  is  rising  at  that  time  by  multiplying  the  number  of  hours  from 
the  rising  of  the  sun  for  the  day,  from  the  setting  of  the  sun  for  the  night,  by  the 
proper  number  of  time-degrees  for  that  hour.  For  we  compare  the  resulting 
number  with  the  ascensions  of  the  given  latitude:  in  the  case  of  the  day  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  sun  and  going  eastward;  in  the  case  of  the  night,  from  the 
opposite  point  on  the  ecliptic.  And  to  whatever  degree  the  number  corresponds 
we  shall  say  that  degree  rises  at  that  moment. 

And  if  we  wish  to  get  the  degree  culminating,  we  multiply  the  seasonal  hours, 
counted  always  from  midday  to  the  given  hour,  by  the  proper  number  of  time- 
degrees  for  that  hour.  Beginning  from  the  sun  eastward,  with  the  ascensions  in 
the  right  sphere,  we  compare  the  resulting  number,  and  on  whatever  degree  the 
number  falls,  that  degree  will  be  culminating  at  that  moment. 

Likewise  from  the  degree  given  as  rising  we  shall  get  the  degree  culminating 
by  locating  the  number  resulting  from  the  successive  additions  corresponding 
to  the  degree  given  as  rising,  in  the  table  of  the  proper  latitude.  For  by  always 
subti*acting  from  it  the  90°  in  time  of  the  quadrant,  we  shall  find  the  degree 
culminating  as  that  corresponding  to  the  number  resulting  from  this  subtrac¬ 
tion  found  in  the  column  of  successive  additions  of  the  right  sphere.  And  con- 

‘For  this  difference,  according  to  the  construction  of  the  Table  [p.  52],  is  arc  EL  which  is 
half  the  difference  between  the  given  and  the  equinoctial  day  [p.  50]. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II  57 

versely,  from  the  degree  given  as  culminating,  we  shall  again  get  the  degree 
which  is  rising  by  considering  the  number  resulting  from  the  successive  addi¬ 
tions  corresponding  to  the  degree  given  as  rising,  in  the  table  of  the  right  sphere. 
For  after  always  adding  the  90°  in  time,  we  shall  look  for  the  degree,  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  resulting  number,  in  the  column  of  successive  additions  of  the  given 
latitude.  And  then  we  shall  have  the  degree  rising  at  that  moment. 

And  it  is  also  evident  that  for  those  living  under  the  same  meridian  the  sun 
is  the  same  number  of  equatorial  hours  from  noon  or  midnight;  but  for  those 
not  living  under  the  same  meridian,  it  will  differ  by  as  many  equatorial  hours 
as  one  meridian  differs  from  the  other. 

10.  On  the  Angles  Formed  by  the  Ecliptic  and  the  Meridian 

Since  we  still  have  to  treat  of  the  angles,  to  complete  this  theory — I  mean 
those  angles  made  by  the  ecliptic — it  must  first  be  understood  that  we  say  a 
right  angle  is  contained  by  great  circles  if,  when  a  circle  is  drawn  with  the  inter¬ 
section  of  the  given  great  circles  as  pole  and  any  distance,  the  arc  intercepted 
on  this  circle  by  the  sections  of  the  great  circles  containing  the  angle  is  a  quad¬ 
rant.  And  in  general  we  say  that  whatever  ratio  the  intercepted  arc  has  to  the 
circle  drawn  in  the  manner  we  described,  that  same  ratio  does  the  angle  con¬ 
tained  by  the  inclination  of  the  planes  have  to  four  right  angles.  And  so,  since 
we  suppose  the  perimeter  to  be  360°,  whatever  number  of  degrees  the  inter¬ 
cepted  arc  is  found  to  be,  that  same  number  will  the  angle  subtending  it  be. 
For  instance,  one  right  angle  is  90°. 

Of  the  angles  made  by  the  ecliptic  the  most  useful  with  respect  to  this  theory 
are:  (1)  those  contained  by  its  intersection  with  the  meridian,  (2)  those  con¬ 
tained  by  its  intersection  with  the  horizon  for  each  position,  and  likewise  (3) 
those  contained  by  its  intersection  with  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the 
horizon’s  poles.  And  along  with  the  exposition  of  these  last  angles  will  be  given 
also  an  exposition  of  the  arcs  intercepted  on  this  great  circle  by  the  intersection 
and  the  horizon’s  pole — that  is,  the  zenith.  For  every  one  of  the  aforemen¬ 
tioned  things,  when  demonstrated,  has  a  very  considerable  place  in  the  theory 
and  contributes  most  especially  to  researches  concerning  the  parallaxes  of  the 
moon,  since  such  work  cannot  advance  without  the  prior  understanding  of  these. 

But  since  there  are  four  angles  contained  by  the  intersection  of  the  two 
circles  (that  is,  by  the  ecliptic  and  one  of  those  intersecting  it),  and  since  we  are 
going  to  speak  of  just  one  of  them  always  similar  in  position,  it  is  first  necessary 
to  determine  that  in  general,  of  the  two  angles  on  either  side  of  that  arc  of  the 

ecliptic  east  of  the  intersection  of  the  circles,  the  one 
on  the  north  is  to  be  considered,  so  that  the  inci¬ 
dents  and  quantities  which  will  be  demonstrated  be¬ 
long  to  such  angles.  And  since  the  demonstration  of 
the  angles  of  the  ecliptic  considered  with  respect  to 
the  meridian  is  simpler,  we  shall  begin  with  it,  and 
we  shall  first  prove  that  points  on  the  ecliptic  equi¬ 
distant  from  the  same  equinoctial  point  make  the 
resulting  angles  equal  to  each  other. 

For  let  ABC  be  the  arc  of  the  equator,  and  DBE 
the  arc  of  the  ecliptic,  and  point  F  the  pole  of  the 
equator.  And  with  arcs  BG  and  BH  cut  off  equal  on 


58  PTOLEMY 

either  side  of  the  equinoctial  point  let  there  be  drawn  through  the  pole  F  and 
the  points  G  and  H  the  arcs  of  meridian  circles  FKG  and  FHL, 

I  say  that 

angle  =  angle  FHE. 

For  the  three-sided  figure  BGK  is  equiangular  with  the  three-sided  figure 
BHLj  since  it  has  its  three  sides  equal  to  the  three  sides  of  the  other  respectively, 
GB  to  BHy  GK  to  HLy  and  BK  to  BL.  For  all  these  things  have  been  proved  be¬ 
fore  [Book  I,  Chaps.  14,  15].  And  therefore 

angle  KGB  =  angle  Bi/L  =  angle  FHE, 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Again  it  must  be  proved  that,  given  two  points  on  the  ecliptic  equidistant 
from  the  same  tropic  point,  the  angles  there  formed  with  the  meridian  are  to¬ 
gether  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For  let  ABC  be  an  arc  of  the  ecliptic  with  B  given  as  the  tropic  point.  And 
with  the  equal  arcs  BD  and  BE  intercepted  on  either 
side  of  it,  let  the  arcs  of  meridian  circles  FD  and  FE 
be  drawn  through  the  points  D  and  E  and  the  pole 
F  of  the  equator. 

I  say  that 

angle  FBB-t- angle  FEC  =  2  rt.  angles. 

And  this  is  immediately  evident.  For  since  the 
points  D  and  E  are  equidistant  from  the  same  tropic 
point, 

arc  DF=Sirc  EF. 

And  therefore 

angle  FDB  =  angle  FEB 

But 

angle  FBB+ angle  FEC  —  2  rt.  angles. 

And  therefore 

angle  FZ)B+ angle  FEC-2  rt.  angles. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  with  these  things  understood  first,  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  ABCDy 
and  the  semicircle  of  the  ecliptic  AEC  with  the  point  A  taken  as  the  winter 
tropic.  And  with  A  as  pole  and  with  a  side  of  the  inscribed  square  as  distance 

let  the  semicircle  BED  be  drawn.  Since  then  the 
meridian  ABCD  has  been  drawn  through  the  poles 
of  AEC  and  those  of  BEDj  therefore  ED  is  the  arc 
of  the  quadrant  of  a  circle.  Then  the  angle  DAE  is 
right.  And,  by  what  has  just  been  demonstrated,  the 
angle  at  the  summer  tropic  is  also  right.  Which  was 
to  be  proved. 

Again  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  ABCDy  and 
the  semicircle  of  the  equator  AEC.  And  let  the  semi¬ 
circle  of  the  ecliptic  AFC  be  drawn  in  such  a  way 
that  the  point  A  is  the  autumn  equinox;  and  with  A 
as  pole  and  with  the  side  of  the  inscribed  square  as 
distance,  let  the  semicircle  BFED  be  drawn. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II  59 

For  the  same  reasons,  then,  since  ABGD  has  been 
dra\\Ti  through  the  poles  of  AEC  and  BEDy  there* 
fore  AF  and  ED  are  quadrants.  And  so  the  point  F 
is  the  winter  tropic,  and  as  already  proved 
arc  EF  =  2S°5l\ 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

arc  F^;Z)  =  113°51', 
angle  Z)AF=  113°51'. 

And  therefore,  as  already  proved,  the  angle  at  the 
point  of  the  spring  equinox  is  what  remains  of  two 
right  angles  or  66°9'. 

Again  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  A  BCD,  and 
the  semicircle  of  the  equator  AECy  and  that  of  the  ecliptic  BFD,so  that  the  point 
F  is  taken  as  the  autumn  oquinox,  the  arc  BF  first  as  one  twelfth  of  the  circle, 
that  of  the  Virgin,  and  the  point  B  clearly  as  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Virgin.  And  again  with  B  as  pole 
and  with  the  side  of  the  inscribed  square  as  dis¬ 
tance  let  the  semicircle  GHEK  be  drawn. 

And  let  it  be  required  to  find  angle  KBH, 

Since,  then,  the  meridian  ABCD  has  been  drawn 
through  the  poles  of  AEC  and  GEKj  each  of  the  arcs 
BGj  BHy  and  EG  is  a  quadrant.  Because  of  the  con¬ 
struction, 

chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  AG  comp, 
chord  2  arc  BF  :  chord  2  arc  FH; 
chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EG. 

But  from  things  already  proved 

2  arc  AB  =  23^20', 
chord  2  arc  AB  =  24^16'; 


and 


and  again 


and 


2  arc  AG=156°40', 
chord  2  arc  AG=  117^31'; 

2  arc  BF  =  60^ 

:  chord  2  arc  BF  =  60^ ; 


a/ 


r  l  2arcF/7=120°,  - 

chord  2  arc  F/7  =  103p55'23".  L 

Then  again 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EG  comp.  24^16' :  117^31',  103p55'23"  ;  60^ 
or,  very  nearly,  ^  ^  u 

chord  2  arc  EH :  chord  2  arc  EG  :  :  42p58'  :  120^ 

And  i 

chord  2  arc  EG  =  120p  ; 

and  therefore 

chord  2  arc  EH  — 

And  so  ■ 

2arcFLr  =  42°, 

arc  DD  =  21^  i  < 


60 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 


PTOLEMY 


arc  HEK^lW, 
angle  AJSiy  =  111°; 

and,  by  previous  proofs,  the  angle  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Scorpion  is 
also  lir,  and  each  of  the  angles  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bull  and  of  the 
Fishes  is  the  69°  which  remain  from  two  right  angles.  Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Again,  with  the  same  construction,  let  arc  BF  be  taken  as  two  twelfths  of  a 
circle,  so  that  the  point  B  is  the  beginning  of  the  Lion  and,  vdth  the  same  things 
being  assumed,  so  that 


and 


2  arc  AB  =  41°, 
chord  2  arc  AB  =  42p2'; 


2arc  A(?=139°, 
chord  2  arc  AG=112p24'; 

and  again 

2  arc  BF=120°, 
chord  2  arc  103p55'23"; 

and 

■'  2arcra=60° 

chord  2  arc  FH  =  60^. 

Then 

chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EG  comp.  42p2'  :  112p24',  GQp  :  103p55'23" 


or 

Therefore 
And  so 


chord  2  arc  EH  :  chord  2  arc  EG  :  :  25p53'  :  120p. 
chord  2  arc  EH  =  25^53', 


2  arc  EH  =  25°, 
arc  EH  =  12}/^°, 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

SiTcHEK  =  lQ2y2°, 
angle  KBH  =  102y°. 

And  for  this  reason  the  angle  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Archer  is  also 
1023^°,  and  each  of  the  angles  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Twins  and  of  the 
Water  Bearer  is  what  remains  of  two  right  angles,  or  773^°. 

And  we  have  proved  what  was  required;  and  the  method  will  be  the  same 
for  still  smaller  sections  of  the  ecliptic.  But  the  exposition  of  the  twelve  signs  is 
sufficient  for  the  needs  of  this  treatise. 


11.  On  the  Angles  Formed  by  the  Ecliptic  and  the  Horizon 

And  next  we  shall  show  how  we  can  also  get,  for  a  given  latitude,  the  angles 
formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon;  for  they  have  a  simpler  system  than  the 
others  that  are  left  to  do.  Now  it  is  clear  that  those  formed  with  the  meridian 
are  the  same  as  those  formed  with  the  horizon  in  the  right  sphere.  But  to  get 
those  in  the  oblique  sphere  it  is  first  necessary  to  prove  that  points  on  the  eclip¬ 
tic  equidistant  from  the  same  equinoctial  point  make  with  the  horizon,  angles 
equal  to  each  other. 

For  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  ABCD,  and  the  semicircle  of  the  equator 


61 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


EK.  Therefore  also 


AECy  and  that  of  the  horizon  BED.  And  let  two 
sections  of  the  ecliptic,  FGH  and  KLMy  be  drawn 
in  such  a  way  that  each  of  the  points  F  and  K  is 
taken  to  be  the  autumn  equinox,  and 
arc  FG  =  arc  KL, 

I  say  that  also 

angle  EGH  =  angle  DLK. 

And  this  is  immediately  evident.  For  the  three- 
sided  figure  EFG  is  equiangular  with  the  three- 
sided  figure  EKLy  since,  by  previous  proofs,  it 
has  its  three  sides  equal  respectively  to  the  three 
sides  of  the  other;  FG  to  KL^  the  section  of  the 
horizon  GE  to  EL^  and  the  ascension  arc  EF  to 


angle  EGF  =  erngle  ELK, 

and  the  supplements 

angle  =  angle  DLK. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  I  say  also  that  the  two  angles  formed  at  two  points  directly  opposite, 
one  at  the  east  and  the  other  at  the  west,  together  make  two  right  angles. 

For  if  we  draw  circle  ABCD  as  the  horizon  and  AECF  as  the  ecliptic,  cutting 
each  other  at  the  points  A  and  C, 

angle  FAD+smgle  DAE  =  2  rt.  angles. 

But 

angle  FAD  =  angle  FCD 

so  that 

angle  FCD+angle  DAE  =  2  rt.  angles. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  now  that  these  things  are  so — since  angles 
formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  same  horizon,  at 
points  on  the  ecliptic  equidistant  from  the  same 
equinoctial  point,  have  been  proved  equal — it 
will  also  follow  that  the  angle  at  the  east  and  the 
angle  at  the  west,  for  points  equidistant  from  the 
same  tropic  and  formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon,  will  together  equal  two 
right  angles.  And  so,  for  this  reason,  if  we  find  the  rising  angles  from  the  Ram  to 
the  Balance,  the  rising  angles  of  the  other  semicircle  will  be  made  known  at  the 
same  time,  and  also  the  setting  angles  of  both.  And  we  shall  briefly  expound  how 
this  is  demonstrated,  using  again  as  an  example  the  same  parallel — that  is,  the 
one  where  the  north  pole  is  36®  above  the  horizon. 

Now,  the  angles  formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon  at  the  equinoctial 
points  can  be  easily  found.  For  if  we  draw  the  circle  ABCD  as  the  meridian  and 
AED  as  the  eastern  semicircle  of  the  horizon,  and  EF  as  a  quadrant  of  the  equa¬ 
tor,  and  if  we  draw  the  two  arcs  of  the  ecliptic  BE  and  CE  in  such  a  way  that 
the  point  E  is  conceived  as  the  fall  equinox  with  respect  to  the  quadrant  BE  and 
as  the  spring  equinox  with  respect  to  CE,  and  B  in  the  first  instance  becomes  the 
winter  tropic  and  C  in  the  second  becomes  the  summer  tropic,  then  it  is  inferred 
that,  since  it  is  supposed 


62 


PTOLEMY  .11 


arci)F  =  54^ 

and 

arc  5i^  =  arc  CGN  23°51', 

therefore 

arc  CZ)  =  30X 
arc  BD  =  n%l\ 

And  so,  since  the  point  EisB,  pole  of  the  meridian 
ABCf  therefore  the  angle  DEC  formed  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Ram  will  be  30°9',  and  angle  DEB 
formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Balance  will  be 
77°51'. 

To  show  clearly  the  method  for  getting  the  others,  let  it  be  required,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  to  find  the  rising  angle  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bull  by  the  eclip¬ 
tic  and  the  horizon.  And  let  there  be  the  meridian 
circle  ABCD  and  the  eastern  semicircle  of  the 
given  horizon  BED.  And  let  the  semicircle  of  the 
ecliptic  A  EC  be  drawn  so  that  the  point  E  is  the 
beginning  of  the  Bull.  And  since  in  this  same  lati¬ 
tude,  when  the  beginning  of  the  Bull  is  just  ris¬ 
ing,  the  point  17°41'  within  the  Crab  is  at  the 
meridian  under  the  earth  (for  we  showed  [p.  66] 
how  to  get  such  results  easily  from  our  Table  of 
Ascensions).  Therefore  the  arc  CE  is  less  than  a 
quadrant.  Then  let  the  section  HGF  of  a  great 
circle  be  drawn  with  E  as  pole  and  the  side  of  the 
inscribed  square  as  distance;  and  let  the  quad¬ 
rants  ECG  and  EDH  be  filled  out.  But  each  of  the  arcs  DCF  and  FGH  is  also  a 
quadrant  because  the  horizon  BEH  is  through  the  poles  of  the  meridian  FCD 
and  of  the  great  circle  FGH.  Again,  since  the  point  17°41'  within  the  Crab  is 
22°40'  from  the  equator  towards  the  north  along  the  great  circle  through  the 
equator’s  poles  (for  this  we  have  also  proved),  and  since  the  equator  is  36®  from 
the  horizon’s  pole  F  along  the  same  arc  FCD,  therefore  it  is  inferred 

arc  CF  =  58®40'. 

Now  with  this  given,  because  of  the  construction, 

chord  2  arc  CD  :  chord  2  arc  DF  comp,  chord  2  arc  CE  :  chord  2  arc  EG, 
chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  FH. 

But,  by  what  has  already  been  laid  down, 

2  arc  CD  =  62®40', 
chord  2  arc  CD  =  62p24'  ; 

and 

2arcDF=180®, 
chord  2  arc  DF  =  120^; 

and  again 

2arcCD=155®22', 
chord  2  arc  CD  =  117^14' ; 

and 

2  arc  DC  =180®, 
chord  2  arc  EG=  120^. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


63 


Then 

chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  FH  comp.  62p24'  :  120^,  120^  :  117^14' 
or 


chord  2  arc  GH  ;  chord  2  arc  FH  : :  63^52'  :  120^. 

And 

chord  2  arc  Fi7  =  120^; 

therefore 

chord  2  arc  0^  =  63^52'. 

And  so 

2  arc  G/f  =  64°20', 
arc  (?^  =  32^10', 
angle  (?£;i7  =  32^10', 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Not  to  draw  out  this  treatise  by  repeating  for  each  case,  the  same  method 
will  be  understood  as  used  for  the  other  signs  and  latitudes. 


12.  On  the  Angles  and  Arcs  Made  by  the  Ecliptic  with,  and  on, 
THE  Circle  through  the  Poles  of  the  Horizon 


Now  there  remains  the  method  by  which  we  can  get  the  angles  formed  by  the 
ecliptic  and  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  horizon  for  each  latitude  and 
position.  And,  as  we  said,  there  will  result,  at  the  same  time  and  in  each  case,  a 
demonstration  of  the  arc  on  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  horizon  inter¬ 
cepted  by  the  zenith  and  the  intersection  with  the  ecliptic.  And  again  we  shall 
set  out  the  fundamental  things  for  this  particular  situation ;  and  we  shall  prove 
first  that,  if  two  points  on  the  ecliptic  equidistant  from  the  ;Same  tropic  inter¬ 
cept  an  equal  number  of  time  degrees  on  either  side  of  the  meridian  (the  one  to 
the  east,  the  other  to  the  west),  then  the  arcs  on  great  circles  from  the  zenith 
to  each  of  these  points  are  equal  to  each  other,  and  the  angles  formed  at  these 
points  in  the  way  we  have  stipulated  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For  let  there  be  a  section  of  the  meridian,  ABC^  and  take  the  zenith  B  on  it, 

and  the  pole  of  the  equator  C.  And  let  two  sec¬ 
tions  of  the  ecliptic,  ADE  and  AFG^  be  drawn  in 
such  a  way  that  the  points  D  and  F  are  equi¬ 
distant  from  the  same  tropic  and  intercept  ^ual 
arcs  on  the  parallel  through  them  from  either 
side  of  the  meridian  ABC,  And  let  the  arcs  of 
great  circles,  CD  and  CF,  be  drawn  through  the 
points  D  and  F  from  the  equator ^s  pole  C;  and 
from  the  zenith  B  the  arcs  of  great  circles  BD  and 
BF. 

I  say  that 

BD  =  a>rc  BF, 


and 


angle  B2)£^+angle  BFA  =  2  rt.  angles. 

For  since  the  points  D  and  F  are  equidistant  from  the  meridian  ABC  by 
equal  arcs  on  the  parallel  through  them, 

angle  BCD  =  angle  BCF, 

Then  we  have  the  two  three-sided  figures  BCD  and  BCF  having  two  sides 
equal  to  two  sides  respectively,  CD  to  CF  and  BC  common,  and  the  angles 


64  PTOLEMY 

contained  by  the  equal  sides  equal — that  is,  angle  BCD  to  angle  BCF,  And 
therefore 

base  5Z)  =  base  BF^ 
angle  BFC  =  angle  BCD. 

But  since  it  has  just  been  proved  that  the  angles  at  points  equidistant  from  the 
same  tropic  and  formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  circles  through  the  equator ^s  poles 
are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,  therefore 

angle  CDE'd- angle  CFA=2  rt.  angles. 

But  it  was  proved  also 

angle  BDC  =  angle  BFC. 

And  therefore 

angle  BDE+emgle  BFA=2  rt.  angles. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Again,  it  must  be  proved  that,  when  the  same  points  on  the  ecliptic  are  equi¬ 
distant  in  time  from  either  side  of  the  meridian,  the  arcs  of  great  circles  from  the 
zenith  tp  these  points  are  equal  to  each  other;  and  the  angles  formed  by  these 
arcs  with  the  ecliptic  (the  one  in  the  east  and  the  other  in  the  west)  are  together 
equal  to  the  two  angles  at  the  same  point  formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  merid¬ 
ian  at  that  point,  whenever  the  culminations  of  the  points  in  either  position  are 
either  both  to  the  north  or  both  to  the  south  of  the  zenith. 

First  let  them  be  taken  both  to  the  south,  and  let  there  be  the  section  of  the 
meridian  ABCD,  and  on  it  the  zenith  C,  and  the 
pole  of  the  equator  D.  And  let  two  sections  of  the 
ecliptic,  AEF  and  BGH^  be  drawn  so  that  points  E 
and  Gy  taken  as  the  same,  are  equally  distant  from 
the  meridian  A  BCD  on  either  side  by  an  arc  of  the 
parallel  through  the  point.  And  again  let  the  sec¬ 
tions  of  great  circles,  CE  and  CG,  be  drawn  through 
these  points  from  C;  and  DE  and  DG,  from  D. 

By  the  same  reasoning  as  before,  since  the  points 
E  and  G,  on  the  same  parallel,  make  on  that  parallel 
equal  arcs  on  either  side  from  the  meridian,  there¬ 
fore  the  three-sided  figure  CDE  is  equiangular  and 
equilateral  with  the  figure  CDGy  so  that 

arc  CE  =  arc  CG. 

I  say  then  that 

angle  CfiF+angle  GGB  =  angle  Z)£^F+angle  DGB. 

For  since  angle  DEF  is  the  same  as  angle  DGB,  and 

angle  CED  =  angle  DGC, 

therefore 

angle  G£'Z)+ angle  GGB  =  angle  DEF. 

And  so  also 

angle  CEF-\- angle  GGB  =  angle  DEF -{-angle  DGB. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Let  the  same  sections  of  the  aforementioned  circles  be  again  constructed  so 
that  this  time  the  points  A  and  B  are  north  of  the  point  G. 

I  say  that  the  same  thing  will  follow,  that  is 

angle  KEF +angle  LGB  =  angle  DEF +angle  DGB. 


THE  ALMAGICST,  II 


0^ 


For  sinco  t  he  angle  DEF  is  t  he  ^ame  os  angle  DGfi 
and 

angle  DEK  -  fXthj 
therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  /vt7/y wangle  i;/i,T+angIe  DEK, 

And  80 

angle  A’' AT d- angle  />^/i5*arigle  />)A’F+angle  DGIL 
Now,  again,  let  a  similar  figure  be  set  <jut  so  that 
this  time  the  point  of  the  eelipfie^rt  eastern  ser-tion 
when  culminating,  that  is  /I,  is  south  of  the  zenith 
C,  and  the  point  of  the  wesU*rn  s^'etion  when  cul¬ 
minating,  that  is  //,  is  north  of  it. 


I  say  that 

angle  CAT+angle  AG/i wangle  DEE 
+  angle  I)GE-\-2  rt.  angles 

For  since 

angle  angle  DEC, 

and 

angle  /)(7C4' angle  DGL^2  rt.  angles, 
therefore  also 

angle  /)A'C+angle  DGL  —  2  rt.  angles. 

But  angle  DEF  is  the  same  as  angle  DEG,  And  so 
angle  CAFd- angle  ACVi wangle  DEF+ 
angle  /XZ/i+angle  />/sC+angle  DGL 


or 

angle  CAF4" angle  LGE  —  2  angle  DEF‘\-2  rt.  angles. 

Which  was  to  Ixi  proven!. 

And  let  the  final  combination  be  set  out  in  a  similar  figure;  the  point  A  of  the 

ef'liptic’s  f  astern  section  culminating  north  of  the 
point  C,  and  the  point  E  of  the  wedern  tion  cul¬ 
minating  south  of  it. 

I  say  that 

angle  A'AF+angle  CGEA-2  rt.  anghij^  =  2angh*  DEF 
For,  by  the  same  reasoning,  again 

angle  XAT+angle  C(/A-f-angle  DEK  + 
angle  DOT;  =  angle  />>AT+anglc>  DGE 
or 

angle  AAF+angle  r;07i  +  angle  !)EK+ 
angle  DGC  =  2  angh*  DEF. 

But 

angle  /dA7\  d-angle  DGC^2  rt.  angh^i, 


because 

and 


angle  /dAT+angle  DEC ^2  rt.  anglesj 
angle  />A'C  =  angle  IXiC, 


^^^^ich  was  to  be  provcKj. 

And  it  will  Ixi  irnmenJiately  clear  that,  from  the  angles  and  arcs  forrnfyj  by  the 
ecliptic  with  the  great  circle  through  the  7/*rnth  irr  the  way  we  have  dfiscrjI^e^J, 


66  PTOLEMY 

those  formed  on  the  meridian  and  the  horizon 
can  be  easily  gotten.  For  if  we  draw  the  meridian 
circle  ABCD,  and  the  semicircle  of  the  horizon 
BED,  and  that  of  the  ecliptic  PEG  in  any  manner 
whatsoever,  then,  whenever  we  conceive  the 
great  circle  drawn  through  the  zenith  A  as  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  culminating  point  F,  it  will  coin¬ 
cide  with  the  meridian  ABCD,  And  the  angle 
DFE  is  immediately  given  us  because  the  point  F 
and  the  angle  formed  at  it  by  the  meridian  [Book 
II,  Chap.  10]  are  given.  And  the  arc  AF  is  given 
because  we  know  how  far  on  the  meridian  the 
point  F  is  from  the  equator,  and  how  far  the 
equator  is  from  the  zenith  A.  And  whenever  we 
conceive  the  great  circle  drawn  through  A  as  passing  through  the  rising  point  E 
(for  example,  the  semicircle  AEC)  then  it  is  immediately  clear  that  the  arc  AE 
will  always  be  a  quadrant;  because  the  point  A  is  the  pole  of  the  horizon  BED. 
And  since  for  the  same  cause  the  angle  AED  is  always  right,  and  the  angle 
formed  by  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon  (that  is,  angle  DEG)  is  giyen.  Therefore 
the  whole  angle  AEG  is  also  given.  Which  was  to  be  proved.  ^ 

And  so  it  is  clear  that,  since  things  are  thus,  if,  in  each  latitude,  we  calculate 
only  the  angles  and  arcs  preceding  the  meridian  and  only  those  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  Crab  to  the  beginning  of  the  Goat,  we  shall  have  calculated  at  the 
same  time  {p.  63;  p.  64]  the  angles  and  arcs  which  follpw  the  meridian,  and  for 
the  rest  of  the  signs  both  those  preceding  and  those  following. 

To  make  the  method  here  clear  for  each  position,  again  as  an  example,  we 
shall  set  out  what  will  be  a  general  demonstration  through  one  theorem,  sup¬ 
posing  that,  in  the  same  latitude  (that  is,  where  the  north  pole  is  36°  above, the 
horizon),  the  beginning  of  the  Crab  for  instance  is  one  equatorial  hour  to  the 
east  of  the  meridian.  And  in  this  position,  for  this  parallel,  the  point  16°12'  with¬ 
in  the  Twins  is  culminating  and  the  point  17°37'  within  the  Virgin  is  rising. 
Then  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  ABCD;  and  the  semicircle  of  the  horizon 

BED;  and  that  of  the  ecliptic  FGH  in  such  a  way 
that  the  point  G  is  the  beginning  of  the  Crab,  the 
point  F  16°12'  within  the  Twins,  and  H  17°37' 
within  the  Virgin.  And  let  section  AG  EC  of  the 
great  circle  through  the  zenith  A  and  through  (?, 
the  beginning  of  the  Crab,  be  drawn.  / 

And  let  it  be  required  first  to  find  arc  AG. 
Then  it  is  evident  that 

arc  ra  =  91°25', 

arc  GH  =  77^37'. 

And  likewise  since  the  point  16°  12'  within  the 
Twins  intercepts  23°7'  on  the  meridian  from  the 
equator  northward  and  the  equator  is  36°  from 

arc  AF=12°53',  ''dV/ 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  quadrant, 

arc  J5F=77°7'.. 


the  zenith  A,  therefore 


A 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II  67 

With  these  things  given,  it  again  follows  from  the  construction  that  chord  2 
arc  BF  .  chord  2  arc  AB  comp,  chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  GH, 
chord  2  arc  EG  :  chord  2  arc  AE. 


But 

and 

and  again 
and 


2  arc  BF=154°14', 
chord  2  arc  BF=116p59'; 

2  arc  =  180®, 
chord  2  arc  AB  =  \20^; 

2  arc  F/f=182°50', 
chord  2  arc  =  119p58'; 


2  arc  (?Lr=155°14', 
chord  2  arc  0/7  =  117^12'. 

Therefore 

chord  2  arc  F(7  :  chord  2  arc  AF  comp.  116^59' :  120p,  117pI2'  :  119p58' 
or  ’ 

chord  2  arc  EG  :  chord  2  arc  AiJ ; :  114p16'  *  120^ 

And 

chord  2  arc  A£'  =  120p; 

and  therefore 

chord  2  arc  £'G=114p16'. 

And  so 

2  arc  14^26', 
arc  £7(?=72°13'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction  from  the  quadrant, 

arc  A(?=17°47'. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

And  next  we  shall  also  find  the  angle  AGHm  this  way;  let  the  same  figure  be 

set  out,  and  with  G  as  pole  and  with  the  side  of 
the  inscribed  square  as  distance  let  the  section 
KLM  of  a  great  circle  be  draivn  so  that,  since  cir¬ 
cle  AGE  has  been  drawm  through  the  poles  of 
EHM  and  KLM,  each  of  the  arcs  EM  and  KM  is 
a  quadrant.  Then  again,  because  of  the  con¬ 
struction, 

chord  2  arc  EG  :  chord  2  arc  EK  comp, 
chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  HL, 
chord  2  arc  LM  :  chord  2  arc  KM. 

But 

2  arc  FG  =  144°26', 
chord  2  arc  £'G=114p16'; 


and 


2  arc  FF:=35°34', 
chord  2  arc  EK =36^38'; 

2  arc  GH  =  155°U', 
chord  2  arc  GH=117n2'; 


and  q 


68 

PTOLEMY 

and 

2  arc  FL  =  24°46' 

chord  2  arc  i/L  =  25‘’44'. 

And  so 

chord  2  arc  LM  :  chord  2  arc  KM  comp.  114^6'  :  36^38',  25^44'  :  117^12' 
or  very  nearly 

chord  2  arc  LM  :  chord  2  arc  KM  :  :  82^11' :  120^. 


And 


therefore 


chord  2  arc  KM  =120p; 


chord  2  arc  LM  =  82^11'. 

And  so 

2  arc  LM  =  86°28', 
arc  LM  =  43°14'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  KL  =  46°46' 
angle  LGK  =  46°46'. 

And  so,  by  subtraction  from  two  right  angles, 

angle  AGK  =  133°14'. 

Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Now,  the  method  of  finding  these  arcs  and  angles  is  inferred  to  be  the  same 
also  for  the  rest.  But  to  have  them  set  out,  ready  to  hand,  we  have  calculated 
as  many  of  the  other  arcs  and  angles  as  seemed  likely  to  be  useful  for  the  de¬ 
tailed  researches.  And  we  have  begun  geometrically  with  the  parallel  through 
Meroe  where  the  longest  day  is  13  equatorial  hours  and  have  gone  to  the  parallel 
drawn  above  Pontus  through  the  mouth  of  the  Borysthenes.  And  we  have  used 
again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ascensions,  an  increase  each  time  of  a  half  hour  for 
the  latitudes,  of  a  twelfth  of  a  circle  for  the  sections  of  the  ecliptic,  and  of  one 
equatorial  hour  for  the  positions  either  east  or  west  of  the  meridian.  And  we  set 
them  out  in  tables,  one  for  each  latitude  and  sign,  putting  in  the  first  column 
for  each  position  the  number  of  its  equatorial  hours^  distance  from  either  side 
of  the  meridian;  in  the  second  column  the  lengths  of  the  arcs  running,  as  we 
said,  from  the  zenith  to  the  beginning  of  the  sign  in  question;  and  in  the  third 
and  fourth  columns  the  sizes  of  the  angles  formed  at  the  intersections  and  situ¬ 
ated  in  the  way  we  defined,  with  the  positions  east  of  the  meridian  in  the  third 
column  and  those  west  in  the  fourth.  And  it  is  necessary  to  remember,  as  we 
stipulated  in  the  beginning,  that,  of  the  two  angles  contained  by  the  section  of 
the  ecliptic  east  of  the  intersection,  we  have  always  taken  the  one  to  the  north 
of  it,  comparing  the  size  of  each  of  them  with  the  90°  of  a  right  angle.  And 
here  are  the  tables.^ 

^Since,  for  latitudes  between  the  tropic  of  the  Crab  (Cancer)  and  the  tropic  of  the  Goat 
(Capricorn),  the  zeniths  lie  on  the  meridian  between  the  points  where  the  two  tropics  cul¬ 
minate,  therefore,  as  the  tropic  of  the  Crab,  for  instance,  is  considered  at  the  meridian  and 
then  farther  and  farther  eastward,  the  arc  of  the  great  circle  through  the  zenith  and  the  tropic, 
first  south  of  the  ecliptic,  comes  nearer  and  nearer  to  coinciding  with  the  ecliptic.  Finally  it 
does  coincide,  and  then  passes  to  the  northern  side  of  the  ecliptic.  The  angle  in  question  starts 
as  a  right  angle,  becomes  smaller  and  smaller,  does  not  exist  or  is  equal  to  two  right  angles,  and 
then  starting  again  as  if  from  two  right  angles  gets  smaller  and  smaller.  This  is  repeated, 
mutatis  mutandis  for  all  the  signs.  The  letter  A  or  8  placed  after  an  angle  in  the  tables  indicates 
that  the  point  of  the  ecliptic  culminating  is  north  or  south  of  the  zenith  for  that  angle  and  all 
below  it  until  a  change  is  indicated. 


13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. 
Of  the  Parallel  through  Meroe  13  hours  laL  16°27\ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


II 

8  c 

Ram 

W  M  ^  o 

CO  »0  »0  CO 

'ffl'  ^  'A, 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

lO  <0  00  OJ  Oi 

CQ  t'* 

Bull 

00  wo  ^  b«  CO  ^ 

d  d  wo 

g 

0  0  ooo  00 

S  d  0  ^  eo  'O'  wo 

Twins 

d  wo  ^  b-  b  b 

wo  CO  wo  ''b  d 

I? 

00  ooo  00 

CO  Hf  05  CO  CO  wo 

wo  CO  0  b. 

Eastern 

Angles 

^  V  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

^  ^  o  M 

^  CO  ’«1<  ■o* 

s 

0  o  0  e  0  o  0 

CO  “5  CO  t'.  Ci  Oi 

CO  O  CO  CO  eo  CO 

obo  wo  0  CO  b- ^ 

i-H  CO  wo  CO 

'm 

^5^0-  ooo  00 

O5OOCO  b-CO'*!'  COd 

coeo^  ■o<'0' 

ocog  wobco  b^ 

eo  d  —CO  *0 

ooo  ooo  00 

b-  —  0  wo  —  b-  d05 

b.  b^  CO  CO  »o  wo  'b 

Ares 

00  Q  o  05  o 

io  CO 

O  0  O  O  0  o  o 

CO  Ol  CO  tN.  lO  o 

«  <N  CO  <0  t>  05 

b*  0  «  0  CO  cb  ^0 

'O'  d  d  'O'  I-H  eo  -O' 

ooo  ooo  00 

'0*w?O5  COOOd  coo 

-H  M  -O'  wo  b»  00  05 

eood  coboo  t-b 

d  Tb  Hf  'b  eo  ^ 

ooo  ooo  00 

'b'bOO  dcoO  'bO 

—  d  Hb  *.0  b.  ob  CD 

Hours 

a 

o 

o 

<7  0  0  O  O  0  o 

^  oj  CO  ‘O  o 

§  - 

•7OO  ooo  00 

'^'-HCI  C0'0'*0  coco 

g  w 

8 

^00  ooo  00 

—  Cl  CO-fWO  coco 

Western 

Angles 

c8 

O 

o 

g  05  uo  O'*  CO 

eo  ^  eo  <-• 

'm 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

00  .1  00  ao  00 

CO  ‘O  CO  <N  w  »-< 

(h 

0) 

u 

a 

0 

0 

c3 

«  wo  b-  Cl  b-  05 

'O'  wo  wo  T-I  1-H 

0^  0  ooo  0 

cc  CO  *o  00  wo 

wo  CO  d 

M 

<v 

42 

cc 

s 

b  —  b.  b  b  ^ 

:o  — ' wo 

S  S 

0  0  ooo  0 

—  d  0  eo  00  wo 

''b  d  —  b-  b- 

•  i 

Eastern 

Angles 

o  ^  o  lb  00 

Ol  »0  C'J  -0*  o 

s 

0  o  e  o  0  0  o 

o  ^  00  00  -H 

o  *-•  Ol  rf  lO  »0  <0 

0  Cl  wo  CO  «  CO  ^ 

eo  ^  '0<  'O'  *0 

S 

0  -0  0  ooo  0 

b-  0  00  -H  05  CO  05 

b-  0  '-H  CO  CO  Hj,  Tf 

b  b  b  CO  —  ^  b 

*0  d  Hf  Tjl 

'S' 

ooo  ooo  0 

05  b-  wo  b-  Hj'  05  d 

CO  05  —  d  CO  CO  ■'»' 

Ares 

00  ^  00  »b  ^  ^  o 

O  »0  CO  CO 

0  O  0  o  o  o  o 

O  <N  05  05  .-1  CO  O 

'O'  lO  00  05 

b-  0  WO  CO  0  00  0 

wo  ''!'  ,-H  CO  CO  ^ 

ooo  ooo  0 

CO  <75  b-  05  d  Q 

CO  CO  Ti'  10  CO  00  0 

b-  b  d  b  b  00  b 

wo  CO  'i'  — 

ooo  ooo  0 

00  —  0  d  wo  05  0 

d  eo  'H'  wo  0  b-  05 

Hours 

g  o 

*700  000  0 

*  .-c  CO  ■'J'  uo  »o 

s  « 

§  ” 

■700  ooo  0 

w  d  CO  ■'}'  wo  wo 

fl  0 

8  '' 

^00  ooo  0 

—  d  CO  wo  wo 

Western 

Angles 

s 

a 

2  ^  ®  ^  CO  00 

c<i  ,-1  CO  eo  y-i 

'm 

00  000  0 

M  -O'  CO  0  0 

»0  -O'  'O' 

a 

0 

‘Sh 

0 

CQ 

0  ^  b*  05  ^  ^H 

CO  «5 

2 

0^  0  ooo  0 

CO  ''1'  d  wo  0  b» 

00  CO  wo  ■t'  CO 

0 

X 

ZJ 

Ih 

c 

b  wo  b-  d  b.  b 

wo  wo  —  — 

'cD 

00  0^  0  0  0 

05  —  00  0  CO  0 

b-  CO  Hfi  -Tb  CO  CO 

Eastern 

Angles 

^  cb  c..  eo  00  0  ^ 

*0  »o  .-1  Cl  Cl 

25 

0  0  e  000  0 

CO  -t*  CO  ,-H  «o 

lO 

obo  CO  ^  ^  0 

wo  d  ■'J'  -f 

'ffl'  25 

^00  000^  0 

,-H  0  b-  0  CO  ^  ''J' 

CO  wo  CO  b- 

0  d  wo  CO  00  CO  — 

CO  —  rf  wo 

'a 

0  0  0  ooo  0 

d  wo  CO  0  ■'J'  —  ■'*' 

0  d  ''C  ifO  CO  b-  b- 

5 

00  0  0  Cl  ^  0 

Cl  »o  Cl  Cl  eo 

000  000  0 

0  Cl  eo  b.  ^  10  0 

«-<  d  eo  <0  t>.  05 

b-  0  d  0  b  00  b 

Tb  wo  CO  ''b  hh 

ooo  ooo  0 

00  ^  0  d  wo  05  Q 

d  CO  ■'b  wo  CO  b.  05 

b-  b  WO  CO  b  00  b 

wo  'O'  —  CO  CO  — 

ooo  ooo  0 

CO  05  b-  05  d  P 

CO  CO  'O'  WO  CO  00  05 

Hours 

a 

0 

0 

•700  000  0 

Cl  CO  'O'  0  <0 

d  ^ 

^00  ooo  0 

1-H  d  CO  Hb  wo  wo 

s  « 

8  ” 

0  0  ooo  0 

—  d  CO  -O'  wo  wo 

Western 

Angles 

Xi 

u 

6 

^  uo  d  eo  d  hi  CO 

■n*  Cl  uo  ■n'  -H 

'2'  S 

00  0  oT'  0  00 

0  00  'O'  05  10  00 

iO  1-1  Tl 

C3 

0 

3 

b.  £2  wo  ,M  b-  0  b 

wo  CO  wo  rb  d 

s$ 

00  ooo  00 

00  05  -b  00  d  00  0 

b,  ,-1  ,-H  d  d  CO 

c 

'B 

> 

Ooo  wo  —  b-  CO  — 

'O'  d  d  wo 

s 

0  0  0  ooo  00 

Od'O'  dCOWO  COb- 

■O'  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 

'  II 

0  cb  wo  00  00  ^-1 

w  eo  «o 

w  S 

OO'O  ooo  00 

0*005  i-Hioo  ■f.-' 

05  d  t>.  b*  0  CO 

b  CO  00  wo  b  CO  0^ 

M  d  ,-H  CO  wo 

ooo  ooo  ^0 

dCOWO  OCOd  b.'b 

0  d  ,-H  ,1  t>.  t- 

obb  b  b  CO  b- b 

^  —  CO  wo  CO 

sS 

ooo  ooo  00 

—  OC50  POOCO  WO'^JC 

8 

^  WO  CO  Cl  WO  d  0 

d  *0  'O'  d  d 

000  ooo  00 

b*woo5  dcoo  eoQ 

,-Id  'O'  wo  t-  00  Cft 

bbd  CO  b  00  b,  b 

d  'b  ''b  "b  eo  ,-H 

ooo  ooo  00 

Hb-bOO  dcoo  'bo 

,-H  d  Tb  wo  b.  00  b 

b-bb  bcob  — b 

■O'  d  d  'O'  —  CO  'O' 

ooo  ooo  00 

■o'wop  COOOd  coo 

—  d  -O'  wo  b.  00  C5 

Hours 

C  b 

0  C5 

0  0  ooo  00 

Z'-'d  C0'0'»0  coco 

g  b 

0 

1^00  ooo  00 

CO'^O  <D  <0 

§ 

0 

.^00  ooo  OO. 

—  d  CO'O'WO  COCO 

69 


13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. — Continued 
Of  the  Parallel  through  Soene  13}/^  hours  lat.  23^51'. 


PTOLEMY  1 


Western 

Angles 

Ram 

Ob-  Ib  ^  b-  o 

^  lO 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

‘Ob-  00  CO  O  O 

CO  i-< 

Bull 

p  b)  b^  0  «o  bs 

N  — 1  to  (N  1-H 

0  o_  000  00 

to  1-10  0  <N  CO 

Twins 

to  0  b-  N  Q  ^  ii- 

to  If  N 

p  p  PPP  p  p 

eo  0  0  N  to  I-H  CO' 

Eastern 

Angles 

b>  00  CO  00 

W  CO  —IN  ^ 

Q  0  o  o  o  o  o 

O  O  -f  0>  —I  N 

O  OS  -H  N  N  CO  CO 

oc5^  cootb  bs^ 

^  'If  1-1  CO  ''f 

000  000  00 

OStOi-l  tOOOb.  tOif 

0^0  cb«)o  bseb 

CO  I-H  If  to  to-' 

PPP  PPP  PP 

f.i-iio  'ifNOO  CO— 1 

b-toto  totoif  'ifHf 

Arcs 

^-1  cb  O  N  b-  o  o 

to  lO  CO  -t  N 

OOP  0  o  o  o 

CO  b.  b.  OS  N  to  o 

<N  N  CO  to  b.  OS 

N  b-  N  ^-1  CO  00 

rH  'If  to  N  If  N 

000  000  00 

NOOO  'ifOOrH  too 

I-H— ICO  'iftOb.  OOOS 

^hoo«d  ^^co  no 

N  I-H  to  Hf  — 1  If  to 

PPP  ppp^  PP 

eoHfb-  — Itooo  -HQ 

—IN  Hf  to  to  00  0 

Hours 

0 

o 

o 

>7  0  0  o  o  o  e 

1-1  N  eo  -tit  to  o 

B  i, 

8  « 

^00  000  00 

1^— IN  COHfto  toto 

s  « 

8  « 

^pp  PPP  PP 

<^1-HN  CO'iftO  toco 

Western 

Angles 

c3 

O 

O 

b-  b)  CO  CO  o  ^ 

to  N  (N 

O  O  O  O  0  o 

—1  to  Tji  to  00  to 

b-  to  -^l  CO  N  N 

2 

c3 

OJ 

CQ 

u 

CD 

0  ^  tb  N  ^  b- 

co  ""f  —1 

00  000  0 

00  N  0  N  to  CO 

to  CO  N  — 1  —1 

w 

<D 

<c 

E 

tb  N  bs  tb  0  bs 

Hf  'If  I-H  to  CO  I-H 

p  p  PPP  p 

^  g>  «  0  to  eo 

1  Eastern 

1  Angles 

\ 

O  CO  ^  b-  b-  O  b) 

CO  CO  to  -HI 

O  0  0  o  o  o  o 

O  00  CO  to  N  CO 

OS  o  N  2  ^  ^ 

cs  0  0  lb  «  0  CO 

CO  CO  —1  N  to  'If  to 

000  000  0 

b-  to  N  -f  N  OS  I-H 

OS  — 1  N  CO  CO  If 

0  00  ^  tb  0  ^ 

—1  1-H  Hf  eo  -If 

PPP  PPP  p*" 

OS  —1  00  OS  bi  N  Hf 

to  OS  0  — 1  N  CO  CO 

Arcs 

N  N  N  b-  N  ^  O 

to  to  CO  1-1  to 

0  O  0  O  0  o  o 

b.  OS  to  -^1  to  to  o 

-<1  'If  to  to  00  os 

0  ^  00  0  CO  0 

N  If  —INN 

000  000  0 

'If  to  CO  N  CO  to  0 

'If  'If  to  to  b-  00  OS 

^H  tb  N  0  ^H  N  b 

CO  N  CO  CO  N 

PPP  PPP  p 

to  00  to  to  00  I-H  Q 

CO  CO  Hf  to  to  00  b 

Hours 

§ 

o 

•700  000  0 

—1  N  CO  "tf  to  to 

b  ^ 

0  N 

^00  000  0 

<1  — 1  N  CO  ''f  to  to 

0  h 

0  ^ 

^  p  p  PPP  p 

— 1  N  CO  Hf  to  to 

W estern 
Angles 

<D 

O 

N  bs  b^  cb  bs  N 

CO  IN  to  -If  CO  'If 

00  000  0 

CO  to  to  0  00  b- 

00  to  to  to  -f 

G 

0 

a 

t-i 

0 

« 

tb  N  bs  lb  0  bs 

-If  -f  — 1  to  CO  —1 

00  000  0 

00  I-H  0  N  b.  to 

00  b-  to  to  Hf  <^f 

Ui 

CD 

x: 

0 

< 

b  tb  N  ^  -  ?H 

eo  eo  I-H 

p  0  PPP  p 

CO  b.  to  b.  0  00 

00  to  to  Hf  Hf  eo 

Eastern 

Angles 

^-1  0  bs  to  bs  CO  0 

to  i-H  i-H  -^f  to 

000  000  0 

CO  If  N  —1  to  OS  0 

,-1  Tf  to  b-  b.  b.  00 

0  ^  w  ^H  lb  0  ^ 

— 1  — 1  'If  CO  'If 

000  000  0 

— 1  CO  0  I-H  OS  -^f  to 

—1  CO  to  to  to  b-  b- 

b  b  b  lb  00  b  b 

eo  CO  — 1  N  to  Hf  to 

PPP  PPP  0 

N  — 1  b-  OS  b.  to 

0  N  CO  Hf  to  to  to 

Ares 

b)  b)  N  b-  0  0 

;  to  to  CO  If  -f  IN 

000  000  0 

CO  b-  b-  OS  IN  to  0 

:  N  IN  CO  If  to  b^  OS 

^  tb  N  0  ^  N  0 

CO  N  CO  CO  N 

000  000  0 

to  00  to  to  00  —1  0 

CO  CO  'If  to  to  00  OS 

^b^  bbco  b- 

N  Hf  I-H  N  N  Q 

PPP  PPP  p 

Hf  CO  CO  N  CO  to  0 

Hf  Hf  to  to  b.  00  OS 

Hours 

§ 

0 

>7  0  0  000  0 

— 1  N  CO  'f  to  to 

a  bs 

§  ^ 

^00  000  e 

1^  — 1  N  CO  "f  to  to 

S  N 

^  p  p  PPP  p 

1^— IN  eoHftO  to^ 

Western 

Angles 

o^obs  tobsoo" 

•^f  If  —1  i-i 

000  000  00 

OCOtO  -HCOb^  iNtO 

1-H  iH  1-^  N  N 

bs  0  b.  N  0  ^  b- 

to  to  Hf  N 

00  000  00 

«  to  to  b.  — 1  to  00 

N  N  N  N  CO  CO  eo 

b  b  b.  b  b  ^  b 

N  — 1  »0  Hf  N  — 1 

p  p  PPP  p  • 

CO  00  eo  N  N  Hf  to 

to  Hf  rf  Hf  Hf  Hf  Hf 

Eastern 

Angles 

Si 

o3 

o 

0  tb  — 1  to  N  bs  0 

—1  to  i-(  to  -f  to  ^ 

000  000  00 

otoco  OOtON  b.C0 

OSb-b-  tototo  tOlO 

G 

0 

3 

0^0  eoooo  bsM 

CO  — 1  Hf  to  to 

000  OOP  PP 

NtOO  O5b.C0  ooto 

Ob.00  b'.b-b-  toto 

G 

‘be 

> 

bb^  cobb  b^H 

Hf  Hf  —  eo  Hf 

PPP  PPP  PP 

— lOOCO  OOQOS  b-to 

Arcs 

OCOCO  Ob-N  too 

^  N  N  IN  CO 

000  000  00 

ocot^  —I'^b.  QQ 

1-s  N  -If  to  to  00  0 

^H  00  «  ^  ^  CO  NO 

N  -1  to  '•f  I-H  'If  to 

PPP  PPP  OP 

COift^  — Itooo  — 10 

-IN  -If  to  to  00  OS 

^HNt-  N^b  bb 

— 1  Hf  to  N  Hf 

PPP  PPP  PP 

NOOO  HfOO^  too 

— 1— ICO  HftOb.  OOW 

Hours 

g  « 

^700  ooe  eo 

iH— ic^  e^'ifto  tpto 

0  O) 

0  CO 

t^oo  000  00 

B  ^ 

8  ” 

^  00  000  00 

Z-IN  C0Hf*O  toto 

THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. — Continued 

Of  the  Parallel  through  the  Low  Countries  of  Egypt  I4  hours  lat.  30^22'. 

Weatem 

Angles 

1  Ram 

00  ^  0  W  Cft 

N  Tf  0  tH  CO  CO 

00  000  e 

(N  u3  0  <0 

TJI  <N  -H 

Bull 

d  p  p  p  d  p  p 

Tl<  CO  d  P  CO  P 

0  0  000  00 

P  b-  b-  00  P 

CO  1-c  l-H  IH 

Twins 

b»  00  ^  d  P  ^ 

Tl<  CO  CO  P  P  1^  1-1 

o_  0  000  00 

0  CO  p  p  d  P  0 

<N  1-1  1-1  l-H  1-1  1-H  d 

ll 

1^ 

®  0  00  lb  oj 

0  CO  Cl  CO 

000  000  0 

CO  05  CO  CO  Cl  »0 

CO  00  0  ^  Cl  d  d 

POOP  ^  p  00  pp 

1-H  d  CO  i-c  d  P 

ooo  000  00 

PCOP  b»pp  Pb. 

PPd  dCOCO  dd 

pcod  poo^  pp 

CO  1-H  d  d  Tic  Tf 

000  000  00 

tICtICC^I  pTf 

b»dTlC  TjlTtlTlC  COP 

00 

u 

d  Ib  0  »b  00  cb  0 

d  CO  CO  d  d 

000  000  0 

0  CO  ^  d  0 

CO  CO  10  CO  05 

dMP  p^p  p 

Ti<  i-H  CO  CO  d  1-c 

000  000  00 

OOCOCO  POOiH  Tjco 

1-HC^CO  Ticpt>.  CO  Oi 

dp^  ^b-b.  pp 

P  Tic  Tic  P  d  1-H  T}c 

000  000  00 

PPP  1-HTlCb^  pp 

-H  d  Tic  P  p  b-  P 

00 

u 

1 

as 

c 

0 

0 

^00  000  0 

— 1  d  CO  ^  to  CO 

C3  X 

§ 

^00  000  00 

C^i-cd  COTlcp  pp 

rt  ^H 

8 

^00  000  00 

'^i-cd  PTicp  Pto 

-k> 

o3 

0 

a 

cb  c.  ^  0  Cl 

d  CO  »-•  CO  CO 

00  000 

0  05  0  CO 

b-  CO  Tic  CO 

2 

a 

p 

PQ 

'  t-> 

s 

I' 

^  P  P  CO  b-  ^H 

d  P  d  IH  1-1 

00  000  0 

1-lb.  P  b^  1-H  p 

p  Tic  CO  d  d  d 

CO 

0 

.22 

£ 

00  d  b-  ^  P  p 

d  d  d 

00  000  0 

OP  Tic  b-  d  0 

P  P  d  IH  .-H  l-H 

t  2 

II 

0  ^  cb  cb  0  00 

CO  d  CO  d 

000  000 

0  *0  05  0  05  CO 

05  0  ’-1  CO  CO  Tl< 

0  P  ^  ^H  b-  CO  P 

CO  CO  P  CO  Tic  Tic 

000  000  0 

CO  b-  P  b.  CO  Tic 

b.  P  P  1-H  d  CO  CO 

P  d  00  P  0  ^  P 

PM  PPP  p 

000,  000  0 

P  b-  d  POP  b. 

0  p  0  ^  ^  2  2 

«9 

W 

CO  cb  d  b-  0  0 

1-(  d  1-1 10 

000  000 

Tic  CO  I-H  <35  00  P 

»0  »0  CO  CO  b-  P 

d  cb  b-  ^  ^  05  p 

P  P  d  Tic  P 

000  000  0 

p  d  00  p  p  00  p 

PPP  P  b-  00  P 

d  p  P  POP  0 

d  P  1-H  d  1-H 

000  000  0 

Tic  ^  S  p  b^  So  S 

w 

a 

0 

0 

•700  000 

i-(  d  CO  Tic  U5 

§ 

0 

•700  000  0 

i-c  d  CO  P  P 

0  s 

0  ^ 

700  000  0 

1-H  d  p  T^  P  P 

1  ^ 

00  5 

<D 

« 

CS 

CQ 

0  CO  d  uo  ^  « 

1-H  d  CO  »0  d  1-c 

00  000  0 

p  CO  CO  b-  «J0  Til 

p  b»  p  UO  UO  UO 

0 

■& 

0 

« 

CQ 

00  d  b*  ^  p  P 

d  d  d 

00  000  0 

d  b.  P  P  Tic  Cl 

p  PPP  p 

(h 

a> 

0 

t-l 

^  P  P  CO  b-  ^-H 

d  p  d  t-l  1-H 

0  0  000  0 

«o  d  0  d  p  p 

P  br  P  P  ^  ^ 

«e 

1- 

^  d  p  p  b-  05 

10  CO  I-H  1-1  Tic  d  d 

000  000  0 

CO  b.  Tic  Tic  05  d  CO 

M  10  2  5h  in 

p  d  00  cb  p  ^  p 

CO  CO  CO  P  P  P 

000  000  0 

iH  p  Tt  P  d  b.  P 

1-H  d  Tt  PPP  p 

00^  ^  b-  p  p 

M  P  P  P  Til 

000  000  0 

d  P  d  Tf  d  00  P 

0  ^  P  Tic  P 

«o 

d  uo  p  tb  00  cb  ^  0 

d  CO  CO  d  d 

000  0  0  e  0 

0  CO  »-i  d  Tic  0 

CO  CO  Tic  »o  p  p 

d  p  00  PPP  p 

dp  1-H  (M  ,1 

000  000  0 

d  Tic  0  P  ^  CO  P 

Tic  Tic  P  P  b.  «  05 

d  p  b-  ^  Xl  p  0 

P  P  d  Tic  P  ^ 

000  000  0 

0  d  p  PPP  0 

PPP  p  b^  p  p 

£ 

s 

tS 

fl 

0 

0 

^00  e  0  0  0 

1-c  d  CO  Tic  p  p 

g  d 

S  ” 

►700  000  0 

1-c  d  CO  P  P 

g  05 

0 

700  000  0 

1-H  d  P  Tic  p  UO 

t  J 
It 

-Q 

0 

p  d  p  p  p  ^  d 

d  CO  1-c  CO 

00  000  00 

P  Q  ■  P  r-C  Til  P  CO 

CO  d  1-c  d  d  d  CO 

p 

0 

b-  00  ^  d  p  ^  ^-c 

Tic  CO  CO  P  P  1-1  1-H 

00  000  00 

rH  00  P  P  b.  .-Ip 

P  CO  CO  CO  CO  Tic  Tic 

a 

‘Sd 

> 

dp  p  0  d  p  p 

TIC  P  d  P  P  P 

00  000  00 

«o  P  d  P  P  0  d 

b«  P  p  ^  Tf  p  p 

5  2 

■2  "5, 

Opoo  o^p  P« 

CO  CO  50  Tic  (M 

000  000  00 

PPP  POOP  1-cP 

PPP  PPP  pTlC 

p  CO  d  p  00  ^  pp 

CO  1-1  d  d  Tic  Tic 

000  000  00 

dCOP  PPt^  COP 

PPP  PPP  pp 

OPP  ^ooo  pp 

1-H  d  P  rH  d  P 

000  000  00 

1-HPd  Pdd  1-ip 

rHTfp  Pb»b^  b^P 

K 

^Hpcb  p^p  pp 

CO  P  d  1-1  l-H  p  1-1 

000  000  00 

pTjct,.  PCOP  OOP 

1-Id  Tic  P  p  b-  P 

dp^  ^  b- b-  OOP 

P  Tic  Tic  CO  d 

000  000  00 

PPP  ^Tict^  050 

1-H  d  Tt  P  P  b-  P 

dPO  P^p  b^O 

TP  1-H  p  p  d  rH 

000  000  00 

PPP  PPrH  TfO 

rHdP  Ticpbr.  pp 

£ 

1 

aj 

a 

0 

0 

>700  000  00 

Zi-Cd  COTlCp  pt^ 

§  5 

1700  000  00 

c^iHd  CO-^P  pp 

g  p 

0 

I7OO  OOo  00 

C^l-ld  PTlCp  pp 

13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. — Continued 
Of  the  Parallel  through  Rhodes  14}/2  hours  lat.  36°. 


PTOLEMY 


Western 

Angles 

Ram 

e<i  ^  o 

CO  eo  W5 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

CO  O  M  w 

CO  Cl  1-t  <H  .-t 

3 

PQ 

d  ^  bbb  b  b 

d  b  d  d  eo  50 

O  O  OOO  O  0 

d  CO  b.  eo  ”^50 

rf  d  -(  ^  -H  -( 

1  Twins 

bb  bbb  b^b 

dTf  d'^5o  bdd 

OO  ooe  OOO 

O..P  O5b-Q0  ^COCO 

■.^(d  i-H— 1— r  ddd 

Eastern 

Angles 

bi  «b  ^  Oi 

-t  »o 

0  O  0  o  o  o  o 

CO  lO  O  O  <0  00  O 

CO  00  O  ^  .-H  (N 

bbb  bb^  bl^ 

CO  50  — 1  ^  eo  CO 

OOO  OOO  OO 

05  50--  oco-^  eod 

C005— 1  ddd  dd 

bdb  b- ^  b  bbb 

COCO'-'  COt^  — (COCO 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

br-TPO  50b»C0  cooooo 

Arcs 

b  b-  ^  b  b  b  b 

CO  lO 

0  o  o  o  o  o  o 

CO  00  lO  kO  «o  t>.  Q 

CO  CO  *0  «o  t>.  b 

b^^  bbb  bb 

d  50  d  — ( 

OOO  ooe  OO 

rt(b.CO  1^05— (  COO 

ddeo  '«t50t^  0005 

bbb  b  d  b»  b  b- b 

CO  d  d  — (  ^  d 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

*000  d'^co  00050 

— (deo  TP50CO  1^,0005 

Hours 

f3 

o 

o 

>7  o  o  o  o  o  o 

d  CO  lO  <D 

ft  b 

§  " 

*700  OOO  OO 

•^-(d  e0'^5O  coco 

§ 

o 

^OO  OOO  OOO 

/^THd  eo.'p*o  cDt^b- 

Western 

Angles 

-^3 

g 

o 

b  b  ^  ^  b 

O  Cl  »o 

o  o  o  o  o 

CO  CO  CO  UO  o> 

CO  »0  CO 

(U 

c3 

(D 

w 

b  b-  bbb 

d  CO  — (  -(  d 

O  O  OOO 

CO  o  o  d  CO 

CO  50  CO  d 

cc 

CJ 

X 

eo 

E 

b  b  b  b  d  b 

d  CO  b 

O  O  OOO  o 

eo  05  05  d  br.  50 

50  CO  d  d  — *  -H 

Eastern 

Angles 

b  b  b  b  b 

^  ^  CO  lO 

0  0  o  o  o  o 

O  CO  CO  CO  O 

Oi  O  ^  d  CO 

bbb  b-  b 

eo  CO  d  ^  eo 

OOO  OOO 

— (  -^  d  00 

05  o  — (  d  d 

bbb  ^  b  b- 

*0  d  CO  50  d 

OOO  OOO  o 

05  Tj(  00  00  50  O  d 

CO  00  05  o  d  d 

Ares 

a-(  b  d  d  ^  b 

»o  CO  •"<  d  d 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

oj  — <  CO  eo  d  o 

to  CO  CO  b-  00  05 

bbb  b  d  b 

CO  -(  -< 

OOO  OOO 

CO  00  CO  O  Q  O 

50  50  O  00  05 

bdb  bbb  b 

tP  tP  d  tP  lO 

OOO  OOO  o 

b^  05  50  CO  eo  50  o 

TP  «p  50  CO  b«  00  0) 

■  Hours 

S  w 

8 

ITT  o  o  o  o  o 

,-t  d  CO  ''ic 

cJ  b 

8 

>7  0  0  OOO 

rH  d  CO  ^ 

g  A 

8  ” 

^  O  O  OOO  o 

d  eo  50  50 

Western 

Angles 

(D 

a 

c: 

b  b  b  ^  b  ^ 

eo  *0 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

■^  05  05  eo  -H  05 

05  <D  <0  *0 

a 

o 

& 

o 

w 

02 

b  b  b  b  d  b 

^  d  CO  50 

O  O  OOO  o 

50  —(  Tj.  O)  b» 

05  00  CO  50  50 

o 

-C 

^  b-  b  b  ^ 

d  eo  ^  — (  d 

O  O  OOO 

00  50  50  b-  ^ 

00  br.  CO  50  to 

Eastern 

Angles 

^  eo  M  b  b  b  ^ 

*o  d  d  lo  eo  »o 

O  o  o  o  o  o  o 

CO  CO  00  00  eo  CO  b- 

rH  eo  *0  CO  CO  CO 

bbb  b  ^  b  b- 

50  d  CO  50  d 

OOO  OOO  o 

-(  CO  O  O  b*  d  ''t 

^  d  ^  50  50  O  CO 

bbb  b-  b-  b 

CO  eo  d  ..p  tp  CO 

OOO  OOO 

d  CO  05  05  b*  CO 

o  -H  d  eo  Tf  50 

Arcs 

b  b»  ^  b  b  b  o 

eo  CO  50 

O  O  O  0  0^0  o 

CO  00  »0  50  CO  b-  Q 

eo  eo  50  CO  b»  a> 

b  d  b  bbb  b 

TP  d  •*<<  50 

OOO  OOO  o 

t'.  o  50  CO  eo  ^  o 

TP  TJ(  50  CO  tr.  00  05 

b  ^  b  d  b 

CO  — (  — 1  tP 

OOO  OOO 

CO  00  CO  O  Q  O 

50  50  CO  t>.  00  05 

00 

a 

o 

o 

►tt  Q  o  0  o  o  o 

d  CO  O  CO 

S  b 

o  d 

^  0  0  OOO  o 

^  d  CO  '>t  50  50 

s  ® 

8  " 

*7  0  0  OOO 

-H  d  eo  .«p 

Western 

Angles 

Xi 

cS 

u 

O 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

•«t  CO  eo  50 

OO  OOO  00® 

cod  ooooo  eoooc35 

>^00  ddeo  eoeoeo 

O 

3 

b^H  bbb^cb^b 

dTfl  dT<(|0'-'50dd 

OO  OOO  OOO 

50  05  TPdeo  CO.-*— f 

COtP  Tj(TtlTP  TP5050 

a 

’Sb 

> 

d  bbb  b  b 

d  50  d  d  eo  50 

O  O  OOO  o  o 

tP  00  05  CO  50  CO  br. 

00  CO  50  to  50  50  50 

Eastern 

Angles 

bbb  bdb  bb^ 

.-H  Tjc  50  50  d  eo 

ooe  OOO  OOO 

oeob-  -(.-(05  co^o 

OTCO'^  5050^^ 

bdb  b- ^  b  bbb 

coeo-H  CO— <  i-Hcoeo 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

d05»o  Qd— (  ooeoeo 

0eo50  cOcoco  505050 

bbb  bbb  bb- 

CO  »o  .-H  CO  eo 

looe  OOO  OO 

-Ttr-CO  d50CD  50^* 

— ieo50  cococo  coco 

Arcs 

b  t' d  b»  b  b  bbb 

d  d  eo  eo  —id 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

dt>.(»  Od-^  cob-o 

(d  ■Tj(lOCO  t^00O5 

bbb  b  d  b- b 

eo  d  d  -H  -(  d 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

5000  d^^co  00O5Q 

— (dCO  TpiOCO  t>.ooo 

b  b  bbb  bb 

d  50  d  r-( 

OOO  OOO  OO 

TPb-CO  0>  -1  COQ 

ddeo  ■.p50b.  ao  a> 

( 

1 

a 

0 

k 

1 

a 

§  2 

.Soo  OOO  OOO 

(d  C0'^‘O  cob-b. 

§ 

^oo  OOO  ooe 

X  -i  d  CO  '.p  50  CO  b-  b^ 

a  b 

O  CO 

^oe  OOO  OO 

(d  co'.p50  coco 

Of  the  Parallel  through  the  Hellespont  15  hours  lat.  Jfi^66\ 


73 


T? 

O 

S3 

.£ 

‘■iS 

O 

O 


cc 

w 

p 

p 


O 


o 


cc 

o 

p 

W 


CO 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


Western 

Angles 

Ram 

CO  C^l  M  PO  ^  uo 

to  f-t 

0  o  o  O  0  o 

o  O  CO  —t  00  N. 

lO  CO  M  (N  ^  -H 

BuU 

b  bbb  b  ^  - 

CO  v5  eo  CM 

p  o  ooo  0  o 

P^  CM  tP  03  00  03  F-I 

eo  CM  »H  ^  fH  CM 

bb  bbb  bbb 

kO  fh  kO  kO  CO  kO  kO 

00  ooo  ooo 

ooeo  cocohp  cdofh 

hPCO  cmcmcm  cmcoco 

Eastern 

Angles 

b>  ib  CO  cb  uo  ro 

— 1  lO  l-H  ^ 

0  e  0  o  o  o  0 

CD  (N  lO  lO  lO 

CO  OO  03  O  i-H  1-H  »-< 

bbb  bp»b  bb 

eo  eo  CM  ^  v3 

ooo  ooo  oo 

030*0  '*t00O3  coco 

C0030  I-Hi— lf-(  F-I.-4 

w 

•S 

H 

bbb  gbb  bbb 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

PhCOCM  OOfHO  OOhPcO 

PhOCM  cmcoco  cmcmcm 

«e 

i! 

CD  00  b-  M  O  *0  O 

lO  lO 

O  O  O  O  O  0  o 

O  CO  03  tN.  P.  oo  o 

^  Mi  CO  t'.  03 

bbb  bbb  bb 

fh  CM  V5  CM 

0.0  0  ooo  oo 

03CM03  03  03fh  CMO 

CMcoeo  Tpv3p»  00O3 

b  b  pH  00  b  b  bbb 

CM  CO  fh  eo  HP  CM 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

ohpcm  eonpko  COP.Q 

CMCMCO  HP  kO  CO  P-  00  03 

Hours 

a 

o 

o 

»7  O  O  0  o  o  o 

<<  i-<  CO  UO  CO 

g  N 

o  '' 

*700  ooo  oo 

•^fhcm  eo'M*»o  coco 

§  2 

0 

^00  ooo  ooo 

•^fhCM  COHPkO  COPHpH 

Western 

Angles 

o3 

O 

O 

PO  uo  VO  ^ 

CO  CM 

O  0  0  o  o 

b.  CO  03  uo 

CO  »o 

03 

03 

PQ 

Ul 

03 

b  bbb 

V3  eo  V3  w  lO 

o  o  ooo 

eo  eo  CO  fh 

CO  V5  Tf  eo  CO 

% 
03 
fTJ 
•  Sh 

E 

b  bbb  b 

fh  eo  ko 

00  ooo  0 

»c  eo  eo  CO  CM  fh 

kO  HP  CO  CM  CM  CM 

Eastern 

Angles 

o  Ib  VO  00  o 

CM  CO  lO  CO  IM 

O  0  0  o  o  o 

Q  CM  eo  CM  o 

^  O  ^  N  eo  M 

bbb  bbb 

eo  CM  ^ 

ooo  ooo 

p.  O  FI  i-(  OO  CO 

03  o  fh  FH  CM 

bbb  bbb  b 

HP  kO  CM  rH  HP  kf> 

ooo  ooo  0 

03  CM  HP  Hp  F-I  kO  CO 

CO  00  03  0  fH  ^ 

Ares 

VO  b  ^  00  b 

^  eo  »H 

O  0  O  0  O  0 

CD  O  t>.  iO  O 

CO  CO  p«.  00  03 

bbb  bbb 

CM  CM  FH  HP 

ooo  ooo 

FH  eo  pH  Tf  CM  Q 

CO  CO  CO  Ph  00  03 

bbb  bbb  b 

CO  CM  CM  kO  fH  CO 

ooo  ooo  0 

CM  HP  03  CO  CO  CO  0 

kO  VO  kO  CO  pH  00  03 

Hours 

g  b 

O  CO 

^  O  0  o  o  o 

<<  1-H  CM  eo 

g  b 

o 

*7  0  0  ooo 

»H  CM  eo  "Ft* 

§  2 

0 

^00  ooo  0 

FH  CM  eo  HP  10  v5 

Western 

Angles 

o 

« 

a 

m 

U3  ^  ^  Ib  CO 

eo  W5 

0  O  O  0  o  o 

p-  ^  00  »o  'I* 

03  CO  P-  CO  CO  CO 

a 

o 

& 

o 

C3 

CG 

b  b  bbb  b 

»H  CO  *o 

0  0  ooo  o 

p-  kO  ko  <50  HP  eo 

03  00  pH  CO  CO  CO 

03 

'0 

»H 

c 

b  b  bbb 

kfj  eo  ko  F-H  10 

00  ooo 

03  00  00  fh  (0 

00  Ph  CO  CO  ko 

Eastern 

Angles 

p.  00  00  p-  b  VO 

lO  VO  CO  VO  VO 

O  O  O  O  O  0  o 

eo  03  eo  eo  oo  fh  cm 

2  i2  2  52 

bbb  bbb  b 

np  kC  CM  fh  Hp  kO 

ooo  ooo  o 

FH  HP  CO  CO  CO  pH.  00 

FH  CM  CO  -"p  VO  lO  lO 

bbb  bbb 

CO  CM  F-H  Hp 

ooo  ooo 

CM  kO  CO  CO  eo  00 

0  FH  CM  CO  HP  Hp 

C 

b  b  p-  b  b  VO  b 

VO  V5 

o  o  O  O  0  0  o 

O  eo  03  p-  00  Q 

tp  Tji  VO  CO  P*  ro 

bbb  bbb  b 

CO  CM  CM  ko  FH  eo 

ooo  ooo  0 

CM  HP  03  CO  «0  CO  O 

kO  kO  kO  CO  P-  00  03 

ooo  ooo 

FH  eo  P-  HP  CM  0 

CO  CO  CO  Ph  00  <73 

Hours 

a 

o 

o 

^  o  O  O  0  o  o 

^  CM  eo  Tj*  V5  CO 

8 

*7  0  0  ooo  o 

<*  FH  CM  eo  HP  lO  V5 

g 

8  H 

0  0  ooo 

fh  CM  CO  HP  HP 

Western 

Angles 

o 

00^  b  CM  CM  obb 

CMCO  Tj«CMeO  POVO-^f 

OO  OOO  ooo 

VO-^VO  O0CMV5 

*0-^  COCOCO  co'^'^ 

C 

o 

3 

bb  bbb  bbb 

kO  W  iO  kO  CO  kO  kO 

oo  ooo  ooo 

eooo  FH00O3  .Hvoco 

P^iO  kfjHPnp  io»o*o 

s 

> 

b  b  bbb  b  b 

eo  eo  ko  eo  cm 

00  ooo  00 

03  Hp  CO  F-H  0  fh  eo 

00  P-  CO  CO  CD  CO  CO 

Eastern 

Angles 

b  CM  b  «)  b  b  bbb 

CO  CM  ^  eo  CM  eo  ^ 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

OCMOO  •^UO'^P  fhP^tP 

03CMe0  TpCOCO 

bbb  bbb  bbb 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

cmfhp*  eoco-ko  eoo3oo 

oeoHp  lOkOkc  lOHpHp 

bbb  bbb  bb 

eo  eo  CM  HP  ko 

ooo  ooo  00 

^CMPh  CDQfh  OOO 

fhcOhP  kOCOCO  COkO 

«» 

JiS- 

§ 

b  b  p.  p»  b  p*  bbb 

’I  fh  eo  cm  ^  ''P 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

P.F-IO  ^CMCO 

^CMCO  ’>i*(»OCD  t^OOP 

bbb  bbb  bbb 

CM  CO  FH  eo  HP  CM 

ooo  ooo  ooo 

OHpcM  eoHpko  'ccphc 

CMCMCO  HPICCO  IhQOO 

bbb  bbb  bb 

FH  CM  kO  CM 

ooo  ooo  00 

03CM03  0303fh  CMO 

CMeoeo  HpkctH  ooo 

§ 

»vOO  ooo  ooo 

ZfHCM  eO'^»0  COP-P^ 

§  2 

o 

>700  ooo  ooo 

FH  CM  eo  HP  »o  <opH>p. 

0  HP 

k^eo  eoe  eo 

ZfhcM  CO'^kO  OO 

74 


PTOLEMY  1 


THE  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. — Continued 
le  Parallel  through  the  Middle  of  Pontus  15]/2  hours  lat, 

Western 

Angles 

Ram 

^  ^  O  M  IC  o 

^  eo  *o  i-i  T-i 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

-H  Oi  O  1-* 

O  CO  coo^ 

lb  0  ^  05  05 

•.jl  t-H  10  d  10  d  r-t 

0  0  000  0  0 

0  t'T  00  Hf  d  CO  10 

wo  CO  Cl  d  Cl  d  Cl 

^b  bbb  b^b 

T-t^  loicio  HjHdco 

OO  OOO  000 

1005  T-iOOCO  O-^CD 

loco  codd  cococo 

■g 

tj 

^  t*.  ^  M  O  CO  00  1 

CO  — • 

4  0  0  O  O  O  O 

«D  Q  N  *-•  t-  O 

O  00  o>  O  O 

^  f-H  rH  *— 

3 

oibo  oP-ico  ^co 

^  IC  CO  CO  HJH 

000  OOO  00 

05CjO  O5C01C  Hi<d 

COOOO  Oi-IhH  t-Ht-h 

CO 

.2 

H 

bbb-  bbb-  bbb 

CO  TJH  Tji  d  CO  Cl 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

b-C5iO  COOCD  -Hjiooo 

b-05^  ddd  ddi-H 

w 

uo  ^  00  o 

»o  ^  ^  Cl 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

uo  «D  Cl  o  o>  cr>  o 

»0  «D  «0  0> 

PhcO^  O^Cl  OO 

Cl  TfH  'l^l  T^H  t-I 

OOO  OOO  00 

co»od  00^  1-ho 

CO, CO  Ht  wo  CO  b-  00  05 

Pnbb  bb-b  bbb 

cociHji  dcoi-H  coco 

000  OOO  OOO 

■HjHb-Htl  ■'^'H}<lO  lOlOO 

d  d  CO  lO  CD  b-  00  b 

2 

a 

o 

o 

>7  0  0  o  o  o  o 

t-H  d  CO  »o  <o 

s  » 

8  H. 

^00  000  00 

<^»-Hd  COHjHiO  coco 

e  00, 

8 

*700  OOO  OOO 

<^i-td  COh^iuo  cOb-b- 

1  ^ 

-*-> 

c3 

O 

O 

a>c>  ^  c-  o 

CO  CO  Tt<  CO 

o  o  o  o  o 

00  00  O  1-1  o 

t>.  o  lO  lO  ^ 

t-l 

2 

c3 

<D 

PQ 

-2 

0  0  Ph  0  wo 

^  CO  -Hf  H*H  CO 

0  0  OOO 

CO  10  CO  05  CO 

CO  10  H^«  CO  CO 

00 

E 

b  b  b  b  ^  b- 

Cl  TtH  IIH  d  wo  T-H 

00  OOO  4 

CO  ID  CD  0  ID  ID 

wo  HJH  CO  CO  Cl  d 

^  g 

■g 

6J 

0^0  C>  CO  ^ 

1-t  CO  Cl  ^  Cl 

0  o  o  o  o  o 

O  ^  1-I  o  00  05  r-  — 

0>  O  1|H  2  ■*■ 

b  b  ^  b  b  b 

CO  10  d  ^  d  d 

OOO  OOO 

00  05  CO  IC  00 

t^-00  05  0  »-H  1-1 

b  ^  b  Cl  ^  b  CO 

CO  T-H  t-H  CO  Til 

OOO  OOO  0 

05  d  1-t  b-  d  d 

CD  CO  05  0  0  T-H  tH 

ao 

2 

d  ^  lb  o  d  o 

lO  i-< 

0  o  o  o  o  o 

00  O  Q  C-  O 

cc  t>.  t>.  00  00  o> 

^  lb  00  ^  b  b 

CO  IC  10  T-H  ^ 

OOO  000 

IC  cO  0  b*  wo  0 

CO  CO  b-  00  05 

Ph  b  b  Cl  b  b  b 

T!f  t-H  Tt  -IH  1-1  ID 

OOO  OOO  0 

CD  CO  d  05  CO  b-  0 

ID  ID  CO  CD  b-  00  05 

ee 

u 

S 

o 

as 

i  . 

o 

>7  0  0  O  O  O 

ft  Cl 

§  " 

•700  OOO 

^  d  CO  rlH 

0  2 

0 

•700  OOO  0 

th  d  CO  Tt  ID  ID 

g  .s 

i  8 

a; 

o 

a 

CO  O  00  ^  o 

d  .-•  CO  lO  *c- 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

OS  C-  00  d  05  00 

05  00  CO  CO 

b  ^  00  b  b  b- 

d  TJH  d  lO  1-* 

0  0  OOO  0 

00  b»  00  d  b-  b* 

05  00  b-  b-  CO  CO 

t- 

a» 

-C 

0 

(-4 

< 

b  b  ^  b  b 

t-H  CO  T}H  T*H  CO 

0  0  0  p  0 

^  Q  -H  ^  t-H 

05  06  CD  CD 

8  so 

*' .s 
^  *3» 

K} 

^  05  QD  ^  00  lb  o 
»0  »-i  d  lO  *o 

O  O  O  O  O  O  o 

CO  00  o  05  t>.  00 
^  d  lO  lO  lO 

c 

0 

a 

Ch 

0 

0 

za 

b  P-t  b  Cl  ^  b  b 

CO  T-H  t-H  CO 

OOO  OOO  0 

T-H  CO  CO  05  T»H  Tf 

t-H  d  M  ^  ^  12  i2 

b  b  Ph  bbb 

CO  ID  d  T-H  d  d 

OOO  OOO 

Cl  CO  Ht  CO  0  CO 

0  1-H  d  CO  Til  rlH 

g 

U 

hQ 

lb  t*  ^  05  00  o 

■  lO  .1  l-H  d 

4  0  0  O  0  O  0 

»0  CO  d  o  05  05  o 

rf  tJ4  »0  CO  CO  ti.  O 

^  b  b  d  b  b  b 

1-1  Tji  tJH  t-H  wo 

OOO  OOO  0 

<0  00  d  05  00  b-  0 

lO  10  CO  CO  b-  00  05 

^-H  b  00  bbb 

CO  ID  ID  1-H  t-H 

OOO  OOO 

ID  CD  0  b-  iD  0 

CD  CD  b-  b-  00  05 

o 

t-H 

H 

hH 

m 

O 

Pu 

X  ^ 

W 

«D 

U 

S 

c 

o 

o 

>7  0  0  O  O  O  O 

T-I  d  CO  lO  CO 

§  2 

0 

*700  000  0 

^  d  CO  H^H  lO  wo 

ft  b  s, 

8  ” 

>700  OOO 

T-H  d  CO  TJH  Tt 

W  « 

1  ^ 

JD 

O 

lb  o  CO  ^  00  «  ^  05 

iceo  -^ciic  deoco 

OO  OOO  OOO 

coco  1-105  05  dcoo 

co-t  -^COCO  TtiTflO 

^-tco  bbb  b^b 

t-ht-h  uo>0>0  TbdCO 

00  OOO  OOO 

Oh1<  COCOCO  w0O5t-h 

OOCO  lOiOlO  lOiOCO 

c 

'Sb 

s~, 

> 

b  b  bbb-  b  b- 

t-H  id  Cl  id  d  ^ 

0  0  OOO  0  0 

d  C5  0  CD  Tji  ID  b- 

05  b-  b-  CD  CD  CD  CD 

CO  c 

1-H 

8  «e 

K3 

o  *b  c  t«.  ^  Cl  d  CO  ^ 

CO  rH  CO  CO  Cl  d 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

QCOt-i  OOOO  t>.C0O5 

05^w 

c 

0 

3 

b  b  b-  b  b  b»  bbb 

CO  HjH  ’TiH  d  CO  Cl 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

dH^io  00^1-H  osioeo 

od^  23i2i2 

bbb  bbpQ  bb, 

1-H  ID  CO  CO  Ht 

OOO  OOO  OO 

1-H05d  i-HiDb-  CDTf 

«o 

o  Cl  d  o  ^  ^  o 

l-H  CO  -I  Cl  d  1-H 

OOO  OO  OOO 

Tf  d  d  Cl  CO  CO  CO  o 

dClCO  Hj^OCO  C-00O5 

Ph  b  b  b  b- b  bbb 

COClHti  dC0»-H  coco 

OOO  OOO  OOO 

Thb--^  H^H11^^lO  “5“20 

ddco  H^IOCO  b-0005 

bcob  bbb  bb 

d  Tjl  H}1  Tl*  1-H  hIH 

OOO  OOO  OO 

COIDCI  00-H  1-hQ 

C0C0t1<  iDCDb-  000 

eo 

1 

g  ^3 

o 

K700  OOO  000 

-H  d  CO  lO  <D^ 

c  b 

ft 

>2oO  OOO  OOO 

Z -H  d  CO 'cj*  »o  ot^t^ 

ft  ^ 

0  ^ 

>^00  OOO  OO 

ZT-Hd  COh^IiD  cocd 

13.  Exposition  of  the  Angles  and  Arcs  by  Parallels  or  Latitudes. — Continued 
Of  the  Parallel  through  the  Borysthenes  16  hours  lat.  Ji.8'^32^. 


75 


THE  ALMAGEST,  II 


76 


PTOLEMY 


And  now,  although  the  business  of  the  angles  has  been  worked  out  and  there 
is  left  to  add  to  these  things  now  established  a  research  into  the  positions  of  the 
principal  cities  of  each  province  according  to  their  longitudes  and  latitudes  for 
the  calculations  of  the  appearance  observed  in  them,  we  shall  do  this  exposition 
as  a  special  geographical  treatise  by  itself;  and  we  shall  follow  the  writings  of 
those  who  have  especially  worked  in  this  kind  of  thing,  finding  out  how  many 
degrees  each  city  is  from  the  equator  along  the  meridian  dra^vn  through  that 
city,  and  how  many  degrees  east  or  west  of  the  meridian  of  Alexandria  each 
city  is.  For  we  arrange  the  times  of  the  other  places  with  reference  to  this 
meridian. 

Now  we  have  thought  it  pertinent  to  add  this  much  about  these  positions: 
whenever  we  wish  to  know,  at  a  given  hour  in  one  of  these  places,  what  hour  it 
is  in  some  other  if  their  meridians  are  different,  we  must  take  the  number  of 
degrees  they  differ  from  each  other  along  the  equator,  and,  according  as  the  one 
sought  is  east  or  west  of  the  one  given,  increase  or  decrease  the  given  hour  by 
that  number  of  degrees  to  get  the  hour  defined  at  the  same  time  in  the  place 
sought. 


BOOK  THREE 


Now  that  we  have  methodically  gone  through,  in  all  that  has  been  put  together 
up  until  now,  those  things  which  have  first  to  be  completely  grasped  mathe¬ 
matically  concerning  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  also  concerning  the  ob¬ 
liquity  of  the  sun^s  path  through  the  middle  of  the  zodiac  [along  the  ecliptic]  and 
its  particular  incidents  in  the  right  sphere  and  the  oblique  sphere  for  each  lati¬ 
tude,  we  consider  it  proper  after  all  this  to  treat  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  to  take 
account  of  the  incidents  concerning  their  movements,  since  without  a  prior 
understanding  of  them  none  of  the  appearances  having  to  do  with  the  stars  can 
be  discovered.  And  we  find  the  treatise  on  the  sun^s  movement  advanced  first, 
for  again,  without  this,  matters  concerning  the  moon  could  not  be  grasped  in 
detail. 

1.  On  the  Year’s  Magnitude 

Since  finding  the  year’s  time-length  is  the  first  of  all  the  things  demonstrated 
concerning  the  sun,  we  shall  first  learn  from  the  treatises  of  the  ancients  the  dis¬ 
agreements  and  difficulties  concerning  their  statement  on  this,  and  especially 
from  that  of  Hipparchus,  a  diligent  and  truth-loving  man.  For  he  is  brought  to 
a  difficulty  of  this  kind  especially  by  the  fact  that,  for  the  apparent  returns  of 
the  sun  with  respect  to  the  tropics  and  equinoxes,  the  length  of  the  year  is  found 
to  be  less  than  365J^  days,  but  for  its  returns  observed  with  respect  to  the  fixed 
stars  it  is  found  to  be  more.  And  from  that  he  conjectures  that  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  also  has  a  very  slow  movement,  and  like  that  of  the  planets  is  in  the 
direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  prime  movement  which  revolves  the  circle  that 
passes  through  the  poles  of  the  equator  and  the  ecliptic.  And  we  shall  show  this 
is  so  and  how  it  comes  about,  in  the  chapters  on  the  fixed  stars.  For  matters 
concerning  them  could  not  be  seen  in  their  entirety  without  a  prior  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  sun  and  moon. 

But  for  the  present  research  we  believe  that  w^e  must  consider  the  length  of 
the  year  looking  only  to  the  sun’s  return  with  respect  to  itself — that  is,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  oblique  circle  made  by  it  [the  ecliptic] — and  that  we  must  define  the 
length  of  the  year  as  the  time  in  which  the  sun  proceeds  continuously  from  some 
fixed  point  of  this  circle  back  to  the  same  point,  supposing  as  we  do  that  the  only 
proper  principles  of  this  return  are  the  points  of  this  circle  determined  by  the 
tropics  and  equinoxes.  For,  if  we  tell  the  story  mathematically,  we  shall  not  find 
a  more  proper  return  than  that  which  carries  the  sun  through  the  same  config¬ 
uration  both  in  space  and  time,  whether  it  be  considered  with  respect  to  the 
horizons  or  the  meridian  or  the  magnitude  of  the  solar  days ;  and  we  shall  find  no 
other  principles  of  the  ecliptic  except  those  accidentally  defined  by  the  tropic 
and  equinoctial  points.  And  if  one  examines  the  subject  more  physically,  he  will 
not  find  a  more  reasonable  return  than  that  which  brings  the  sun  from  a  like  to 
a  like  weather-condition  and  from  the  same  season  to  the  same  season;  nor  will 

77 


78  PTOLEMY 

he  find  other  principles  than  those  by  which  the  seasons  are  the  most  completely 
distinguished.  And  the  return  of  the  sun  considered  with  respect  to  the  fixed 
stars  seems  quite  inept  for  this  reason  particularly  that  their  sphere  is  observed 
to  make  an  ordered  movement  contrary  to  that  of  the  heavens.  For,  with  things 
this  way,  nothing  will  keep  one  from  saying  that  the  length  of  the  sun^s  year  is 
the  time  it  takes  the  sun  to  overtake  Saturn,  for  instance,  or  some  other  star. 
And  so  there  would  be  many  different  years. 

And  so  we  think  it  proper  to  consider  such  a  period  of  time  the  sun^s  year 
which  is  found,  by  as  many  observations  as  possible  taken  over  a  rather  long  in¬ 
terval,  from  one  tropic  or  equinox  back  to  the  same. 

But  since  a  suspected  inequality  in  the  periods  of  even  this  return,  suspected 
through  continuous  and  successive  observations,  more  or  less  worried  Hip¬ 
parchus,  we  shall  try  briefly  to  show  how  this  ii§  not  at  all  disturbing,  since  we 
are  sure  by  the  continuous  instrumental  observations  we  have  made  of  the 
tropics  and  equinoxes  that  these  periods  are  not  unequal.  For  we  find  them  dif¬ 
fering  by  no  appreciable  amount  from  the  additional  quarter  day,  but  at  times 
by  about  as  much  as  could  be  attributed  to  the  error  diie  to  the  construction  or 
position  of  the  instruments.  For  we  guess  from  what  Hipparchus  reports  that 
the  error  with  regards  to  inequality  belongs  rather  to  the  observations.  For  after 
he  has  first  set  out,  in  his  treatise  On  the  Precession  of  the  Tropic  and  Equi¬ 
noctial  Points^  the  summer  and  winter  tropics  seeming  to  him  to  have  been  ac¬ 
curately  observed  and  in  order,  he  himself  agrees  that  there  is  not  such  a  differ¬ 
ence  between  them  as  to  recognize  for  this  reason  an  inequality  in  the  year.  For 
he  adds  this:  “Then  it  is  clear  from  these  observations  that  the  differences  in  the 
years  have  been  altogether  small.  But  in  the  case  of  the  tropics  I  do  not  despair 
of  Archimedes^  and  my  having  made  an  error  of  as  much  as  a  quarter  day  both 
in  observation  and  calculation.  But  the  irregularity  of  the  years  can  be  ac¬ 
curately  perceived  from  observations  made  on  the  bronze  ring  situated  in  what 
is  called  the  Square  Hall  in  Alexandria  which  is  supposed  to  indicate  the  equi¬ 
noctial  day  as  that  on  which  its  concave  surface  begins  to  be  lighted  up  from  the 
opposite  side. 

Then  he  lists,  first,  the  dates  of  thoi^e  autumn  equinoxes  which  have  been  very 
accurately  observed.  One  fell  in  the  year  17  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period,  Mesore 
30,  at  the  setting  of  the  sun;  and  another  three  years  after,  year  20,  on  the  first 
of  the  intercalated  days  in  the  morning,  which  should  have  been  noon,  so  that 
there  was  a  disagreement  of  a  quarter  day.  And  another  a  year  after,  year  21, 
at  the  sixth  hour,  which  agreed  with  the  preceding  observation.  And  another 

^The  inequality  of  the  year  is  here  being  judged  in  terms  of  the  number  of  solar  days.  This 
might  seem  arbitrary,  since  the  days  might  be  unequal.  And  indeed  it  will  be  seen  later  on  in 
this  Book  that  the  solar  days  are  considered  to  be  unequal.  But  the  theory  of  their  irregularity 
will  be  such  that  their  inequahty  is  exactly  symmetrical  within  each  year.  But,  of  course,  to 
judge  that  the  inequality  is  symmetrical,  it  is  necessary  to  fall  back  on  something  else  sup¬ 
posed  equal.  The  Greeks  usually  supposed  it  to  be  the  stellar  day,  the  time  it  takes  a  fixed 
star  to  go  from  a  meridian  back  to  the  same  meridian  again.  This  is  practically  true  for 
Ptolemy,  but  not  absolutely  so,  because  pf  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  For,  as  we  shall  see 
in  Book  VII,  the  fixed  stars  move  from  west  to  east  about  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  nearly  a 
half  a  degree  in  a  hundred  years.  This  introduces  an  irregularity  in  the  kngth  of  the  stellar 
day  exactly  parallel  to  one  of  the  irregularities  in  the  length  of  the  solar  day  described  in 
Chapter  9  of  this  Book,  but  one  so  small  in  magnitude  that  it  could  not  be  perceived  from  day 
to  day,  or  even  from  year  to  year. 


THE  ALIVIAGEST,  III  79 

eleven  years  after,  year  32,  on  the  third  of  the  intercalated  days  at  midnight  be¬ 
fore  the  fourth.  And  it  should  have  been  in  the  morning,  so  that  there  was  again 
a  disagreement  of  a  quarter  day.  And  another  a  year  after,  year  33,  on  the  fourth 
of  the  intercalated  days  in  the  morning,  which  agi’eed  with  the  preceding  ob¬ 
servation.  And  another  three  years  after,  year  36,  on  the  fourth  of  the  inter¬ 
calated  days  in  the  evening.  And  it  should  have  been  at  midnight  so  that  there 
was  again  a  disagreement  of  a  quarter  da5^ 

And  next  he  lists  those  spring  equinoxes  likewise  accurately  observ’ed.  One 
fell  in  the  year  32  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period,  Mechir  27,  in  the  morning. 
But  he  adds:  *^The  ring  in  Alexandria  was  also  lighted  up  equally  on  both  sides 
at  the  fifth  hour,  so  that  the  same  equinox  differently  observed  differed  by  near- 
nearly  five  hours. And  he  says  the  equinoxes  following,  up  to  the  year  37, 
agreed  ^vith  the  addition  of  a  quarter  day.  And  eleven  years  after,  3’ear  43, 
Mechir  29-30,  just  after  midnight,  he  sa3"s>  there  was  a  spring  equinox,  which 
also  agreed  with  the  observation  in  the  yesLV  32;  and  also,  he  sa^^s,  with  the  ob¬ 
servations  in  the  folloTvdng  years  up  to  the  year  50.  For  in  that  year  it  fell  on 
Phamenoth  1  at  sunset,  within  very  nearly  1^  days  of  that  of  the  year  43, 
which  is  also  proportional  to  the  7  intervening  years.  And  so  in  these  observa¬ 
tions  there  was  no  perceptible  difference  although  it  is  possible  for  there  to  be 
an  error  of  as  much  as  a  quarter  day,  not  onl^"  as  regards  the  tropic  observations, 
but  also  the  equinoctial.  For  even  if  the  position  or  discrimination  of  the  instru¬ 
ments  is  inaccurate  by  only  Meoo  of  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  equator, 
at  the  equinoctial  intersections  the  sun  makes  up  for  this  advance  in  latitude 
by  shifting  34°  longitude  along  the  ecliptic,  so  that  there  could  be  an  incon¬ 
sistency  of  very  nearly  a  quarter  day.  And  there  could  be  a  greater  error  still  in 
the  case  of  instruments  not  placed  permanently  and  not  then  corrected  for  each 
observation,  but  which  have  been  attached  for  some  time  to  the  pavement  'vsdth 
a  view  to  keeping  a  steady  position  for  a  good  while,  where  yet  some  long  un¬ 
noticed  shift  has  been  made  in  them.  And  anyone  can  see  an  example  of  this  in 
the  bronze  rings  in  the  palestra  of  our  city,  which  are  supposed  to  be  in  the 
plane  of  the  equator.  For  in  making  observations  we  find  such  a  distortion  in 
their  placement,  and  especially  in  the  case  of  the  largest  and  oldest,  that  at 
times  their  concave  surfaces  t^vice  suffer  a  shift  in  lighting  at  the  same  equi¬ 
noxes. 

But  certainly  from  such  things  Hipparchus  himself  does  not  think  there  is 
anything  solid  to  support  a  suspicion  of  inequality  in  the  lengths  of  years.  But 
he  says  he  finds  by  calculating  from  certain  eclipses  of  the  moon  that  the  irregu¬ 
larity  of  the  years,  on  the  average,  does  not  embrace  a  difference  greater  than 
three  quarters  of  a  day.  And  this  would  merit  some  attention  if  it  were  so  and 
not  evidently  belied  by  the  reasons  he  offers.  For  he  calculates,  by  the  lunar 
eclipses  observed  near  certain  fixed  stars,  by  how  much  in  each  case  the  star 
Spica  precedes  the  autunm  equinox.  And  in  this  way  he  thinks  he  finds  that 
once  it  was  at  its  greatest  distance  of  634°;  the  time  he  observed,  and  once 
at  its  least  distance  of  534°-  And  he  infers  from  this  fact  that,  since  it  is  not 
possible  for  Spica  to  move  so  far  in  such  a  short  time,  it  is  likel}^  that  the  sun, 
from  which  Hipparchus  examines  the  positions  of  the  fixed  stars,  does  not  al¬ 
ways  make  its  return  in  an  equal  time.. 

But  he  has  overlooked  the  point  that,  since  this  calculation  cannot  proceed 
without  laying  down  the  sun^s  position  at  the  echpse,  he,  taking  for  this  purpose 


so  Fl^OLEMY 

in  each  case  the  tropics  and  equinoxes  accurately  observed  by  hiniself  in  those 
veiy  years,  thereby  immediately  makes  clear  that  in  comparing  the  years  tliere 
is  no  difference  beyond  the  addition  of  the  quarter  day. 

For  example,  from  the  observation  of  the  eclipse  in  the  year  32  of  the  Third 
Callippic  Period  he  tliinks  he  finds  Spica  preceding  the  autumn  equinox  by 
63^°;  but  from  the  eclipse  in  the  year  43  of  the  same  period,  by  534°.  And  like¬ 
wise  setting  beside  these  calculations  the  spring  equinoxes  accurately  observed 
in  those  same  years — so  that  by  means  of  these  he  may  get  the  sun’s  positions 
at  the  middle  of  the  eclipses,  and  from  these  the  moon’s  positions,  and  from  the 
moon’s  those  of  the  stars — he  says  that  the  spring  equinox  of  the  year  32  fell  on 
Mechir  27  in  the  morning,  and  that  of  the  year  43  on  Mechir  29-30  after  mid¬ 
night,  nearly  2^4  later  than  that  of  the  year  32,  which  is  just  equal  to  the 
quarter  day  added  for  each  of  the  11  intervening  years.  If,  then,  the  sun  has 
made  its  return  to  these  equinoxes  in  neither  more  nor  less  time  than  the  addi¬ 
tional  quarter  day,  and  if  it  is  not  possible  for  the  star  Spica  to  have  moved 
I3>i°  in  so  few  years,  how  could  it  be  otherwise  than  absurd  to  take  the  results 
calculated  from  the  principles  assumed  a.s  an  accusation  against  the  very  prin¬ 
ciples  combined  to  produce  them,  as  if  one  were  unable  to  saddle  aiything  else 
with  the  cause  of  this  excessive  movement  of  Spica  e.xcept  the  equinoxes  as¬ 
sumed  at  the  same  time  to  have  been  accurately  and  inaccurately  observed, 
although  there  were  man}’’  things  which  could  have  introdiiced  such  an  error?* 
For  it  would  seem  much  more  possible  that  the  distances  of  the  moon  at  the 
eclipses  with  respect  to  the  nearest  fixed  stars  had  been  estimated  rather 
roughly;  or  that  the  calculations  either  of  the  moon’s  parallaxes  for  the  sighting 
of  its  apparent  positions  or  of  the  sun’s  movement  from  the  equinoxes  to  the 
middle  of  the  eclipses  had  been  eiYected  neither  truly  nor  accurately. 

And  I  think  Hipparchus  himself  recognized  there  is  nothing  convincing  in 
such  things  as  far  as  imposing  a  second  anomaly  on  the  sun,  but  I  think  he  only 
wishes  for  the  love  of  the  truth  not  to  keep  back  anything  which  could  in  any¬ 
way  bring  one  to  suspect.  And  so  he  himself  used  hypothe.ses  concerning  the 
sun  and  moon  with  just  one  anomaly  belonging  to  the  sun,  an  anomaly  which  is 
redeemed  in  the  year  considered  with  respect  to  the  tropics  and  equinoxes. 
And  in  supposing  these  revolutions  to  be  equal  in  time  we  do  not  observe  the 
appearances  at  the  eclipses  differing  in  any  perceptible  way  from  the  calcula¬ 
tions  based  on  these  hypotheses.  For  it  would  be  quite  perceptible  if  a  correc¬ 
tion  for  the  inequality  of  the  year  were  not  made  at  the  same  time,  even  if  it 
were  only  a  difference  of  one  degree  or  very  nearly  two  standard  hours. 

From  all  these  things,  and  from  the  times  of  the  returns  which  we  ourselves 
have  gotten  from  the  consecutive  passages  of  the  sun  observed  by  us,  we  do  not 
find  the  magnitude  of  the  year  unequal  if  it  is  considered  with  respect  to  some 
one  thing  and  not  one  time  with  respect  to  the  tropic  and  etiuinoctial  points 
and  another  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars.  Nor  do  we  find  any  more  proper 
period  of  return  than  that  which  carries  the  sun  from  one  tropic  or  equinoctial 
point,  or  any  other  point  on  the  ecliptic,  back  to  that  same  point.  And  we  do 
think  it  entirely  proper  to  explain  the  appearances  by  the  simplest  hypotheses 

qiipparchus*  logic,  contrary  to  what  Ptolemy  says,  seems  impeccable  insofar  as  he  is  s.ay- 
ing  that  assumptions  which  lead  to  their  contradictories  are  false.  But  the  reasoning  must  be 
right,  and  Pt-olemy  is  also  suggesting  that  there  u^re  many  steps  in  between  which  might  have 
been  false. 


THE  AL^L\GEST,  III  81 

possible,  so  long  as  nothing  perceptible  appears  contrary  to  this  deduction. 

And  therefore  it  has  become  clear  to  us  from  what  Hipparchus  has  showm 
that  the  length  of  the  year  observed  with  respect  to  the  tropics  and  equinoxes 
is  less  than  365t<^  days,  but  it  would  not  be  possible  to  hnd  out  with  very  great 
certainty  by  how  much  it  is  less  since  the  increase  of  a  quarter  day  remains  per¬ 
ceptibly  unchanged  for  many  years  because  of  the  very  small  difference.  And  so 
the  extra  amount  can  be  perceived  only  when  it  is  found  added  up  together 
o\-er  a  longer  period  of  time.  .Vnd  it  must  be  divided  among  the  intervening 
years  of  the  interval  and  it  must  be  observed  for  a  greater  and  a  smaller  number 
of  years  than  this  same  interval.  And  the  period  of  return  will  be  gotten  the 
more  accurately  the  longer  the  time  between  the  observations  compared.  And 
this  is  the  case  not  only  with  this  period  of  return,  but  with  all  of  them.  For  the 
error  resulting  from  the  weakness  of  the  observations  themselves,  even  if  they 
are  managed  accurately,  is  small  and  very  nearly  the  same  as  far  as  the  senses 
are  concerned  both  for  appearances  considered  over  a  long  time  and  for  those 
considered  over  a  short  time.  .Vnd  this  error  of  observation,  when  it  is  dis¬ 
tributed  over  fewer  years,  makes  the  error  in  the  length  of  the  year  greater  and 
also  in  multiples  of  it  over  a  longer  period  of  time;  and  it  makes  the  error  in  the 
length  of  the  year  smaller  when  distributed  over  a  greater  number  of  years. 

And  therefore  it  is  properly  thought  sufficient  if,  when  we  consider  how  much 
the  time  between  us  and  the  old  yet  accurate  observations  can  help  in  the  ap¬ 
proximation  of  the  supposed  periods  of  revolution,  we  try  to  introduce  them 
with  the  others  and  do  not  willingly  forego  the  proper  verification,  and  if  we 
suppose  the  establishing  of  dates  for  a  w’hole  long  age  or  for  some  great  multiple 
of  time  between  observations  is  the  work  for  another's  love  of  wisdom  and 
truth.  Because  of  their  age,  then,  the  summer  tropics  observed  by  the  pupils 
of  Meton  and  Euctemon  and  those  observed  after  them  by  the  pupils  of  Aris¬ 
tarchus  should  be  compared  with  those  observed  by  us.  But  because  the  ob¬ 
servations  of  the  tropics  are  generally  hard  to  determine  and,  moreover,  be¬ 
cause  the  observations  handed  dowm  by  these  people  were  taken  more  or  less  in 
the  rough,  as  Hipparchus  also  seems  to  have  thought,  w’e  pass  them  over.  We 
have  used  for  this  comparison  the  observation  of  the  equinoxes,  and,  because 
of  their  accuracy,  especially  those  given  Hipparchus'  approval  as  having  been 
most  certainly  taken  by  him,  and  those  most  carefully  observed  by  ourselves 
with  the  instruments  for  such  purposes  described  at  the  beginning  of  this 
treatise.  And  from  these  we  find  that,  in  very  nearly  300  years,  the  tropics 
and  equinoxes  fall  one  day  sooner  than  the  quarter-day  addition  to  365  days 
allow-s. 

For  in  the  year  32  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period  Hipparchus  singles  out  es¬ 
pecially  the  autumn  equinox  as  most  accurately  observed,  and  he  says  he 
calculates  it  to  have  fallen  at  midnight  between  the  third  and  fourth  of  the 
intercalated  days.  And  this  is  the  year  178  after  the  death  of  Alexander.  And 
2S5  years  after  in  the  year  3  of  Antonine  (w’hich  is  463  years  after  the  death  of 
Alexander)  w'e  observed,  again  most  correctly,  the  autumn  equinox  as  having 
fallen  on  Athyr  9  about  one  hour  after  sunrise.  Therefore  the  return  added  on 
in  aU  the  285  Egyptian  years,  that  is  those  of  365  days  each,  all  told  70+3^+}  20 
days  instead  of  the  71)^  days  due  these  years  by  the  regular  quarter-day  addi¬ 
tion.  And  so  the  return  fell  sooner  by  very  nearly  1  day  less  F20  than  the  regular 
quarter-day  addition  allowed. 


82  PTOLEMY 

And  likewise  Hipparchus  again  says  the  spring  equinox  in  the  same  year  32 
of  the  Third  Callippic  Period  was  very  accurately  observed  to  have  fallen  on 
Mechir  27  in  the  morning.  And  this  is  178  years  after  the  death  of  Alexander. 
And  likewise  285  years  later  (463  years  after  the  death  of  Alexander)  we  find 
the  spring  equinox  has  fallen  on  Pactom  7  very  nearly  one  hour  after  noon,  so 
that  the  period  reached  the  aforesaid  70 +34+ Mo  days  very  nearly,  instead  of 
the  regular  quarter-day  addition  to  the  285  years  of  7134  days.  Therefore  the 
return  of  the  spring  equinox  fell  sooner  by  1  day  less  34o  f  ban  the  regular  quarter- 
day  addition  allowed.  And  so,  since  300  years  to  285  years,  and  1  day  to  1  day 
less  34oj  the  same  ratio,  it  is  inferred  that  in  very  nearly  300  years  the  sun^s 
return  with  respect  to  the  equinoctial  points  is  sooner  by  1  day  than  the  regular 
quarter-day  addition  allows. 

Even  if,  because  of  its  antiquity,  we  compare  the  summer  tropic  more  or  less 
roughly  recorded  by  the  pupils  of  Meton  and  Euctemon  with  that  calculated 
by  us,  we  shall  find  the  same  thing.  For  it  is  recorded  to  have  taken  place 
Athenianwise  in  the  Magistracy  of  Apseudes,  Egyptianwise  Phamenoth  21  in 
the  morning,  and  we,  in  the  same  463rd  year  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  very 
carefully  calculated  it  to  have  fallen  on  Mesore  11-12  two  hours  after  midnight. 
And  from  the  summer  tropic  recorded  under  Apseudes  to  that  observed  by  the 
pupils  of  Aristarchus  in  the  year  50  of  the  First  Callippic  Period,  as  Hipparchus 
also  says,  is  152  years.  And  from  this  year  50  (which  was  the  44th  year  after 
the  death  of  Alexander)  to  the  463rd  year  [after  the  death  of  Alexander],  the 
year  of  our  observation,  is  419  years.  Therefore,  in  the  intervening  571  years 
of  the  whole  interval,  if  the  summer  tropic  observed  by  the  pupils  of  Euctemon 
fell  at  the  beginning  of  Phamenoth  21,  very  nearly  140+J4+34  days  have 
been  added  to  the  complete  Egyptian  years  instead  of  the  regular  quarter-day 
addition  to  the  571  years  of  142+J4+34  days;  so  that  this  return  fell  sooner 
by  2  days  less  342  thsin  the  regular  quarter-day  addition  allowed.  It  is  therefore 
evident  that  in  600  complete  Egyptian  years,  the  lengths  of  the  solar  years 
anticipate  the  regular  quarter-day  addition  by  nearly  2  whole  days. 

And  with  many  other  observations  we  find  this  same  thing  happening,  and  we 
see  Hipparchus  several  times  agreeing  to  this.  For  in  his  treatise  On  the  Length 
of  the  Year,  when  he  compares  the  summer  tropic  observed  by  Aristarchus  at  the 
end  of  the  year  50  of  the  First  Callippic  Period  with  the  one  taken  again  very 
accurately  by  himself  at  the  end  of  the  year  43  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period,  he 
says  as  follows:  ^Tt  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  145  years  the  tropic  has  fallen 
sooner  by  half  a  day  and  night  together  than  the  regular  quarter-day  addition 
allows.’^  And  again  in  his  treatise  On  Intercalated  Months  and  Days,  saying  first 
that  the  year,  for  the  pupils  of  Meton  and  Euctemon,  contains  365+34+346 
days  and  according  to  Callippus  only  36534  days,  he  adds  this:  '^And  we  have 
found  as  many  whole  months  in  the  19  years  as  they,  but  we  have  found  that 
the  year  comes  to  34oo  day  less  than  the  regularly  added  quarter  day,  so  that 
in  300  Egyptian  years  the  sum  of  the  solar  years  is  5  days  less  than  Meton's  and 
only  1  day  less  than  Callippus\”  And  also  in  summarizing  his  views  by  citing 
his  own  works,  he  says  as  follows:  ^^And  I  have  also  treated  the  question  of  the 
length  of  the  year  in  a  book  in  which  I  show  that  the  solar  year  (that  is,  the  time 
in  which  the  sun  goes  from  a  tropic  back  to  the  same  tropic  or  from  an  equinox 
back  to  the  same  equinox)  contains  365  days  and  less  than  34  day  by  34oo  of  a 
day  and  night,  and  not  as  the  mathematicians  think  36534  days.'^ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III  83 

I  think,  then,  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the  appearances  observed  up  to  this 
time  concerning  the  magnitude  of  the  year  agree  with  the  size  just  assigned  the 
return  of  the  tropic  and  equinoctial  points  by  a  concurrence  of  present  ap¬ 
pearances  with  earlier  ones.  And  since  all  this  is  so,  if  we  distribute  the  one  day 
over  the  300  years,  there  falls  to  each  year  12"  of  a  day.  And  if  we  subtract  this 
from  the  365  days  15'  where  the  quarter  day  has  been  added,  we  shall  have  the 
length  of  the  year  we  are  looking  for — that  is,  365  days  14'  48".  And  this  num¬ 
ber  of  days  can  be  taken  by  us  as  the  nearest  approximation  possible  from  the 
observations  we  have  at  present. 

And  as  regards  the  scrutiny  of  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  the  other  planets 
in  their  particularities  which  is  best  furnished  ready  to  hand  and  all  set  out  by 
the  orderly  construction  of  tables,  we  believe  it  is  the  necessary  purpose  and 
aim  of  the  mathematician  to  show  forth  all  the  appearances  of  the  heavens  as 
products  of  regular  and  circular  motions.  And  it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  con¬ 
struct  such  tables  as,  proper  and  consequent  upon  this  purpose,  separate  out 
the  particular  regular^  motions  from  the  anomaly  which  seems  to  result  from 
the  hypotheses  of  circles,  and  show  forth  their  apparent  movements  as  a  com¬ 
bination  and  union  of  all  together.  In  order,  then,  that  we  may  get  this  sort  of 
thing  in  more  serviceable  form  for  the  demonstration  under  consideration,  we 
shall  set  out  the  regular  movements  of  the  sun  in  their  particularities  in 
this  way. 

For  since  a  return  has  been  proved  to  be  365  days  14'48",  if  we  divide  these 
into  the  360®  of  one  circle,  we  shall  have  the  sun's  mean  daily  movement  along 
the  ecliptic  as  approximately  0®59'8'H7''H3''^12'^31'^*;2  for  it  will  suffice  to  carry 
out  the  fractions  to  this  power  of  sixtieths.  And  again,  taking  3^4  of  the  daily 
movement  along  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  have  for  the  hourly  movement  approxi¬ 
mately  0°2'27“50'"43'^3''1''\  Likewise  multiplying  the  daily  movement  by  the 
30  days  of  a  month,  we  shall  have  the  mean  monthly  movement  of  29®34'8'*36'“ 
36^''15''30'^L*  and  multiplying  by  the  365  days  of  an  Egyptian  year  we  shall  have 
the  mean  yearly  movement  of  359®45*24'^5'“2F''8''35'^^  Again  multiplying  the 
mean  yearly  movement  by  18  years,  because  of  the  symmetry  which  will  appear 
in  the  construction  of  the  tables,  and  subtracting  the  whole  circles,  we  shall  have 
the  surplus  for  the  18-year  period,  that  is  355®37'25''36“'20'''34''30''^ 

We  have  accordingly  drawn  up  three  tables  of  the  regular  movement  of  the 
sun,  one  in  forty-five  rows  and  the  others  in  two  parts.  The  first  table  contains 
the  mean  movements  for  the  18-year  periods;  the  second  table  contains  first 
the  movements  for  the  Egyptian  years,  and  then  for  hours;  the  third,  first  the 
movements  for  months  and,  under  that,  for  days.  The  numbers  designating  the 
time  are  set  out  in  the  first  columns,  and  in  the  next  columns  the  degrees,  min¬ 
utes,  etc.,  are  put  beside  them  according  to  the  proper  combinations  of  each. 
And  the  tables  are  as  follows: 

^The  word  '‘regular'’  is  here  used  as  a  translation  of  the  Greek  word  oMaXos.  On  the  other 
hand  avofxaXia,  its  privative,  is  translated  by  the  technical  “anomaly”  instead  of  by  the  more 
obvious  “irregularity.”  There  will  be  times,  however,  when  “irregularity”  is  used.  The  Greek 
word  ofiaXos  has  three  meanings,  all  significant  in  an  astronomical  context:  (1)  regular,  (2) 
uniform,  (3)  mean  or  average.  It  is  evident  that  “regular”  and  “uniform”  are  here  synonym¬ 
ous.  But  also  the  regular  movement  of  the  sun  is  computed  as  the  average  or  mean  movement 
of  the  sun  for  the  interval  of  a  solar  year. 

^The  superscripts  indicate  the  powers  of  the  sixtieths  in  the  denominator.  Thus  in  ordinary 
fractions  this  would  be  written  +  ^2  -J-  -j-  ^4^  etc. 


84 


PTOLEMY 


2.  Table  of  the  Sun's  Regular  Movement 


Distance  from  the  apogee  265°  15';  mean  epoch  0°45'  mthin  the  Fishes 


18- 

18- 

year 

De- 

I 

II 

HI 

IV 

V 

VI 

year 

De¬ 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

period 

grees 

period 

grees 

18 

355 

37 

25 

36 

20 

34 

30 

450 

250 

35 

40 

8 

34 

22 

30 

36 

351 

14 

51 

12 

41 

9 

0 

468 

246 

13 

5 

44 

54 

57 

0 

54 

346 

52 

16 

49 

1 

43 

30 

486 

241 

50 

31 

21 

15 

31 

30 

72 

342 

29 

42 

25 

22 

18 

0 

504 

237 

27 

56 

57 

36 

6 

0 

90 

338 

7 

8 

1 

42 

52 

30 

522 

233 

5 

22 

33 

56 

40 

30 

108 

333 

44 

33 

38 

3 

27 

0 

540 

228 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

0 

126 

329 

21 

59 

14 

24 

1 

30 

558 

224 

20 

13 

46 

37 

49 

30 

144 

324 

59 

24 

50 

44 

36 

0 

576 

219 

57 

39 

22 

58 

24 

0 

162 

320 

36 

50 

27 

5 

10 

30 

594 

215 

35 

4 

59 

18 

58 

30 

180 

316 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

0 

612 

211 

12 

30 

35 

39 

33 

0 

198 

311 

51 

41 

39 

46 

19 

30 

630 

206 

49 

56 

12 

0 

7 

30 

216 

307 

29 

7 

16 

6 

54 

0 

648 

202 

27 

21 

48 

20 

42 

0 

234 

303 

6 

32 

52 

27 

28 

30 

666 

198 

4 

47 

24 

41 

16 

30 

252 

298 

43 

58 

28 

48 

3 

0 

684 

193 

42 

13 

1 

1 

51 

0 

270 

294 

21 

24 

5 

8 

37 

30 

702 

189 

19 

38 

37 

22 

25 

30 

288 

289 

58 

49 

41 

29 

12 

0 

720 

184 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

0 

306 

285 

36 

15 

17 

49 

46 

30 

738 

180 

34 

29 

50 

3 

34 

30 

324 

281 

13 

40 

54 

10 

21 

0 

756 

176 

11 

55 

26 

24 

9 

0 

342 

276 

51 

6 

30 

30 

55 

30 

774 

171 

49 

21 

2 

44 

43 

30 

360 

272 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

0 

792 

167 

26 

46 

39 

5 

18 

0 

378 

268 

5 

57 

43 

12 

4 

30 

810 

163 

4 

12 

15 

25 

52 

30 

396 

263 

43 

23 

19 

32 

39 

0 

414 

259 

20 

48 

55 

53 

13 

30 

432 

254 

58 

14 

32 

13 

48 

0 

THE  ALMAGEST,  III 

2.  Table  of  the  Sun’s  Regular  Movement — Continued 


85 


Distance  from  the  apogee  265^15';  mean  epoch  0^45'  within  the  Fishes 


Single 

De- 

Sitigle]  De- 

years 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

VI 

years 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

1 

359 

45 

24 

45 

21 

8 

35 

10 

357 

34 

7 

33 

31 

25 

50 

2 

359 

30 

49 

30 

42 

17 

10 

11 

357 

19 

32 

18 

52 

34 

25 

3 

359 

16 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

12 

357 

4 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

4 

359 

1 

39 

1 

24 

34 

20 

13 

356 

50 

21 

49 

34 

51 

35 

5 

358 

47 

3 

46 

45 

42 

55 

14 

356 

35 

46 

34 

56 

0 

10 

6 

358 

32 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

15 

356 

21 

11 

20 

17 

8 

45 

7 

358 

17 

53 

17 

28 

0 

5 

16 

356 

6 

36 

5 

38 

17 

20 

8 

358 

3 

18 

2 

49 

8 

40 

17 

355 

52 

0 

50 

59 

25 

55 

9 

357 

48 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

18 

355 

37 

25 

36 

20 

34 

30 

De¬ 

] 

De¬ 

Hours 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Hours 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

VI 

1 

0 

2 

27 

50 

43 

3 

1 

13 

0 

32 

1 

59 

19 

39 

16 

2 

0 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

14 

0 

34 

29 

50 

2 

42 

18 

3 

0 

7 

23 

32 

9 

9 

3 

15 

0 

36 

57 

40 

45 

45 

19 

4 

0 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

16 

0 

39 

25 

31 

28 

48 

20 

5 

0 

12 

19 

13 

35 

15 

6 

17 

0 

41 

53 

22 

11 

51 

21 

6 

0 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

18 

0 

44 

21 

12 

54 

54 

23 

7 

0 

17 

14 

55 

1 

21 

9 

19 

0 

46 

49 

3 

37 

57 

24 

8 

0 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

20 

0 

49 

16 

54 

21 

0 

25 

9 

0 

22 

10 

36 

27 

27 

11 

21 

0 

51 

44 

45 

4 

3 

27 

10 

0 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

22 

0 

54 

12 

35 

47 

6 

28 

11 

0 

27 

6 

17 

53 

33 

14 

23 

0 

56 

40 

26 

30 

9 

29 

12 

0 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

24 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

The  surplus  of  the  distance  from  the  apogee  of  the  sun  5°30'  within  the  Twins  to  its  mean 
epoch  in  the  year  I  of  Nabonassar  0°45'  within  the  Fishes  is  265°15'. 


86 


PTOLEMY 

2.  Table  of  the  Sun^s  Regular  Movement — Continued 


Distance  from  the  apogee  265^15';  mean  epoch  within  the  Fishes 


Egypt- 

Egypt¬ 

ian 

De- 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

ian 

De¬ 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

moHhs 

grees 

moHhs 

grees 

30 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

210 

206 

59 

0 

16 

13 

48 

30 

60 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

0 

240 

236 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

0 

90 

88 

42 

25 

49 

48 

46 

30 

270 

266 

7 

17 

29 

26 

19 

30 

120 

118 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2 

0 

300 

295 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

0 

150 

147 

50 

43 

3 

1 

17 

30 

330 

325 

15 

34 

42 

38 

50 

30 

180 

177 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

0 

360 

354 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

0 

De- 

De¬ 

Days 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Days 

grees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

1 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

16 

15 

46 

12 

35 

31 

20 

16 

2 

1 

58 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2 

17 

16 

45 

20 

52 

44 

32 

47 

3 

2 

57 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

18 

17 

44 

29 

9 

57 

45 

18 

4 

3 

56 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

19 

18 

43 

37 

27 

10 

57 

49 

5 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

20 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

20 

6 

5 

54 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

21 

20 

41 

54 

1 

37 

22 

51 

7 

6 

53 

58 

0 

32 

27 

37 

22 

21 

41 

2 

18 

50 

35 

22 

8 

7 

53 

6 

17 

45 

40 

8 

23 

22 

40 

10 

35 

3 

47 

53 

9 

8 

52 

14 

34 

58 

52 

39 

24 

23 

39 

18 

53 

17 

0 

24 

10 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

10 

25 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

55 

11 

10 

50 

31 

9 

25 

17 

41 

26 

25 

37 

35 

27 

43 

25 

26 

12 

11 

49 

39 

26 

38 

30 

12 

27 

26 

36 

43 

44 

56 

37 

57 

13 

12 

48 

47 

43 

51 

42 

43 

28 

27 

35 

52 

2 

9 

50 

28 

14 

13 

47 

56 

1 

4 

55 

14 

29 

28 

35 

0 

19 

23 

2 

59 

15 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

45 

30 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

3.  On  the  Hypotheses  concerning  Regular  and  Circular  Movement 

Since  the  next  thing  is  to  explain  the  apparent  irregularity  of  the  sun,  it  is 
first  necessary  to  assume  in  general  that  the  motions  of  the  planets  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  contrary  to  the  movement  of  the  heavens  are  all  regular  and  circular  by 
nature,  like  the  movement  of  the  universe  in  the  other  direction.  That  is,  the 
straight  lines,  conceived  as  revolving  the  stars  or  their  circles,  cut  off  in  equal 
times  on  absolutely  all  circumferences  equal  angles  at  the  centres  of  each;^  and 
their  apparent  irregularities  result  from  the  positions  and  arrangements  of  the 
circles  on  their  spheres  through  which  they  produce  these  movements,  but  no 
departure  from  their  unchangeableness  has  really  occurred  in  their  nature  in 
regard  to  the  supposed  disorder  of  their  appearances. 

But  the  cause  of  this  irregular  appearance  can  be  accounted  for  by  as  many 
as  two  primary  simple  hypotheses.  For  if  their  movement  is  considered  with 
respect  to  a  circle  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  concentric  with  the  cosmos  so  that 
our  eye  is  the  centre,  then  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  they  make  their  regular 

^This  principle  of  celestial  mechanics  will  be  considerably  broadened  in  the  case  of  the 
moon  and  the  other  five  planets  as  treated  in  Books  V,  IX,  and  X. 


87 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 

movements  either  along  circles  not  concentric  with  the  cosmos,  or  along  con¬ 
centric  circles;  not  with  these  simply,  but  with  other  circles  borne  upon  them 
called  epicycles.  For  according  to  either  hypothesis  it  udll  appear  possible  for 
the  planets  seemingly  to  pass,  in  equal  periods  of  time,  through  unequal  arcs  of 
the  ecliptic  circle  which  is  concentric  with  the  cosmos. 

For  if,  in  the  case  of  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity,  we  conceive  the  eccentric 

circle  A  BCD  on  which  the  star  moves  regularly, 
with  E  as  center  and  with  diameter  AED,  and  the 
point  F  on  it  as  your  eye  so  that  the  point  A  be¬ 
comes  the  apogee  and  the  point  D  the  perigee ;  and 
if,  cutting  off  equal  arcs  AB  and  DC,  we  join  BE^ 
BFj  CEj  and  CF,  then  it  vnW  be  evident  that  the 
star  moving  through  each  of  the  arcs  AB  and  CD  in 
an  equal  period  of  time  will  seem  to  have  passed 
through  unequal  arcs  on  the  circle  described  around 
F  as  a  centre.  For  since 

angle  BE  A  ==  angle  CFD, 

therefore  angle  BFA  is  less  than  either  of  them,  and 
angle  CFD  greater  [Eucl.  i,  16]. 

And  if  in  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle  we  con¬ 
ceive  the  circle  ABCD  concentric  vdth  the  ecliptic  with  centre  E  and  diameter 
AEC,  and  the  epicycle  FGHK  borne  on  it  on 
which  the  star  moves,  with  its  centre  at  A,  then 
it  will  be  immediately  evident  also  that  as  the 
epicycle  passes  regularly  along  the  circle  ABCD, 
from  A  io  B  for  example,  and  the  star  along  the 
epicycle,  the  star  vnll  appear  indifferently  to  be 
at  A  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  when  it  is  at  F  or 
H;  but  when  it  is  at  other  points,  it  will  not.  But 
having  come  to  G,  for  instance,  it  will  seem  to 
have  produced  a  movement  greater  than  the  reg¬ 
ular  movement  by  the  arc  AG;  and  having  come 
to  K,  likevdse  less  by  the  arc  AK. 

Then  vdth  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity  it  is 
always  the  case  that  the  least  movement  belongs 
to  the  apogee  and  the  greatest  movement  to  the 
perigee,  since  angle  AFB  is  always  less  than  angle 
DFC.  But  both  cases  can  come  about  with  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle.  For 
when  the  epicycle  moves  contrary  to  the  heavens  [from  west  to  east],  for  exam¬ 
ple  from  A  to  B,  if  the  star  so  moves  on  the  epicycle  that  it  goes  from  the  apogee 
again  contrary  to  the  heavens  (that  is,  from  F  in  the  direction  of  G),  there  ^\dll 
result  at  the  apogee  the  greatest  advance,  because  the  epicycle  and  the  star  are 
moving  the  same  way.  But  if  the  movement  of  the  star  on  the  epicycle  is  in  the 
direction  of  that  of  the  heavens  [from  east  to  west],  that  is,  from  F  towards  K, 
conversely  the  least  advance  will  be  effected  at  the  apogee  because  the  star  is 
then  moving  contrary  to  the  movement  of  the  epicycle. 

With  these  things  established,  it  must  next  be  understood  that,  in  the  case  of 
those  planets  which  effect  two  anomalies,  it  is  possible  to  combine  both  of 
these  hypotheses,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  chapters  concerning  them.  But,  in 


A 


88 


PTOLEMY 


the  case  of  those  planets  subject  to  only  one  anomaly,  one  of  the  hypotheses 
will  suffice.  And  it  must  be  understood  that  all  the  appearances  can  be  cared 
for  interchangeably  according  to  either  hypothesis,  when  the  same  ratios  are 
involved  in  each.  In  other  words,  the  hypotheses  are  interchangeable  when,  in 
the  case  of  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle,  the  ratio  of  the  epicycle^s  radius  to 
the  radius  of  the  circle  carrying  it^  is  the  same  as,  in  the  case  of  the  hypothesis 
of  eccentricity,  the  ratio  of  the  line  between  the  centres  (that  is,  bet^veen  the 
eye  and  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle),  to  the  eccentric  circle’s  radius;  ^vith 
the  added  conditions  that  the  star  move  on  the  epicycle  from  the  apogee  in  the 
direction  of  the  movement  of  the  heavens  wdth  the  same  angular  velocity  as 
the  epicycle  moves  on  the  circle  concentric  with  the  eye  in  the  direction  op¬ 
posite  to  that  of  the  heavens,  and  that  the  star  move  regularly  on  the  eccentric 
circle  with  the  same  angular  velocity  also  and  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the 
movement  of  the  heavens. 

And  ^ve  shall  briefly  show  in  a  systematic  way,  first  by  reasoning  and  secondly 
by  the  numbers  discovered  in  the  appearances  of  the  sun’s  anomaly,  that  with 
the  above  assumptions  the  same  appearances  agree  with  either  hypothesis. 

I  say  first,  then,  that  on  either  hypothesis  the  greatest  difference  between  the 
regular  movement  and  the  apparent  irregular  movement  (difference  by  which 
the  mean  passage  of  the  stars  is  apprehended)  occurs  when  the  apparent  angular 
distance  cuts  off  a  quadrant  from  the  apogee;  and  that  the  time  from  the  apogee 
to  this  mean  passage  is  greater  than  from  this  mean  passage  to  the  perigee. 

Therefore  it  results — ahvays  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  eccentric  circles,  and  on 
the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle  whenever  their  movements  occur  in  the  direction 
of  the  movement  of  the  heavens — that  the  time  from  the  least  passage  to  the 
mean  passage  is  greater  than  that  from  the  mean  to  the  greatest  passage,  be¬ 
cause  in  each  case  the  least  progress  is  effected  at  the  apogee.  But  on  the  hypoth¬ 
esis  of  the  epicycles  which  supposes  the  revolutions  of  the  stars  on  them  in  the 
direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  heavens,  conversely  the  time  from  the  greatest 
to  the  mean  passage  is  greater  than  that  from  the  mean  to  the  least,  because  in 
this  case  the  greatest  progress  is  effected  at  the  apogee. 

First,  then,  let  there  be  the  star’s  eccentric  circle  ABCD  with  centre  E  and 
diameter  AEC.  And  let  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic  be 
taken  (that  is,  the  point  at  the  eye),  and  let  it  be  F, 

And  with  BED  drawn  through  F  at  right  angles  to 
AEC,  let  the  star  be  supposed  at  points  B  and  D, 
so  that  the  apparent  angular  distance  on  either 
side  from  the  apogee  A  is  clearly  a  quadrant. 

It  must  be  proved  that  the  greatest  difference 
between  the  regular  and  irregular  movements  oc¬ 
curs  at  the  points  B  and  D, 

For  let  EB  and  ED  be  joined.  Then  it  is  im¬ 
mediately  evident  that  the  arc  of  the  anomalistic 
difference  has  to  the  whole  circle  the  same  ratio 
that  angle  EBF  has  to  4  right  angles,  since  the 
angle  AEB  subtends  the  arc  of  the  regular  move¬ 
ment  and  angle  AFB  that  of  the  apparent  irregular  movement,  and  angle  EBF 
is  the  difference  between  them. 

^The  circle  carrying  the  epicycle  is  often  called  the  deferent. 


TIIE  ALMAGEST,  III 


89 


I  say,  then,  that  no  other  angle  can  be  constructed  on  the  circumference  of 
the  circle  ABCD  and  on  the  straight  line  EF  greater  than  these  two  at  B  and  D. 

For  let  the  angles  EHF  and  EKF  be  constructed  at  the  points  H  and  /C,  and 
let  HD  and  KD  be  joined.  Since  then  in  every  triangle  the  greater  side  sub¬ 
tends  the  greater  angle,  and 

HFy  FD,  [Eucl.  Ill,  7,3] 


also 

angle  /7Z)F>  angle  DHF 

But 

angle  EDH  =  angle  EHD 

since 

EH  =  ED. 

And  therefore 

angle  EDF>ang\e  EHF, 

angle  EBD  >  angle  EHF. 

Again  since 

DF>KF, 

angle  FA'Z)>  angle  FDK. 

But 

angle  EKD  =  angle  EDK, 

since  again 

EK  =  ED. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

ajigle  FDF>  angle  EKF, 
angle  EBFy  angle  EKF. 

Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  construct  other  angles  in  the  way  we  have  de¬ 
scribed  greater  than  those  at  points  B  and  D} 

And  at  the  same  time  it  is  proved  that  arc  AB,  which  embraces  the  time 
from  the  least  to  the  mean  movement,  is  greater  than  arc  BC  which  embraces 
the  time  from  the  mean  to  the  greatest  movement,  by  twice  the  arc  containing 
the  anomalistic  difference.  For 

angle  =  angle  SF.B+ angle  EBF, 

=  rt.  angle+angle  EBF, 

and 

angle  J^EC+angle  EBF^ri.  angle. 

Again,  to  prove  the  same  thing  occurs  in  the  other  hypothesis,  let  there  be 
the  circle  ABC  concentric  with  the  cosmos,  with  center  D  and  diameter  ABD; 
and  let  there  be  in  the  same  plane  the  epicycle  EFG  with  centre  A,  carried  on  it. 
And  let  the  star  be  supposed  at  G  where  it  appears  to  be  a  quadrant’s  distance 
from  the  apogee  point.  And  let  AG  and  DGC  be  joined. 

^The  Greeks,  in  general,  avoided  the  notion  of  a  body^s  speed  at  a  given  point,  and  Ptolemy 
here  handles  the  problem  in  the  classic  way,  in  terms  of  boundarj^  points.  Thus  by  proving 
that  the  greatest  difference  between  the  angle  of  the  regular  movement  and  that  of  the  ap¬ 
parent  irregular  movement  is  at  a  point  an  apparent  quadrant’s  distance  from  the  apogee,  it 
then  follows  that  this  point  is  a  boundary  point  such  that  for  all  arcs  between  it  and  the 
apogee  the  star  will  appear  to  move  more  slowly  than  its  regular  or  average  movement,  and 
for  all  arcs  between  it  and  the  perigee  the  star  will  appear  to  move  faster  than  its  regular  or 
average  movement.  Ptolemy  therefore  calls  the  point  itself  the  point  of  the  star’s  mean  pas¬ 
sage.  It  is  not  very  different  from  saying  in  modern  terms  that  the  speed  of  the  star  at  this 
point  is  its  regular  speed. 

That  the  point  of  greatest  anomalistic  difference  is  such  a  boundar>^  point  is  simply  stated 
by  Ptolemy  and  not  explained.  The  explanation  is  this:  From  the  apogee  to  the  point  of 
greatest  difference  the  apparent  angular  speed  of  the  star  is  always  slower  than  its  regular 
speed,  for  otherwise  the  difference  between  the  two  angles  traveled  would  not  be  getting 
greater  and  greater.  Likewise  from  the  point  of  greatest  difference  to  the  perigee  the  apparent 
angular  speed  is  greater  than  the  regular  speed,  for  otherwise  the  difference  between  the  two 
angles  traveled  would  not  be  getting  less  and  less. 


90  PTOLEMY 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  DGC  is  tangent  to 
the  epicycle.  For  at  that  time  there  occurs  the 
greatest  difference  between  the  regular  and  ir¬ 
regular  movements. 

For  since  the  regular  movement  from  the  apo¬ 
gee  is  contained  by  the  angle  EAG  (for  the  star 
traverses  the  epicycle,  and  the  epicycle  the  cir¬ 
cle  ABCj  with  the  same  angular  velocity),  and 
the  difference  between  the  regular  and  apparent 
movements  is  contained  by  the  angle  ADG^ 
therefore  it  is  evident  that  also  the  difference 
between  angle  EAG  and  angle  ADG  (that  is, 
angle  AGD)  contains  the  apparent  angular  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  star  from  the  apogee.  And  so,  since 
it  is  assumed  to  be  the  angle  of  a  quadrant, 
angle  AGD  will  also  be  a  right  angle,  and  therefore  the  straight  line  DGC  will  be 
tangent  to  the  epicycle  EFG  [Fuel,  iii,  16,  Por.].  Therefore  the  arc  AC  between 
the  centre  A  and  the  tangent  is  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference. 

And  in  the  same  way  arc  EG,  which,  according  to  the  motion  assumed  for 
the  epicycle,  embraces  the  time  from  the  least  to  the  mean  movement,  is 
greater  than  arc  GF,  which  embraces  the  time  from  the  mean  to  the  greatest 
movement.  And  it  is  greater  by  twice  arc  AC.  For  if  we  produce  the  straight 
line  DGH  and  draw  AKH  at  right  angles  to  FF,  then 

angle  FAG  =  angle  ADCj  [Fuel,  vi,  8] 

and  arc  KG  is  similar  to  arc  AC.  Therefore  arc  EKG  is  greater  than  a  quadrant 
by  arc  AG,  and  arc  FG  is  less  than  a  quadrant  by  arc  AG.  Which  it  was  re¬ 
quired  to  prove.^ 

And  next  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that,  even  in  the  other  particular  movements, 

in  the  case  of  both  hypotheses,  for  equal  times, 
all  the  same  things  will  occur  with  respect  to  the 
regular  and  apparent  movements  and  the  differ¬ 
ences  between  them — that  is,  the  anomalistic 
difference. 

For  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  Z>, 
concentric  with  the  ecliptic;  and  the  eccentric 
EFG  with  center  F,  equal  to  the  concentric  circle 
ABC;  and  the  diameter  EAHD  common  to  both, 
through  the  centres  D  and  H  and  the  apogee  E. 
And  with  arc  AB  taken  at  random  length  on  the 
concentric  circle,  let  the  epicycle  KF  with  centre 
B  and  radius  DH  be  described,  and  let  KBD  be 
joined. 

I  say  that  the  star  will  be  borne  by  either 
movement  to  F,  the  intersection  of  the  eccentric 

^In  the  case  where  the  star  moves  on  the  epicycle  in  the  same  direction  that  the  epicycle 
moves  on  the  concentric  circle,  the  mean  passage  and  greatest  anomahstic  difference  do  not 
occur  an  apparent  quadrant’s  distance  from  the  apogee — that  is,  if  the  angular  velocity  of  the 
star  on  the  epicycle  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  epicycle’s  centre  on  the  concentric  circle.  But  it 
is  greater  than  a  quadrant’s  distance  from  the  apogee.  This  is  immediately  evident  if  we  refer 
to  the  previous  figure  and  suppose  DGH  drawn  tangent  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  epicycle. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III  91 

circle  and  the  epicycle,  in  the  same  amount  of  time.  That  is,  the  three  arcs,  EF 
on  the  eccentric,  AB  on  the  concentric,  and  KF  on  the  epicycle  are  similar  to 
each  other;  and  the  difference  between  the  regular  and  irregular  movements, 
and  the  apparent  passage  of  the  star,  will  be  similar  and  the  same  under  either 
hypothesis. 

For  let  FH,  BFj  and  DF  be  joined.  Since  the  opposite  sides  of  the  quadri¬ 
lateral  BDHF  are  equal  to  each  other,  FH  to  BD,  and  BF  to  DHy  the  quadri¬ 
lateral  BDFH  is  a  parallelogram.  Therefore  the  three  angles  EHFj  ADBy  and 
FBK  are  equal.  And  so,  since  they  are  angles  at  the  centres,  the  arcs  sub¬ 
tended  by  them — EF  on  the  eccentric,  AB  on  the  concentric,  and  KF  on  the 
epicycle — are  similar  to  one  another.  Therefore  by  either  motion,  the  star  will 
be  brought  to  the  same  point  F  in  an  equal  period  of  time,  and  will  appear  to 
have  passed  from  the  apogee  along  the  same  arc  of  the  ecliptic,  AL.  And  ac¬ 
cordingly  the  anomalistic  difference  will  be  the  same  according  to  either  hypo¬ 
thesis,  since  we  have  already  proved  that  the  difference  contained  by  angle 
DFH  on  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  contained 
by  angle  BDF  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle,  and  since  these  angles  are  here 
also  alternate  and  equal,  with  FH  proved  parallel  to  BD. 

And  it  is  clear  that  for  all  distances  these  same  results  will  follow,  HDFB  be¬ 
ing  always  a  parallelogram  and  the  eccentric  circle  being  described  by  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  star  on  the  epicycle  whenever  the  relations  under  either  hypothesis 
are  both  similar  and  equal. 

But  it  will  also  become  clear  in  the  following  way  that,  even  if  they  are  only 
similar  but  unequal  in  magnitude,  the  same  appearances  will  again  result.  For 
in  the  same  way,  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  D,  concentric  with  the 
cosmos;  and  its  diameter  ADC  passing  through  the  starts  apogee  and  perigee; 
and  the  epicycle  about  B  at  the  random  distance  of  arc  AB  from  the  apogee  A. 
And  let  the  star  have  moved  through  arc  EF  similar  to  AB  since  the  returns  of 
the  circles  take  place  in  the  same  time.  And  let  the  straight  lines  DBEy  BF,  and 
DF  be  joined. 

It  is  immediately  clear  that,  on  this  hypothesis,  angle  ADE  and  angle  FBE 

are  always  equal,  and  that  the  star  will 
appear  on  the  straight  line  DF, 

I  say  also  that,  on  the  hypothesis  of 
eccentricity,  both  if  the  eccentric  circle 
is  greater  than  the  concentric  circle 
and  if  it  is  less,  with  only  the  similarity 
of  the  relations  and  the  isochronism  of 
the  returns  assumed,  the  star  will 
again  appear  on  the  same  straight 
line  DF. 

For  let  the  eccentric  circle  GH  be 
drawn  greater,  as  we  said,  with  its  centre 
at  K  on  AC;  and  likewise  LM  less,  with 
centre  N.  And  producing  DMFH  and 
DLAGy  let  HK  and  MN  be  joined.  Since 
DB:BF  ::HK:KD::MN  :  NDy 
and  since 

angle  BFD  =  angle  MDN 


92  PTOLEMY 

because  of  the  parallels  DA  and  BF^  therefore  the  three  triangles  are  equian¬ 
gular  [Eucl.  VI,  7],  and  the  angles  BDFy  DHK,  and  DMN,  subtending  the  corre¬ 
sponding  sides,  are  equal.  Therefore  the  straight  lines  BD,  HK,  and  MN  are 
parallel,  so  that  also  angles  ADBj  AKH,  and  ANM  are  equal.  And  since  they 
are  angles  at  the  centres  of  the  circles,  therefore  the  arcs  subtended  by  them, 
AB,  GH,  and  LM,  will  be  similar.  Therefore,  in  the  same  length  of  time,  not 
only  has  the  epicycle  traversed  arc  AB^  and  the  star  arc  EF,  but  also  on  the 
eccentric  circles  the  star  will  have  traversed  arcs  GH  and  LM;  and  in  each  case, 
therefore,  it  will  be  observed  on  the  same  straight  line  DMFH,  being  at  the 
point  F  in  the  case  of  the  epicycle,  at  H  for  the  greater  eccentric,  at  M  for  the 
smaller  eccentric,  and  likewise  for  all  positions. 

And  furthermore  it  results  that,  when  the  star  appears  to  have  traversed 
equal  arcs  both  from  the  apogee  and  the  perigee,  the  anomalistic  difference  in 
either  position  will  be  equal. 

For,  on  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity,  if  we  describe  the  eccentric  circle 
ABCD  about  centre  E  with  diameter  AEG  through 
the  apogee  A,  with  the  eye  supposed  on  it  at  F,  and 
if,  drawing  through  F  the  straight  line  BFD  at  ran¬ 
dom,  we  join  EB  and  FD,  then  the  apparent  courses 
will  be  equal  and  opposite;  that  is,  angle  AFB  of  the 
course  from  the  apogee  and  angle  CFD  of  that  from 
the  perigee.  And  the  anomalistic  difference  will  be 
the  same  because  BE  is  equal  to  DE  and  angle  EBF 
to  angle  EDF,  And  so  the  arc  from  the  apogee  A  and 
the  arc  from  the  perigee  C  (that  is,  the  arcs  con¬ 
tained  by  angles  A FJ5  and  CFD,  respectively)  are, 
the  one  greater  and  the  other  less,  than  the  regular 
movement  by  the  same  difference  of  the  apparent 
arc;  because  AEB  is  greater  than  angle  AFB  and 
angle  CED  less  than  angle  CFD, 

And,  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle,  if  we  describe  likewise  the  concentric 

circle  around  centre  D  and  with  diameter  ADC y  and 
the  epicycle  EFG  around  centre  A,  and  if,  drawing 
at  random  the  straight  line  DGBFj  we  join  AF  and 
AGj  then  the  arc  of  the  anomalistic  difference  AB 
will  be  the  same  for  both  positions.  That  is,  if  the 
star  is  at  F  or  if  the  star  is  at  G,  it  will  appear  on  the 
ecliptic  at  the  same  distance  from  the  apogee  point 
when  it  is  at  F  as  from  the  perigee  point  when  it  is 
at  Gy  since  the  apparent  arc  from  the  apogee  is  con¬ 
tained  by  angle  DFA.  For  angle  DFA  has  been 
shown  to  be  the  difference  between  the  regular 
movement  and  the  anomalistic  difference.  And  the 
apparent  arc  from  the  perigee  is  contained  by  angle 
FGA,  For  it  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  of  the  regular 
movement  from  the  perigee  plus  the  anomalistic 
difference.  And  so  it  is  thereupon  inferred  again  that 
the  mean  movement  is  greater  than  the  apparent  movement  about  the  apogee 
(that  is,  angle  EAF  than  angle  AFD)  and  the  mean  movement  is  less  than  the 


A 


93 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 

apparent  about  the  perigee  (that  is,  angle  GAD  than  angle  AGF),  both  by  the 
same  difference,  by  angle  ADG.  Which  was  to  be  proved. 

4.  On  the  Apparent  Irregularity  or  Anomaly  of  the  Sun 

With  these  things  explained,  it  is  now  necessary  to  take  up  4he  apparent  ir¬ 
regularity  or  anomaly  of  the  sun;  because  there  is  one  only,  and  it  is  such  that 
the  time  from  the  least  movement  to  the  mean  is  greater  than  the  time  from  the 
mean  to  the  greatest  movement.  For  we  find  this  agrees  with  the  appearances. 
And  this  can  be  accomplished  by  either  hypothesis: — (1)  by  that  of  the  epicycle 
when  the  movement  of  the  sun  is  in  the  direction  of  the  movement  of  the  heav¬ 
ens  on  its  arc  at  the  apogee.  But  (2)  it  would  be  more  reasonable  to  stick  to  the 
hypothesis  of  eccentricity  which  is  simpler  and  completely  effected  by  one  and 
not  two  movements. 

Now,  the  first  question  is  that  of  finding  the  ratio  of  eccentricity  of  the  sun^s 
circle — that  is,  what  ratio  the  line  between  the  eccentric  circle’s  centre  and  the 
ecliptic’s  centre  at  the  eye  has  to  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle;  and  next  at 
what  section  of  the  ecliptic  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  to  be  found.  And 
these  things  have  been  shown  in  a  serious  way  by  Hipparchus.  For  having  sup¬ 
posed  the  time  from  the  spring  equinox  to  the  summer  tropic  to  be  943^^  days, 
and  the  time  from  the  summer  tropic  to  the  autumn  equinox  to  be  923^2  days, 
he  proves  from  these  appearances  alone  that  the  straight  line  between  the 
aforesaid  centres  is  very  nearly  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle;  and  that 
its  apogee  precedes  the  summer  tropic  by  very  nearly  243^°  of  the  ecliptic’s 
360^ 

And  we  too  find  that  the  time-periods  of  these  quarters  and  these  ratios  are 
very  nearly  the  same  even  now,  so  that  in  this  way  it  is  clear  to  us  that  the  sun’s 
eccentric  circle  always  preserves  the  same  position  with  respect  to  the  tropic  and 
equinoctial  points.  And  not  to  establish  this  position  on  hearsay  only,  but  to 
expound  the  theory  systematically  with  our  own  numbers,  we  shall  prove  these 
things  ourselves,  using  these  same  appearances  as  regards  the  eccentric  circle — 
that  is,  as  we  said,  943^  days  from  the  spring  equinox  to  the  summer  tropic  and 
923/^  days  from  the  summer  tropic  to  the  autumn  equinox.  For  with  the  very 
accurate  observations  made  by  us  in  the  year  463  after  the  death  of  Alexander 
we  find  a  complete  agreement  in  the  number  of  days  between  the  summer  tropic 
and  the  equinoxes.  For  as  we  said  [pp.  81-82],  the  autumn  equinox  fell  on 
Athyr  9  after  sunrise,  the  spring  equinox  on  Pachom  7  after  midday,  which 
makes  an  interval  of  17834  days,  and  the  summer  tropic  on  Mesore  11-12  after 
midnight,  which  makes  the  interval  from  the  spring  equinox  to  the  summer 
tropic  94J4  days,  and  leaves  very  nearly  9234  days  for  the  interval  from  the 
summer  tropic  to  the  following  autumn  equinox. 

Then  let  there  be  the  ecliptic  circle  ABCD  with  centre  and  let  the  two  di¬ 
ameters  AC  and  BD  be  drawn  in  it  perpendicular  to  each  other  through  the 
tropic  and  equinoctial  points.  And  let  A  be  supposed  the  spring  point,  B  the 
summer,  and  the  rest  accordingly. 

Now,  that  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle  will  fall  between  the  straight 
lines  EA  and  EB,  is  clear  on  the  one  hand  from  the  fact  that  the  semicircle 
ABC  embraces  more  time  than  half  a  year  and  therefore  cuts  off  a  section  of  the 
eccentric  greater  than  a  semicircle,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  the  fact  that 
the  quadrant  AB  itself  also  embraces  more  time  and  cuts  off  a  greater  arc  of 


94 


PTOLEMY 


the  eccentric  than  quadrant  J5C. 

This  being  so,  let  the  point  F  be  sup¬ 
posed  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle, 
and  let  the  diameter  EFG  be  drawn 
through  both  centres  and  the  apogee. 
And  with  centre  F  and  any  radius,  let  the 
eccentric  circle  of  the  sun  HKLM  be 
drawn,  and  through  F  the  line  NQO  par¬ 
allel  to  AC  and  the  line  PRS  parallel  to 
BD.  And  again  let  HTU,  the  perpendi¬ 
cular  from  H  to  NQO,  and  KWX,  the 
perpendicular  from  K  to  PRS,  be  drawn. 

Since,  then,  the  sun,  moving  regularly 
on  the  circle  HKLM,  traverses  arc  HK 
in  943^  days  and  arc  KL  in  923^  days, 
and  since  it  covers  regularly  in  943^ 
days  very  nearly  93°9',  and  in  923^  days  91 
Movement],  therefore 


A 


°11'  [Chap.  II,  Table  of  Sun’s  Regular 


arc  /fZL  =  184°20', 


and 


arc  iVi7+arc  LO  =  4"20' 
by  subtraction  of  the  semicircle  NPO.  And 

arc  HNU  =  2  arc  ifA  =  4°20'. 


And  so 
where 

And,  the  half  of  chord  HU, 
Again,  since 


chord  HU  =  m2' 
ecc.  diam.  =  120^ 
HT  =  EQ  =  2m\ 
arc  HNPK  =  9S%' 


and 


arc  HN  =  2^10' 


and 

quadrant  NP  =  90®, 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  PZ  =  0®59' 

and 

arc  KPX  =  2  arc  P/^  =  l®58'. 

And  so 

chord  KWX^2H' 

and,  the  half  of  it, 

KW  =  FQ  =  1^2'. 

But,  it  was  proved 

EQ  =  2m\ 

And  since 

sq.  PQ+sq.  PQ  =  sq.  EF, 


therefore,  in  length, 
where 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 


95 


£'F  =  2p29'30" 


rad.  ecc.  ==60p. 

Therefore  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  very  nearly  twenty-four  times 
the  line  between  its  centre  and  that  of  the  ecliptic. 

Again  since 

FQ  =  1^2' 

where  it  was  proved 

EF  =  2^29'S0'\ 

therefore 

FQ  =  49^46' 

where 

hypt.  EF=  120^, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EFQ^ 

arc  FQ  =  49^ 

And  therefore 

angle  FEQ  =  49°  to  2  rt. 

=  24°30'. 


And  so,  since  the  angle  is  at  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic,  arc  BG  by  which  the 
apogee  G  precedes  the  summer  tropic  point  is  also  24°30'. 

Finally,  since  the  quadrants  OS  and  SN  are  each  90°,  and 
arc  OL  =  arc  HN  =  2°10\ 

and 


therefore 


arc  MaS  =  0°59', 
arc  LM  =  86°51' 


and 


arc  M^^  =  88°49'. 

But  the  sun  moves  regularly  through  86°51'  in  88J^  days,  and  through  88° 
49'  in  very  nearly  90J^  days  [Chap.  2,  Table  of  Sun’s  Regular  Movement]. 
And  so  the  sun  will  appear  to  traverse  arc  CD,  which  is  the  arc  from  the 
autumn  equinox  to  the  winter  tropic  in  883^  days;  and  arc  DA,  which  is  the 
arc  from  the  winter  tropic  to  the  spring  equinox,  in  very  nearly  903^  days. 
And  these  things  have  been  found  by  us  in  accord  with  what  Hipparchus 


says. 


Now  with  these  quantities,  let  us  find  out  first 
how  much  is  the  greatest  difference  between  the 
regular  and  irregular  movements,  and  at  what  point 
this  occurs. 

Then  let  there  be  the  eccentric  circle  ABC  with 
centre  D  and  diameter  ADC  through  the  apogee  A; 
and  on  it  let  there  be  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic  E, 
And  let  EB  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AC,  and  DB 
be  joined.  Since 

1.  betw.  c.  DE  =  2m' 

where 


rad.  RZ)  =  60p 


96 


PTOLEMY 


according  to  the  ratio  of  1  to  24,  therefore 

DE  =  5^ 

where 

hypt.  BD  =  120^, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BDE, 

arc  Z)£J  =  4°46'. 

And  so  angle  DBE  which  contains  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference  will  be 
4°46'  to  2  right  angles^  and  2°23'  to  4  right  angles’  360°.  And 

rt.  angle  BED  —  90° 

and 

angle  BDA  =  angle  BED+smgle  DBE==92°2S\ 

And  since  angle  BDA  is  at  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle  and  angle  BED  of 
the  ecliptic,  we  shall  have  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference  as  2°23'.  And 
as  for  the  arcs  at  which  this  occurs,  that  of  the  eccentric  which  is  regular  is 
92°23'  from  the  apogee,  and  that  of  the  ecliptic  which  is  apparent  and  irregular 
is  a  quadrant  or  90°,  as  we  have  already  proved.  And  it  is  clear  from  what  has 
been  set  out  that  in  the  opposite  section  the  apparent  mean  passage  and  the 
greatest  anomalistic  difference  will  be  at  270°,  and  the  regular  mean  passage 
at  267°37'  on  the  eccentric. 

In  order  to  show  with  numbers  also  that  the  same  quantities  can  be  in¬ 
ferred  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle  when  there 
are  the  same  ratios  in  the  way  we  described,  let 
there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  D  and  diameter 
ADCj  concentric  with  the  ecliptic,  and  the  epicycle 
EFG  with  centre  A,  And  let  the  straight  line  DFB 
be  drawn  from  D  tangent  to  the  epicycle,  and  let 
AF  be  joined.  Then  likevdse 

AD  =  24  AF, 

so  that  again  also 

AF  =  5P 

where 

hypt.  AD  =  120p, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADF, 
arc  AD  =  4°46'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°23' 

Therefore,  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference  (that 

is,  arc  AB)  is  thereupon  found  rightly  to  be  2°23';  and  the  irregular  arc,  since  it 
is  contained  by  the  right  angle  AFD,  to  be  90°  and  the  regular  arc,  contained  by 
angle  EAF,  again  to  be  92°23'. 


5.  On  the  Examination  of  Particular  Sections  of  the  Anomaly 

And  to  be  able  to  distinguish  at  any  time  particular  irregular  movements, 
we  shall  again  show  for  either  hypothesis  how,  given  one  of  these  arcs,  we  can 
get  the  others  also. 

Then  first  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  D,  concentric  with  the 
ecliptic;  and  the  eccentric  circle  with  centre  H;  and  the  diameter  EAHDG 
through  both  centres  and  the  apogee  E.  And  with  arc  EF  cut  off,  let  F D  and  FH 
be  joined.  And  first  let  arc  EF  be  given,  for  instance,  as  30°;  and  on  FH  pro¬ 
duced  let  fall  the  perpendicular  DK  from  D, 


97 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 


And  so 

where 

And  since 

And  therefore 
where 

FZ)  =  ]20P, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FDK, 

arc  = 


Since  then  it  is  assumed 

arc  EF  j 

therefore 

angle  EHF  =  angle  DHK  =  30® 

=  60®  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle 
DHK, 

arc  DA  =  60®, 

and,  the  rest  of  the  semicircle, 

arc  HK  =  120®.  [Eucl.  iii,  31] 

And  therefore 

DA  =  60P 

and 

AA=  103^55' 

where 

hypt.  DJT  =  120p. 

DA=1P15', 

AA  =  2p10', 

AAF  =  62^10' 


DH  =  2m', 

rad.  DA  =  60p. 

sq.  DA+sq.  FAA  =  sq.  FD, 
hypt.  ED  =  62^1 1'. 

DA  =  2P25' 


And  so 

angle  DDA  =  2®18'  to  2  rt. 
=  TQ'. 

Therefore  the  anomalistic  difference  at  that  time  is 
1®9'.  But  angle  EHF  was  30®,  and  therefore  the  re¬ 
maining  angle  ADB  (that  is,  arc  AB  on  the  ecliptic) 
is  28®51'. 

And  with  the  same  construction,  if  HL  is  dropped 
from  H  perpendicular  to  FD,  it  will  be  immediately 
clear  that  also,  if  any  other  angle  is  given,  the  rest 
are  given.  For  if  we  suppose  the  arc  A  A  on  the  eclip¬ 
tic  given  (that  is,  angle  HDL),  then  the  ratio  of  DH 
to  HL  is  given.  And  if  the  ratio  DH  to  HF  is  given, 
the  ratio  of  HF  to  HL  is  also  given;  and  therefore 
we  shall  have  angle  HFL  given  (that  is,  the  anom¬ 
alistic  difference)  and  angle  EHF  (that  is,  arc  EF  of 
the  eccentric  circle). 


98  PTOLEMY 

And  if  we  suppose  the  anomalistic  difference  (that  is,  angle  HFD)  given,  then, 
conversely,  the  same  things  will  occur.  For  the  ratio  of  HF  to  HL  is  given,  and 
given  from  the  first  is  the  ratio  of  HF  to  HD,  And  so  the  ratio  of  DH  to  HL  is 
also  given;  and  therefore  also  angle  HDL  (that  is,  arc  AB  of  the  ecliptic)  and 
angle  EHF  (that  is,  arc  EF  on  the  eccentric  circle)  are  given. 

Again  let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  with  centre  D  and  diameter  ADC,  con¬ 
centric  with  the  ecliptic,  and  the  epicycle  EFGH 
with  centre  A,  in  the  same  ratio.  And  let  arc  EF  be 
cut  off,  and  FBD  and  FA  joined.  Again  let  arc  EF 
be  supposed  30°,  and  let  the  line  KF  be  drawn  from 
F  perpendicular  to  AE. 

Since 

arc  £"^  =  30°, 
angle  J?AF  =  30° 

=  60°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AFK, 
arc  FK  =  60°, 

and,  the  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  AA  =  120°. 

And  therefore 

chord  FK  =  60^, 
chord  AA  =103^55' 

where 

diam.  AF=120p. 

And  so 

FK=ind\ 

AK  =  2nO\ 

KAD==Q2m' 

hypt.  AF  =  2p30', 
rad.  AZ)  =  60p. 

sq.  FA+sq.  K AD  =  sq.  FBD, 

FD  =  ^2ni' 

FK=in5\ 

FK  =  2^2b' 


where 

And  since 

therefore,  in  length, 
where 

And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  i)F=120P, 
and,  on  the  circle  about  the  right  triangle  DFK, 

arc  FA  =  2°18'. 

And  so  also 

angle  FDK  =  2°18'  to  2  rt. 

=  1°9'. 

And  therefore,  again,  the  anomalistic  difference,  which  is  arc  AB,  is  also  1°9', 
But  angle  EAF  was  30°.  Therefore  the  remaining  angle  AFD  (that  is,  the  ap- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III  99 

parent  arc  of  the  ecliptic)  is  28°51',  which  agrees  with  the  magnitudes  proved  on 
the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity. 

Likewise  in  this  case  too,  even  if  any  other  angle  is  given,  the  others  will  also 

be  given  if,  A\dth  the  same  construction,  AL  is  drawn 
from  A  perpendicular  to  FD.  For  if,  conversely,  we 
give  the  apparent  arc  of  the  ecliptic  (that  is,  angle 
AFD)  then  the  ratio  of  AF  to  AL  is  also  given.  And 
since  the  ratio  of  AF  to  AD  was  given  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  the  ratio  of  AD  to  AL  is  also  given.  And 
therefore  angle  ADB  (that  is,  arc  AB  which  is  the 
anomalistic  difference)  is  given;  and  also  angle  EAF 
(that  is,  arc  EF)  of  the  epicycle. 

And  if  we  suppose  the  anomalistic  difference  given 
(that  is,  angle  ADB)  then,  conversely,  the  ratio  of 
AD  to  AL  vdll  likewise  be  given.  But  since  the  ratio 
of  AD  to  A F  was  given  from  the  beginning,  the  ratio 
of  AF  to  AL  is  also  given,  and  therefore  angle  AFD 
is  given  (that  is,  the  apparent  arc  of  the  ecliptic) 
and  angle  EAF  (that  is,  arc  EF  of  the  epicycle). 
Again,  with  the  previous  construction  of  the  eccentric  circle,  let  the  arc  FG 
be  cut  off  from  the  perigee  G  on  the  eccentric  circle 
and  be  assumed  to  be  30®.  And  let  DFB  and  FH  be 
joined,  and  let  DK  be  dropped  from  D  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  HF, 

Since 

arc  F(?  =  30®, 
angle  FDD  =  30® 

=  60®  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DHK, 
arc  DK  =  60® 

and,  the  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arcXD=120®. 

And  therefore 


chord  DK  =  60^, 
chord  F:D  =  103^55' 


where 


And  therefore 


where 


And  since 


diam.  DH=  120^. 

Di^=lM5', 

HK  =  2m\ 

i^ir  =  57P50', 

hypt.  DD  =  2P30', 
rad.  HF  =  m^, 

sq.  D/v+sq.  iiF  =  sq.  DF, 


therefore,  in  length. 


DFN57P51' 


100 

where 


PTOLEMY 


And  therefore 

/)7i=2p34'36" 

where 

hypt.  DF=120p, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFKy 

arc  DK  =  2^27'. 

And  so 

angle  DFK  —  2'^21'  to  2  rt. 

Therefore  the  anomalistic  difference  is  1°14'.  And  since  angle  FHG  is  assumed 
to  be  30°,  the  whole  angle  BDC  (that  is,  arc  BC  of  the  ecliptic)  will  be  31°14'. 

And  in  the  same  way  now,  with  BD  produced  and  HL  drawn  perpendicular 
to  it,  if  we  give  arc  BC  of  the  ecliptic  (that  is,  angle 
HDL)y  then  the  ratio  of  DH  to  HL  is  also  given ;  and 
since  the  ratio  of  HD  to  HF  was  given  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  the  ratio  of  FH  to  HL  is  also  given.  And 
therefore  we  have  angle  HFD  given,  that  is,  the 
anomalistic  difference;  and  angle  FHD  (that  is,  arc 
GF)  on  the  eccentric  circle. 

And  if  we  give  the  anomalistic  difference  (that  is, 
angle  HFD)  then  conversely  the  ratio  of  FH  to  HL 
is  also  given;  and  since  the  ratio  of  FH  to  DH  has 
been  given  from  the  beginning,  the  ratio  of  DH  to 
HL  is  also  given.  And  therefore  we  have  angle  HDL 
given  (that  is,  arc  BC  of  the  ecliptic)  and  angle  FHG 
(that  is,  arc  FG  of  the  eccentric  circle). 

In  the  same  way,  with  the  previous  construction 
of  the  concentric  circle  and  epicycle,  let  arc  HG  be 

cut  off  from  the  perigee  H  at  30°.  And  let  AG  and  DGB  be  joined,  and  GK  drawn 
from  G  perpendicular  to  AD. 

Then  since  again 

arc  GH  =  30^ y 
angle  HAG  =  30^ 

=  60°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  GKAy 
arc  GK  =  60° 

and,  the  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  AK=  120°. 

And  therefore 


where 


And  therefore 


chord  GK  =  60^, 
chord  A  K  =  103^55' 

hypt.  AG=  120p. 

GK=m5\ 
AK-=2nO'y 
A:D  =  57^50' 


vvhere 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 


101 


And  since 

therefore,  in  length, 
where 

And  therefore 


AG  =  2^30', 
rad.  A7J  =  G0p, 

sq.  GK+sq.  KD  =  sq.  DG, 

£)G  =  57^51' 

GA=in5'. 

GA:  =  2p34'36" 


where 

Z)G  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DGK^ 

arc  G/r  =  2°27'. 


And  so  also 


angle  GDK  -  2°27'  to  2  rt. 

=  ri4'. 

Therefore  the  anomalistic  difference  (that  is,  arc  AB)  is  here  also  very  nearly 
1®14'.  And  since  angle  KAG  is  assumed  to  be  30®,  the  whole  angle  BGA  which 
contains  the  apparent  arc  of  the  ecliptic  will  be  31®  14',  agreeing  with  the  mag¬ 
nitudes  found  for  the  eccentric  circle. 

And  likewise  here  also,  with  AL  drawn  perpendicular  to  DBj  if  we  give  the 

arc  of  the  ecliptic  (that  is,  angle  AGL),  then  the 
ratio  of  AG  to  A L  is  given;  and  since  the  ratio  of 
AG  to  AD  has  been  given  from  the  beginning,  the 
ratio  of  AD  to  A L  is  also  given.  And  therefore  we 
have  angle  ADB  given  (that  is,  arc  AB  which  is  the 
anomalistic  difference)  and  angle  HAG  (that  is,  arc 
HG  of  the  epicycle). 

And,  again,  if  we  give  arc  AB  of  the  anomalistic 
difference  (that  is,  angle  ADB)  then,  conversely,  the 
ratio  of  A Z)  to  A L  is  likewise  given;  and  since  the 
ratio  of  AD  to  AG  has  been  given  from  the  begin¬ 
ning,  the  ratio  of  AG  to  A L  is  also  given.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  shall  have  angle  AGL  given  (that  is,  the  arc 
of  the  ecliptic)  and  angle  HAG  (that  is,  arc  HG  of 
the  epicycle).  And  we  have  shown  what  was  pro¬ 
posed. 

Now,  although,  by  means  of  these  theorems,  various  tables  of  the  sections 
containing  the  anomalistic  distinctions  of  the  apparent  courses  can  be  con¬ 
structed,  yet  that  one  containing  the  anomalistic  differences  arranged  side  by 
side  with  the  regular  arcs  will  better  serve  us  for  getting  easily  the  magnitudes 
of  the  particular  corrections,  both  because  of  its  conformity  with  the  hypotheses 
themselves  and  because  of  the  simplicity  and  facility  in  the  calculation  for  each 
section.  Therefore  we  followed  the  first  of  the  theorems  set  out  with  numbers  for 
the  particular  sections,  and  calculated  geometrically  just  as  before  the  anomal¬ 
istic  differences  corresponding  to  each  of  the  regular  arcs.  And  in  general,  both 
in  the  case  of  the  sun  and  of  the  other  planets,  we  divide  the  quadrants  at  the 


102 


PTOLEMY 


apogees  into  15  sections,  so  that  the  comparison  is  at  intervals  of  6°;  and  the 
quadrants  at  the  perigees  into  30  sections  so  that  the  comparison  in  this  case  is 
at  intervals  of  3°.  This  is  done  because  the  differences  in  excess  at  the  perigees 
are  greater  than  those  corresponding  to  equal  sections  at  the  apogee. 

And  so  we  shall  arrange  the  table  of  the  sun^s  anomaly  into  forty-five  rows 
and  three  columns.  And  of  these  columns  the  first  two  contain  the  numbers  of 
the  360°  of  regular  movement,  while  the  first  fifteen  rows  embrace  the  two  quad¬ 
rants  at  the  apogee,  and  the  other  thirty  those  at  the  perigee.  And  the  third  col¬ 
umn  contains  the  degrees  of  anomalistic  difference  to  be  added  or  subtracted, 
corresponding  to  each  of  the  regular  numbers.  And  here  is  the  table: 


6.  Table  of  the  Sun^s  Anomaly 


1.  2, 
Common  numbers 
{Degrees  of  Regular 
M  ovement) 

5. 

Additive — sub¬ 
tractive  differences 

1,  2, 
Common  numbers 
{Degrees  of  Regular 
Movement) 

5* 

Additive — sub¬ 
tractive  differences 

6° 

354° 

0° 

14' 

120° 

240° 

2° 

6' 

12° 

348° 

0° 

28' 

123° 

237° 

2° 

2' 

18° 

342° 

0° 

42' 

126° 

234° 

1° 

58' 

24“ 

336“ 

0° 

56' 

129° 

231° 

1° 

54' 

30° 

330° 

1° 

9' 

132° 

228° 

1° 

49' 

36° 

324° 

1° 

2T 

135° 

225° 

1° 

44' 

42° 

318° 

1° 

32' 

138° 

222° 

1° 

39' 

48° 

312° 

1° 

43' 

141° 

219° 

1° 

33' 

64° 

306° 

1° 

53' 

144° 

216° 

1° 

27' 

60° 

300° 

2° 

1' 

147° 

213° 

1° 

21' 

66° 

294° 

2° 

8' 

150° 

210° 

1° 

14' 

72° 

288° 

2° 

14' 

153° 

207° 

1° 

7' 

00 

o 

282° 

2° 

18' 

156° 

204° 

1° 

0' 

84° 

276° 

2° 

21' 

159° 

201° 

0° 

53' 

90° 

270° 

2° 

23' 

162° 

198° 

0° 

46' 

,  93° 

267° 

2° 

23' 

165° 

195° 

0° 

39' 

96° 

264° 

2° 

23' 

168° 

192° 

0° 

32' 

99° 

261° 

2° 

22' 

171° 

189° 

0° 

24' 

102° 

258° 

2° 

21' 

174° 

186° 

0° 

16' 

105° 

255° 

2° 

20' 

177° 

183° 

0° 

8' 

108° 

252° 

2° 

18' 

180° 

180° 

0° 

0' 

111° 

249° 

2° 

16' 

114° 

246° 

2° 

13' 

117° 

243° 

2° 

10' 

/ 


i. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 


103 


7.  On  the  Epoch  of  the  Sun’s  Mean  Course 

Since  there  remains  to  be  established  the  epoch  of  the  sun’s  regular  movement 
for  finding  out  its  particular  course  at  any  time,  we  shall  make  the  following  ex¬ 
position,  using  again  in  general,  both  in  the  case  of  the  sun  and  of  the  other 
planets,  the  passages  most  accurately  observed  by  ourselves,  and  taking  the 
establishing  of  the  epochs  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Nabonassar  by 
means  of  the  mean  movements  already  demonstrated.  For  we  have  ancient  ol> 
servations  completely  preserved  from  that  period  to  the  present. 

Then  let  there  be  the  circle  with  centre  D  concentric  with  the  ecliptic ;  and  the 


eccentric  circle  of  the  sun  EFG  with  centre  H;  and 
the  diameter  EAGC  through  both  centres  and  the 
apogee  E.  And  let  B  be  supposed  the  fall  equinox 
point  on  the  ecliptic;  and  let  BED  and  FH  be 
joined;  and  let  HK  be  dropped  from  H  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  FD. 


E 


Since  the  point  By  the  autumn  equinox,  is  at  the 
beginning  of  the  sign  of  the  Balance,  and  the  perigee 
C  53^°  mthin  the  sign  of  the  Archer,  therefore 


arc  5C  =  65°30'. 


And  therefore 


angle  jBDC  =  angle  /fDX  =  65°30' 


=  131°  to2rt. 


And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DHK, 


c 


where 


diam.  DH  =  120^. 


Therefore 


i7A  =  4p33' 


where 


DH=5^y 

hypt.  FH  =  120^. 


And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FHK, 


arc  //i^  =  4°20'. 


And  so 


angle  /fFA  =  4°20'  to  2  rt. 
=  2°10'. 


But  it  was  proved 

angle  5D(7  =  65°30', 


and  therefore  the  remaining  angle  FHG  (that  is,  arc  FG  on  the  eccentric  circle) 
is  63°20'.  Therefore,  when  the  sun  is  at  the  autumn  equinox,  it  precedes  the 
perigee  (that  is,  the  point  5)^°  within  the  Archer)  by  63°20'  mean  movement; 
and  it  is  116°40'  in  mean  movement  from  the  apogee  (that  is,  within  the 
T\vins)  in  the  direction  contrary  to  the  movement  of  the  heavens. 

Now  that  this  is  understood — since,  of  the  first  equinoxes  observed  by  us,  one 
of  the  most  accurate  occured  as  the  autumn  equinox  in  the  year  17  of  Hadrian, 
Egyptianwise  Athyr  7,  very  nearly  2  hours  after  midday — it  is  clear  that  at  that 


104 


PTOLEMY 


time  the  sun  was  116°40'  in  mean  movement  on  the  eccentric  circle,  away  from 
the  apogee  in  the  direction  contrary  to  the  movement  of  the  heavens.  But  from 
the  reign  of  Nabonassar  to  the  death  of  Alexander  amounts  to  424  Egyptian 
years;  and  from  the  death  of  Alexander  to  the  reign  of  Augustus,  294  years;  and 
from  the  year  1  of  Augustus,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  1,  midday  (for  we  establish 
the  epochs  from  midday)  to  the  year  17  of  Hadrian,  Athyr  7,  2  hours  after  mid¬ 
day,  amounts  to  161  years,  66  days,  and  2  equatorial  hours.  And  therefore  from 
the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  1,  midday,  to  the  time  of  the 
autumn  equinox  just  mentioned  amounts  to  879  Egyptian  years,  66  days,  and 
2  equatorial  hours. 

But  in  that  amount  of  time  the  sun  makes  a  mean  movement  of  very  nearly 
211°25'  over  and  above  the  complete  circles.  If  then  we  add  to  the  116°40', 
representing  the  distance  of  this  autumn  equinox  from  the  eccentric  circlets  apo¬ 
gee,  the  360°  of  a  whole  circle  and  subtract  from  the  sum  the  311°25'  left  over 
from  the  time  between,  then  we  shall  have  the  sun  at  its  epoch  of  mean  move¬ 
ment  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  1  at  midday,  265°  15'  of 
mean  movement  distant  from  the  apogee  in  the  direction  contrary  to  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  heavens,  and  0°45'  within  the  Fishes. 

8.  On  Calculating  the  Sun 

Whenever  we  wish  to  know  the  course  of  the  sun  for  any  desired  time,  taking 
the  total  time  from  the  epoch  to  the  proposed  date  with  reference  to  the  hour 
in  Alexandria  and  taking  it  to  the  tables  of  mean  movement,  we  add  the  degrees 
corresponding  to  the  particular  numbers  to  the  265°15'  of  the  distance  found 
above ;  and  striking  the  complete  circles  out  of  the  result,  we  subtract  the  rest 
from  the  5°30'  within  the  Twins  backwards  in  the  order  of  the  signs  [from  west 
to  east].  And  wherever  the  number  falls,  there  we  find  the  mean  course  of  the 
sun.  Next  we  take  the  same  number  (that  is,  the  number  of  degrees  from  the 
apogee  to  the  mean  course)  to  the  Table  of  Anomaly.  And,  if  the  number  falls 
in  the  first  column  (that  is,  if  it  is  not  greater  than  180°),  then  we  subtract  the 
corresponding  degrees  in  the  third  column  from  the  position  of  the  mean  course; 
but,  if  it  falls  in  the  second  column  (that  is,  if  it  is  greater  than  180°),  then  we 
add  it  to  the  mean  course.  And  thus  we  find  the  true  and  apparent  sun. 

9.  On  the  Inequality  of  Solar  Days 

Now  this  is  pretty  nearly  all  of  the  theory  of  the  sun  considered  by  itself.  But 
it  would  be  well  to  add  briefly  to  this  something  concerning  the  inequality  of 
the  solar  days,  a  matter  which  ought  to  be  cleared  up  before  what  follows.  For 
each  of  the  simple  mean  movements  we  have  given  receives  a  uniform  increase, 
as  if  the  solar  days  were  equal  in  time;  but  this  is  contrary  to  true  theory.  Now, 
given  that  the  revolution  of  the  universe  is  effected  regularly  about  the  poles  of 
the  equator,  if  the  cyclical  return  is  taken  either  with  respect  to  the  horizon  or 
the  meridian  (whichever  point  is  the  more  easily  distinguishable),  it  is  clear  that 
one  complete  turn  of  the  cosmos  is  the  return  of  the  same  equatorial  point  from 
some  section  either  of  the  horizon  or  the  meridian  back  to  that  same  section, 
and  the  solar  day  considered  simply  is  the  return  of  the  sun  from  some  section 
either  of  the  horizon  or  of  the  meridian  back  again  to  the  same  section.  The 
regular  [or  mean]  solar  day  is,  therefore,  that  embracing  a  course  of  360°  equa¬ 
torial  time  proper  to  one  revolution  of  the  equator  plus  very  nearly  59'  equa- 


105 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III 

torial  time  for  the  sun's  contrary  mean  movement  along  the  ecliptic.  And  the 
irregular  solar  day  is  that  embracing  a  course  of  360°  equatorial  time  proper  to 
one  revolution  of  the  equator  plus  the  extra  arc,  either  at  the  horizon  or  at  the 
meridian,  corresponding  to  the  sun's  contrary  irregular  movement. 

And  so  this  section  of  the  equator  which  is  traversed  over  and  above  the  360° 
equatorial  time  must  be  an  unequal  one  because  of  the  sun's  apparent  irregu¬ 
larity,  and  because  equal  sections  of  the  ecliptic  do  not  traverse  the  horizon  or 
the  meridian  in  equal  periods  of  time.  Each  of  these  extra  sections  makes  the 
difference  between  the  regular  and  irregular  return,  in  the  case  of  one  solar  day, 
a  difference  indistinguishable  by  the  senses;  but  a  total  of  many  solar  days 
makes  a  very  sensible  difference. 

Now,  the  sun's  greatest  anomalistic  difference  occurs  at  intervals  of  one  mean 
movement  of  the  sun  to  the  other.  For  in  this  way  the  total  of  solar  days  will 
differ  from  the  total  of  regular  [or  mean]  solar  days  by  very  nearly  4^°  equa¬ 
torial  time;  and  the  total  in  one  interval  will  differ  from  the  total  in  the  other 
by  twice  as  much,  that  is  by  9J^°  equatorial  time.  And  this  is  so  because  the 
apparent  course  of  the  sun  is  less,  in  the  semicircle  of  the  apogee,  than  the  regu¬ 
lar  course  by  4^°,  but  greater,  in  the  semicircle  of  the  perigee,  by  the  same 
amount.^ 

And  the  greatest  difference  of  irregularity  in  the  corresponding  risings  or  set¬ 
tings  occurs  in  the  semicircles  bounded  by  the  tropic  points.  For  then  the  ascen¬ 
sions  in  each  of  these  semicircles  will  differ  from  the  180°  equatorial  time  of 
those  considered  regularly  by  the  difference  between  the  shortest  or  longest  day 
and  the  equinoctial  day;  and  they  will  differ  from  each  other  by  the  difference 
between  the  longest  day  or  night  and  the  shortest  day  or  night.  But  the  greatest 
difference  of  inequality  in  the  case  of  simultaneous  culminations  occurs  in  the 
intervals  containing  two  signs,  one  sign  on  each  side  of  the  tropic  or  equinoctial 
point.  For  those  at  the  tropics  taken  together  will  differ  from  the  regular  by  very 
nearly  43^°  equatorial  time,  but  from  those  at  the  equinoctial  points  taken  to¬ 
gether  by  9°  equatorial  time.  For  the  latter  are  less  than  the  mean  movement, 
and  the  former  are  greater  by  nearly  an  equal  amount.^  And  thence  we  estab¬ 
lish  the  beginnings  of  the  solar  days  at  the  positions  of  the  sun  as  it  passes  the 
meridian,  and  not  from  the  sun's  risings  or  settings;  because  the  difference  con¬ 
sidered  with  respect  to  horizons  can  amount  to  many  hours  and  is  not  the  same 
ever3rwhere,  but  changes  with  the  excess  of  the  longest  over  the  shortest  day  in 
each  latitude  of  the  sphere.  But  the  difference  at  the  meridian  is  the  same  every¬ 
where  and  does  not  exceed  the  total  time  of  the  sun's  anomalistic  difference. 

And  the  difference  in  the  intervals  to  be  added  or  subtracted  is  constructed 
out  of  the  combination  of  both  of  the  aforesaid  differences:  that  of  the  sun's 

^For  the  greatest  anomalistic  differences,  it  has  already  been  proved,  occur  at  the  apparent 
distance  of  a  quadrant  from  the  apogee,  which  are  also  the  points  of  mean  movement.  Now, 
it  has  been  shown  that  the  difference  between  the  angles  of  the  regular  and  irregular  move¬ 
ments  from  the  mean  to  the  apogee  is  2°23'  and  from  the  apogee  to  the  other  mean  again 
2°23',  the  regular  exceeding  in  both  cases.  The  same  thing  occurs  from  the  mean  through  the 
perigee  to  the  other  mean,  the  irregular  exceeding  in  both  cases. 

*This  difference  is  demonstrated  in  the  Table  of  Ascensions  for  the  Right  Sphere,  Book  II. 
The  difference  in  the  co-ascensions  of  the  ecUptic  and  equator  is  additive  for  the  ecliptic  in 
the  Twins  and  the  Crab,  and  the  Archer  and  the  Goat.  It  is  subtractive  for  the  ecliptic  in  the 
Fishes  and  the  Ram,  and  the  Virgin  and  the  Balance.  The  other  signs  are  all  mixed.  The 
equator  here,  of  course,  represents  the  regular  movement  of  the  sun  for  the  mean  solar  days; 
and  the  ecliptic  represents  the  irregular  movement  of  the  sun  for  the  irregular  true  solar  days. 


106 


PTOLEMY 


anomaly  and  that  of  the  culminations.  And  the  interval  from  the  middle  of  the 
Water  Bearer  to  the  Balance  is  subtractive  for  either  difference;  and  the  interval 
from  the  Scorpion  to  the  middle  of  the  Water  Bearer  is  additive.  For  each  of 
these  sections  either  adds  or  subtracts  with  respect  to  the  solar  anomaly  at  most 
very  nearly  equatorial  time,  and  with  respect  to  the  culminations  very 
nearly  equatorial  time.  And  so,  at  most,  the  difference  in  the  solar  day, 
gotten  from  the  combination  of  the  two,  amounts,  for  either  interval,  to  83^° 
equatorial  time  over  and  above  the  regular  difference — that  is,  M+Ks  [equa¬ 
torial]  hour.  And  with  respect  to  each  other  it  amounts  to  16%°  equatorial  time 
— that  is,  1%  [equatorial]  hours.  Now,  if  this  difference  is  neglected  in  the  case 
of  the  sun,  it  perhaps  would  not  hurt  the  study  of  its  appearances  to  any  appre¬ 
ciable  extent;  but  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  because  of  the  rapidity  of  its  move¬ 
ment,  it  would  produce  a  considerable  difference  even  for  3%°. 

In  order  to  reduce  the  solar  days  given  over  any  interval  of  time  (and  by  solar 
days  I  mean  from  midday  or  midnight  to  midday  or  midnight)  to  regular  solar 
days,  we  find  out  for  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  given  interval  at  what  part  of 
the  ecliptic  the  sun  is  to  be  found  both  in  its  regular  and  irregular  movements. 
Then,  taking  the  surplus  over  and  above  complete  revolutions  accumulated  in 
the  irregular  interval  (that  is,  from  apparent  position  to  apparent  position)  to 
the  Table  of  Ascensions  in  the  Right  Sphere,  we  find  out  with  how  many  de¬ 
grees  equatorial  time  the  degrees  of  the  irregular  interval,  as  we  said,  culminate. 
Then  we  take  the  difference  between  the  amount  of  time  thus  found  and  the 
degrees  of  the  regular  interval  and  calculate  the  part  of  the  corresponding  equa¬ 
torial  hour.  And  if  the  amount  of  time  found  in  the  Table  of  Ascensions  in  the 
Right  Sphere  is  greater  than  that  of  the  regular  interval,  we  add  this  difference 
to  the  given  number  of  solar  days;  if  less,  we  subtract.  And  finally,  in  this  way, 
we  have  the  time  expressed  in  mean  solar  days.  We  shall  use  this  correction 
especially  in  the  successive  additions  of  the  mean  movements  in  the  moon’s  ta¬ 
bles.  And  it  is  immediately  seen  that,  given  the  regular  [or  mean]  solar  days,  the 
simply  considered  seasonal  solar  days  are  gotten  by  an  addition  or  subtraction 
in  the  converse  order.^ 

Tf  the  sun  moved  regularly  along  the  equator  instead  of  moving  irregularly  along  the 
ecliptic,  the  solar  days  would  all  be  regular.  Their  irregularity,  then,  is  due  to  two  things:  (1) 
the  irregularity  of  the  sun’s  movement,  and  (2)  the  fact  that  the  sun  moves  on  a  circle  oblique 
to  the  equator. 

Now,  as  far  as  the  solar  days  are  concerned,  it  is  not  the  arc  of  the  ecUptic  that  is  directly 
involved,  but  the  corresponding  or  co-ascending  arc  of  the  equator.  For  the  culminations 
which  define  solar  days  take  place  at  the  meridian,  and  the  meridian  is  through  the  pole  of  the 
equator.  Therefore  we  first  find  the  arc  on  the  equator  co-ascending  with  the  apparent  arc 
traversed  by  the  sun  along  the  ecliptic. 

Now  if  the  arc  of  the  sun’s  regular  movement  is  less  than  the  equatorial  arc  co-ascending 
with  the  apparent  arc,  then  the  number  of  actual  solar  days  is  less  than  the  number  of  regular 
ones.  But  if  the  arc  of  the  sun’s  regular  movement  is  greater,  then  the  number  of  actual  solar 
days  is  greater  than  the  number  of  regular  ones.  For  when  the  sun  moves  faster  than  the 
regular,  then  the  actual  solar  day  is  longer  than  the  mean  solar  day  and  there  are  fewer  of 
them  in  a  given  time;  but,  when  it  moves  slower,  then  the  actual  solar  day  is  shorter. 

And  in  each  case  the  difference  between  the  number  of  actual  solar  days  and  the  number 
of  corresponding  regular  solar  days  is  expressed  by  the  difference  between  the  equatorial  arc  cor¬ 
responding  to  the  apparent  arc  on  the  ecliptic  and  the  arc  of  regular  movement.  For  (1)  if  the 
regular  arc  is  less  than  the  equator’s  arc,  then  the  apparent  arc  is  reaching  the  meridian  that 
many  time-degrees  later;  and  so  just  so  many  time-degrees  have  been  lost  to  the  number  of 
regular  solar  days.  For  the  same  number  of  regular  solar  days  as  actual  solar  days  would  only 
take  the  sun  the  length  of  the  arc  of  regular  movement,  if  we  consider  it  as  moving  on  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  III  107 

Now,  according  to  the  epoch  we  have  chosen  (that  is,  the  year  1  of  Nabonas- 
sar,  Egyptian  vise  Thoth  1  at  midday),  the  siin^s  mean  position,  as  we  have  just 
shovm  [p.  104],  was  0®45'  within  the  Fishes.  But,  considered  with  its  anomaly, 
its  position  was  very  nearly  3®8'  within  the  Fishes. 


equator.  It  would  perhaps  be  clearer  if  we  imagined  that  the  regular  arc  were  less  by  a  revolu¬ 
tion  than  the  equator’s  arc  representing  the  apparent  arc  on  the  ecliptic.  Then  the  number  of 
actual  solar  days  would  be  one  day  less  than  the  number  of  regular  solar  days.  For  the  sun 
would  have  moved  back  one  whole  circle,  and  thus  would  have  come  to  the  meridian  one  time 
less  over  the  period  assigned  than  if  it  had  moved  back  according  to  the  regular  movement. 
And  by  the  same  argument  (2)  if  the  regular  arc  is  greater,  just  so  many  time-degrees  have 
been  added  to  the  number  of  regular  solar  days.  Therefore,  in  the  first  case,  we  add  the  differ¬ 
ence  to  the  number  of  actual  solar  days  to  get  the  number  of  regular  solar  days;  and,  in  the 
second  case,  we  subtract. 


BOOK  FOUR 


1.  From  What  Kind  of  Observations  an  Inquiry  into 
THE  Moon  Must  be  Conducted 

Having  now  organized  in  the  preceding  book  all  the  incidents  one  could  ob¬ 
serve  with  respect  to  the  sun^s  movement,  we  begin  next  in  order  with  the  trea¬ 
tise  on  the  moon.  First  we  think  it  is  not  proper  to  proceed  simply  and  hap¬ 
hazardly  in  the  use  of  observations  for  this  purpose;  but  for  the  general  under¬ 
standing  of  the  moon  it  is  best  to  attend  especially  to  those  demonstrations 
which  not  only  cover  a  longer  period  of  time  but  also  are  gotten  from  the  obser¬ 
vations  of  lunar  eclipses.  For  it  is  only  by  means  of  these  that  the  positions  of 
the  moon  can  be  found  in  an  accurate  way,  since  the  other  kinds  of  observations 
which  depend  either  on  its  courses  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  or  on  instru¬ 
ments,  or  on  the  solar  eclipses,  can,  because  of  the  moon's  parallaxes,  be  very 
deceptive.  But  with  respect  to  the  particular  incidents  the  inquiry  can  be  carried 
on  from  the  other  observations  also. 

For  since  the  distance  from  the  earth's  centre  to  the  lunar  sphere  is  not  as 
that  to  the  ecliptic  circle  which  is  so  great  that  the  magnitude  of  the  earth  is 
in  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  it,  therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  moon's 
centre  to  sections  of  the  ecliptic,  according  to  which  the  true  courses  of  all  the 
stars  are  conceived,  necessarily  does  not  everywhere  sensibly  coincide  with  the 
straight  line  according  to  which  its  apparent  course  is  observed — that  is,  the 
straight  line  drawn  from  some  part  of  the  earth's  surface  or  rather  from  the  ob¬ 
server's  eye  to  the  moon's  centre.  But  when  the  moon  is  directly  above  the  ob¬ 
server,  then  only  are  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  earth's  centre  and  the  ob¬ 
server's  eye  to  the  moon's  centre  and  the  ecliptic  one  and  the  same  straight  line. 
And  when  it  is  in  any  way  v/hatsoever  removed  from  the  zenith,  a  difference  of 
inclination  in  these  straight  lines  follows;  and  therefore  the  apparent  course  dif¬ 
fers  from  the  true  one  for  different  positions  of  the  eye  as  it  moves  downward. 
For  the  positions  of  the  moon  seen  from  the  earth's  centre  are  determined  pro¬ 
portionately  to  the  magnitudes  of  the  angles  resulting  from  the  inclination. 

Therefore,  when  solar  eclipses  take  place  through  the  intervention  and  inter¬ 
position  of  the  moon,  and  when  their  occurrence  shapes  its  passing  shadow  into 
a  cone  from  our  eye  to  the  sun,  the  result  is  that  these  things  are  not  fulfilled 
everywhere  in  the  same  way  either  in  magnitudes  or  times,  nor  to  all  alike  for 
the  causes  we  have  assigned;  nor  does  the  moon  appear  to  shadow  the  same 
parts  of  the  sun.  But  in  the  case  of  lunar  eclipses  no  such  difference  follows  from 
the  parallaxes,  since  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  does  not  involve  the  eye  of  the  ob¬ 
server  as  an  incidental  cause.  For  the  moon  always  receives  its  light  from  the 
sun;  and,  when  the  moon  is  opposite  it,  the  whole  of  it  appears  to  us  lighted  up, 
because  the  whole  of  the  bright  hemisphere  is  also  at  that  time  turned  towards 
us.  But  when  it  is  opposite  the  sun  in  such  a  way  that  it  falls  into  the  cone  of  the 
earth's  shadow  which  is  always  revolving  opposite  the  sun,  then  the  moon  be- 

108 


109 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

comes  darkened  proportionately  to  the  extent  it  enters  the  cone,  since  the  earth 
screens  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Therefore  it  appears  to  be  eclipsed  similarly  for  all 
parts  of  the  earth  both  as  to  magnitudes  and  as  to  the  times  of  the  intervals. 

Therefore,  insofar  as  we  are  concerned  with  a  general  examination  of  the  true 
positions  of  the  moon  but  not  of  apparent  ones^  (the  true  ones  to  be  ascertained 
because  the  ordered  and  similar  thing  should  be  necessarily  preferred  to  dis¬ 
ordered  and  dissimilar  things),  we  say  we  must  not  use  the  other  observations 
where  the  positions  depend  on  the  eye  of  the  observers,  but  only  the  observa¬ 
tions  of  the  moon^s  eclipses,  since  there  the  eye  is  in  no  way  involved  in  getting 
the  positions.  For  whatever  section  of  the  ecliptic  the  sun  is  found  to  occupy  at 
the  midtime  of  the  eclipse  when  the  moon^s  centre  is  directly  opposite  in  true 
longitude  to  the  sun^s  centre,  the  section  opposite  that  section  the  moon^s  centre 
will  also  truly  occupy  at  the  same  midtime  of  the  eclipse. 

2.  On  the  Moon’s  Periods  of  Time 

Let  this  be  our  brief  exposition  as  to  what  observations  are  to  be  used  for  gen¬ 
eral  considerations  of  the  moon.  We  shall  try  and  give  an  account  of  how  the 
ancients  proceeded  in  their  demonstrations,  and  how  we  can  make  a  more  useful 
differentiation  of  the  hypotheses  which  conform  to  the  appearances. 

Now,  since  the  moon  appears  to  move  irregularly  both  in  longitude  and  lati- 
tude,2  and  not  to  cross  the  ecliptic  nor  to  have  a  cyclical  return  in  its  latitudinal 
course  at  equal  intervals  of  time ;  and  since,  without  the  discovery  of  the  interval 
in  which  this  irregularity  is  redeemed,  necessarily  the  periods  of  the  others  could 
not  be  gotten;  and  since,  from  particular  observations,  the  moon  appears  to 
have  its  mean,  greatest,  and  least  movements  in  all  parts  of  the  zodiac,  and  to 
be  at  its  northernmost  point,  southernmost  point,  and  on  the  ecliptic  itself  at 
all  parts  of  the  zodiac,  very  reasonably  therefore  the  ancient  mathematicians 
sought  a  certain  time  in  which  the  moon  would  always  move  the  same  distance 
in  longitude,  for  this  alone  could  redeem  the  irregularity.  Comparing,  then,  for 
the  causes  we  have  assigned,  the  observations  of  the  lunar  eclipses,  they  tried 
to  find  what  multitude  of  lunar  months  would  always  be  isochronous  with  other 
equal  multitudes  and  would  embrace  an  equal  number  of  circles  in  longitude, 
either  whole  or  in  parts.  Now'  the  even  more  ancient  ones  in  a  more  or  less  rough 

'In  the  case  of  the  sun,  there  were  the  mean  positions  and  the  true  (dxptjS^s)  positions. 
And  the  true  positions  were  taken  as  coinciding  with  the  apparent  ones.  For  the  true  positions 
are  the  projections  of  the  sun  on  the  ecliptic  by  a  straight  line  through  the  earth’s  centre  and 
the  sun’s  centre;  the  apparent  ones  are  the  projections  on  the  ecliptic  by  a  straight  line  through 
the  observer’s  eye  and  the  sun’s  centre.  In  the  case  of  the  moon,  they  are  all  three  distinct  by 
reason  of  the  parallaxes. 

*The  moon’s  latitudinal  movement  is  its  movement  along  a  great  circle  inclined  to  the 
ecliptic.  It  is  not,  as  might  be  thought,  its  movement  along  an  arc  at  right  angles  to  the 
ecliptic.  This  inchned  circle  is  the  moon’s  oblique  circle  which  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the 
ecliptic  itself,  the  sun’s  oblique  circle.  The  moon’s  longitudinal  movement  is  its  movement 
considered  with  reference  to  the  ecliptic,  just  as  the  sun’s  is  its  movement  with  respect  to  the 
equator.  The  sim’s  movement  with  respect  to  the  equator  is  distinguished  from  its  movement 
along  the  ecliptic  because  of  the  great  obliquity  of  the  one  to  the  other.  In  the  case  of  the 
moon,  the  inclination  of  its  oblique  circle  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic  is  so  small  as  to  be  neg¬ 
ligible  for  such  considerations.  But  the  moon’s  returns  in  latitude  do  not  appear  to  correspond 
to  its  returns  in  longitude — that  is,  its  successive  returns  to  the  same  parallel  to  the  ecliptic 
take  place  at  different  great  circles  through  the  echptic’s  poles.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  nodes  of  its  oblique  circle  move  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic,  and  therefore  it  is 
necessary  to  distinguish  its  latitudinal  movement  from  its  longitudinal. 


no  PTOLEMY 

way  assumed  that  period  of  time  to  be  6,585J^  days.  For  in  this  period  they  saw 
accomplished  very  nearly  223  lunar  months,  239  restitutions  of  anomaly,  242 
latitudinal  cycles,  and  241  longitudinal  cycles  plus  the  10^^°  which  the  sun  also 
adds  to  its  18  complete  revolutions  in  that  time,  their  restitutions  being  ob¬ 
served  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars.  And  they  called  this  interval  of  time 
“periodic^^  as  being  the  least  to  collect  approximately  the  differences  of  the 
movements  into  one  complete  cyclical  restitution.  In  order  to  arrange  it  in  terms 
of  whole  days,  they  tripled  the  6,5853^  days  and  got  the  number  19,756  which 
they  called  an  evolution  [efeXty/zos].  And  likemse  tripling  the  others,  they  had 
669  lunar  months,  717  restitutions  of  anomaly,  726  latitudinal  cycles,  and  723 
longitudinal  cycles  plus  the  32°  which  the  sun  also  adds  to  its  54  complete 
revolutions. 

And  again  Hipparchus  proved  by  calculations  from  his  own  and  Chaldean 
observations  that  these  numbers  were  not  accurate.  For  he  shows  by  the  obser¬ 
vations  he  lays  down  that  the  least  number  of  days  in  which  the  moment  of 
eclipse  recurs,  after  an  equal  number  of  months  and  an  equal  number  of  move¬ 
ments,  is  126,007  days  and  1  equatorial  hour.  And  in  this  amount  of  time  he 
finds  fulfilled  4,267  lunar  months,  4,573  complete  restitutions  of  anomaly,  4,612 
zodiacal  revolutions  less  the  73^°  (very  nearly)  which  the  sun  also  lacks  of  com¬ 
pleting  345  circles,  these  restitutions  again  being  observed  with  respect  to  the 
fixed  stars.  And  so  he  finds,  when  the  given  number  of  days  is  distributed  over 
the  4,267  lunar  months,  that  the  mean  time  of  the  lunar  month  amounts  to  very 
nearly  29  days  3F50“8“'20^"'.  Then  he  shows  that  in  this  period  of  time  the  cor¬ 
responding  intervals  from  lunar  eclipse  to  lunar  eclipse  are  equal,  so  that  the 
restitution  of  irregularity  becomes  evident  from  the  fact  that  always  in  this 
amount  of  time  there  are  contained  just  so  many  lunar  months,  and  that  to  the 
4,611  revolutions,  equal  in  longitude,  are  added  3523/^°  in  accordance  with  the 
sun^s  syzygies. 

But  if  one  should  seek,  not  the  number  of  months  from  lunar  eclipse  to  lunar 
eclipse,  but  only  from  a  conjunction  or  full  moon  to  the  corresponding  syzygy, 
he  would  find  a  still  smaller  number  for  the  restitution  of  anomaly  and  for  the 
lunar  months  by  taking  their  only  common  measure  17,  which  brings  the  result 
to  251  lunar  months  and  269  restitutions  of  anomaly.  But  this  period  of  time 
was  found  no  longer  to  complete  the  latitudinal  restitution.  For  the  return  of  the 
eclipses  appeared  to  save  the  equalities  only  with  respect  to  the  intervals  of  time 
and  of  the  longitudinal  revolutions,  but  not  with  respect  to  the  magnitudes  and 
similarities  of  the  shadows  cast,  from  which  the  latitude  is  known. 

Now,  having  already  found  the  time  of  the  return  of  anomaly,  Hipparchus 
again  compares  the  intervals  of  lunar  months  bounded  by  eclipses  in  every  way 
similar  both  in  the  magnitude  and  length  of  time  of  the  shadows  cast  and  in 
which  was  no  anomalistic  difference,  so  that  the  latitudinal  course  for  that  rea¬ 
son  appears  to  make  a  cyclical  return.  And  he  shows  that  such  a  revolution  is 
completed  in  5,458  lunar  months  and  5,923  latitudinal  cycles. 

Now  this  was  somewhat  the  way  in  which  our  predecessors  dealt  with  these 
researches.  But  we  would  consider  it  neither  a  simple  nor  easy  way,  but  one  de¬ 
manding  much  methodical  diligence.  For,  first,  it  would  be  no  use  for  us  to  grant 
that  the  durations  of  the  intervals  are  accurately  found  to  be  equal  to  each 
other,  unless  the  sun  effected  either  the  same  anomalistic  difference  or  none  for 
each  of  the  intervals.  For  if  this  should  not  be  so,  and  there  should  be,  as  I  said. 


Ill 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

some  anomalistic  difference  of  the  sun,  then  neither  will  the  sun,  nor  evidently 
the  moon,  have  made  equal  revolutions  in  equal  periods  of  time.  If,  for  instance, 
each  of  the  distances  compared  in  addition  to  the  complete  and  equal  solar  years 
takes  on  another  half  year,  and  if  in  this  amount  of  time  the  sun  happens  to 
have  moved  in  the  first  interval  from  its  mean  movement  in  the  Fishes,  and  in 
the  second  interval  from  its  mean  movement  in  the  Virgin,  then  in  the  first  in¬ 
terval  it  will  have  added  on  less  than  the  semicircle  by  nearly  4^°;  and  in  the 
second  interval,  more  than  the  semicircle  by  the  same  amount.  And  so  in  the 
same  time  the  moon  has  a  surplus,  over  and  above  complete  circles,  of  1753^° 
in  the  first  interval;  and  184%°  in  the  second. 

Hence  we  say  it  is  first  necessary  that  this  sort  of  accident  be  characteristic 
of  the  intervals  in  their  relationship  to  the  sun:  either  (1)  that  it  embrace  whole 
circles;  or  (2)  that  for  one  interval  it  add  on  a  semicircle  from  the  apogee  and 
for  the  other  a  semicircle  from  the  perigee;  or  (3)  that  for  both  it  begin  from  the 
same  section;  or  (4)  that  it  be  equidistant  on  each  side  of  either  the  apogee  or 
the  perigee,  for  the  first  eclipse  in  one  interval  and  for  the  second  eclipse  in  the 
other.  For  only  in  this  way  would  its  anomalistic  difference  be  either  equal  or 
absent  in  each  interval,  so  that  the  extra  arcs  would  be  equal  either  to  each 
other,  or  to  each  other  and  arcs  of  regular  movement. 

And,  secondly,  we  think  that  like  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  courses  of 
the  moon.  For  if  no  distinctions  are  made  here,  it  will  again  appear  possible  for 
the  moon  to  be  able  to  add  on  equal  longitudinal  arcs  in  equal  periods  of  time 
without  any  restitution  of  its  anomaly.  And  this  will  happen  (1)  if  for  each  of 
the  intervals  it  begins  from  the  same  course  which  is  to  be  added  or  subtracted 
and  does  not  stop  at  the  same;  or  (2)  if  in  one  interval  it  begins  from  the  greatest 
movement  and  stops  at  the  least,  while  in  the  other  it  starts  from  the  least  and 
ends  at  the  greatest;  or  (3)  if  the  first  course  of  one  interval  and  the  last  course 
of  the  other  are  equidistant  on  each  side  of  either  the  course  of  greatest  move¬ 
ment  or  the  course  of  least  movement.  For  each  of  these  cases,  if  it  come  about, 
will  either  again  produce  no  anomalistic  difference  or  the  same,  and  therefore 
make  the  longitudinal  surpluses  equal,  but  will  effect  no  restitution  of  anomaly. 
Therefore  the  intervals  considered  must  fall  under  none  of  these  cases  if  they 
are  to  embrace  a  restitution  of  anomaly. 

But  on  the  contrary,  if  complete  restitutions  of  anomaly  are  not  embraced  by 
the  intervals,  we  should  choose  those  which  can  most  thoroughly  manifest  the 
inequality;  that  is,  we  should  choose  them  when  they  begin  not  only  from  differ¬ 
ent  courses  but  also  from  ones  very  different  either  in  magnitude  or  power; 
(a)  in  magnitude  as  when  in  one  interval  it  begins  from  the  least  course  and  does 
not  end  with  the  greatest  and  when  in  the  other  interval  it  begins  from  the  great¬ 
est  and  does  not  end  with  the  least,  for  in  this  way  the  difference  of  longitudinal 
surplus  will  be  greatest  if  whole  cycles  of  anomaly  are  not  completed,  especially 
when  one  quadrant  or  three  quadrants  of  one  anomaly  are  left  over,  the  inter¬ 
vals  then  being  unequal  by  twice  the  anomalistic  difference;  and  (b)  in  power 
as  when  in  each  of  the  intervals  it  begins  from  the  mean  course,  and  not  from 
the  same  mean,  but  in  one  interval  from  the  mean  additively  and  in  the  other 
subtractively;  for  in  this  way,  if  the  anomaly  is  not  restored,  the  longitudinal 
surpluses  will  differ  from  each  other  the  most — by  twice  the  anomalistic  differ¬ 
ence  if  the  surpluses  are  again  a  quadrant  or  three  quadrants  of  an  anomalistic 
cycle,  or  four  times  the  difference  if  a  half  cycle. 


112  PTOLEMY 

And,  therefore,  we  see  that  Hipparchus  was  most  attentive,  as  he  judged,  in 
his  choice  of  the  intervals  gotten  for  this  research.  And  we  see  he  used  the  case 
where  the  moon,  in  one  interval,  started  from  the  greatest  course  and  did  not 
stop  with  the  least,  and,  in  the  other  interval,  started  from  the  least  and  did  not 
stop  with  the  greatest;  and  redeemed  the  resulting  anomalistic  difference  of  the 
sun,  although  it  is  short  a  bit  because  the  sun^s  return  fails  of  complete  circles 
by  very  nearly  one  quarter  of  a  sign  which  is  not  the  same  sign  and  does  not 
produce  an  equal  anomalistic  difference  in  each  of  the  intervals. 

And  we  say  these  things,  not  to  belittle  this  method  of  getting  at  the  periods 
of  return,  but  to  bring  to  mind  that,  when  it  is  done  with  the  proper  care  and 
consequent  calculation,  it  can  rectify  the  difference ;  but  that,  if  any  at  all  of  the 
incidents  explained  are  neglected,  it  will  completely  falsify  the  solution  sought; 
and  that  a  rectification  which  accurately  takes  into  account  all  the  incidents  of 
the  observations  is  very  difficult  for  those  who  are  making  a  discerning  choice 
of  these  observations. 

Now,  of  the  periodic  returns  given  according  to  the  calculations  made  by 
Hipparchus,  that  of  the  lunar  month,  as  we  said,  appears  to  have  been  calcu¬ 
lated  as  soundly  as  possible  and  not  to  differ  by  any  sensible  amount  from  the 
true  one.  But  the  periodic  return  in  latitude  and  the  restitution  of  anomaly  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  off  by  an  appreciable  amount.  So  much  so  that  we  have  immediately 
seen  the  flaw  from  the  simpler  and  easier  means  employed  by  us  in  view  of  the 
same  discrimination.  And  we  shall  immediately  demonstrate  these  methods  a- 
long  with  the  quantity  of  the  moon^s  anomaly.  But  first  we  set  out,  for  greater 
service  in  what  follows,  the  particular  mean  movements  in  latitude,  longitude, 
and  anomaly,  in  accordance  with  the  proposed  times  of  return  of  the  periodic 
movements  modified  by  that  correction  which  will  be  demonstrated  later. 

3.  On  the  Moon^s  Regular  Movements  in  Detail 

If  now  we  multiply  the  sun^s  mean  daily  movement,  proved  to  be  very  nearly 
0'^59'8"17*“13'^12'^3H*,  by  the  29  days  31'50“8“'20'''  of  one  lunar  month,  and 
add  to  the  result  the  360°  of  one  circle,  then  we  shall  have  the  longitudinal 
course  of  the  moon^s  mean  movement  in  one  lunar  month — that  is,  very  nearly 
389°6'23'U“‘24'''2'^30'''57^^^  Distributing  these  over  the  days  of  the  lunar  month 
we  shall  have  the  moon^s  daily  movement  in  longitude — that  is,  very  nearly 
13°10^34“58"^33*'^30\30'^^ 

Again,  multiplying  the  269  circles  of  the  anomaly  by  the  360°  of  one  circle, 
we  shall  have  the  number  96,840°.  Distributing  these  over  the  7,412  days  10^4*' 
51iii40iv  Qf  the  251  lunar  months,  we  shall  have  a  daily  mean  movement  of 
anomaly  of  13°3^53“56“^29^'^38'^38'^^ 

Likewise  multiplying  the  5,923  returns  in  latitude  by  the  360°  of  one  circle,  we 
shall  have  the  number  2,132,280°.  Distributing  these  over  the  161,277  days  58' 
58''3“'20'''  of  the  5,458  lunar  months,  we  shall  have  the  daily  mean  latitudinal 
movement  of  13°1345''39'"40'''17''19''^ 

Again,  subtracting  the  sun^s  daily  mean  movement  from  the  moon^s  daily 
mean  movement  in  longitude,  we  shall  have  the  dail}’’  mean  elongation  of  12°11' 
26"41'''20'^17'^59'^^ 

Through  the  methods  we  shall  employ  later  on,  as  we  have  already  said,  we 
find  that  the  daily  mean  movement  in  longitude  remains  practically  unchanged 
and  that,  of  course,  the  movement  of  elongation  remains  about  the  same,  too; 


113 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

but  that  the  daily  mean  movement  of  anomaly  is  less  by  11'''46''39''',  so  that  it 
becomes  13°3^53"56“H7^''51''59''S  and  that  the  daily  mean  movement  in  latitude 
is  more  by  8»'^39n8^S  so  that  it  becomes  13°1345“39“48*'^56'^37^^ 

If,  in  accordance  with  these  daily  movements,  we  take  one  twenty-fourth  of 
each,  we  shall  have  the  hourly  mean  movement  in  longitude  of  0°32'56"27“*26*^ 
23v45vij5vii.  hourly  mean  movement  of  anomaly  of  0°32'39'44'"50'''44'^ 
39vi57vii3oviii.  in  latitude  of  0°33^"24^"9^'^32'^21'^*32'^"30'^“^;  and  of  elongation 
of  0°30*28“36*“43^^20''44"'*57''"30''“\  And  if  we  multiply  the  daily  movements 
by  thirty  and  subtract  the  complete  circles,  we  shall  have  the  monthly  mean 
surplus  in  longitude  of  35°17'29*H6"^5’'^15'';  the  monthly  mean  surplus  of  a- 
nomaly  of  31°56'58''8"‘55'''59'^30'^^;  in  latitude  of  36°52^9"54"*28'''18''31''’;  and 
of  elongation  of  5°43'20“40'"8‘''59''30^\ 

Again,  multiplying  the  daily  mean  movements  by  the  365  days  of  an  Egyp¬ 
tian  year  and  subtracting  the  complete  circles,  we  shall  have  the  yearly  mean 
surplus  in  longitude  of  129°22^6'H3'”50'^32'^30''*;  the  yearly  mean  surplus  of 
anomaly  of  88°437”28i“4H'^13'^55'^S-  in  latitude  of  148°42i47"12”^4»'^25\5'^»; 
and  of  elongation  of  129°37'21”28^“29*^23''55''^ 

Next,  multiplying  the  yearly  movements  by  eighteen  for  greater  facility  as 
we  said,  in  using  the  table,  and  subtracting  the  complete  circles,  we  shall  have 
an  eighteen-year  mean  surplus  in  longitude  of  168°49'52"9'"9'''45'';  an  eighteen- 
3^ear  mean  surplus  of  anomaly  of  156°56H4“36'“22''^10''30'^';  in  latitude  of  156° 
50^9^^9“H9^^31'^30'^S*  and  of  elongation  of  173°12‘26"32"^9^'^10^30'^\ 

Then  we  shall  construct,  as  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  3  tables,  again  of  45  rows  and 
5  columns  each.  Now  the  first  column  will  contain  the  particular  times:  in  the 
first  table,  the  eighteen-year  periods;  in  the  second  table,  the  years  and  then 
again  the  hours;  in  the  third  table,  the  months  and  then  again  the  days.  And  the 
other  four  columns  contain  the  particular  comparisons  in  degrees:  the  second 
column  those  in  longitude,  the  third  those  of  anomaly,  the  fourth  those  in  lati¬ 
tude,  and  the  fifth  those  of  elongation.  See  tables  on  following  pages. 


t 


114 


PTOLEMY 


4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  I 


Col.  1 
Years 

Col.  2 
Degrees 

I 

Long' 
11°  22 
II 

itudin 
'  with 
III 

al  Su 
in  the 
IV 

rplus 

BulV 

V 

L 

VI 

Col.  3 
Degrees 

I 

Sur'f 

II 

)lus  oj 
263 
III 

Ano', 

°49' 

IV 

maly 

V 

VI 

18 

168 

49 

52 

9 

9 

45 

0 

156 

56 

14 

36 

22 

10 

30 

36 

337 

39 

44 

18 

19 

30 

0 

313 

52 

29 

12 

44 

21 

0 

54 

146 

29 

36 

27 

29 

15 

0 

no 

48 

43 

49 

6 

31 

30 

72 

315 

19 

28 

36 

39 

0 

0 

267 

44 

58 

25 

28 

42 

0 

90 

124 

9 

20 

45 

48 

45 

0 

64 

41 

13 

1 

50 

52 

30 

108 

292 

59 

12 

54 

58 

30 

0 

221 

37 

27 

38 

13 

3 

0 

126 

101 

49 

5 

4 

8 

15 

0 

18 

33 

42 

14 

35 

13 

30 

144 

270 

38 

57 

13 

18 

0 

0 

175 

29 

56 

50 

57 

24 

0 

162 

79 

28 

49 

22 

27 

45 

0 

332 

26 

11 

27 

19 

34 

30 

180 

248 

18 

41 

31 

37 

30 

0 

129 

22 

26 

3 

41 

45 

0 

198 

57 

8 

33 

40 

47 

15 

0 

286 

18 

40 

40 

3 

55 

30 

216 

225 

58 

25 

49 

57 

0 

0 

83 

14 

55 

16 

26 

6 

0 

234 

34 

48 

17 

59 

6 

45 

0 

240 

11 

9 

52 

48 

16 

30 

252 

203 

38 

10 

8 

16 

30 

0 

37 

7 

24 

29 

10 

27 

0 

270 

12 

28 

2 

17 

26 

15 

0 

194 

3 

39 

5 

32 

37 

30 

288 

181 

17 

54 

26 

36 

0 

0 

350 

59 

53 

41 

54 

48 

0 

306 

350 

7 

46 

35 

45 

45 

0 

147 

56 

8 

18 

16 

58 

30 

324 

158 

57 

38 

44 

55 

30 

0 

304 

52 

22 

54 

39 

9 

0 

342 

327 

47 

30 

54 

5 

15 

0 

101 

48 

37 

31 

1 

19 

30 

360 

136 

37 

23 

3 

15 

0 

0 

258 

44 

52 

7 

23 

30 

0 

378 

305 

27 

15 

12 

24 

45 

0 

55 

41 

6 

43 

45 

40 

30 

396 

114 

17 

7 

21 

34 

30 

0 

212 

37 

21 

20 

7 

51 

0 

414 

283 

6 

59 

30 

44 

15 

0 

9 

33 

35 

56 

30 

1 

30 

432 

91 

56 

51 

39 

54 

0 

0 

166 

29 

50 

32 

52 

12 

0 

450 

260 

46 

43 

49 

3 

45 

0 

323 

26 

5 

9 

14 

22 

30 

468 

69 

36 

35 

58 

13 

30 

0 

120 

22 

19 

45 

36 

33 

0 

486 

238 

26 

28 

7 

23 

15 

0 

277 

18 

34 

21 

58 

43 

30 

504 

47 

16 

20 

16 

33 

0 

0 

74 

14 

48 

58 

20 

54 

0 

522 

216 

6 

12 

25 

42 

45 

0 

231 

11 

3 

34 

43 

4 

30 

540 

24 

56 

4 

34 

52 

30 

0 

28 

7 

18 

11 

5 

15 

0 

558 

193 

45 

56 

44 

2 

15 

0 

185 

3 

32 

47 

27 

25 

30 

576 

2 

35 

48 

53 

12 

0 

0 

341 

59 

47 

23 

49 

36 

0 

594 

171 

25 

41 

2 

21 

45 

0 

138 

56 

2 

0 

11 

46 

30 

612 

340 

15 

33 

11 

31 

30 

0 

295 

52 

16 

36 

33 

57 

0 

630 

149 

5 

25 

20 

41 

15 

0 

92 

48 

31 

12 

56 

7 

30 

648 

317 

55 

17 

29 

51 

0 

0 

249 

44 

45 

49 

18 

18 

0 

666 

126 

45 

9 

39 

0 

45 

0 

46 

41 

0 

25 

40 

28 

30  ^ 

684 

295 

35 

1 

48 

10 

30 

0 

203 

37 

15 

2 

2 

39 

0 

702 

104 

24 

53 

57 

20 

15 

0 

0 

33 

29 

38 

24 

49 

30 

720 

273 

14 

46 

6 

30 

0 

0 

157 

29 

44 

14 

47 

0 

0 

738 

82 

4 

38 

15 

39 

45 

0 

314 

25 

58 

51 

9 

10 

30 

756 

250 

54 

30 

24 

49 

30 

0 

111 

22 

13 

27 

31 

21 

0 

774 

59 

44 

22 

33 

59 

15 

0 

268 

18 

28 

3 

53 

31 

30 

792 

228 

34 

14 

43 

9 

0 

0 

65 

14 

42 

40 

15 

42 

0 

810 

37 

24 

6 

52 

18 

45 

0 

222 

10 

57 

16 

37 

52 

30 

^These  numbers  under  the  headings  refer,  of  course,  to  the  surpluses  at  the  epochs  in  the 
year  1  of  Nabonassar. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV  115 

4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  I — Continued 


Latitudinal  Surplus 

Col,  1 

Col.  4 

354' 

°15' 

Years 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

18 

156 

50 

9 

49 

19 

31 

36 

313 

40 

19 

38 

39 

3 

54 

no 

30 

29 

27 

58 

34 

72 

267 

20 

39 

17 

18 

6 

90 

64 

10 

49 

6 

37 

37 

108 

221 

0 

58 

55 

57 

9 

126 

17 

51 

8 

45 

16 

40 

144 

174 

41 

18 

34 

36 

12 

162 

331 

31 

28 

23 

55 

43 

180 

128 

21 

38 

13 

15 

15 

198 

285 

11 

48 

2 

34 

46 

216 

82 

1 

57 

51 

54 

18 

234 

238 

52 

7 

41 

13 

49 

252 

35 

42 

17 

30 

33 

21 

270 

192 

32 

27 

19 

52 

52 

288 

349 

22 

37 

9 

12 

24 

306 

146 

12 

46 

58 

31 

55 

324 

303 

2 

56 

47 

51 

27 

342 

99 

53 

6 

37 

10 

58 

360 

256 

43 

16 

26 

30 

30 

378 

53 

33 

26 

15 

50 

1 

396 

210 

23 

36 

5 

9 

33 

414 

7 

13 

45 

54 

29 

4 

432 

164 

3 

55 

43 

48 

36 

450 

320 

54 

5 

33 

8 

7 

468 

117 

44 

15 

22 

27 

39 

486 

274 

34 

25 

11 

47 

10 

504 

71 

24 

35 

1 

6 

42 

522 

228 

14 

44 

50 

26 

13 

540 

25 

4 

54 

39 

45 

45 

558 

181 

55 

4 

29 

5 

16 

576 

338 

45 

14 

18 

24 

48 

594 

135 

35 

24 

7 

44 

19 

612 

292 

25 

33 

57 

3 

51 

630 

89 

15 

43 

46 

23 

22 

648 

246 

5 

53 

35 

42 

54 

666 

42 

56 

3 

25 

2 

25 

684 

199 

46 

13 

14 

21 

57 

702 

356 

36 

23 

3 

41 

28 

720 

153 

26 

32 

53 

1 

0 

738 

310 

16 

42 

42 

20 

31 

756 

107 

6 

52 

31 

40 

3 

774 

263 

57 

2 

20 

59 

34 

792 

60 

47 

12 

10 

19 

6 

810 

217 

37 

21 

59 

38 

37 

Surplus  of  Elongation 

Col.  5 

70°37' 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

173 

12 

26 

32 

49 

10  i 

30 

346 

24 

53 

5 

38 

21 

0 

159 

37 

19 

38 

27 

31 

30 

332 

49 

46 

11 

16 

42 

0 

146 

2 

12 

44 

5 

52 

30 

319 

14 

39 

16 

55 

3 

0 

132 

27 

5 

49 

44 

13 

30 

305 

39 

32 

22 

33 

24 

0 

118 

51 

58 

55 

22 

34 

30 

292 

4 

25 

28 

11 

45 

0 

105 

16 

52 

1 

0 

55 

30 

278 

29 

18 

33 

50 

6 

0 

91 

41 

45 

6 

39 

16 

30 

264 

54 

11 

39 

28 

27 

0 

78 

6 

38 

12 

17 

37 

30 

251 

19 

4 

45 

6 

48 

0 

64 

31 

31 

17 

55 

58 

30 

237 

43 

57 

50 

45 

9 

0 

50 

56 

24 

23 

34 

19 

30 

224 

8 

50 

56 

23 

30 

0 

37 

21 

17 

29 

12 

40 

30 

210 

33 

44 

2 

1 

51 

0 

23 

46 

10 

34 

51 

1 

30 

196 

58 

37 

7 

40 

12 

0 

10 

11 

3 

40 

29 

22 

30 

183 

23 

30 

13 

18 

33 

0 

356 

35 

56 

46 

7 

43 

30 

169 

48 

23 

18 

56 

54 

0 

343 

0 

49 

51 

46 

4 

30 

156 

13 

16 

24 

35 

15 

0 

329 

25 

42 

57 

24 

25 

30 

142 

38 

9 

30 

13 

36 

0 

315 

50 

36 

3 

2 

46 

30 

129 

3 

2 

35 

51 

57 

0 

302 

15 

29 

8 

41 

7 

30 

115 

27 

55 

41 

30 

18 

0 

288 

40 

22 

14 

19 

28 

30 

101 

52 

48 

47 

8 

39 

0 

275 

5 

15 

19 

57 

49 

30 

88 

17 

41 

52 

47 

0 

0 

261 

30 

8 

25 

36 

10 

30 

74 

42 

34 

58 

25 

21 

0 

247 

55 

1 

31 

14 

31 

30 

61 

7 

28 

4 

3 

42 

0 

234 

19 

54 

36 

52 

52 

30 

VI 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 

0 

30 


116 


PTOLEMY 


4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  II 


Col,  1 

Col.  2 

Longitudinal  Surplus 

Col.  8 

Surplus  of  Anomaly 

Years 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

1 

129 

22 

46 

13 

50 

32 

30 

88 

43 

7 

28 

41 

13 

55 

2 

258 

45 

32 

27 

41 

5 

0 

177 

26 

14 

57 

22 

27 

50 

3 

28 

8 

18 

41 

31 

37 

30 

266 

9 

22 

26 

3 

41 

45 

4 

157 

31 

4 

55 

22 

10 

0 

354 

52 

29 

54 

44 

55 

40 

5 

286 

53 

51 

9 

12 

42 

30 

83 

35 

37 

23 

26 

9 

35 

6 

56 

16 

37 

23 

3 

15 

0 

172 

18 

44 

52 

7 

23 

30 

7 

185 

39 

23 

36 

53 

47 

30 

261 

1 

52 

20 

48 

37 

25 

8 

315 

2 

9 

50 

44 

20 

0 

349 

44 

59 

49 

29 

51 

20 

9 

84 

24 

56 

4 

34 

52 

30 

78 

28 

7 

18 

11 

5 

15 

10 

213 

47 

42 

18 

25 

25 

0 

167 

11 

14 

46 

52 

19 

10 

11 

343 

10 

28 

32 

15 

57 

30 

255 

54 

22 

15 

33 

33 

5 

12 

112 

33 

14 

46 

6 

30 

0 

344 

37 

29 

44 

14 

47 

0 

13 

241 

56 

0 

59 

57 

2 

30 

73 

20 

37 

12 

56 

0 

55 

14 

11 

18 

47 

13 

47 

35 

0 

162 

3 

44 

41 

37 

14 

50 

15 

140 

41 

33 

27 

38 

7 

30 

250 

46 

52 

10 

18 

28 

45 

16 

270 

4 

19 

41 

28 

40 

0 

339 

29 

59 

38 

59 

42 

40 

17 

39 

27 

5 

55 

19 

12 

30 

68 

13 

7 

7 

40 

56 

35 

18 

168 

49 

52 

9 

9 

45 

0 

156 

56 

14 

36 

22 

10 

30 

Hours 

Longitudinal  Surplus 

Surplus  of  Anomaly 

1 

0 

32 

56 

27 

26 

23 

46 

0 

32 

39 

44 

50 

44 

40 

2 

1 

5 

52 

54 

52 

47 

32 

1 

5 

19 

29 

41 

29 

20 

3 

1 

38 

49 

22 

19 

11 

18 

1 

37 

59 

14 

32 

14 

0 

4 

2 

11 

45 

49 

45 

35 

5 

2 

10 

38 

59 

22 

58 

40 

5 

2 

44 

42 

17 

11 

58 

51 

2 

43 

18 

44 

13 

43 

20 

6 

3 

17 

38 

44 

38 

22 

37 

3 

15 

58 

29 

4 

28 

0 

7 

3 

50 

35 

12 

4 

46 

23 

3 

48 

38 

13 

55 

12 

40 

8 

4 

23 

31 

39 

31 

10 

10 

4 

21 

17 

58 

45 

57 

20 

9 

4 

56 

28 

6 

57 

33 

56 

4 

53 

57 

43 

36 

42 

0 

10 

5 

29 

24 

34 

23 

57 

42 

5 

26 

37 

28 

27 

20 

40 

11 

6 

2 

21 

1 

50 

21 

28 

5 

59 

17 

13 

18 

11 

20 

12 

6 

35 

17 

29 

16 

45 

15 

6 

31 

56 

58 

8 

56 

0 

13 

7 

8 

13 

56 

43 

9 

1 

7 

4 

36 

42 

59 

40 

39 

14 

7 

41 

10 

24 

9 

32 

47 

7 

37 

16 

27 

50 

25 

19 

15 

8 

14 

6 

51 

35 

56 

33 

8 

9 

56 

12 

41 

9 

59 

16 

8 

47 

3 

19 

2 

20 

20 

8 

42 

35 

57 

31 

54 

39 

17 

9 

19 

59 

46 

28 

44 

6 

9 

15 

15 

42 

22 

39 

19 

18 

9 

52 

56 

13 

55 

7 

52 

9 

47 

55 

27 

13 

23 

59 

19 

10 

25 

52 

41 

21 

31 

38 

10 

20 

35 

12 

4 

8 

39 

20 

10 

58 

49 

8 

47 

55 

25 

10 

53 

14 

56 

54 

53 

19 

21 

11 

31 

45 

36 

14 

19 

11 

11 

25 

54 

41 

45 

37 

59 

22 

12 

4 

42 

3 

40 

42 

57 

11 

58 

34 

26 

36 

22 

39 

23 

12 

37 

38 

31 

7 

6 

43 

12 

31 

14 

11 

27 

7 

19 

24 

13 

10 

34 

58 

33 

30 

30 

13 

3 

53 

56 

17 

51 

59 

THE  ALMAGEST,  IV  117 

4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  II — Continued 


CoL  1 

Single 

CoL  4 

Latitudinal  Surplus 

Col.  5 

Surplus  of  Elongation 

Years 

Degrees 

I 

11 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

I 

148 

42 

47 

12 

44 

25 

5 

129 

37 

21 

28 

29 

23 

55 

2 

297 

25 

34 

25 

28 

50 

10 

259 

14 

42 

56 

58 

47 

50 

3 

86 

8 

21 

38 

13 

15 

15 

28 

52 

4 

25 

28 

11 

45 

4 

234 

51 

8 

50 

57 

40 

20 

158 

29 

25 

53 

57 

35 

40 

5 

23 

33 

56 

3 

42 

5 

25 

288 

6 

47 

22 

26 

59 

35 

6 

172 

16 

43 

16 

26 

30 

30 

57 

44 

8 

50 

56 

23 

30 

7 

320 

59 

30 

29 

10 

55 

35 

187 

21 

30 

19 

25 

47 

25 

8 

109 

42 

17 

41 

55 

20 

40 

316 

58 

51 

47 

55 

11 

20 

9 

258 

25 

4 

54 

39 

45 

45 

86 

36 

13 

16 

24 

35 

15 

10 

47 

7 

52 

7 

24 

10 

50 

216 

13 

34 

44 

53 

59 

10 

11 

195 

50 

39 

20 

8 

35 

55 

345 

50 

56 

13 

23 

23 

5 

12 

344 

33 

26 

32 

53 

1 

0 

115 

28 

17 

41 

52 

47 

0 

13 

133 

16 

13 

45 

37 

26 

5 

245 

5 

39 

10 

22 

10 

55 

14 

281 

59 

0 

58 

21 

51 

10 

14 

43 

0 

38 

51 

34 

50 

15 

70 

41 

48 

11 

6 

16 

15 

144 

20 

22 

7 

20 

58 

45 

16 

219 

24 

35 

23 

50 

41 

20 

273 

57 

43 

35 

50 

22 

40 

17 

8 

7 

22 

36 

35 

6 

25 

43 

35 

5 

4 

19 

46 

35 

18 

156 

50 

9 

49 

19 

31 

30 

173 

12 

26 

32 

49 

10 

30 

Hours 

Latitudinal  Surplus 

Surplus  of  Elongation 

1 

0 

33 

4 

24 

9 

32 

22 

0 

30 

28 

36 

43 

20 

45 

2 

1 

6 

8 

48 

19 

4 

43 

1 

0 

57 

13 

26 

41 

30 

3 

1 

39 

13 

12 

28 

37 

5 

1 

31 

25 

50 

10 

2 

15 

4 

2 

12 

17 

36 

38 

9 

26 

2 

1 

54 

26 

53 

23 

0 

5 

2 

45 

22 

0 

47 

41 

48 

2 

32 

23 

3 

36 

43 

45 

6 

3 

18 

26 

24 

57 

14 

9 

3 

2 

51 

40 

20 

4 

30 

7 

3 

51 

30 

49 

6 

46 

31 

3 

33 

20 

17 

3 

25 

15 

8 

4 

24 

35 

13 

16 

18 

52 

4 

3 

48 

53 

46 

46 

0 

9 

4 

57 

39 

37 

25 

51 

14 

4 

34 

17 

30 

30 

6 

45 

10 

5 

30 

44 

1 

35 

23 

35 

5 

4 

46 

7 

13 

27 

30 

11 

6 

3 

48 

25 

44 

55 

57 

5 

35 

14 

43 

56 

48 

15 

12 

6 

36 

52 

49 

54 

28 

19 

6 

5 

43 

20 

40 

9 

0 

13 

7 

9 

57 

14 

4 

0 

40 

6 

36 

11 

57 

23 

29 

44 

14 

7 

43 

1 

38 

13 

33 

2 

7 

6 

40 

34 

6 

50 

29 

15 

8 

16 

6 

2 

23 

5 

23 

7 

37 

9 

10 

50 

11 

14 

16 

8 

49 

10 

26 

32 

37 

45 

8 

7 

37 

47 

33 

31 

59 

17 

9 

22 

14 

50 

42 

10 

6 

8 

38 

6 

24 

16 

52 

44 

18 

9 

55 

19 

14 

51 

42 

28 

9 

8 

35 

1 

0 

13 

29 

19 

10 

28 

23 

39 

1 

14 

49 

9 

39 

3 

37 

43 

34 

14 

20 

11 

1 

28 

3 

10 

47 

11 

10 

9 

32 

14 

26 

54 

59 

21 

11 

34 

32 

27 

20 

19 

32 

10 

40 

0 

51 

10 

15 

44 

22 

12 

7 

36 

51 

29 

51 

54 

11 

10 

29 

27 

53 

36 

29 

23 

12 

40 

41 

15 

39 

24 

15 

11 

40 

58 

4 

36 

57 

14 

24 

13 

13 

45 

39 

48 

56 

37 

12 

11 

26 

41 

20 

17 

59 

118 


PTOLEMY 


4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  III 


Col.  1 

Col.  2 

Longitudinal  Surplus 

Col.  8 

Surplus  of  Anomaly 

Months 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

30 

35 

17 

29 

16 

45 

15 

0 

31 

56 

58 

8 

55 

59 

30 

60 

70 

34 

58 

33 

30 

30 

0 

63 

53 

56 

17 

51 

59 

0 

90 

105 

52 

27 

50 

15 

45 

0 

95 

50 

54 

26 

47 

58 

30 

120 

141 

9 

57 

7 

1 

0 

0 

127 

47 

52 

35 

43 

58 

0 

150 

176 

27 

26 

23 

46 

15 

0 

159 

44 

50 

44 

39 

57 

30 

180 

211 

44 

55 

40 

31 

30 

0 

191 

41 

48 

53 

35 

57 

0 

210 

247 

2 

24 

57 

16 

45 

0 

223 

38 

47 

2 

31 

56 

30 

240 

282 

19 

54 

14 

2 

0 

0 

255 

35 

45 

11 

27 

56 

0 

270 

317 

37 

23 

30 

47 

15 

0 

287 

32 

43 

20 

23 

55 

30 

300 

352 

54 

52 

47 

32 

30 

0 

319 

29 

41 

29 

19 

55 

0 

330 

28 

12 

22 

4 

17 

45 

0 

351 

26 

39 

38 

15 

54 

30 

360 

63 

29 

51 

21 

3 

0 

0 

23 

23 

37 

47 

11 

54 

0 

Days 

Longitudinal  Surplus 

Surplus  of  Anomaly 

1 

13 

10 

34 

58 

33 

30 

30 

13 

3 

53 

56 

17 

51 

59 

2 

26 

21 

9 

57 

7 

1 

0 

26 

7 

47 

52 

35 

43 

58 

3 

39 

31 

44 

55 

40 

31 

30 

39 

11 

41 

48 

53 

35 

57 

4 

52 

42 

19 

54 

14 

2 

0 

52 

15 

35 

45 

11 

27 

56 

5 

65 

52 

54 

52 

47 

32 

30 

65 

19 

29 

41 

29 

19 

55 

6 

79 

3 

29 

51 

21 

3 

0 

78 

23 

23 

37 

47 

11 

54 

7 

92 

14 

4 

49 

54 

33 

30 

91 

27 

17 

34 

5 

3 

53 

8 

105 

24 

39 

48 

28 

4 

0 

104 

31 

11 

30 

22 

55 

52 

9 

118 

35 

14 

47 

1 

34 

30 

117 

35 

5 

26 

40 

47 

51 

10 

131 

45 

49 

45 

35 

5 

0 

130 

38 

59 

22 

58 

39 

50 

11 

144 

56 

24 

44 

8 

35 

30 

143 

42 

53 

19 

16 

31 

49 

12 

158 

6 

59 

42 

42 

6 

0 

156 

46 

47 

15 

34 

23 

48 

13 

171 

17 

34 

41 

15 

36 

30 

169 

50 

41 

11 

52 

15 

47 

14 

184 

28 

9 

39 

49 

7 

0 

182 

54 

35 

8 

10 

7 

46 

15 

197 

38 

44 

38 

22 

37 

30 

195 

58 

29 

4 

27 

59 

45 

16 

210 

49 

19 

36 

56 

8 

0 

209 

2 

23 

0 

45 

51 

44 

17 

223 

59 

54 

35 

29 

38 

30 

222 

6 

16 

57 

3 

43 

43 

18 

237 

10 

29 

34 

3 

9 

0 

235 

10 

10 

53 

21 

35 

42 

19 

250 

21 

4 

32 

36 

39 

30 

248 

14 

4 

49 

39 

27 

41 

20 

263 

31 

39 

31 

10 

10 

0 

261 

17 

58 

45 

57 

19 

40 

21 

276 

42 

14 

29 

43 

40 

30 

274 

21 

52 

42 

15 

11 

39 

22 

289 

52 

49 

28 

17 

11 

0 

287 

25 

46 

38 

33 

3 

38 

23 

303 

3 

24 

26 

50 

41 

30 

300 

29 

40 

34 

50 

55 

37 

24 

316 

13 

59 

25 

24 

12 

0 

313 

33 

34 

31 

8 

47 

36 

25 

329 

24 

34 

23 

57 

42 

30 

326 

37 

28 

27 

26 

39 

35 

26 

342 

35 

9 

22 

31 

13 

0 

339 

41 

22 

23 

44 

31 

34 

27 

355 

45 

44 

21 

4 

43 

30 

352 

45 

16 

20 

2 

23 

33 

28 

8 

56 

19 

19 

38 

14 

0 

5 

49 

10 

16 

20 

15 

32 

29 

22 

6 

54 

18 

11 

44 

30 

18 

53 

4 

12 

38 

7 

31 

30 

35 

17 

29 

16 

45 

15 

0 

31 

56 

58 

8 

55 

59 

30 

THE  ALIMAGEST,  IV  119 


4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  the  Moon,  Table  III — Continued 


Col.  1 

Col.  4 

Latitudinal  Surplus 

Col.  6 

Surplus  of  Elongation 

Months 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Degrees 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

30 

36 

52 

49 

54 

28 

18 

30 

5 

43 

20 

40 

8 

59 

30 

60 

73 

45 

39 

48 

56 

37 

0 

11 

26 

41 

20 

17 

59 

0 

90 

no 

38 

29 

43 

24 

55 

30 

17 

10 

2 

0 

26 

58 

30 

120 

147 

31 

19 

37 

53 

14 

0 

22 

53 

22 

40 

35 

58 

0 

150 

184 

24 

9 

32 

21 

32 

30 

28 

36 

43 

20 

44 

57 

30 

180 

221 

16 

59 

26 

49 

51 

0 

34 

20 

4 

0 

53 

57 

0 

210 

258 

9 

49 

21 

18 

9 

30 

40 

3 

24 

41 

2 

56 

30 

240 

295 

2 

39 

15 

46 

28 

0 

45 

46 

45 

21 

11 

56 

0 

270 

331 

55 

29 

10 

14 

46 

30 

51 

30 

6 

1 

20 

55 

30 

300 

8 

48 

19 

4 

43 

5 

0 

57 

13 

26 

41 

29 

55 

0 

330 

45 

41 

8 

59 

11 

23 

30 

62 

56 

47 

21 

38 

54 

30 

360 

82 

33 

58 

53 

39 

42 

0 

68 

40 

8 

1 

47 

54 

0 

Days 

Latitudinal  Surplus 

Surplus  of  Elongation 

1 

13 

13 

45 

39 

48 

56 

37 

12 

11 

26 

41 

20 

17 

59 

2 

26 

27 

31 

19 

37 

53 

14 

24 

22 

53 

22 

40 

35 

58 

3 

39 

41 

16 

59 

26 

49 

51 

36 

34 

20 

4 

0 

53 

57 

4 

52 

55 

2 

39 

15 

46 

28 

48 

45 

46 

45 

21 

11 

56 

5 

66 

8 

48 

19 

4 

43 

5 

60 

57 

13 

26 

41 

29 

55 

6 

79 

22 

33 

58 

53 

39 

42 

73 

8 

40 

8 

1 

47 

54 

7 

92 

36 

19 

38 

42 

36 

19 

85 

20 

6 

49 

22 

5 

53 

8 

105 

50 

5 

18 

31 

32 

56 

97 

31 

33 

30 

42 

23 

52 

9 

119 

3 

50 

58 

20 

29 

33 

109 

43 

0 

12 

2 

41 

51 

10 

132 

17 

36 

38 

9 

26 

10 

121 

54 

26 

53 

22 

59 

50 

11 

145 

31 

22 

17 

58 

22 

47 

134 

5 

53 

34 

43 

17 

49 

12 

158 

45 

7 

57 

47 

19 

24 

146 

17 

20 

16 

3 

35 

48 

13 

171 

58 

53 

37 

36 

16 

1 

158 

28 

46 

57 

23 

53 

47 

14 

185 

12 

39 

17 

25 

12 

38 

170 

40 

13 

38 

44 

11 

46 

15 

198 

26 

24 

57 

14 

9 

15 

182 

51 

40 

20 

4 

29 

45 

16 

211 

40 

10 

37 

3 

5 

52 

195 

3 

7 

1 

24 

47 

44 

17 

224 

53 

56 

16 

52 

2 

29 

207 

14 

33 

42 

45 

5 

43 

18 

238 

7 

41 

56 

40 

59 

6 

219 

26 

0 

24 

5 

23 

42 

19 

251 

21 

27 

36 

29 

55 

43 

231 

37 

27 

5 

25 

41 

41 

20 

264 

35 

13 

16 

18 

52 

20 

243 

48 

53 

46 

45 

59 

40 

21 

277 

48 

58 

56 

7 

48 

57 

256 

0 

20 

28 

6 

17 

39 

22 

291 

2 

44 

35 

56 

45 

34 

268 

11 

47 

9 

26 

35 

38 

23 

304 

16 

30 

15 

45 

42 

11 

280 

23 

13 

50 

46 

53 

37 

24 

317 

30 

15 

55 

34 

38 

48 

292 

34 

40 

32 

7 

11 

36 

25 

330 

44 

1 

35 

23 

35 

25 

304 

46 

7 

13 

27 

29 

35 

26 

343 

57 

47 

15 

12 

32 

2 

316 

57 

33 

54 

47 

47 

34 

27 

357 

11 

32 

55 

1 

28 

39 

329 

9 

0 

36 

8 

5 

33 

28 

10 

25 

18 

34 

50 

25 

16 

341 

20 

27 

17 

28 

23 

32 

29 

23 

39 

4 

14 

39 

21 

53 

353 

31 

53 

58 

48 

41 

31 

30 

36 

52 

49 

54 

28 

18 

30 

5 

43 

20 

40 

8 

59 

30 

120 


PTOLEMY 


5.  Th.\t,  in  the  Case  of  the  Simple  Hypothesis  of  the  Moon, 

BOTH  the  Hypothesis  of  Eccentricity  asd  of  the  Epicycle 
Produce  the  Same  Appearances 

And  after  these  things  there  follows  an  expHcation  of  the  manner  and  size  of 
the  moon's  anomaly.  At  present  we  shall  develop  the  explication  as  if  there  were 
that  one  anomaly  belonging  to  it  to  which  alone  nearly  all  our  predecessors  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  turned  their  attention;  I  mean  to  that  anomal}"  completed  in  the 
period  of  return  already  mentioned.  -Afterwards  we  shall  show  that  the  moon 
effects  a  second  anomal}^  in  its  elongations  from  the  sun,^  an  anomal}-  which  be¬ 
comes  greatest  at  the  two  quarters  and  is  tvTce  redeemed  in  the  month's  time, 
at  conjunctions  and  full  moons. 

We  shall  use  this  order  of  demonstration  because  the  second  can  never  be 
found  vithout  the  first's  being  imphed  b}'  it.  But  the  first  can  be  found  without 
the  second  since  it  is  derived  from  lunar  eclipses  where  there  is  no  sensible  dif¬ 
ference  due  to  the  anomah"  relative  to  the  sun.  And  in  the  first  proof  we  shall 
follow  the  methods  we  see  Hipparchus  used.  For  consideiing  three  lunar  echp- 
ses,  vre  shall  demonstrate  the  size  of  the  greatest  difference  at  the  point  of  mean 
movement  and  the  position  of  the  apogee;  we  shall  show  that  considered  in  itself 
this  first  anomaly  can  be  effected  both  by  the  h3"pothesis  of  the  epic^Tle  and  the 
h\q>othesis  of  eccentricity  and  the  appearances  vUl  be  the  same;  but  that  this 
last  h^q^othesis  would  be  more  properl}'  apphed  to  the  second  anomaly  relative 
to  the  sun  in  the  combination  of  both  anomalies. 

And  so,  in  making  this  research,  we  shall  see  that  again  in  the  case  of  the  sim¬ 
ple  anomaly  of  the  moon  the  appearances  are  the  same  in  either  of  these  hy¬ 
potheses  even  if  the  time-periods  of  the  two  returns — (1)  that  relative  to  the 
anomaly  and  (2)  that  relative  to  the  ecliptic — are  not  equal  to  each  other  as  in 
the  case  of  the  sun,  but  are  imequal  as  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  with  only  the 
ratios  being  again  supposed  the  same.  Since,  then,  the  moon  effects  its  return 
with  respect  to  the  ecliptic  more  rapidly  than  its  return  with  respect  to  this 
anomaly,  therefore  it  is  evident  that,  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle,  in  equal 
times  the  epicycle  vill  move  on  the  circle  concentric  with  the  ecliptic  through 
an  arc  greater  than  the  one  similar  to  that  traversed  by  the  moon  on  the  epicycle 
itself;  but  that,  on  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity,  the  moon  vtII  traverse  an 
arc  on  the  eccentric  circle  similar  to  that  traversed  on  the  epicycle,  and  the  ec¬ 
centric  will  turn  about  the  ecliptic's  centre,  in  the  same  direction  as  the  moon,- 
through  an  arc  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  longitudinal  course  over  the  anomalistic 
course — that  is,  the  excess  of  the  concentric  circle's  arc  over  the  epicycle's.  For 
in  this  way  not  only  the  sameness  of  the  ratios  but  also  the  equahty  of  the  timas 
of  each  of  the  movements  vill  be  saved  in  both  hypotheses. 

Now,  these  things  being  supposed  as  necessary  and  immediate  consequences, 

^This  second  anomaly  of  the  moon  with  respect  to  the  sun  is  the  first  of  those  appearances 
which  tie  the  planets  to  the  sun  instead  of  the  earth.  As  we  shall  see  later,  each  of  the  five 
planets  has  an  anomaly  with  respect  to  the  sun  besides  its  other  anomahes.  And  thus  even  on 
the  geocentric  hypothesis  of  Ptolem^^  there  are  manifested  ine\itably  heHocentric  appear¬ 
ances.  And  so  it  is  no  v>*onder  the  Greeks  had  hehocentric  theories.  Xor  is  the  api>earance  of 
the  Copernican  theor}"  anything  very  extraordinar}' ;  Copernicus  had  only  to  look  at  Ptolemy. 
Ptolemy  himself  sees  all  this  when  he  says,  in  Book  I,  that  the  heliocentric  theorj"  would  be 
simpler  as  far  as  the  planets  are  concerned. 

*That  is,  both  movements  of  the  eccentric  h\’pothesis — (1)  that  of  the  moon  on  the  ec- 


121 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

let  there  be  the  circle  ABC  concentric  with  the 
ecliptic,  with  centre  D  and  diameter  AD;  and 
the  epicycle  EF  with  centre  C.  And  let  it  be 
assumed  that,  w’hen  the  epicycle  was  at  A,  the 
moon  was  at  E,  the  epicycle's  apogee;  and 
that  in  the  same  time  the  epicycle  has  tra¬ 
versed  the  arc  AC  and  the  moon  the  arc  EF. 
And  let  DE  and  CF  be  joined.  And  since  the 
arc  AC  is  greater  than  the  arc  similar  to  FF, 
let  BC  be  taken  similar  to  EF  and  let  BD  be 
joined.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  in  the  same  time 
the  eccentric  circle  has  moved  through  angle 
ADBj  the  excess  of  one  of  the  courses  over  the 
other,  and  that  its  centre  and  apogee  have 
come  to  be  along  the  straight  line  BD.  This 
being  so,  let  DG  be  laid  off  equal  to  CF,  and 
let  FG  be  joined.  And  with  centre  G  and  radius  FG,  let  the  eccentric  circle  FH 
be  drawm. 

I  sav  that 

FGiDG::  CD:  CF; 

and  that,  according  to  this  last  hypothesis  also,  the  moon  will  be  at  point  F — 
that  is,  arc  FH  will  also  be  similar  to  arc  EF. 

For  since 

angle  B DC  =  Single  ECF, 

CF  is  parallel  to  DG.  And 

CF  =  DG; 

and  therefore 

FG  =  CD, 

and  is  parallel  to  it.  And 

FG:DG::CD:  CF. 

Again,  since  CD  is  parallel  to  FG, 

angle  BDC  =  angle  FGH. 

But  it  was  supposed 

angle  BDC  =  single  ECF. 

And  so  also  arc  FH  is  similar  to  arc  EF.  Therefore,  in  the  same  time  according 
to  either  hypothesis,  the  moon  has  arrived  at  the  point  F,  since  it  has  moved 
through  the  epicycle's  arc  EF  and  the  eccentric's  arc  FH,  which  have  been 
proved  similar,  and  since  the  epicycle's  centre  has  moved  through  arc  AC  and 
the  eccentric's  centre  through  arc  AB,  the  excess  of  arc  AC  over  arc  EF.  MTiich 
w'as  to  be  proved. 


centric,  and  (2)  that  of  the  eccentric  about  the  echptic^s  centre  or  the  earth — are  from  west 
to  east  in  the  general  direction  of  the  moon’s  movement  on  the  echptic  or  of  the  epicycle’s 
centre  on  the  concentric  circle. 

The  equivalent  epicycHc  hypothesis  is,  of  course,  the  case  where  the  epicycle’s  centre  moves 
counter-clockwise  while  the  epic^xle  itself  turns  clockwise.  In  the  case  of  the  moon,  Ptolemy 
does  not  exphcitly  state,  as  he  does  ^ith  the  other  five  planets,  why  it  is  necessarj’  to  take 
one  epicychc  hypothesis  and  not  the  other.  The  reason  is  obvious.  By  the  tables  of  observa¬ 
tions  it  was  knowm  that  the  time  from  the  moon’s  mean  movement  in  longitude  through  its 
greatest  movement  back  to  the  mean  is  always  less  than  the  time  from  its  mean  movement 
through  its  least  movement  back  to  the  mean. 


122 


PTOLEMY 


And,  even  if  only  the  ratios  are  equal  without  their  respective  terms  being  so, 
and  the  eccentric  circle  is  not  equal  to  the  concentric,  it  is  clear  to  us  as  follows 
that  the  result  will  be  the  same. 

For  let  each  of  the  hypotheses  be  drawn  separately.  And  let  there  be  the  circle 
ABC  concentric  with  the  ecliptic,  with  centre 
D  and  diameter  AD;  and  the  epicycle  EF  with 
centre  C.  And  let  the  moon  be  at  F.  And  again 
let  there  be  the  eccentric  circle  GHK  with  cen¬ 
tre  L  and  diameter  HLM.  And  on  this  diame¬ 
ter  let  there  be  the  ecliptic^s  centre  M;  and  let 
the  point  K  be  the  moon.  And  in  the  first 
figure  let  DCEy  CF,  DF  be  joined;  and  in  the 
second  figure  (?M,  KM,  KL. 

And  let 

CD  :  CE  ::HL:  LM. 

And  let  the  epicycle  have  moved  through 
angle  ADC  and  the  moon  through  angle  ECF 

in  the  same  time.  And  let  the  eccentric  circle  have  moved  through  angle  GMH 
^  and  the  moon  in  turn  through  angle  HLK  in  the 

same  time.  Then,  because  of  the  relations  assumed 
to  hold  between  the  movements, 

angle  FCF  =  angle  HLK 

and 

angle  ADC  =  angle  GMD+angle  HLK. 

This  being  so,  I  say  that,  again  on  either  hypothe¬ 
sis,  in  the  same  time  the  moon  will  appear  to  have 
traversed  equal  arcs;  that  is, 

angle  ADF  =  angle  GMK. 

For  the  moon  at  the  beginning  of  the  interval  is  at 
the  apogees,  and  appears  along  the  straight  lines 
AD  and  GM;  and  at  the  end  of  the  interval  is  at  the 
points  F  and  K,  and  appears  along  the  straight  lines  DF  and  KM. 

For  again  let  arc  BC  be  laid  out  similar  to  each  of  the  arcs  HK  and  EF,  and 
let  BD  be  joined.  Then,  since 

CD  :CF::KL:  LM, 

and  since  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  at  C  and  L  are  for  that  reason  pro¬ 
portional,  therefore  the  triangle  CDF  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  KLM  and 
the  angles  opposite  the  proportional  sides  are  equal.  Therefore 

angle  CFD  =  angle  KML. 

But  also 

angle  DDF  =  angle  CFD 

since  it  is  supposed 

angle  FCF  =  angle  BDC 

and  since,  therefore,  CF  and  BD  are  parallel.  Therefore 

angle  DDF  =  angle  KML. 

But  angle  ADD,  the  excess  of  one  movement  over  the  other,  is  assumed  equal  to 
angle  GMH,  the  passage  of  the  eccentric.  And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  ADF  =  angle  GMK. 


Which  was  to  be  proved. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 


123 


6.  Demonstration  of  the  Moon’s  First  and  Simple  Anomaly 

Now  that  we  have  understood  this  much,  we  shall  demonstrate  this  lunar 
anomaly  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle  for  the  reason  we  assigned,  first  using 
three  of  the  oldest  eclipses  we  have  which  seem  to  have  been  faithfully  recorded, 
and  then  again  three  from  the  present  very  accurately  observed  by  ourselves. 
In  this  way  our  inspection  will  extend  over  the  longest  time  possible;  and  espe¬ 
cially  it  Mill  be  evident  that  the  anomalistic  difference  comes  to  be  very  nearly 
the  same  in  both  cases,  and  that  the  surplus  of  the  mean  movements  is  always 
found  to  agree  with  that  computed  from  the  periods  of  time  already  given  with 
our  corrections.  With  respect,  then,  to  the  demonstration  of  the  first  anomaly 
considered  in  itself,  let  the  hypothesis  of  the  epicycle,  the  one  we  have  chosen, 
be  applied  as  follows: 

Let  the  concentric  circle  be  conceived  on  the  lunar  sphere  and  lying  in  the 
same  plane  with  the  ecliptic.  And  let  another  circle  be  conceived  inclined  to  this 
one  proportionately  to  the  quantity  of  the  moon’s  latitudinal  course,  and  borne 
from  east  to  west  around  the  ecliptic’s  centre  at  a  regular  speed  equal  to  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  latitudinal  movement  over  the  longitudinal.  Then  on  this  oblique 
circle  ^ve  suppose  the  epicycle  to  be  moving  regularly  but  from  west  to  east  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  latitudinal  return,  which  (considered  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic) 
produces,  of  course,  the  longitudinal  movement.  And  on  the  epicycle  we  suppose 
the  moon  to  be  passing  through  the  arc  of  the  apogee  from  east  to  west,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  anomalistic  return.  Yet  in  this  demonstration  we  shall  not  be  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  latitudinal  advance  nor  with  the  obliquity  of  the  lunar  circle 
since  no  appreciable  difference  results  in  the  longitudinal  movement  from  an  in¬ 
clination  of  this  amount. 

I. — Then  of  the  three  ancient  eclipses  observed  in  Babylon,  of  which  we 
spoke,  the  first  is  recorded  as  having  taken  place  in  the  year  1  of  Mardokempad, 
Egyptianwise  Thoth  29-30.  And  the  eclipse  began,  it  is  stated,  more  than  one 
hour  after  the  rise  of  the  moon,  and  the  eclipse  was  total.  Now,  since  the  sun 
^vas  very  nearly  at  the  end  of  the  Fishes,  and  the  night  was  very  nearly  12  equa¬ 
torial  hours,  evidently  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  was  43/^  equatorial  hours  be¬ 
fore  midnight,  and  the  middle  of  the  eclipse,  since  it  was  complete,  was  23^ 
hours  before  midnight.  Therefore,  in  Alexandria,  the  midtime  of  this  eclipse  oc¬ 
curred  33^  equatorial  hours  before  midnight.  For  we  establish  hour-positions 
with  respect  to  its  meridian,  and  the  meridian  through  Alexandria  is  west  of  that 
through  Babylon  by  J^+3^  equatorial  hour.  And  at  that  hour  the  sun’s  true 
position  M’-as  very  nearly  243^°  Mdthin  the  Fishes. 

The  second  of  the  eclipses  is  recorded  as  having  occurred  in  the  year  2  of  Mar¬ 
dokempad,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  18-19.  And  there  was  an  eclipse,  it  says,  of  3 
digits^  from  the  southern  end  at  midnight.  Since,  then,  the  middle  of  the  eclipse 
appears  to  have  occurred  in  Babylon  at  midnight,  it  must  have  occurred  in 
Alexandria  3^+34  hour  before  midnight.  And  at  that  hour  the  sun’s  true 
position  was  13^°  within  the  Fishes. 

The  third  of  the  eclipses  is  recorded  as  having  taken  place  in  the  same  year  2 
of  Mardokempad,  Egyptianwise  Phamenoth  15-16.  And  the  eclipse  began,  it 
says,  after  the  rise  of  the  moon,  and  there  was  an  eclipse  of  more  than  half  from 
the  northern  end.  Now,  since  the  sun  was  near  the  beginning  of  Virgin,  the  night 

^A  digit  is  1/12  of  the  moon^s  apparent  diameter. 


124 


PTOLEMY 


in  Babylon  was  very  nearly  11  equatorial  hours,  and  half  the  night  53^  hours. 
Therefore  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  occurred,  at  most,  5  equatorial  hours  be¬ 
fore  midnight  since  it  began  after  the  moon^s  rise;  and  the  middle  of  the  eclipse 
hours  before  midnight,  since  the  whole  time  of  an  eclipse  of  this  magnitude 
must  have  been  very  nearly  3  hours.  Therefore  in  Alexandria,  in  turn,  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  eclipse  was  effected  4J4  equatorial  hours  before  midnight.  And  at  this 
hour  the  sun^s  true  position  was  very  nearly  334°  within  the  Virgin. 

It  is  thus  clear  that,  from  the  middle  of  the  first  eclipse  to  that  of  the  second, 
the  sun  had  moved,  and  the  moon  too,  349°  15'  over  and  above  the  complete 
circles;  and  from  the  middle  of  the  second  eclipse  to  that  of  the  third  169°30'. 
But  the  interval  of  time  between  the  first  and  second  contains  354  days  and  2J4 
equatorial  hours  for  those  considering  them  simply,  but  relative  to  the  calcula¬ 
tion  of  regular  solar  days  2+34+345  hours;  and  between  the  second  and  third 
176  days  and  again  2034  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  2034  hours 
accurately  considered.  And  the  moon  moves  regularly  (for  in  this  amount  of 
time  there  will  be  no  sensible  difference  even  if  one  follow  revolutions  very  close 
upon  the  true  ones)^  in  354  days  and  2+34+345  equatorial  hours,  306°25'  of 
its  cycle  of  anomaly  over  and  above  the  complete  cir¬ 
cles,  and  345°5T  in  longitude.  And  in  176  days  and 
2034  equatorial  hours,  150°26'  of  its  cycle  of  anomaly, 
and  very  nearly  170°7'  in  longitude.  It  is  clear,  then, 
that  the  306°25'  of  the  epicycle’s  first  interval  have 
added  3°24'  to  the  moon’s  mean  movement;  and  that 
the  150°26'  of  the  second  interval  have  subtracted  37' 
from  the  mean  movement. 

These  things  being  assumed,  let  there  be  the 
moon’s  epicycle  ABC.  And  let  point  A  be  the  moon’s 
position  in  the  middle  of  the  first  eclipse,  and  B  its 
position  in  the  middle  of  the  second,  and  C  its  posi¬ 
tion  in  the  middle  of  the  third.  Let  the  moon’s  move¬ 
ment  on  the  epicycle  be  thought  as  taking  place  from 
B  io  A  and  from  A  to  C  in  such  a  way  that  the  arc 
ACB  of  306°25',  which  it  has  traveled  from  the  first 
eclipse  to  the  second,  adds  3°24'  to  the  mean  move¬ 
ment;  and  that  the  arc  BAC  of  150°26',  which  it 
has  traveled  from  the  second  eclipse  to  the  third, 
subtracts  37'  from  the  mean  movement.  And  there¬ 
fore  in  such  a  way  that  fhe  passage  from  5  to  A  of 
53°35'  subtracts  the  3°24'  from  the  mean  movement, 
and  the  passage  from  A  to  C  of  96°51'  adds  2°47'  to  the 
mean  movement.^ 

^In  establishing  the  mean  positions  for  the  moon  in  each  of  the  two  series  of  eclipses,  the 
lengths  of  the  time-intervals  are  so  small  that  there  is  no  sensible  difference  if  one  use  the 
averages  of  Hipparchus  or  the  corrected  ones  given  by  Ptolemy  in  the  tables.  This  remark  is 
necessary  because  it  is  from  a  comparison  of  the  second  eclipse  in  the  old  series  and  in  the  new 
series,  in  Chapter  7  of  this  Book,  an  interval  of  some  854  Egyptian  years,  that  the  corrections 
are  gotten— very  small,  indeed,  but  appreciable.  Otherwise  Ptolemy  would  be  pulling  himself 
up  by  his  boot-straps. 

^Whatever  A  to  B  adds,  B  to  A  must  subtract,  since  A  to  A  being  a  complete  cycle  neither 
adds  nor  subtracts.  Likewise  if  B  to  C  subtracts  37'  and  B  to  A  3^*24',  then  A  to  C  must  add 
the  difference  between  37'  and  3°24',  or  2°47'. 


THE  AL^UGEST,  IV  125 

Xow,  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  epicycle’s  perigee  to  be  on  the  arc  BAG  is 
clear  from  the  fact  that  this  arc  is  subtractive  and  less  than  a  semicircle.  But  the 
greatest  movement  is  assumed  to  be  at  the  perigee.  Since,  then,  it  must  be  on 
the  arc  BEG,  let  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the  circle  carr\dng  the  epicy¬ 
cle’s  centre  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  D.  And  let  the  straight  lines  DAj  DEB,  DG, 
from  the  center  of  the  three  points  of  eclipse,  be  joined. 

Then,  generally — in  order  that  we  may  easily  apply  this  theorem  in  similar 

demonstrations,  both  in  case  we  prove  them  by  the 
hjT^othesis  of  the  epicycle  as  here,  and  by  the  hy¬ 
pothesis  of  eccentricity  when  the  centre  D  is  taken 
within  the  circle — let  one  of  the  three  straight  lines 
we  just  joined  be  produced  to  the  opposite  arc,  as 
here  we  have  DEB  drawn  from  the  point  B  of  the 
second  eclipse  to  E,  And  let  a  straight  line,  in  this 
case  AGy  join  the  other  two  points  of  eclipse.  And 
from  the  intersection  made  by  the  line  produced,  E 
for  instance,  let  straight  lines  be  joined  to  the  other 
two  points,  in  this  case  the  lines  EA  and  EG.  And  let 
perpendiculars  be  dropped  on  the  straight  lines  from 
these  other  two  points  to  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic, 
that  is  EF  on  AD  and  EG  on  GD.  From  one  of  these 
two  points,  in  this  case  C,  let  the  perpendicular  be  drawm  to  the  line  joining  the 
other  point,  in  this  case  A,  to  the  principal  intersection  made  by  the  line  pro¬ 
duced,  here  E — that  is,  GH  on  AE.  And  from  whatever  intersection  we  extend 
the  construction,  we  shall  always  find  the  same  ratios  resulting  for  the  numbers 
of  the  demonstration;  and  the  choice  is  made  only  ^vith  a  \dew  to  facility. 

Since,  then,  arc  AB  was  proved  to  subtend  3°24'  of  the  ecliptic,  therefore, 
considered  as  an  angle  at  the  ecliptic’s  centre, 

angle  ADB  =  3'^24' 

=  6°48'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEF, 

arc  EF=6^48', 
chord  EF  =  7^7' 

where 

h^’pt.  DE  =  120^. 

Likewise,  since 

arc  AB  =  o3'^Zo\ 

therefore,  being  on  the  circumference,  also 

angle  BE  A  =  53^35'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  seen 

angle  ADB  =  &^AZ'  to  2  rt. 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FA  F  =  46^47'  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AFF, 

arc  FF  =  46®47', 
chord  FF  =  47^38'30’' 

where 

hypt.  AE  =  120^. 


B 


126 


PTOLEMY 


And 

where 

and 


A£;=17p55'32" 
EF  =  7^7\ 


DE  =  120^. 


Again,  since  arc  BAC  subtends  37'  of  the  ecliptic,  considered 
the  centre  of  the  ecliptic, 

angle  BDC  =  d7' 

=  ri4'  to2rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DJS’G, 

arc  EG^rW, 
chord  i^G=lPl7'30" 


where 


as  an  angle  at 


Likewise,  since 


hypt.  DE  =  120p. 
arc  J5AC=150°26', 


being  on  the  circumference, 

angle  BEC=  150°26'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  seen 


angle  J5D(7=  1°14'  to  2  rt. 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  DCE  =149°12'  to  2  rt. 
And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEG, 

arc  jE;G  =  149°12', 
chord  E'(?=115p41'21" 

where 

hypt.  CjB  =  120.p 

And  therefore 

C£'  =  1P20'23" 

where 

EG=in7'30'% 

and 


DE  =  120^, 

and  where  it  was  proved 

AE=17^55'32'\ 

Again,  since  it  was  proved 

arc  AC  =  96°51', 

therefore,  being  on  the  circumference, 

angle  AEC  =  99°5V  to  2  rt. 
Amd  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEH^ 

arc  C^  =  96°51', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arc  EH  =  S3%'. 

And  therefore 

chord  CH  =  S9m'U% 
chord  EH  =  79^37' 55" 


where 


hypt.  CE  =  120^. 


And  therefore 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 


127 


C^-IPO'8", 
£;^  =  0p53'21" 

where 

C^=:1P20'23", 

and  where  it  was  proved 

A^=17P55'32"; 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction. 


AH  =  11^2' IV' 

where 

CH=V0'S". 

And 

sq.  ^i/  =  290Pl4'19'', 

sq,  CH=V0'll" 

which  added  together  give 

sq.  4C'  =  291P14'36". 

Therefore,  in  length, 

4C'=17p3'57", 
CE=  1P20'23" 

where 

DE  =  120^. 

And 

chord  ^C'  =  89P46'14" 

where 

epic.  diam.  =  120p; 

for  it  subtends  arc  AC  and 

arc  ylC=96°51'. 

And  therefore 

Z)£=631P13'48", 

C£=7p2'50" 

where 

4C  =  89P46'14" 

and 

epic.  diam.  =  120p. 

And  so 

arc  C£  =  6°44'l". 

But  it  is  assumed 

arc  BAC=  150°26', 

and  therefore,  by  addition. 

arc  BCE^lbTWV', 
chord  jS£:=117P37'32" 

where 

epic.  diam.  =  120p, 
DE  =  63inZ'A8". 

If,  then,  this  line  BE  were  equal  to  the  epicycle’s  diameter,  the  epicycle’s 
centre  would  fall  on  it,  and  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  would  be  immediately  evi¬ 
dent.  But  since  it  is  less  than  the  diameter,  and  arc  BCE  is  less  than  a  semicircle, 
it  is  clear  that  the  epicycle’s  centre  will  fall  outside  the  sector  BACE. 

Then  let  the  point  K  be  taken  as  centre,  and  let  the  straight  line  DMKL  be 


128 


PTOLEMY 


drawn  from  D,  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic,  through  K  in 
such  a  way  that  point  L  becomes  the  epicycle^s  apogee, 
and  M  the  perigee. 

Since  then 

rect.  BD,  DE  =  rect.  LZ),  DM,  [Eucl.  in,  36] 
and  since  we  have  proved 

DD=117P37'32", 

DD  =  631P13'49", 

and,  by  addition, 

J5D  =  748P51'20" 


where,  as  the  epicycle^s  diameter, 

LKM  =120^, 

therefore 

rect  BD,  DE  =  rect.  LD,  DM  =  472,700p5'32". 

And  again  since 

rect.  LDy  DM+sq.  KM  =  sq.  DKy  [Eucl.  ii,  6] 
and  since,  as  radius  of  the  epicycle, 

+  n  ovoi  rw  A 

sq.  DA:  =  472,700p5'32"+3,600p 
=  476,300p5'32". 

And  therefore,  as  the  radius  of  the  circle  concentric  with 
the  ecliptic  and  carrying  the  epicycle, 

DA  =  690P8'42" 


where,  as  the  epicycle’s  radius, 

a:m=60p. 


And  so 

epic.  rad.  =  5^13' 

where  the  radius  of  the  circle  carrying  the  epicycle  and 
concentric  with  the  eye  is  60^. 

And  in  a  similar  figure  let  fall  KNX  from  the  centre 
K  perpendicular  to  line  BE^  and  let  BK  be  joined. 

Since  then 

DD  =  631P13'48", 

DA  =  half  BE 
=  58P48'46", 

where 

DA  =  690p8'42" 
so  that,  by  addition, 

DDA  =  690p2'34", 

therefore 

DA=119P58'57" 

where 

D/v  =  120^ 

And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DNK^ 
arc  DA=178°2'. 

And  so  also 

angle  DKN^m^2'  to  2  rt. 

=  89^'. 


129 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 
And  therefore,  on  the  epicycle 

arc  MX  =  89°1', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arc  L5X  =  90°59'. 

And 

arc  5X=half  arc  BXE  =  78^35', 

since  it  was  proved 

arc  BXE'~  157°10'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  the  arc  BL  of  the  epicycle,  which  is  the  moon^s 
distance  from  the  apogee  at  the  middle  of  the  second  eclipse,  is  12°24'. 

And  likewise,  since  it  was  proved 

angle  Z)ivA'  =  89°l', 

therefore,  by  subtraction,  angle  RDN,  which  subtends  the  arc  subtracted  from 
the  mean  longitudinal  course  and  resulting  from  the  anomaly  due  to  the  epi¬ 
cycle’s  arc  BL,  is  its  complement  59'.  Therefore  the  moon’s  mean  longitudinal 
position  at  the  middle  of  the  second  eclipse  was  14°44'  within  the  Virgin,  since 
indeed  its  true  position  was  13°45'  within  the  Virgin,  with  the  sun  13°45'  within 
the  Fishes. 

IL — Again,  of  the  three  eclipses  we  have  chosen  from  those  most  carefully  ob¬ 
served  by  us  in  Alexandria,  the  first  occurred  in  the  year  17  of  Hadrian,  Egyp- 
tianwise  Payni  20-21;  and  we  accurately  calculated  the  middle  of  it  to  have  oc¬ 
curred  %  equatorial  hour  before  midnight.  And  the  eclipse  was  total.  At  this 
hour  the  sun’s  true  position  was  very  nearly  13J^°  within  the  Bull. 

The  second  occurred  in  the  year  19  of  Hadrian,  Egyptian  wise  Choiac  2-3;  and 
we  calculated  the  middle  of  it  to  have  occurred  1  equatorial  hour  before  mid¬ 
night.  Aind  there  was  an  eclipse  to  the  extent  of  3^+ of  the  diameter  from  the 
northern  side.  And  at  this  hour  the  sun’s  true  position  was  very  nearly  253^° 
within  the  Balance. 

The  third  of  the  eclipses  occurred  in  the  year  20  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise 
Pharmouthi  19-20;  and  we  calculated  the  middle  of  it  to  have  occurred  4  equa¬ 
torial  hours  after  midnight.  And  there  was  an  eclipse  to  the  extent  of  of  the 
diameter  from  the  northern  side.  And  at  that  hour  the  sun’s  true  position  was 
very  nearly  14°12'  within  the  Fishes. 

Now,  it  is  clear  that  the  moon  and  also  the  sun  have  moved,  from  the  middle 
of  the  first  eclipse  to  the  middle  of  the  second,  161°55'  over  and  above  the  com¬ 
plete  circles;  and  from  the  middle  of  the  second  to  the  middle  of  the  third,  138® 
55'.  The  time  of  the  first  interval  is  1  Egyptian  year  166  days  and  23?^  equa¬ 
torial  hours  simply  considered,  but  23^  hours  accurately  considered,  imd  the 
time  of  the  second  interval  is  again  1  Egyptian  year  137  days  and  5  equatorial 
hours  simply  considered,  but  5^  hours  accurately  considered. 

Now  in  1  year,  166  days,  and  23^  equatorial  hours,  the  moon  makes  a  mean 
movement  of  110°21'  of  its  anomalistic  cycle  over  and  above  the  complete  cir¬ 
cles,  and  very  nearly  169®37'  in  longitude;  and  in  1  year,  137  days,  and  h]/^ 
equatorial  hours,  81®36'  of  its  anomalistic  cycle,  and  very  nearly  137®34'  in 
longitude.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  110°21'  on  the  epicycle  of  the  first  interval 
subtract  7°42'  from  the  mean  longitudinal  course,  and  that  the  81®36'  of  the 
second  interval  add  1°21'  to  the  mean  longitudinal  course. 

Now,  these  things  being  assumed,  let  there  again  be  the  moon’s  epicycle  ABC- 


130 


PTOLEMY 


And  let  the  point  A  be  taken  as  the  moon’s  position  in  the 
middle  of  the  first  eclipse;  B  that  of  the  second  eclipse; 
and  C  that  of  the  third.  And  let  the  movement  of  the 
moon  be  conceived  as  passing  from  A  to  B  and  then  to  C 
in  such  a  way  that  arc  AB  of  1 10°21'  subtracts,  as  we  said, ' 

7°42'  from  the  mean  longitudinal  course;  and  that  arc  BC 
of  81°36'  adds  1^21'  to  the  mean  longitudinal  course;  and 
that  the  remaining  arc  CA  of  168°3'  adds  6°21'. 

That  the  apogee  must  be  on  the  arc  AB  is  clear  from 
the  fact  that  it  can  neither  be  on  arc  BC  nor  arc  CA,  since 
each  of  them  is  additive  and  less  than  a  semicircle.  And 
yet,  as  if  this  were  not  assumed,  let  the  centre  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic  and  of  the  circle  on  which  the  epicycle  is  borne  be 
taken,  and  let  it  be  D.  Let  the  straight  lines  DBA,  DB, 

DC  be  joined  from  the  centre  to  the  three  points  of  eclipse. 

And  vnih  BC  joined,  let  the  straight  lines  EB  and  EG  be 
drawn  from  E  to  B  and  C;  and  EF  and  EG  perpendicular 
to  BD  and  DC;  and  again  from  C  let  CH  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  BE. 

Since  then  arc  AB  subtends  7*^42'  of  the  ecliptic,  there¬ 
fore,  being  at  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic, 

angle  ADJ5  =  7°42' 

=  15^24' to  2  rt.  * 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEF, 

arc  15^24', 
chord  EF  =  imA2" 

where 

hypt.  DE=  120^. 

Likewise,  since 

arc  A^  =  110°21', 

therefore,  being  on  the  circumference, 

angle  AEB  =  110^21'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  ADB  =  15^24'  to  2  rt. 

Therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  EBD  =  94°57'  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEF, 

arc  EF  =  U%7\ 
chdrd  EF  =  SS^2Q'17'^ 

where 

hypt.  BE— 120^, 

And  therefore 

BE  =-21HS'59'' 

where 

EF  =  16HA2\ 

DE=  120^ 

Again,  since  arc  AEC  was  shown  to  embrace  6°21'  of  the  ecliptic,  therefore 
being  at  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic 

angle  ADC  =  6^21' 

=  12%2'  to  2  rt. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEG, 

arc  £^0  =  12^42', 
chord  £(?=13P16'19" 

where 

hypt.  Z)£'  =  120p. 

Likewise,  since,  by  addition, 

arc  ABC  =  m%r, 

therefore,  being  on  the  circumference, 

angle  AEC=1%1%1'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  AZ)C=  12®42'  to  2  rt. 
Therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  ECD=^m^lb'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEG, 

arc  £;G  =  179°15', 


chord  £'(?=119P59'50" 
hypt.  C£;=120P. 
C£;  =  13P16'20" 
£;G=13p16'19", 
Z)£;=120p, 

B£'  =  21P48'59". 


where 

And  therefore 
where 
and 

and  where  it  was  proved 
Again,  since 

arc  £0  =  81*^36', 

therefore,  being  on  the  circumference, 

angle  B^C  =  81°36'  to  2  rt. 
And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEH, 

arc  Ci7  =  8r36', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arc  E'ff  =  98^24'. 

And  therefore 

where 

And  therefore 

where 
and 

Therefore,  by  subtraction. 


chord  CH  =  7Sm'37", 
chord  EH  =  90m'22'' 

hypt.  C£;  =  120p. 

CH  =  Sm'2Q\ 

EH  =  10p2'49" 

CE=lSn&20" 

BE  =  21HS'b9". 

BH^llH&lQ" 


132 

PTOLEMY 

where 

C'F  =  8p40'20". 

And 

sq.  BH  =  iz8m'n", 
sq.  CH  =  75n2'27"; 

and 

sq.  SC=138p31'11"+75p12'27" 

=  213p43'38". 

Therefore,  in  length, 

BC'=14p37'10" 

where 

DE  =  120^, 

CS=13P16'20''. 

But  also 

£C  =  78p24'37" 

where 

epic.  diam.  =  120p, 

for  it  subtends  arc  BC  which  is  81°36'.  And  therefore 

Z)iJ=643P36'39", 

C£  =  7lPll'4" 

where 

5C'  =  78p24'37", 
epic.  diam.  =  120p. 

And  so,  on  the  epicycle, 

arc  Ci;=72°46'10". 

And  it  is  assumed 

arc  CEA  =  168°3'. 

Therefore,  by  subtraction. 

arc  A£;  =  95°16'50"; 

and 

chord  ^£;=88p40'17" 

where 

epic.  diam.  =  120p, 

DE=M3m'39". 

Now  again,  since  arc  AE  was  shown  to  be  less  than  a  semicircle,  it  is  clear  that 
the  epicycle^s  centre  will  fall  outside  the  segment  AE.  Then  let  it  be  taken  and 
let  it  be  K;  and  let  DMKL  be  joined  so  that  again  point  L  becomes  the  apogee 

and  M  the  perigee. 

Now  since 

rect.  ADj  DE  =  rect.  LD,  Z)ilf , 

and  since  we  have  shown  that 

and,  by  addition. 

^i;  =  88p40'17", 

Di;=643P36'39", 

^Z)  =  732p16'5(3" 

where,  as  epicycle^s 

diameter, 

LAW  =  120p, 

therefore 

rect.  LD,  Z)M=471,304p46'17". 

133 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 


L 


And  again,  since 

rect.  LZ),  DM +sq.  KM  =  sq.  DKy 
and  since  ZCM,  the  epicycle^s  radius,  when  squared,  is 
3,600p,  therefore 

sq.  DA:  =  471,304p46'17"+3600p 
=  474,904p46'17". 

And  therefore,  as  the  radius  of  the  circle  bearing  the 
epicycle  and  concentric  with  the  ecliptic, 

DK  =  689^8' 

where,  as  the  epicycle^s  radius, 

KM  =  60p. 


And  so 


epic.  rad.  =  5^14' 

where  the  straight  line  between  the  epicycle^s  centre 
and  the  ecliptic's  centre  is  60^.  And  this  is  very  nearly 
the  same  ratio  as  that  demonstrated  a  little  while 
ago  with  the  other  eclipses. 

Again  with  the  same  figure,  let  the  straight  line 
KNX  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  DEA  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  Ky  and  let  AK  be  joined. 

Now  since 


and 


DD  =  643p36'39", 


DAT  =  half  AD  =  44P20'8" 
so  that,  by  addition, 

DDiV  =  687p56'47" 

where 

DZC  =  689p8', 

therefore  also 

DAr=119P47'36" 

where 

hypt.  DK=120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DKN, 
arc  DiVm73°17'. 

And  so 

angle  DA:iV=  173^17'  to  2  rt. 

=  86°38'30". 

And  therefore,  on  the  epicycle, 

arc  MDX=:86°38'30" 
and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  LAX  =  93°21'30". 

And 

arc  AX  =  half  arc  AD  =  47°38'30", 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  AL  =  45°43', 

But  it  was  assumed 


L 


arc  AD  =  110°21'. 

And  therefore  the  remainder  arc  DL,  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  apogee 
at  the  middle  of  the  second  eclipse,  is  64°38'. 


134 


PTOLEMY 


Likewise,  since  it  was  proved 

angle  DKN  = 

and,  as  its  complement, 

angle  KDN  =  d°22', 

and  since  it  was  assumed 


angle  ADB  =  7°42', 

therefore,  by  subtraction,  angle  LDB,  which  subtends  the  arc  subtracted  from 
the  mean  longitudinal  course  resulting  from  the  anomaly  due  to  the  epicycle^s 
arc  BLj  will  be  4°20'.  And  therefore  the  moon^s  mean  longitudinal  position  at 
the  middle  of  the  second  eclipse  was  29°30'  within  the  Ram,  since  indeed  its 
true  position  was  25°10'  within  the  Ram  with  the  sun  25°10'  within  the  Balance. 


7.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Moon^s  Mean  Movements 
OF  Longitude  and  Anomaly 


Since  we  showed  that  in  the  middle  of  the  second  of  the  old  eclipses  the  moon 
was  situated  14°44'  within  the  Virgin  according  to  mean  longitude,  and  mth 
respect  to  the  anomalistic  cycle  12°24'  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee;  and  that  in 
the  middle  of  the  second  of  our  own  eclipses  it  was  situated  29°30'  within  the 
Ram  according  to  mean  longitude,  and  with  respect  to  the  anomalistic  cycle 
64°38'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee,  therefore  it  is  clear  that,  in  the  interval  of 
time  between  the  two  eclipses,  the  moon  has  run  in  mean  movement  over  and 
above  complete  revolutions  224°46'  in  longitude  and  52°14'  of  its  anomalistic 
cycle.  But  the  interval  of  time  from  the  year  2  of  Mardokempad,  Thoth  18-19, 
equatorial  hours  before  midnight  to  the  year  19  of  Hadrian,  Choiac  2-3, 
1  equatorial  hour  before  midnight  is  854  Egyptian  years,  73  days,  and  233^+3^ 
equatorial  hours  simply  calculated,  but  233^  hours  accurately  calculated  in 
mean  solar  days.  Expressed  entirely  in  days  this  is  311,783  days  2334  equatorial 
hours.  And  we  find  corresponding  to  them,  for  the  daily  movements  we  have  al¬ 
ready  set  up  according  to  the  hypotheses  preceding  the  correction,  over  and 
above  the  complete  revolutions  surpluses  of  224®46'  in  longitude  and  52°31'  in 
the  anomalistic  cycle.  And  so  the  longitudinal  surplus,  as  we  said,  is  found  to  be 
the  same  as  that  deduced  from  our  observations,  but  the  surplus  in  the  anoma¬ 
listic  cycle  exceeds  by  17'.  And  therefore,  before  setting  out  the  tables,  in  order 
to  correct  the  daily  movements,  we  distributed  the  17'  over  the  number  of  days, 
subtracted  the  1H''46''39^*  corresponding  to  each  day  from  the  daily  mean 
movement  of  anomaly  calculated  before  the  correction,  and  found  the  corrected 
figure  to  be  13°3'53"56"^17'''51''59^^  And  in  accordance  with  this  we  made  the 
rest  of  the  calculations  for  the  tables. 


8.  On  the  Epoch  of  the  Moon's  Mean  Movements 
OF  Longitude  and  Anomaly 

In  order  to  establish  the  epochs  of  two  cycles  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptian  wise  Thoth  1  at  midday,  we  take  the  time  from  this  date  to  the  second 
of  the  first  and  nearest  series  of  three  eclipses,  which,  as  we  said,  occurred  in  the 
year  2  of  Mardokempad,  Egyptiamvise  Thoth  18-19,  3^+34  equatorial  hour 
before  midnight.  And  this  makes  a  total  of  27  Egyptian  years,  17  days,  and  very 
nearly  1134  hours  considered  both  simply  and  accurately.  And  corresponding  to 
this  interval  of  time  there  is  a  surplus,  over  and  above  the  complete  revolutions, 
of  123°22'  in  longitude  and  a  surplus  of  lOS'^SS'  of  the  anomalistic  cycle.  If  we. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV  135 

subtract  each  of  these  numbers  from  each  of  the  corresponding  numbers  proper 
to  the  positions  of  the  second  eclipse,  then,  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyp- 
tianwise  Thoth  1  at  midday,  we  shall  have  the  moon\s  mean  position  11°22'  with¬ 
in  the  Bull  and  268^49'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee  in  the  anomalistic  cycle.  And 
its  elongation  from  the  sun  will  be  clearly  70^37',  since  the  sun's  position  at  that 
time  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  0°45'  within  the  Fishes. 

9.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Moon's  Mean  Latitudinal  Movements 

AND  their  Epochs 

Now  this  is  the  way  we  have  established  the  cycles  of  longitude  and  anomaly 
and  their  epochs.  But  in  the  case  of  the  latitudinal  cycles  we  were  quite  wrong 
earlier  in  using  Hipparchus'  assumption  that  the  moon  measures  its  own  circle 
of  revolution  very  nearly  650  times,  and  the  circle  of  [the  earth's]  shadow  2}/2 
times  when  the  moon  is  at  its  mean  distance  at  the  syzygies.^  For  with  these  as¬ 
sumptions  and  the  inclination  of  the  moon's  oblique  circle,  the  limits  of  its  par¬ 
ticular  eclipses  are  given.  Then,  taking  the  intervals  of  eclipse  and  calculating 
from  the  size  of  the  shadows  cast  in  mid-eclipse  the  true  latitudinal  courses  on 
the  oblique  circle  from  either  node,  and  distinguishing  by  means  of  the  anoma¬ 
listic  difference  already  demonstrated  the  periodic  from  the  true  courses,^  we 
find  in  this  way  the  positions  of  the  latitudinal  cycle  at  mid-eclipse  and  the 
surplus  over  and  above  the  complete  revolutions  which  accrues  in  the  time  be¬ 
tween.  But  by  using  more  elegant  methods  which  need  none  of  the  former  hy¬ 
potheses  for  getting  what  is  desired,  we  have  found  that  the  latitudinal  course  is 
quite  faulty.  And  from  the  course  obtained  now  without  them  we  have  proved 
that  these  hypotheses  concerning  magnitudes  and  distances  were  not  right,  and 
we  have  made  corrections. 

We  have  done  likewise  in  the  case  of  the  hypotheses  concerning  Saturn  and 
Mercury,  changing  certain  things  not  altogether  accurately  determined  before 
us  by  having  fallen  later  upon  surer  observations.  For  it  behooves  those  going 
forward  with  this  theory  inquiringly  and  for  the  love  of  truth  to  use  the  new  and 
surest  methods  found,  not  only  for  the  correction  of  the  old  hypotheses  but  also 
of  their  own  if  they  need  it;  and  not  to  think  it  disgraceful  (for  it  is  a  great  and 
divine  profession)  even  if  they  happen  upon  a  correction  for  greater  accuracy 
due  to  others  and  not  only  to  themselves. 

Later  in  this  treatise  we  shall  explain  in  the  proper  places  how  we  prove  each 
of  these  things.  At  present,  for  the  sake  of  sequence,  we  shall  turn  to  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  latitudinal  course.  And  here  is  the  method. 

Now,  in  the  correction  of  the  mean  course  we  first  looked  for  lunar  eclipses 
from  among  those  accurately  recorded,  as  far  apart  in  time  as  possible,  in  which 

^By  the  moon's  mean  distance  at  the  syzygies  is  here  meant  the  linear  distance  from  the 
earth  of  the  centre  of  the  moon's  epicycle  at  the  syzygies.  This  is  speaking  strictly;  practically 
it  is  the  distance  from  the  earth  to  the  moon  when  it  is  at  the  point  of  mean  movement  on  its 
epicycle  at  the  syzygies.  For  it  will  be  seen  later,  in  Book  V,  that  the  moon's  epicycle  is  borne 
on  a  moving  eccentric  in  such  a  way  that  the  epicycle's  centre  is  always  at  the  apogee  of  the 
eccentric  at  the  syzygies.  Hence  the  mean  distance  at  the  syzygies  is  strictly  the  distance  from 
the  earth  to  the  apogee  of  the  moon's  eccentric  circle.  These  distances  are  calculated  in  detail 
in  Chapter  13  of  Book  V. 

^The  true  latitudinal  return  is  the  latitudinal  return  with  respect  to  the  moon;  and  the 
periodic  latitudinal  return  is  the  latitudinal  return  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the  moon's 
epicycle.  Hence,  as  we  shall  see,  when  the  anomahstic  difference  is  known  it  is  possible  to  find 
the  latitudinal  position  of  the  epicycle's  centre. 


136  PTOLEMY 

the  magnitudes  of  the  shadows  were  equal,  near  the  same  node  with  both  shad¬ 
ows  either  on  the  southern  or  northern  side,  and  in  which,  moreover,  the  moon 
was  at  the  same  distance  from  the  earth.  All  this  being  so,  it  necessarily  follows 
that  the  moon^s  centre  in  each  of  the  eclipses  is  equidistant  on  the  same  side  of 
the  same  node;  and,  therefore,  that  the  true  course  of  the  moon  embraces  com¬ 
plete  latitudinal  cycles  in  the  time  between  the  observations. 

We  then  took,  first,  the  eclipse  observed  in  Babylon  in  the  year  31  of  Darius, 
Egyptian  wise  Tybi  3-4  at  the  middle  of  the  sixth  hour;  and  the  moon  was 
eclipsed  to  a  breadth  of  2  digits  from  the  southern  side. 

Second,  we  took  that  observed  in  Alexandria  in  the  year  9  of  Hadrian,  Egyp- 
tianwise  Pachom  17-18  at  3^  equatorial  hours  before  midnight;  and  the  moon 
was  eclipsed  likewise  to  the  extent  of  3^  of  its  diameter  from  the  southern  side. 

And  the  latitudinal  course  of  the  moon  was  in  each  eclipse  near  the  descend¬ 
ing  node.  For  this  is  taken  from  more  general  hypotheses.  And  the  distance  was 
very  nearly  equal  and  a  little  towards  the  perigee  from  the  mean.  For  this  be¬ 
comes  clear  from  the  previous  demonstrations  of  the  anomaly.  Now  since,  when¬ 
ever  the  moon  is  eclipsed  from  the  southern  side,  its  centre  is  north  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  it  is  clear  the  moon,  in  each  of  the  eclipses,  precedes  the  descending  node  by 
an  equal  amount. 

But  at  the  first  eclipse  the  moon  was  100°19'  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee,  for 
the  middle  of  this  eclipse  occurred  in  Babylon  3^  hour  before  midnight,  and  in 
Alexandria  IJ^  hours  before  midnight.  And  the  time  from  its  epoch  in  the  reign 
of  Nabonassar  totals  256  years,  122  days,  and  10^  equatorial  hours  simply  con¬ 
sidered,  but  1034  hours  with  respect  to  mean  solar  days.  Therefore,  the  true 
course  was  less  than  the  periodic  course  by  5°L  In  the  second  eclipse  the  moon 
was  251°53'  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee.  Here  the  time  from  the  epoch  to  the 
middle  of  the  eclipse  totals  871  years,  256  days,  and  8^  equatorial  hours  con¬ 
sidered  simply,  but  83^2  accurately  considered.  Therefore,  the  true  course  was 
more  than  the  mean  course  by  4°53'.  Consequently,  in  the  interval  of  time  be¬ 
tween  the  two  eclipses,  which  contains  615  Egyptian  years,  133  days,  and  21  + 
34+ equatorial  hours,  the  true  latitudinal  course  of  the  moon  consists  of  com¬ 
plete  cycles;  but  the  periodic  falls  short  of  complete  cycles  by  a  total  of  9°53' 
from  the  two  anomalistic  differences.  But  calculated  from  the  mean  courses  set 
out  according  to  Hipparchus^  hypotheses,  the  periodic  course  falls  short  of  com¬ 
plete  restitutions  by  very  nearly  10°2'.  Therefore  the  mean  latitudinal  course 
is  9'  greater  than  his  hypotheses  allow. 

Now,  distributing  these  over  the  given  number  of  days  which  is  very  nearly 
224,609,  and  adding  the  resulting  8'''39^18"^‘  to  the  daily  mean  movement  al¬ 
ready  demonstrated  according  to  those  hypotheses,  we  found  the  corrected  daily 
mean  movement  to  be  13°1345"39'“48''^56'^37^^  And  again,  in  accordance  with 
this  result,  we  made  out  the  rest  of  the  additions  in  the  tables. 

Once  the  periodic  latitudinal  movement  had  been  demonstrated  in  this  way, 
in  order  to  establish  its  position  we  again  looked  for  an  interval  between  two 
well-observed  eclipses  having  the  same  incidents  as  the  former — that  is,  where 
the  distances  of  the  moon  were  very  nearly  equal,  and  the  shadows  cast  were 
equal,  being  in  both  cases  either  on  the  northern  side  or  on  the  southern  side, 

^This  is  taken  from  the  Table  of  the  Moon^s  First  and  Simple  Anomaly  which  is  Chapter  10 
of  this  Book.  This  table  is  only  for  the  anomahes  at  the  syzygies  because  of  the  later  use  of  an 
eccentric  deferent. 


137 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

but  where  the  nodes  were  no  longer  the  same  but  opposite. 

The  first  of  these  eclipses  is  the  one  we  used  in  connection  with  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  anomaly,  Avhich  occurred  in  the  year  2  of  Mardokempad,  Egyp¬ 
tian  wise  Thoth  18-19,  at  midnight  in  Babylon,  and  3^+3^  equatorial  hour  be¬ 
fore  midnight  in  Alexandria.  And  the  moon  was  observed  to  be  eclipsed  3  digits’ 
breadth  from  the  south. 

The  second  is  the  one  Hipparchus  used,  occurring  in  the  year  20  of  Darius, 
successor  of  Cambyses,  Egyptianwise  Epiphi  28-29,  63^  equatorial  hours  after 
nightfall.  And  here  likewise  the  moon  was  eclipsed  to  the  extent  of  a  quarter  of 
its  diameter  from  the  southern  side.  The  middle  of  the  eclipse  in  Babylon  was 
at  ^  equatorial  hour  before  midnight,  since  a  half-night  at  that  time  w^as  very 
nearly  6 +3^ +34  equatorial  hours,  and  in  Alexandria  1J4  equatorial  hours  be¬ 
fore  midnight. 

Each  of  these  eclipses  occurred  when  the  moon  was  near  the  apogee,  but  the 
first  at  the  ascending  node  and  the  second  at  the  descending  node,  so  that  the 
moon’s  centre  was  an  equal  distance  north  of  the  ecliptic  in  these  eclipses  also. 
Then  let  there  be  the  oblique  circle  of  the  moon  ABC  with  diameter  AC;  and 

let  point  A  be  supposed  the  ascending  node,  C  the 
descending  node,  and  B  the  northernmost  limit. 
And  let  equal  arcs  AD  and  CE  be  cut  off  from 
each  of  the  nodes  A  and  C,  in  the  direction  of  the 
northern  limit  B,  so  that  in  the  first  eclipse  the 
moon’s  centre  is  at  D,  and  in  the  second  at  E, 
But  the  time  from  the  epoch  to  the  first  eclipse 
is  27  Egyptian  years,  17  days,  and  1134  equa¬ 
torial  hours  considered  both  simply  and  accurate¬ 
ly.  And,  therefore,  the  moon  was  12°24'  from  the 
epicycle’s  apogee  and  the  periodic  course  was  59' 
greater  than  the  true  one,  and  the  time  from  the 
epoch  to  the  second  eclipse  is  likewise  245  Egyp¬ 
tian  years,  327  days,  and  10 +^+34  equatorial  hours  simply  considered  and 
1034  accurately  considered.  The  moon  hence  ^vas  2°44'  from  the  epicycle’s  apo¬ 
gee,  and  the  periodic  course  was  13'  greater  than  the  true  one.  The  time  betw^een 
the  observations  (amounting  as  it  does  to  218  Egyptian  years,  309  days,  and 
23}4  equatorial  hours)  gives,  according  to  the  mean  latitudinal  movement  just 
demonstrated,  a  surplus  of  160°4'. 

Now,  with  these  things  in  mind  let  the  mean  course  of  the  moon’s  centre  be 
in  the  first  eclipse  at  F,  and  in  the  second  at  G.  And  since 

arc  FBG==  160°4', 
arc  DF  —  59\ 

SLTcEG=iy, 

therefore 

arc  ED  =  160^50'. 

And  therefore 

arc  AD+arc  (7E  =  19°10' 
the  rest  of  the  semicircle.  And  since 

arc  AD  =  arc  CE, 

therefore 

arc  AD  =  arc  CE  =  9°35'. 


138 


PTOLEMY 


This  is  the  amount  by  which  the  moon’s  true  course,  in  the  first  eclipse,  lay  east 
of  the  ascending  node,  and,  in  the  second  echpse,  lay  west  of  the  descending 
node.  Therefore,  by  addition  and  subtraction, 

arc  10^34', 
arc  C(?  =  9°22'. 

And  so  the  moon’s  periodic  course,  in  the  first  eclipse,  lay  east  of  the  ascend¬ 
ing  node  10°34',  and  was  280°34'  from  the  northern  limit  B;  and,  in  the  second 
eclipse,  lay  west  of  the  descending  node  9°22',  and  was  80°38'  from  the  same 
northern  limit. 

Finally,  since  the  time  from  the  epoch  to  the  middle  of  the  first  eclipse  em¬ 
braces  a  latitudinal  surplus  of  286°19',  therefore,  if  we  subtract  this  surplus 
from  a  circle  plus  the  280^34'  representing  the  position  of  the  first  eclipse,  we 
shall  have  the  epoch  of  the  latitudinal  cycle  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyp¬ 
tian  wise  Thoth  1  at  midday;  and  it  will  be  354°  15'  from  the  northern  limit. 

As  for  the  determinations  of  the  calculations  for  the  conjunctions  and  full 
moons — since  for  these  passages  we  need  take  no  heed  of  the  second  anomaly  to 
be  demonstrated  later — ^^ve  shall  set  out  the  table  of  the  particular  sections  geo¬ 
metrically  again  as  in  the  case  of  the  sun.  And  we  shall  do  it  by  making  use  of 
the  ratio  of  60  to  534j  and  dividing  as  before  the  quadrants  at  the  apogee  into 
sections  of  6°  and  the  quadrants  at  the  perigee  into  sections  of  3°,  so  that  again 
the  scheme  of  the  table  is  similar  to  that  of  the  sun’s,  with  45  rows  and  3  col¬ 
umns.  The  first  two  columns  contain  the  numbers  representing  the  degrees  of 
anomaly,  and  the  third  the  corresponding  degrees  to  be  added  or  subtracted. 
They  are  to  be  subtracted  in  computing  the  movement  in  longitude  and  latitude 
when  the  total  number  representing  the  arc  of  anomaly  from  the  epicycle’s  apo¬ 
gee  is  less  than  180°,  and  are  to  be  added  when  it  exceeds  180°.  See  following 
table : 


THE  ALIVIAGEST,  IV  139 


10.  Table  of  the  Moon’s  First  and  Simple  Anomaly 


Common 

numbers 

Additive — 
subtractive 

Common 

numbers 

Additive — 
subtractive 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

6 

354 

0 

29 

120 

240 

4 

31 

12 

348 

0 

57 

123 

237 

4 

24 

18 

342 

1 

25 

126 

234 

4 

16 

24 

336 

1 

53 

129 

231 

4 

7 

30 

330 

2 

19 

132 

228 

3 

57 

36 

324 

2 

44 

135 

225 

3 

46 

42 

318 

3 

8 

138 

222 

3 

35 

48 

312 

3 

31 

141 

219 

3 

23 

54 

306 

3 

51 

144 

216 

3 

10 

60 

300 

4 

8 

147 

213 

2 

57 

66 

294 

4 

24 

150 

210 

2 

43 

72 

288 

4 

38 

153 

207 

2 

28 

78 

282 

4 

49 

156 

204 

2 

13 

84 

276 

4 

56 

159 

201 

1 

57 

90 

270 

4 

59 

162 

198 

1 

41 

93 

267 

5 

0 

165 

195 

1 

25 

96 

264 

5 

1 

168 

192 

1 

9 

99 

261 

5 

0 

171 

189 

0 

52 

102 

258 

4 

59 

174 

186 

0 

35 

105 

255 

4 

57 

177 

183 

0 

18 

108 

252 

4 

53 

180 

180 

0 

0 

111 

249 

4 

49 

114 

246 

4 

44 

117 

243 

4 

38 

11.  That  the  Quantity  of  the  Moon’s  Anomaly  as  Given  by 
Hipparchus  did  not  Differ  because  of  the  Dissimilarity 
IN  Hypotheses,  but  because  of  the  Calculations 

These  things  having  been  demonstrated  in  this  way,  it  would  be  reasonable  to 
try  and  find  out  why,  in  the  case  of  the  lunar  ecHpses  compared  by  Hipparchus 
in  his  research  on  this  anomaly,  the  ratio  does  not  tall}^  with  that  demonstrated 
by  us;  and  why  the  first  ratio,  demonstrated  according  to  the  hypothesis  of  ec¬ 
centricity,  does  not  agree  mth  the  second  calculated  according  to  the  hypothesis 
of  the  epicycle.  For  according  to  the  first  demonstration,  he  finds  the  ratio  of  the 
eccentric’s  radius  to  the  line  between  its  centre  and  the  ecliptic’s  centre  to  be 
very  nearly  3,144  to  327^,  which  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  60^  to  6^15'.  And 
according  to  the  second  demonstration,  he  finds  the  ratio  of  the  line  from  the 


140  PTOLEMY 

ecliptic^s  centre  to  the  epicycle^s  centre  to  the  epicycle^s  radius  to  be  3,1223/^  to 
2473^,  which  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  60^  to  4p46'.  And  the  ratio  of  60  to  634 
makes  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference  5°49';  and  the  ratio  of  60^  to  4^46' 
makes  the  greatest  difference  4p34'.  But  in  our  calculations  the  ratio  of  60  to  534 
makes  the  greatest  difference  very  nearly  5°. 

Now,  it  became  evident  to  us  a  little  way  back,  from  the  fact  that  the  same 
appearances  would  result  interchangeably  from  either  hypothesis,  that  this  dis¬ 
crepancy  does  not  follow,  as  some  think,  from  the  difference  of  the  hypotheses; 
and  that  if  we  should  make  our  calculations  with  numbers  we  would  find  the 
same  ratio  resulting  from  either  hypothesis  if  one  should  follow  the  same  ap¬ 
pearances  for  each,  and  not  different  ones  like  Hipparchus.  For  in  this  way,  with 
different  eclipses  supposed,  it  is  possible  for  the  error  to  have  occurred,  either 
because  of  the  observations  themselves  or  because  of  the  calculations  of  the  in¬ 
tervals. 

In  these  eclipses  we  find  the  syzygies  well  observed  and  we  find  that  they  oc¬ 
curred  according  to  the  hypotheses  of  regular  and  irregular  movements  we  have 
just  demonstrated.  But  we  find  that  the  calculations  of  the  intervals  by  which 
the  ratio  is  demonstrated  were  not  made  with  the  greatest  care  possible.  And  be¬ 
ginning  wdth  the  first  three  eclipses  we  shall  go  through  each  one  of  these  calcu¬ 
lations. 

Now’  he  says  these  three  eclipses  w’ere  given  out  by  those  crossing  over  from 
Babylon  as  having  been  observed  there,  that  the  first  of  them  occurred  in  the 
Athenian  magistracy  of  Phanostratus  in  the  month  of  Poseideon,  and  that  the 
moon  was  eclipsed  to  the  extent  of  a  small  bit  of  its  circle  on  the  side  of  the  sum¬ 
mer  rising  point,  the  night  failing  a  half  hour  of  being  finished.  And  he  says  it 
w’as  still  eclipsed  w’hen  setting.  Now^,  this  date  is  the  year  366  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptianwdse,  as  he  himself  says,  Thoth  26-27,  534  seasonal  hours  after  mid¬ 
night,  since  there  remained  a  half  hour  of  night.  But  w’hen  the  sun  is  at  the  end 
of  the  Archer  in  Babylon,  the  night  hour  is  18°  equatorial  time.  For  then  the 
night  is  14%  equatorial  hours.  Therefore  the  534  seasonal  hours  come  to  6% 
equatorial  hours.  The  beginning  of  the  eclipse  hence  occurred  18%  equatorial 
hours  after  midday  of  Thoth  26.  But  since  a  small  part  w’as  shadow’ed,  the  whole 
time  of  the  eclipse  must  have  been  very  nearly  134  hours.  Therefore  in  Alex¬ 
andria  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  must  have  occurred  1834  equatorial  hours  after 
midday  of  Thoth  26.  And  the  time  from  the  epoch  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar 
to  the  eclipse  in  question  is  365  Egyptian  years,  25  days,  and  18J4  equatorial 
hours  considered  simply,  but  1834  hours  considered  accurately.  And  calculating 
according  to  our  hypotheses  w’e  find  the  sun^s  true  position  at  this  time  to  be 
28°18'  w’ithin  the  Archer;  and  find  the  moon^s  mean  position  to  be  24°20' 
within  the  Tw’ins,  but  true  position  to  be  28°17',  since  according  to  its  anom, 
alistic  cycle  it  is  227°43'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

Again,  he  says,  the  next  eclipse  occurred  in  the  Athenian  magistracy  of 
Phanostratus  in  the  month  of  Scirophorion,  but  Egyptian  wise  Phamenoth  24-25. 
And  the  moon  w’as  eclipsed,  he  says,  on  the  side  of  the  summer  rising  point  at 
the  end  of  the  first  hour  of  the  night.  Now,  this  date  is  the  year  366  of  Nabonas¬ 
sar,  Phamenoth  24-25,  at  most  5J4  seasonal  hours  before  midnight.  But  w^hen 
the  sun  is  at  the  extremity  of  the  Twins,  the  night-hour  in  Babylon  is  12°  equa¬ 
torial  time.  Therefore  534  seasonal  hours  make  4%  equatorial  hours,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  eclipse  occurred  7%  equatorial  hours  after  midday  of  Phame- 


141 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IV 

noth  24.  But  since  the  whole  eclipse  is  recorded  as  having  lasted  3  hours,  the 
middle  of  the  eclipse  evidently  occurred  9y{o  equatorial  hours  after  midday. 
In  Alexandria,  therefore,  it  must  have  occurred  very  nearly  834  equatorial  hours 
after  midday.  And  again  the  time  from  the  epochs  to  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  is 
365  Egyptian  years,  203  days,  and  834  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but 
7+34+34  hours  accurately  considered.  And  we  find  the  sun^s  true  position  at 
this  time  to  be  21®46'  within  the  Twins;  and  the  moon^s  mean  position  to  be 
23°58'  within  the  Archer,  but  true  position  21°48',  since  according  to  its  anom¬ 
alistic  cycle  it  is  27°37'  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee.  And  the  interval  from  the 
first  to  the  second  eclipse  comes  to  177  days  and  13%  equatorial  hours,  and 
173°28'  of  the  sun’s  movement,  while  Hipparchus  proceeded  as  if  the  interval 
were  177  days  and  13+34+34  equatorial  hours,  and  172%®  of  the  sun’s  move¬ 
ment. 

And  he  says  the  thii'd  eclipse  occurred  in  the  Athenian  magistracy  of  Evan- 
drus  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  of  Poseideon,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  16-17.  And 
the  eclipse,  he  says,  was  total,  beginning  from  the  direction  of  the  summer  rising 
point  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  hour  of  the  night.  Now,  this  date  is  the  year  367 
of  Nabonassar,  Thoth  16-17,  at  most  234  hours  before  midnight.  But  when  the 
sun  is  about  two-thirds  the  way  within  the  Archer,  the  night-hour  in  Babylon  is 
nearly  18°  equatorial  time.  Therefore  234  seasonal  hours  make  3  equatorial 
hours.  And  so  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  occurred  9  equatorial  hours  after  mid¬ 
day  of  Thoth  16.  But  since  the  eclipse  was  total,  the  whole  time  of  the  eclipse 
was  very  nearly  4  equatorial  hours,  and  the  middle  of  it  was  evidently  11  hours 
after  midday.  In  Alexandria,  therefore,  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  must  have  oc¬ 
curred  1034  equatorial  hours  after  midday  of  Thoth  16.  And  the  time  from  the 
epochs  to  the  middle  of  this  eclipse  is  366  Egyptian  years,  15  days,  and  again 
10%  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  9  +34+  34  hours  accurately  con¬ 
sidered.  At  this  time  we  find  the  sun’s  true  position  to  be  17°30'  within  the 
Archer;  and  the  moon’s  mean  position  17°21'  within  the  Twins,  but  its  true  posi¬ 
tion  17°28'  because,  according  to  its  anomalistic  cycle,  it  is  181°12'  from  the  epi¬ 
cycle’s  apogee.  And  the  interval  from  the  second  to  the  third  eclipse  comes  to 
177  days  and  2  equatorial  hours,  and  175°44'  of  the  sun’s  movement,  while  Hip¬ 
parchus  again  assumes  the  interval  to  be  177  days  and  1%  hours,  and  175°8'  of 
the  sun’s  movement. 

Now,  in  his  calculations  of  the  intervals  he  appears  to  have  made  an  error,  in 
the  case  of  the  days,  of  %  equatorial  hour  and  %  equatorial  hour;  and,  in  the 
degrees  of  the  sun’s  movement,  to  have  made  an  error  of  very  nearly  %°  in  each 
of  them.  And  this  is  enough  to  exclude  just  a  chance  disagreement  in  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  ratio. 

And  next  we  shall  pass  to  the  three  later  eclipses  set  out  by  him,  which  he  says 
were  observed  in  Alexandria.  He  says  the  first  of  these  occurred  in  the  year  54  of 
the  Second  Callippic  Period,  Egyptianwise  Mesore  16,  in  which  the  moon  began 
to  be  eclipsed  34  hour  before  rising  and  returned  to  its  full  size  in  the  middle  of 
the  third  hour.  Therefore  the  mid-eclipse  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  the  second 
hour  or  5  seasonal  hours  before  midnight,  and  about  as  many  equatorial  hours 
since  the  sun  was  near  the  end  of  the  Virgin.  And  so  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  oc¬ 
curred  in  Alexandria  7  equatorial  hours  after  midday  of  Mesore  16.  The  time 
from  the  epochs  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar  is  546  Egyptian  years,  345  days, 
and  7  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  634  hours  accurately  considered. 


142  PTOLEMY 

And  again  we  find  that  at  this  time  the  sun's  true  position  is  26°6'  within  the 
Virgin;  and  the  moon's  mean  position  22°  within  the  Fishes,  and  its  true  position 
26°7'  because,  according  to  its  anomalistic  cycle,  it  is  300°13'  from  the  epicy¬ 
cle's  apogee. 

The  next  eclipse  occurred,  he  says,  in  the  year  55  of  the  same  period,  Egyp¬ 
tian  wise  Mechir  9;  and  it  began  after  the  night  had  run  53^  hours,  and  the  eclipse 
was  total.  Therefore  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  occurred  11}^  equatorial  hours 
after  midday  of  Mechir  9,  since  the  sun  was  now  near  the  end  of  the  Fishes.  And 
the  middle  of  the  eclipse  was  133^  equatorial  hours  after  midday  since  the  e- 
clipse  of  the  moon  was  total.  The  time  from  the  epochs  to  the  middle  of  the 
eclipse  is  547  Egj^ptian  years,  158  days,  and  very  nearly  13J^  equatorial  hours 
both  simply  and  accurately  computed.  Likewise  ^ve  find  that  at  this  time  the 
sun's  true  position  is  26°17'  within  the  Fishes;  and  the  moon's  mean  position 
1°7'  w  ithin  the  Balance,  and  its  true  position  26°16'  within  the  Virgin,  since  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  anomalistic  cycle  it  is  109°28'  from  the  apogee.  And  the  interval 
from  the  first  to  the  second  eclipse  comes  to  178  days  and  6+ J^+3^  equatorial 
hours,  and  180°11'  of  the  sun's  movement,  w^hile  Hipparchus  proceeded  as  if  the 
interval  were  178  days  and  6  equatorial  hours,  and  180°20'  of  the  sun's  move¬ 
ment. 

And  he  says  the  third  eclipse  occurred  in  the  same  year  55  of  this  Second  Peri¬ 
od,  Egyptianwise  IMesore  5;  and  it  began  after  the  night  had  run  6%  hours,  and 
the  eclipse  w^as  total.  The  middle  of  the  eclipse,  he  says,  occurred  at  about  83^^ 
hours  in  the  night,  that  is  23^  seasonal  hours  after  midnight.  But  w^hen  the  sun 
is  about  the  middle  of  the  Virgin,  the  night-hour  in  Alexandria  is  14%°  equa¬ 
torial  time.  Therefore  the  23^^  seasonal  hours  make  very  nearly  234  equatorial 
hours.  And  so  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  occurred  14%  equatorial  hours  after 
midday  of  Mesore  5.  Again  the  time  from  the  epochs  to  the  middle  of  this  eclipse 
is  547  Egyptian  years,  334  days,  and  14%  equatorial  hours  simply  considered, 
but  13+34+%  accurately  considered.  And  w^e  find  that  the  sun's  true  position 
at  this  time  is  15°  12'  wdthin  the  Virgin;  and  the  moon's  mean  position  10°24' 
within  the  Fishes,  but  true  position  15°13',  since  according  to  its  anomalistic  cy¬ 
cle  it  is  249°9'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee.  And  the  interval  from  the  second  to 
the  third  eclipse  comes  to  176  days  and  %  equatorial  hour,  and  168°55'  of  the 
sun's  movement,  while  Hipparchus  again  assumes  this  interv^al  to  be  176  days 
and  1%  equatorial  hours,  and  168°33'  of  the  sun's  movement. 

Therefore  it  here  appears  that  in  the  degrees  of  the  sun's  movement  he  has 
made  an  error  of  very  nearly  (34+34)'^?  error  in  days  of  very  nearly  34+ 

%+%o  equatorial  hour.  These  errors  can  work  an  appreciable  difference  in  the 
ratio  of  the  hypothesis. 

Now  we  have  seen  the  cause  of  this  disagreement.  We  have  also  seen  that  wdth 
still  more  confidence  w’e  can  use  the  ratio  of  anomaly  demonstrated  by  us  for  the 
moon's  syzygies,  for  their  eclipses  are  found  likewise  to  agree  most  completely 
with  our  hypotheses. 


BOOK  FIVE 


1.  On  the  Construction  of  the  Astrolabe 

We  now  find  that  the  hypothesis  set  up  with  reference  to  the  first  and  simple 
anomaly  is  sufficient  for  the  moon^s  syzygies  with  respect  to  the  sun,  both  the 
synodical  and  the  plenilunar,  as  well  as  for  the  eclipses  which  accompany  them, 
even  if  we  take  this  anomaly  by  itself.  But,  as  regards  the  particular  passages  of 
the  moon’s  other  positions  relative  to  the  sun,  it  would  not  be  found  sufficient. 
For,  as  we  said,  a  second  anomaly  of  the  moon  is  discovered  relative  to  its 
elongations  from  the  sun,  an  anomaly  which  is  reduced  to  the  first  at  the  syzy¬ 
gies,  and  is  greatest  at  the  first  and  third  quarters.  We  were  brought  to  this  ex¬ 
amination  and  opinion  by  the  courses  of  the  moon  observed  and  recorded  by 
Hipparchus,  and  by  those  we  ourselves  obtained  with  an  instrument  we  con¬ 
structed  for  this  purpose.  And  here  is  the  kind  of  thing  it  is. 

We  take  two  circles  accurately  turned  with  four  perpendicular  surfaces  each, 
similar  in  magnitude,  and  in  every  way  equal  and  similar  to  each  other.  And  we 
fit  them  at  right  angles  to  each  other  with  a  common  diameter,  so  that  one  of 
them  is  conceived  to  be  the  ecliptic  and  the  other  becomes  the  meridian  through 
the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the  equator  [solstitial  colure].  On  this  circle  we 
take,  with  the  side  of  the  inscribed  square,  the  points  defining  the  poles  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  we  place  at  both  of  them  pivots  projecting  from  the  inside  and  out¬ 
side  surfaces.  And  on  the  outside  pivots  we  place  another  circle  having  its  con¬ 
cave  surface  exactly  touching  everywhere  the  convex  surface  of  the  circles  al¬ 
ready  fitted  together,  and  able  to  revolve  in  longitude  about  these  poles  of  the 
ecliptic.  Likewise  on  the  inside  pivots  we  place  another  circle  having  its  convex 
surface  everywhere  exactly  touching  the  concave  surface  of  the  two  circles  and 
likewise  revolving  in  longitude  about  the  same  poles  as  the  outside  circle.  Now, 
dividing  this  inside  circle  and  the  one  used  for  the  ecliptic  each  into  the  usual 
360  parts  and  these  in  turn  into  as  many  parts  as  practicable,  we  fit  in  under  the 
inner  circle  another  little  circle  with  diametrically  opposite  projecting  sights. 
And  we  fit  it  in  so  that  it  can  move  in  the  same  plane  with  this  inner  circle  with 
respect  to  each  of  the  poles,  for  latitudinal  observations.  With  this  done,  on 
the  circle  we  supposed  through  both  sets  of  poles,  we  lay  off,  from  each  of 
the  ecliptic’s  poles,  the  arc  we  computed  to  lie  between  the  ecliptic’s  poles 
and  the  equator’s.  We  place  the  limits  of  these  arcs  diametrically  opposite 
each  other  on  the  meridian  like  that  exhibited  in  the  beginning  of  this  treatise 
relative  to  the  observations  of  the  meridian  arc  between  the  tropics,  so  that, 
when  this  meridian  has  been  placed  in  the  same  position  (in  other  words 
when  it  has  been  placed  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon  and  in 
accordance  with  the  height  of  the  pole  of  the  place  in  question  and  parallel 
to  the  plane  of  the  natural  meridian)  then  the  inner  circles  may  move  about 
the  equator’s  poles  from  east  to  west  in  accord  with  the  prime  movement  of 
the  universe. 


143 


144 


PTOLEMY 


Now,  arranging  the  instrument  in  this  way,  whenever 
could  appear  together  above  the  earth,  we  placed  the  outsid( 
labe  as  nearly  as  possible  at  the  sun’s  degree  at  that  hour.  A 
colure  until,  with  the  intersection  of  the  circles  at  the  sun’s 
cisely  to  the  sun  itself,  the  two  circles,  the  ecliptic  and  thi 
poles,  obscured  each  other;  or,  if  it  were  a  star  being  sighted, 
placed  at  one  side  of  the  outside  circle,  already  correctly  arra 
proper  section  of  the  ecliptic,  the  star  as  if  stuck  to  both  su 
the  opposite  side  in  the  plane  through  both  circles.  We  mov( 
side  circle  of  the  astrolabe  towards  the  moon  or  any  other  s 
until,  simultaneously  with  the  sun  or  star  in  question,  the  m 
be  examined  is  lined  up  with  both  sights  of  the  little  circle  f 
side  circle. 

In  this  way,  we  find  out,  from  the  inside  circle’s  intersect 
the  circle  corresponding  to  the  ecliptic,  what  longitudinal  se 
they  occupy  and  how  many  degrees  distant  they  are  either  n( 
circle  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles.  And  this  last  reading  is  ma 
division  of  the  inner  circle,  from  the  interval  between  the  r 
sight  of  the  little  circle  fitted  under  it  and  the  ecliptic. 

2.  On  the  Hypothesis  of  the  Moon’s  Double 

Now,  with  this  kind  of  observation,  the  moon’s  distances 
sun,  both  those  recorded  by  Hipparchus  and  those  observec 
at  times  to  agree  with  the  calculations  made  according  to  the 
advanced,  and  at  other  times  to  disagree  and  differ,  somet 
times  a  great  deal.  With  a  continuously  greater  and  more  n 
of  our  own,  we  learned  concerning  the  order  of  this  irregula 
conjunctions  and  full  moons  there  was  either  little  or  no  appr 
and  only  such  as  the  moon’s  parallaxes  could  account  for;  an( 
the  first  and  third  quarters,  there  is  very  little  or  no  discrepa 
is  at  the  epicycle’s  apogee  or  perigee,  but  the  most  when  th 
courses  effects  the  greatest  difference  of  first  anomaly.  We  f( 
ever  of  the  two  semicircles  the  first  anomaly  is  subtractive,  ’ 
is  found  to  be  advanced  even  less  than  the  result  of  this  first 
but,  when  it  is  additive,  it  is  likewise  found  to  be  more  a 
occurs  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  first  addition- 
this  order  we  see  at  a  glance  that  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  i 
is  borne  on  an  eccentric  circle  with  its  apogee  at  the  conjunct! 
and  its  perigee  at  the  first  and  third  quarters.  And  this  woulc 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

eccentric  circle,  which  is  taken  in  this  same  plane  always  bearini 
centre,  and  turning  it  from  east  to  west  at  a  speed  equal  to  the 
the  moon  s  elongation  from  the  sun  over  the  latitudinal  movemei 
excess  of  the  moon^s  mean  longitudinal  movement  over  the  sun 
And  so^  for  example,  in  one  day  the  epicycle^s  centre  appean- 
neaily  13  14  in  latitude  from  west  to  east,  traversing  13°1H  ir 
cause  of  the  oblique  circle’s  retrogression  of  the  3'  excess  from  ea: 
in  turn  the  eccentric  s  apogee  is  rotated  in  that  same  opposite 
east  to  west  11°9',  by  which  amount  24°23'  (double  the  moon’s  < 
ceeds  13°14'.  Thus,  because  of  the  two  mov'ements’  retrogression 
direction  about  the  ecliptic  s  centre,  as  we  said,  the  movemeii' 
epicycle’s  centre  will  differ  from  that  of  the  eccentric’s  by  the  aj 
13°14'  plus  ir9',  which  is  very  nearly  double  the  12°11>^’  of  1 
Therefore  the  epicycle  will  traverse  the  eccentric  circle’s  circumh 
a  mean  month’s  time,  and  its  return  to  the  eccentric’s  apogee  is  a; 
place  at  mean  conjunctions  and  full  moons4 
But  to  see  the  details  of  the  hypothesis  more  thoroughly,  aga 

conceived  the  circle  A  BCD  concer 
ecliptic  and  lying  in  the  moon’s  obliqi 
E  as  centre  and  AEC  as  diameter.  At 
suppose  the  point  A  to  be  the  eccci 
the  epicycle’s  centre,  the  northern  lii 
ning  of  the  Ram,  and  the  mean  sun. 

Then,  I  say,  in  one  day’s  course  tl 
moves  from  east  to  west,  or  from  A  tc 
ly  3’  about  centre  E,  so  that  the  no: 
comes  to  be  29°57'  within  the  Fishes, 
the  two  contrary  regular  movemeiiti 
straight  line  similar  to  EA  again  aboi 
tic’s  centre,  I  say  that,  likewise  in  a 
the  straight  line  similar  to  EA  throi 
trie’s  centre  and  revolving  westward  at  a  regular  speed  to  ED  < 
centric’s  apogee  to  D,  describes  the  eccentric  circle  DG  about 
makes  an  arc  AD  of  11°9';  but  that  the  straight  line  through  the  ep 
revolving  about  E,  this  time  eastward,  at  a  regular  speed  to  EB^  ( 
cycle’s  centre  to  G  and  makes  an  arc  AB  oi  13°  14'.  And  so  G,  the  < 
tre,  appears  to  be  13°14'  in  latitudinal  movement  distant  from 

'The  mean  conjunctions  and  full  moons  or  mean  syzygies  are  the  conjunct 
tions  of  the  centre  of  the  moon’s  enicvcle  and  the  mean  sun. 


146  PTOLEMY 

limit  A ;  but  13°11'  within  the  Ram  in  longitude,  because  th( 
29°o7'  within  the  Fishes;  and  to  be  24°23',  the  sum  of  arcs  y 
the  eccentric’s  apogee,  which  is  double  the  daily  movemen; 

In  this  way,  since  the  two  movements  together  througt 
make  a  complete  return  to  each  other  in  half  a  mean  month 
that  in  a  quarter  or  three  quarters  of  a  mean  month’s  time 
directly  opposite  each  other — that  is,  at  the  first  and  third  • 
mean  movement — and  that,  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  a 
opposite  the  eccentric’s  apogee  along  ED  it  will  be  at  the  ec 

It  is  clear  that,  with  things  thus  disposed,  as  regards  the  ec 
dissimilarity  of  arcs  DB  and  DG  there  is  no  difference  in  the 
since  the  straight  line  EB,  because  of  its  rotation  about  E  : 
centric's  centre,  traverses  at  a  regular  speed,  not  arc  DG  of 
but  arc  DB  of  the  ecliptic.  But  only  as  regards  the  difference 
itself  will  there  be  a  change.  For  the  epicycle  when  nearer  the 
crease  the  anomalistic  difference,  the  additive  equally  vith 
angle  at  the  eye  intercepting  it  being  made  greater  in  positior 

There  will  be  no  general  difference,  then,  for  the  first  hyi 
epicycle’s  centre  is  at  the  apogee  il.  This  happens  at  mean  C( 
moons. 

For  if  we  draw  the  epicycle  MN  about  A,  the  ratio  of  AE 
as  that  demonstrated  by  means  of  eclipses.  And  the 
difference  will  be  greatest  when  the  epicycle  is  pass¬ 
ing  G,  the  eccentric’s  perigee — as,  for  example,  the  one 
drawn  through  the  points  X  and  0.  This  occurs  at 
the  first  and  third  quarters  considered  in  terms  of 
mean  movement.  For  the  ratio  of  XG  to  GE  is 
greater  than  all  those  constructed  at  the  other  posi¬ 
tions,  since  XG,  the  epicycle’s  radius,  is  always 
equal  and  the  same,  and  the  line  EG  from  the  earth’s 
centre  is  less  than  all  the  others  drawn  to  the  ec¬ 
centric  circle, 

\ 

3.  On  the  Size  of  the  Moon’s  Solar  Anomaly 

To  see,  then,  how  much  the  greatest  anomalistic 
difference  comes  to  \vhen  the  epicycle  happens  to  be 
borne  at  the  eccentric’s  perigee,  we  observed  those 
of  the  moon’s  elongations  sighted  with  the  sun  in 

wViipK  fViP  TY^Dinn^Q  pnnro^iQ:  anrirno pliarl  flio  mnan  (irw 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

tions,  w©  sighted  the  sun  nnd  moon  in  tlic  yeiir  2  of  Antoninc,  I* 
Phamenoth  25,  after  sunrise,  or  5/^  cejuatorial  hours  before  noon.  ^ 
sighted  (18+3^+34)°  within  the  Water  Bearer  and  the  point  M 
Archer  culminating,  the  moon’s  apparent  position  was  93^°  within  t 
and  its  true  position  was  the  same,  since  in  Alexandria,  when  the  m 
first  part  of  the  Scorpion  very  nearly  13^  hours  west  of  the  meridiai 
display  an  appreciable  parallax  in  longitude.  The  time  from  the  e 
year  1  of  N^abonassar  to  this  observation  is  SS5  Egj’ptian  vears,  2( 
18 +3^ +3^  equatorial  hours,  both  simply  and  accurately  considerec 
spending  to  this  amount  of  time  we  find  the  sun’s  mean  position 
within  the  Water  Bearer,  and  its  true  position  18° 50’  which  agr< 
sighting  of  the  astrolabe.  From  the  first  hypothesis,  the  moon  at 
found  to  be  17°20’  within  the  Scorpion  in  mean  longitude,  so  tl: 
elongation  from  the  sun  is  very  nearly  a  quadrant,  and  in  anomab 
from  the  epicycle’s  apogee,  near  which  the  greatest  anomalistic  d 
curs.  Therefore,  the  true  course  was  le.ss  than  the  regular  one  by  73' 
the  first  anomaly’s  5°. 

Again,  in  order  to  have  before  us  the  difference  in  like  cases  from ; 
observed  by  Hipparchus,  we  shall  first  set  out  one  which  he  says  he 
the  year  50  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period,  Egyptian  wise  Epiphi  1 
first  hour  having  passed.  Now  the  course,  he  says,  was  mean.^  And 
sighted  (8 +3^ +^2)°  within  the  Lion,  the  moon’s  apparent  positic 
within  the  Bull,  and  its  true  position  was  very  nearly  the  same.  T 
moon’s  true  elongation  from  the  sun  was  86°15'.  But  when  the  sun  i 
part  of  the  Lion,  in  Rhodes  where  the  observation  occurred,  the 
173^°  in  time.  Therefore  the  53^  seasonal  hours  before  noon  make  G3 
hours,  so  that  the  observation  occurred  634  equatorial  hours  be! 
Epiphi  16  with  the  point  9°  within  the  Bull  culminating.  Consequer 
from  the  epochs  to  this  observation  totals  619  Egyptian  years,  31 
17+3^+3^  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  17+34+M  acc 
sidered.  And  according  to  our  hypotheses  (since  the  meridian  thro 
is  the  same  as  that  through  Alexandria),  for  this  amount  of  time 
sun’s  mean  position  to  be  10°27'  within  the  Lion,  but  its  true  pc 
8°20'.  And  we  find  the  moon’s  mean  longitudinal  position  to  be  4°2c 
Bull  so  that  its  mean  elongation  from  the  sun  is  again  nearly  a  quad 
anomaly  is  257°47'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee,  very  near  which  the 
ference  of  epicyclic  anomaly  occurs.  Therefore,  the  distance  from 
mean  position  to  the  sun’s  true  position  totals  93°55'.  But  the  moon 


148 


PTOLEMY 


4.  On  the  Lunar  Circlets  Ratio  of  Eccentricity 

Now  this  being  so,  let  there  be  the  moon^s  eccentric  circle  ABC  about  D  as 
centre  and  ADC  as  diameter.  And  on  this  diameter 
let  E  be  taken  as  the  ecliptic^s  centre  so  that  A  is 
the  eccentric^s  apogee  and  C  its  perigee.  And  let 
there  be  drawn  the  moon^s  epicycle  FGH  with  cen¬ 
tre  C,  and  let  the  tangent  EHB  be  drawn  to  it,  and 
let  CH  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference  is 
produced  on  this  tangent  of  the  moon^s  epicycle 
(this  being  shown  to  total  7%°),  therefore,  being  at 
the  ecliptic^s  centre, 

angle  CEH  =  r4Q^ 

=  15°20'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle 
CEH, 

arc  CH=  15^20', 
chord  CH'==  16^ 

where 

hypt.  CE—120P, 

And  so  CE,  the  line  from  the  ecliptic’s  centre  to  the  eccentric’s  perigee,  will 
also  be  39^22'  to  the  already-demonstrated  5^15'  of  the  epicycle’s  radius  and  the 
GQp  of  AEj  the  line  from  the  ecliptic’s  centre  to  the  eccentric’s  apogee.  And, 
therefore,  the  ^vhole  diameter  AC  will  be  99^22',  the  eccentric’s  radius  AD 
49^41',  and  DE  the  line  between  the  centres  of  the  ecliptic  and  eccentric  10^19'. 
So  we  have  shown  the  ratio  contained  by  the  eccentricity.^ 

i 

5.  On  the  Inclination  of  the  Moon’s  Epicycle 

Now  this  number  of  circles  would  be  added  to  the  hypotheses  for  an  explana^ 
tion  of  the  appearances  at  the  syzygies  and  again  at  the  first  and  third  quarters. 
But  from  a  consideration  of  the  particular  courses  where  it  is  either  crescent  or 
gibbous  and  when  its  epicycle  is  between  the  eccentric’s  apogee  and  perigee,  in 
the  case  of  the  moon  we  find  a  peculiar  incident  concerning  the  epicycle’s  in¬ 
clination.  For  in  general  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  one  and  the  same  point  oh 
epicycles  with  respect  to  which  the  returns  of  the  movements  on  them  are  ac¬ 
complished.  We  call  this  the  regular  apogee  from  which  we  begin  the  numbers 
of  the  epicyclic  movement,  as  the  point  F  in  the  preceding  figure;  and  this  point 
is  determined  by  the  line  of  centres,  such  as  DEC,  when  the  epicycle  is  at  the 
apogees  and  perigees  of  the  eccentric  circles.  Now,  for  all  the  other  hypotheses, 
we  see  absolutely  nothing  in  the  appearances  contrary  to  this  supposition:  that 
the  diameter  through  the  epicycle’s  apogee  (FCG,  for  instance)  always  and  in 

^From  this  theory  of  eccentricity  it  follows  that  the  moon^s  distance  from  the  earth  varies 
by  as  much  as  34  to  65,  or  nearly  1  to  2.  And  since,  for  small  angles,  the  tangents  are  nearly 
proportional  to  the  angles,  the  size  of  the  moon^s  diameter  (as  Copernicus  points  out  in 
Chapter  2  of  Book  IV,  On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres)  will  vary  as  1  to  2.  But  ,by 
observation,  this  is  not  true.  The  diameter  varies  very  nearly  as  55  to  65,  just  as  the  epicylic 
theory  without  the  eccentric  theory  allows.  Hence  at  this  point  the  Ptolemaic  theory,  in  sav¬ 
ing  the  appearances  of  the  angular  distances,  is  unable  to  save  the  appearances  of  the  diame- 
ter^s  variations. 


A 


149 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

the  other  courses  of  the  epicycles  keeps  the  same  direction  as  the  line  which  re¬ 
volves  the  epicycle  ^s  centre  at  a  regular  speed  (in  this  case  EC) ;  and  that,  con¬ 
sequently,  it  always  points  to  the  centre  of  revolution  at  which  in  equal  times 
are  intercepted  the  equal  angles  of  the  regular  movement. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  the  appearances  are  opposed  to  the  epicyclic 
diameter,  FG^s  being  inclined  towards  E  the  centre  of  revolution  and  keeping 
the  same  direction  as  EC  in  the  passages  between  A  and  C.  True  enough,  we 
find  it,  always  pointing  to  one  and  the  same  point  on  the  diameter  AC;  not  to 
the  ecliptic’s  center  E  nor  to  the  eccentric’s  center  Z),  however,  but  to  the  point 
the  same  distance  from  E  on  the  same  side  of  the  eccentric’s  perigee  as  Z)F,  the 
line  between  the  centres.^ 

Again  we  shall  show  ,this  is  so  by  choosing  from  several  observations  two 
which  can  bring  this  to  light  most  efficiently — that  is,  two  observations  where 
the  epicycle  was  in  the  mean  distances,  and  the  moon  either  at  the  epicycle’s 
perigee  or  apogee.  For  it  is  in  such  passages  that  the  greatest  difference  in  these 
inclinations  occurs. 

Hipparchus  writes  that  he  observed  the  sun  and  moon  with  instruments  in 
Rhodes,  in  the  year  197  after  Alexander’s  death,  Egyptian  wise  Pharmouthi  11, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  hour.  And  he  says  that,  with  the  sun  sighted 
within  the  Bull,  the  apparent  position  of  the  moon’s  centre  was 
21^°  within  the  Fishes,  and  its  true  position  (21-hJ^-h3^)°  within  the  Fishes. 
Therefore,  at  that  time,  the  true  moon’s  eastern  elongation  from  the  true  sun 
was  very  nearly  313°42'.  But  since  the  observation  occurred  at  the  beginning 
of  the  second  hour  or  very  nearly  5  seasonal  hours  before  noon  of  Pharmouthi 
11,  and  since  in  Rhodes  at  that  time  the  seasonal  hours  were  equivalent  to  very 
nearly  equatorial  hours,  therefore  the  time  from  our  epoch  to  this  observa¬ 
tion  totals  620  Egyptian  years,  219  days,  and  18J^  equatorial  hours  simply  con¬ 
sidered,  but  only  18  hours  accurately  considered.  Corresponding  to  this  time, 
we  find  the  regular  sun’s  position  to  be  6°41'  within  the  Bull,  but  the  true  sun’s 
position  to  be  7®45';  and  the  regular  moon’s  longitudinal  position  to  be  22^^13' 
within  the  Fishes,  and  in  anomaly  the  moon  to  be  185°30'  from  the  epicycle’s 
mean  apogee.^  And  so  the  regular  moon’s  elongation  from  the  true  sun  totals 
314^28'. 

Now  all  this  being  granted,  let  ABC  be  the  moon’s  eccentric  circle  with  centre 

^ Again  in  Chapter  2  of  Book  IV,  On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  Copernicus 
sharply  criticises  this  third  lunar  anomaly  where  the  regular  movement  of  the  moon  on  tbe 
epicycle  is  no  longer  tied  to  the  regular  movement  of  the  epicycle  on  its  deferent.  For  the 
result  of  this  contriving  of  movements  is  that  the  moon  moves  irregularly  about  the  epicycle^s 
centre.  Copernicus  says  that  the  initial  violation  of  the  strict  principle  of  celestial  mechanics, 
with  respect  to  the  epicycle's  movement  on  its  deferent,  necessitates  this  further  irregularity. 

But  Ptolemy  might  well  reply  that  even  if  these  movements,  so  contrived,  turn  out  to 
move  the  stars  on  their  epicycles  irregularly  with  respect  to  the  centres  of  the  epicycles,  and 
the  epicycles  irregularly  with  respect  to  the  centres  of  their  deferents,  yet  these  irregular 
movements  are  such  as  can  be  computed  and  mastered  by  means  of  circles  and  regular  move¬ 
ments,  and  this  is  all  that  is  necessary. 

^The  apparent  apogee  and  apparent  perigee  are  those  defined  in  the  normal  way,  by  a 
straight  line  through  the  epicycle's  centre  and  the  ecliptic's  centre,  or  the  earth.  The  mean 
apogee  and  mean  perigee  are  those  defined  in  another  regular  way  to  fit  the  particular  ap¬ 
pearances.  As  Ptolemy  says,  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  they  are  defined  by  a  line  through  the 
epicycle's  centre  and  a  point  on  the  line  of  apsides  other  than  the  earth.  It  is  evident  that  the 
apparent  and  mean  apogees  coincide  at  the  quarters  and  syzygies.  Furthermore,  the  apparent 
and  regular  apogees  always  coincide  in  the  case  of  the  moon. 


PTOLEMY 


150 


D  and  diameter  ADC,  on  which  let 
there  be  the  ecliptic^s  centre  E, 

And  with  B  as  centre  let  the  moon’s 
epicycle  FGH  be  drawn.  Let  the 
epicycle  be  revolved  eastward  as 
from  B  to  A,  and  let  the  moon  be 
revolved  on  the  epicycle  from  F  to 
G  and  H,  letting  DB  and  EHBF  be 
joined. 

Now,  since  a  mean  lunar  month’s 
time  embraces  two  returns  of  the 
epicycle  with  respect  to  the  eccen¬ 
tric,  and  since  in  the  foregoing  po¬ 
sition  the  mean  moon  was  315®32' 
from  the  mean  sun,  it  follows  that 
if  we  double  this  amount  and  sub¬ 
tract  a  complete  circle  we  shall 
have,  for  that  time,  the  epicycle’s  distance  of  271°4'  eastward  from  the  eccen¬ 
tric’s  apogee.  And  so,  by  subtraction, 

angle  =  88^56'. 

Then  let  DK  be  drawn  from  D  perpendicular  to  BE, 

Now,  since 

angle  DEB  =  88°56' 

=  177°52'  to  2  rt., 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEK, 

arc  Z)A=177°52', 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc^A:  =  2°8'. 

And  therefore 

chord  Z)A:  =119^59', 
chord  EK  =  2n^' 


where 

And  therefore 

where  again 
and 

And  since 
therefore 
and,  by  addition, 

BE  =  48HS\ 

Again,  since  the  mean  moon’s  elongation  from  the  true  sun  was  314°28',  and 
in  the  observation  the  true  moon’s  elongation  from  the  true  sun  was  313^42'  so 
that  the  moon’s  anomalistic  difference  subtracts  46',  and  since  the  moon’s  regu- 


diam.  DE=  120^. 

DK 

EK=^0n2' 

l.betw.  c.  DE  =  10n9' 
ecc.  rad.  i?Z)  =  49^41'. 
sq.  BD-sq.  DK  =  sq,  BK, 
BK=^8m\ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  151 

lar  course  is  sighted  along  the  line  EB^  therefore  let  the  moon  be  supposed  at  the 
I  point  G,  for  it  was  near  the  epicycle’s  perigee.  And  with  EG  and  BG  joined,  let 
I  BL  be  drawn  from  B  perpendicular  to  EG  produced. 

Since  it  contains  the  moon’s  anomalistic  difference, 
angle  BEL  =  {fW 

=  r32'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEL, 

arc  BL=VZ2', 
chord  BL  =  1^Z& 

where 

hypt.  BE  =120^, 

And  so 

5L  =  0p39' 

where 

=  48^48' 

and 

epic.  rad.  .BG  =  5p15'. 

And  therefore 

.BL  =  14p52' 

where 

epic.  rad.  BG—\2{)^. 

And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BGL, 

arc  ^L=  14^14'. 

And  so 

angle  5GL  =  14®14'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  £’5G=12°42'  to  2  rt. 

=  6°21'. 

Therefore,  on  the  epicycle, 

arc  G/^  =  6°21' 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  moon  to  the  true  perigee. 

But  since  the  moon,  at  the  time  of  the  observation,  was  185°30'  distant  from 
the  epicycle’s  mean  apogee,  it  is  evident  that  the  mean  perigee  precedes  the 
moon  or  point  G.  Let  it  be  M,  and  let  BMN  be  drawn  and  EX  from  E  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  it. 

Then,  since  it  was  shown 

arcG/f  =  6°21' 

and  it  is  assumed 

arc  GAf  =  5°30' 

from  the  perigee  so  that,  by  addition, 

arc //il/  =  ir51', 

therefore 

angle  EBX=\Vbl' 

=  23°42'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEX, 

arc  £^X  =  23°42'; 


152 


PTOLEMY 
chord  EX  =  2^m' 


where 

hypt.  BE  =120^. 

And  therefore 

£X=10P2' 

where 

=  48^48'. 

Again,  since 

angle  =  177^52'  to  2  rt. 

and 

angle  £'BiY  =  23°42'  to  2  rt., 
therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BAS  =  154^0'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ENX, 

arc  EX  =  15nO'; 
chord  =116^58' 

where 

hypt.  EN  =  120^ 

And  therefore 

EN= ions' 

where 

£'X=10p2' 

and 

1.  betw.  c.  DE=10n9'. 

Therefore,  the  inclination  of  the  straight  line  BM  through  the  mean  perigee  to 
N  cuts  off  EN  very  nearly  equal  to  DE. 

Likewise — to  show  that  the  same  thing  occurs  also  for  the  opposite  parts  of 
the  eccentric  and  epicycle — ^we  have  again  taken  from  among  the  intervals  ob¬ 
served  by  Hipparchus  in  Rhodes,  as  we  said,  the  one  sighted  in  the  same  year 
197  after  Alexander's  death,  Egyptianwise  Payni  17,  at  93^  hours.  At  that  time, 
he  says,  with  the  sun  sighted  10%o°  within  the  Crab,  the  moon's  apparent  po¬ 
sition  was  about  29°  within  the  Lion.  And  this  was  its  true  position  also,  since 
in  Rhodes  towards  the  end  of  the  Lion,  at  very  nearly  one  hour  after  noon,  the 
moon  does  not  display  a  parallax  in  longitude.  Therefore,  at  that  time,  the  true 
moon's  eastern  elongation  from  the  true  sun  was  48°6'.  But  since  the  observa¬ 
tion  occurred  33^  seasonal  hours  after  noon  of  Payni  17,  and  in  Rhodes  at  that 
date  these  came  to  very  nearly  4  equatorial  hours,  the  time  from  this  observa¬ 
tion  to  our  epoch  is  620  Egyptian  years,  286  days,  and  4  equatorial  hours  simply 
considered,  but  3%  hours  accurately  considered.  Likewise  corresponding  to  this 
time  we  find  the  regular  sun's  position  to  be  12°5'  within  the  Crab,  but  the  true 
sun's  position  10°40';  and  the  regular  moon's  position  in  longitude  to  be  27°20/ 
within  the  Lion  so  that  the  regular  moon's  elongation  from  the  true  sun  totals 
46°40',  in  anomaly  the  moon  being  333°  12'  from  the  epicycle's  mean  apogee. 

Now,  with  these  things  granted,  again  let  there  be  the  moon’s  eccentric  circle 
ABC  with  centre  D  and  diameter  ADC  on  which  let  E  be  taken  as  the  ecliptic's 
centre.  And  let  the  moon's  epicycle  FGH  be  described  about  the  point  B,  and 
let  DB  and  EHBF  be  joined. 

Since,  then,  double  the  moon's  mean  elongation  from  the  sun  contains  90°30', 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  153 

therefore  for  reasons  already  given 
angle  AEB  =  90^30' 

=  ISr  to  2  rt. 

Therefore  if  we  extend  the  line  BE 
and  drop  DK  from  D  perpendicular 
to  it,  then,  as  supplement, 
angle  DEK  =  119''  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about 
right  triangle  DEK^ 

arc  D/v  =  179° 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  EK=V. 

And  therefore 

chord  DK  =  119^59', 
chord  EK  =  1^3' 

where 


DK  =10^19', 
KK  =  0p5' 


1.  betw.  c.  DK=  10^19', 
ecc.  rad.  DD  =  49^41'. 


sq.  J5D-sq.  DK  =  sq.  BKy 
J5/1  =  48^36' 


where 

And  since 
we  shall  have 
and,  by  subtraction, 

J5K  =  48^31'. 

Again,  since  the  regular  moon^s  elongation  from  the  true  sun  was  46°40',  but 
the  true  moon^s  elongation  was  48°6'  (so  that  the  anomalistic  difference  has 
added  1°26'),  let  the  moon,  since  it  w^as  near  the  epicycle^s  apogee,  be  supposed 
at  point  (j.  And  wdth  EG  and  BG  joined,  let  BL  be  drawn  from  B  perpendicular 
to  EG, 

Since,  then, 

angle  DKL=1°26' 

=  2°52'  to  2rt. 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BED 

arc  DL  =  2°52'; 
chord  BL  =  2^59' 

w^here 

hypt.  DK  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

DL=1P12' 

where 

DK  =  48P3r 


154 

and 


PTOLEMY 


epic.  rad.  BG  =  bHb', 

And  so 

BL  =  27^34' 

where 

hypt.  5(?=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BGL, 

arc  5L  =  26°34' 

And  therefore 

angle  5GL  =  26°34'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  FBG  =  29°26'  to  2  rt. 

=  14°43'. 

Therefore,  on  the  epicycle, 

arc  F(?  =  14°43', 

which  is  the  moon^s  distance  to  the  true  apogee. 

But  since  at  the  time  of  the  observation  the  moon  was  333°  12'  from  the  mean 
apogee,  if  we  suppose  the  mean  apogee  at  M  and,  joining  MBN^  drop  EX  from 
E  perpendicular  to  it,  then 

arc  GFM  =  26°48' 

the  rest  of  the  circle,  and,  by  subtraction, 

arc  FM=12°5'. 


And  so 


angle  MBF  =  angle  EBX  =  12°5' 

=  24°10'  to2rt. 

And  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEX, 

arcFX-24°10'; 
chord  EX  =  2b^7' 

where 

hypt.  BE  =  120^. 

And  therefore 

EX  =10^8' 

where 

BE=48m' 

and 

1.  betw.  c.  Z)F=  10^19'. 

Again,  since  it  is  assumed 

angle  AEB  =  181°  to  2  rt., 

and  it  was  proved 

angle  FBA^  =  24°10'  to  2  rt. 

so  that  by  subtraction 

angle  ENB  =  lbQ%0'  to  2  rt., 
therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ENX, 

arcFX=156°50'; 
chord  FA  =117^33' 


where 


hypt.  EN  =  120P. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  155 

And  therefore 

EN-=  10P20' 

where 

and 

1.  betw.  c.  £>£7  =  10^19'. 

Therefore  the  inclination  of  the  straight  line  MB  through  the  mean  apogee  M 
to  N  has  again  cut  off  EN  very  nearly  equal  to  Z)£7,  the  line  between  the  centres. 

From  several  other  observations  we  find  that  very  nearly  the  same  ratios  re¬ 
sult,  so  that  in  this  way  the  property  of  the  epicycle^s  inclination  in  the  moon^s 
hypothesis  is  established.  For  on  the  one  hand  the  revolution  of  the  epicycle^s 
centre  takes  place  about  the  ecliptic’s  centre  £7;  on  the  other  hand  the  epicycle’s 
diameter  which  defines  the  epicycle’s  mean-apogee  point  no  longer  points  to  £7, 
the  centre  of  regular  rotation,  as  for  the  other  stars,  but  always  points  to  N  on 
the  other  side  of  £7  from  Z)  at  a  distance  equal  to  Z)£7,  the  line  between  the 
centres. 

6.  How  THE  Moon’s  True  Course  is  Gotten  Geometrically 
FROM  its  Periodic  Movements 

With  these  things  demonstrated,  it  would  be  proper  next  to  add  how,  for  par¬ 
ticular  courses  of  the  moon,  by  taking  the  epochs  of  the  mean  movements  we 
could  find,  from  the  elongation-number  and  the  moon’s  epicyclic  number,  the 
addition  or  subtraction  to  the  mean  longitudinal  course  due  to  the  anomalistic 
difference.  This  determination  is  gotten  geometrically  from  theorems  like  those 
we  have  already  expounded. 

For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  last  figure  we  gave,  let  us  suppose  the  same 

periodic  movements  of  elongation 
and  anomaly — that  is,  for  double 
the  elongation,  90°30',  and  for  a- 
nomaly  333°12'  from  the  epicycle’s 
apogee.  Let  us  draw  NX  perpen¬ 
dicular,  instead  of  £7X,  and  GL  in¬ 
stead  of  BL.  And  by  the  same 
means,  with  the  angles  at  the  cen¬ 
tre  £7  given  and  the  hypotenuses 
DE  and  NE  given  equal,  it  can  be 
shown  that 

=10^19', 

WX  =10^19' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  HD  =  49^41', 
epic.  rad.  HG  =  5p15', 

and 

EK  =  EX  =  0^5/ 

And,  therefore,  as  we  showed  before, 

BK  =  4&m', 

H£7  =  48^31', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

HZ  =  48P26'. 


156 

And  so,  since 


PTOLEMY 


we  shall  have  in  length 


sq.  BX+sq.  A^X  =  sq.  BN, 


BX  =  49P31' 


where 

XX=10'’19'. 

And  therefore 

XX=25P 

where 

hypt.  BX  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BNX, 

arc  XX=24°3'. 

And  so  also 

angle  XBX  =  angle  FBM  =  24°3'  to  2  rt., 

=  12'=’l'. 

And  therefore,  on  the  epicycle,  also 

arc  FA/  =  12°1'. 

But  since  the  point  G,  the  moon,  is  the  remainder  of  the  circle  or  26°48'  distant 
from  the  mean  apogee  il/,  therefore  we  shall  have,  by  subtraction, 

arc  FG=  14°47'. 

And  so  also 

angle  FBG  =  14°47' 

=  29°34'  to  2  rt. 

And  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  GBL, 


arc  (?L  =  29°34', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arc  BL=\N)°2&. 

And  therefore 

chord  GL  =  Zmr, 
chord  BL  =  116’’2' 

where 

hypt.  BG  =  120P. 

And  so 

GL  =  1P20', 

BL  =  5^5' 

where 

epic.  rad.  =  5^15' 

and  where  it  was  proved 

BB =48^31'. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

EBL  =  53'>dQ' 

where 

And  again  since 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 
GL=im'. 


157 


sq.  EBL+^(\.  GL  =  sq.  EG, 
therefore,  we  shall  have  in  length 

=  53^37'. 


And  so 

GL  =  2p59' 

where 

hypt.  E'G=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EGL, 

arc  GL  =  2%2\ 

And  therefore,  as  the  anomalistic  difference, 

angle  GEL  =  2°52'  to  2  rt. 

=  r26'. 

Which  it  was  required  to  show. 


7.  Construction  of  the  Table  of  General  Lunar  Anomaly 

To  have  a  methodical  determination  of  the  particular  addition-subtractions 
set  out  in  a  table,  we  have  again  used  the  same  geometrical  figures  and  filled  out 
the  table  we  constructed  according  to  the  simple  hypothesis,  with  columns 
which  readily  correct  for  the  second  anomaly.  For  after  the  first  two  columns 
containing  the  numbers,  we  have  added  a  third  column  containing  the  addition- 
subtractions  corresponding  to  the  anomalistic  number  for  reducing  this  number, 
calculated  by  the  mean  passages  from  the  mean  apogee  or  M,  to  the  true  apogee 
or  F.  In  the  foregoing  case  of  a  distance  between  the  moon  and  the  eccentric’s 
apogee  of  90°30',  we  showed  the  arc  FM  to  be  12°!'  so  that,  although  the  moon’s 
distance  from  the  mean  apogee  was  only  333°12',  its  distance  from  the  true 
apogee  was  345°13'.  It  is  with  respect  to  this  last  number  that  the  epicyclic  ad¬ 
dition-subtraction  for  mean  longitudinal  movement  must  be  taken.  In  brief, 
therefore,  we  have  gotten  the  quantities  of  addition-subtraction,  at  convenient 
intervals  of  arc-length,  for  the  other  numbers  of  the  moon’s  distance,  and  we 
have  put  them  in  the  third  column  beside  the  proper  number. 

The  fourth  column  contains  the  anomalistic  differences  due  to  the  epicycle 
and  already  set  out ;  here  the  greatest  addition-subtraction  comes  to  very  nearly 
5®1'  according  to  the  ratio  of  60^  to  5^15'.  The  fifth  column  contains  the  excess 
amounts  of  the  differences  resulting  from  the  second  anomaly  over  those  from 
the  first,  the  greatest  addition-subtraction  from  the  second  totaling  7^°,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  ratio  of  60  to  8.  And  so  the  fourth  column  provides  for  the  epicy¬ 
cle’s  position  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee  near  the  syzygies;  but  the  fifth  column 
consists  of  the  excess  amounts  gotten  from  the  anomaly  produced  at  the  ec¬ 
centric’s  perigee  near  the  first  and  third  quarters. 

To  find  proportionately  the  parts  of  these  excess  amounts  corresponding  to 
the  passages  between  these  two  positions  on  the  eccentric,  we  have  added  a 
sixth  column  containing  the  sixtieth  part  of  that  difference  for  each  number  of 
elongation;  and  this  must  be  added  to  the  first  anomaly’s  addition-subtraction 
laid  out  in  the  fourth  colunm.  And  we  have  gotten  them  in  this  way: 


158 


PTOLEMY 


Let  there  be  the  moon’s  eccentric  cir¬ 
cle  ABC  with  centre  D  and  diameter 
ADC  on  which  let  the  ecliptic’s  centre  E 
be  taken.  And  with  arc  AB  cut  off  and 
with  the  epicycle  FGHK  described  about 
By  let  EBF  be  drawn.  By  way  of  exam¬ 
ple,  let  the  moon’s  elongation  be  given  as 
60°  so  that,  for  the  same  reasons  already 
demonstrated,  angle  AEB  is  double  the 
elongation  of  120°.  And  let  DL  be  drawn  > 
from  D  perpendicular  to  BE  produced,  / 
and  let  GBKD  be  drawn  through;  let  the  I 
straight  line  (in  this  case  EMN)  from 
the  centre  E  to  the  moon  be  supposed 
tangent  to  the  epicycle  so  as  to  have  the 
greatest  anomalistic  difference;  and  let 
BM  be  joined. 

Now,  since  it  is  assumed 

angle  AE5  =  120° 

=  240°  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  as  supplement, 

angle  120°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEL, 

arc  i)L=  120°, 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arc£L  =  60°. 

And  therefore 

chord  i7L  =  60P, 
chord  Z)L=  103^55' 

where 

hypt.  DE=\2Q^. 

And  therefore 

EL  =  5nO', 

DL  =  m& 

where  • 

DJ5;  =  10^19', 

J5Z)  =  49^41'. 


And 

therefore,  in  length, 
and,  by  subtraction, 
where 

And  therefore 


sq.  BD-sq.  jDL  =  sq.  BL] 
J5EL  =  48^53', 

BjSJ  =  43^43' 
epic.  rad.  BM  =  bP\b\ 
J5M  =  14P25' 


hypt.  B£  =  120P; 


where 


159 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEM^ 

arc  J5il/  =  13°48'. 

Therefore,  as  the  angle  which  contains  the  greatest  anomalistic  difference, 

angle  BEM  =  13®48'  to  2  rt. 

=  6^54'. 

The  anomalistic  difference  for  this  distance  of  elongation  thus  differs  from  the 
5®1'  produced  at  the  apogee  by  1^53'.  But  the  complete  difference  up  to  the  peri¬ 
gee  is  2°39'.  And  therefore  the  difference  of  1°53'  will  be  42®48'  to  the  greatest 
difference’s  60®.  We  shall  put  this  42®38'  in  the  sixth  column  in  the  row  with  the 
number  120®  which  here  indicates  the  distance  of  the  epicycle  from  the  eccen¬ 
tric’s  apogee. 

Likewise  for  the  other  sections  we  have  calculated  by  the  same  means  the 
parts  so  taken  of  the  excess  of  one  anomaly  over  the  other,  placing  beside  the 
proper  numbers  the  sixtieth  part  of  this  excess  corresponding  to  each  one.  And, 
of  course,  the  whole  60  such  parts  have  been  put  in  a  row  with  double  the  num¬ 
ber  90®,  the  elongation,  for  the  resulting  180®  is  at  the  eccentric’s  perigee. 

We  have  added  a  seventh  column  containing  the  latitudinal  passages  of  the 
moon  on  a  circle  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles  corresponding  to  each  part  of  the 
ecliptic;  or,  in  other  words,  the  arcs  intercepted  on  the  circle  through  the  eclip¬ 
tic’s  poles  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  moon’s  oblique  circle.  Ajid  for  this  we 
have  used  the  same  proof  as  that  by  which  we  calculated  the  arcs  on  the  circle 
through  the  equator’s  poles,  and  which  lie  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator. 
But  in  this  case  the  arc  on  the  great  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and 
of  the  moon’s  oblique  circle,  lying  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  northern  or 
southern  limit  of  the  oblique  circle,  is  very  nearly  5®.  For,  according  to  both 
Hipparchus  and  ourselves  in  calculating  the  appearances  pertaining  to  the 
northernmost  and  southernmost  courses,  the  moon’s  greatest  passage  was  found 
to  be  just  about  that  much  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic.  Nearly  all  things  per¬ 
taining  to  lunar  observation,  considered  with  respect  to  the  stars  and  by  means 
of  instruments,  agree  with  greatest  latitudinal  courses  of  this  size.  And  things 
to  be  demonstrated  later  will  agree  also.  And  the  following  is  the  table  of  general 
lunar  anomaly.^ 

^This  table  is  fairly  complicated  and  condensed,  and  Ptolemy's  explanation  is  not  too  clear. 
We  shall  here  give  a  clearer  and  more  analytical  summary. 

In  the  first  place,  the  first  two  columns  are  called  “common  numbers"  because  these  num¬ 
bers  play  different  roles  for  the  different  columns  that  follow. 

With  respect  to  column  3,  columns  1  and  2  contain  the  numbers  of  arcs  on  the  eccentric  in¬ 
dicating  the  distance  of  the  epicycle's  centre  from  the  eccentric's  apogee.  And  column  3  con¬ 
tains  the  corresponding  addition-subtractions  to  be  made  in  the  moon's  distances  from  the 
epicycle's  mean  apogee,  in  order  to  determine  its  distance  from  the  epicycle's  true  apogee. 

With  respect  to  column  4,  columns  1  and  2  contain  the  numbers  of  arcs  on  the  epicycle  in¬ 
dicating  the  moon's  distance  from  the  epicycle's  true  apogee.  And  column  4  contains  the 
corresponding  addition-subtractions  in  lon^tude  and  latitude  which  correct  for  the  anomaly 
when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  eccentric's  apogee.  These  last  numbers  correspond  to  the  addition- 
subtractions  in  the  table  of  the  first  lunar  anomaly,  but  they  are  here  given  their  proper  place 
\vithin  the  general  scheme  of  lunar  anomaly. 

With  respect  to  column  5,  columns  1  and  2  again  contain  the  numbers  of  arcs  on  the  epi¬ 
cycle  indicating  the  moon's  distances  from  the  epicycle's  true  apogee.  And  column  5  contains 
the  corresponding  additions-sub tractions  in  longitude  due  to  the  second  lunar  anomaly  when 
the  epicycle  is  at  the  eccentric's  perigee,  and  which  are  over  and  above  those  due  to  the  first 
anomaly.  In  other  words,  these  are  the  differences  between  the  first  and  general  anomalies. 

With  respect  to  column  6,  columns  1  and  2  contain  the  numbers  of  arcs  on  the  eccentric 


160 


PTOLEMY 


8.  Table  of  the  General  Lunar  Anomaly 


1 

2 

3 

c 

> 

6 

7 

Addition — 

Addition — 

subtractions 

subtractions 

Difference 

Common 

for  distances 

in  longitude 

Epicyclic 

in 

Latitude 

Numbers 

from 

eccentric^s 

and  latitude 

difference 

sixtieths 

for 

apogee 

epicycle 

6 

354 

0 

53 

0 

29 

0 

14 

0 

12 

4 

58 

Northern 

12 

348 

1 

46 

0 

57 

0 

28 

0 

24 

4 

54 

limit 

18 

342 

2 

39 

1 

25 

0 

42 

1 

20 

4 

45 

24 

336 

3 

31 

1 

53 

0 

56 

2 

16 

4 

34 

30 

330 

4 

23 

2 

19 

1 

10 

3 

24 

4 

20 

36 

324 

5 

15 

2 

44 

1 

23 

4 

32 

4 

3 

42 

318 

6 

7 

3 

8 

1 

35 

6 

25 

3 

43 

48 

312 

6 

58 

3 

31 

1 

45 

8 

18 

3 

20 

54 

306 

7 

48 

3 

51 

1 

54 

10 

22 

2 

56 

60 

300 

8 

36 

4 

8 

2 

3 

12 

26 

2 

30 

66 

294 

9 

22 

4 

24 

2 

11 

15 

5 

2 

2 

72 

288 

10 

6 

4 

38 

2 

18 

17 

44 

1 

33 

78 

282 

10 

48 

4 

49 

2 

25 

20 

34 

1 

3 

84 

276 

11 

27 

4 

56 

2 

31 

23 

24 

0 

32 

90 

270 

12 

0 

4 

59 

2 

35 

26 

36 

0 

0 

93 

267 

12 

15 

5 

0 

2 

37 

28 

12 

0 

16 

96 

264 

12 

28 

5 

1 

2 

38 

29 

49 

0 

32 

99 

261 

12 

39 

5 

0 

2 

39 

31 

25 

0 

48 

102 

258 

12 

48 

4 

59 

2 

39 

33 

1 

1 

3 

105 

255 

12 

56 

4 

57 

2 

39 

34 

37 

1 

17 

108 

252 

13 

3 

4 

53 

2 

38 

36 

14 

1 

33 

111 

249 

13 

6 

4 

49 

2 

38 

37 

50 

1 

48 

114 

246 

13 

9 

4 

44 

2 

37 

39 

26 

2 

2 

117 

243 

13 

7 

4 

38 

2 

35 

41 

2 

2 

16 

120 

240 

13 

4 

4 

32 

2 

32 

42 

38 

2 

30 

123 

237 

12 

59 

4 

25 

2 

28 

44 

3 

2 

43 

126 

234 

12 

50 

4 

16 

2 

24 

45 

28 

2 

56 

129 

231 

12 

36 

4  . 

7 

2 

20 

46 

53 

3 

8 

132 

228 

12 

16 

3 

57 

2 

16 

48 

18 

3 

20 

135 

225 

11 

54 

3 

46 

2 

11 

49 

32 

3 

32 

138 

222 

11 

29 

3 

35 

2 

5 

50 

45 

3 

43 

141 

219 

11 

2 

3 

23 

1 

58 

51 

59 

3 

53 

144 

216 

10 

33 

3 

10 

1 

51 

53 

12 

4 

3 

147 

213 

10 

0 

2 

57 

1 

43 

54 

3 

4 

11 

150 

210 

9 

22 

2 

43 

1 

35 

54 

54 

4 

20 

153 

207 

8 

38 

2 

28 

1 

27 

55 

45 

4 

27 

156 

204 

7 

48 

2 

13 

1 

19 

56 

36 

4 

34 

159 

201 

-  6 

56 

1 

57 

1 

11 

57 

15 

4 

40 

162 

198 

:  6 

3 

1 

41 

1 

2 

57 

55 

4 

45 

165 

195 

5 

8 

1 

25 

0 

52 

58 

35 

4 

50 

168 

192 

4 

11 

1 

9 

0 

42 

59 

4 

4 

54 

171 

189 

3 

12 

0 

52 

0 

31 

59 

26 

4 

56 

174 

186 

2 

11 

0 

35 

0 

21 

59 

37 

4 

58 

177 

183 

1 

7 

0 

18 

0 

10 

59 

49 

4 

59 

Southern 

180 

180 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

60 

0 

5 

0 

limit 

THE  ALMAGEST,  V 


161 


9.  On  General  Calculations  of  the  Moon 

Now  whenever  we  wish,  by  means  of  this  tabular  set  up,  to  calculate  the  lunar 
anomaly  we  take  the  moon^s  mean  movements,  for  the  date  in  question  in  Alex¬ 
andria,  and  we  take  them  in  longitude,  elongation,  anomaly,  and  latitude  in  the 
way  we  have  shown.  Always  doubling  the  first  number  of  elongation  calculated, 
and  subtracting  a  whole  circle  from  the  product  if  we  can,  we  carry  the  result  to 
this  Table  of  Anomaly.  We  then  add  the  degrees  in  the  third  column  correspond¬ 
ing  to  it  to  the  mean  degrees  of  anomaly,  if  the  number  doubled  runs  up  to  180°; 
but,  if  it  exceeds  180°,  we  subtract  it.  Again  we  carry  the  resulting  true  number 
of  anomaly  to  this  same  table,  and  we  note  down  the  addition-subtraction  cor¬ 
responding  to  it  in  the  fourth  column,  and  also  the  corresponding  difference  in 
the  fifth  column. 

After  this  we  again  carry  the  double  of  the  number  indicating  the  mean  elon¬ 
gation  to  the  same  first  two  columns;  and,  as  many  sixtieths  in  the  sixth  column 
as  correspond  to  it,  just  so  many  do  we  take  of  the  difference  from  the  fifth 
column  which  we  have  already  noted  down.  We  always  add  the  result  to  the 
addition-subtraction  we  found  in  the  fourth  column.  If  the  true  anomalistic 
number  is  not  above  180°,  we  subtract  this  sum  from  the  mean  longitude  and 
latitude;  but,  if  it  is  above  180°,  we  add  it.  Of  the  two  resulting  numbers  we  take 
the  one  in  longitude  and  add  it  to  the  mean  position  calculated  at  the  epoch; 
and  whatever  it  comes  out  to,  we  shall  say  the  moon  is  truly  at  that  place. 

We  carry  the  latitudinal  number,  computed  from  the  northern  limit,  to  this 

indicating  the  distances  of  the  epicycle^s  centre  from  the  eccentric^s  apogee.  And  column  6 
contains  the  corresponding  differences  between  the  first  anomaly  and  the  general  anomaly 
when  the  moon  lies  on  the  tangent  from  the  earth  to 

the  epicycle  or  when  the  epicyclic  addition-subtrac¬ 
tion  is  greatest.  But  these  differences  are  here  ex¬ 
pressed  in  terms  of  the  greatest  difference  among 
them,  which  is  taken  as  60.  It  is  then  assumed  that,  for 
all  practical  purposes,  the  ratio  of  a  difference  for  a 
given  position  of  the  epicycle  to  the  greatest  difference 
when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  eccentric’s  perigee  is  the 
same  for  all  positions  on  the  epicycle.  In  other  words, 
taking  the  eccentric  about  0  and  the  centre  of  the 
ecliptic!?,  and  drawing  equal  epicycles  at  the  apogee 
and  perigee,  A  and  C,  and  another  equal  epicycle  at  a 
chance  position  B,  let  the  tangents  from  E  to  the  three 
epicycles  be  drawn,  and  let  equal  arcs  LR,  and 
NT  be  taken  from  their  apogees.  Then  Ptolemy  is  as¬ 
suming  that,  for  all  practical  purposes,  we  can  use  the 
following  proportion: 

angle  CEF  —  angle  AED  : 
angle  BEG  —  angle  AED  :  : 
angle  NET  —  angle  LER  : 
angle  SEM  —  angle  LER. 

Now,  column  6  gives  us  the  first  ratio  for  different  po¬ 
sitions  of  B.  And  therefore,  knowing  the  differences 

between  angle  NET  and  angle  LER,  for  different  lengths  of  LR  and  TN,  from  colmnn  5,  we 
can  find  the  differences  between  angle  SEM  and  angle  LER. 

With  respect  to  column  7,  columns  1  and  2  contain  the  numbers  of  the  arcs  of  the  moon’s 
oblique  circle,  beginning  at  the  northern  limit  and  ending  at  the  southern.  And  column  7  con¬ 
tains  the  corresponding  numbers  of  arcs  intercepted  on  circles  through  the  poles  of  the  eclip>- 
tic,  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  moon’s  oblique  circle. 


162 


PTOLEMY 


same  table.  And  whatever  number  of  degrees  in  latitude  in  the  seventh  column 
correspond  to  it,  by  just  so  many  is  the  moon^s  centre  distant  from  the  ecliptic 
along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  ecliptic^s  poles.  If  the  number  carried 
is  in  the  first  15  rows,  this  distance  is  to  the  north  of  the  ecliptic;  but  if  it  is  in 
the  rows  below,  the  distance  is  to  the  south  of  the  ecliptic.  The  first  column  of 
numbers  embraces  the  movement  from  north  to  south,  and  the  second  column 
the  movement  from  south  to  north. 

10.  That  no  Appreciable  Difference  is  Produced  at  the  Syzygies 
BY  THE  Moon's  Eccentric  Circle 

Now,  it  is  reasonable  for  some  to  suspect  that  at  times  an  appreciable  differ¬ 
ence  occurs  at  the  conjunctions,  full  moons,  and  eclipses  accompanying  them, 
because  of  the  moon's  eccentric  circle.  For  the  epicycle's  centre  does  not  always 
fall  exactly  on  the  eccentric's  apogee  at  these  periods,  but  can  miss  it  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  that  the  return  of  the  epicycle's  centre  to  the  eccentric's  apogee  is  effected 
at  the  mean  syzygies,  but  true  conjunctions  and  full  moons  are  taken  with  the 
anomaly  of  each  of  the  two  luminaries.  Therefore  we  shall  try  and  show  that  this 
difference  can  produce  no  error  worth  mentioning  in  the  appearances  at  the 
syzygies,  even  if  the  difference  due  to  the  circle's  eccentricity  is  neglected. 

For  let  ABC  be  the  moon's  eccentric  circle  with  centre  D  and  diameter  ADC 
on  which  let  the  point  E  be  taken  as 
the  ecliptic's  centre  and  F  on  the  side 
opposite  D  as  the  centre  of  epicyclic 
inclination.  And  with  arc  AB  cut  off 
from  the  apogee  A,  let  the  epicycle 
GHL  be  described  about  J5,  and  let 
BD  and  GBE  and  also  BLF  be  joined. 

Now,  the  magnitude  of  the  anom¬ 
aly  can  differ  in  two  ways  from  that 
proper  to  the  epicycle's  position  at  the 
apogee  A:  (1)  by  cutting  off  a  greater 
angle  at  E  because  of  its  position  to¬ 
wards  the  perigee,  and  (2)  by  having 
the  diameter  through  the  mean  apo¬ 
gee  and  perigee  not  directed  to  the 
center  E  but  to  the  point  F. 

The  difference  due  to  the  first  cause 
is  greatest  when  the  moon's  anomalistic  difference  is  greatest;  and  that  due  to 
the  second  cause,  when  the  moon  is  at  the  epicycle's  apogee  or  perigee.  There¬ 
fore  it  is  evident  that,  when  the  difference  due  to  the  first  cause  is  greatest,  then 
that  due  to  the  second  will  be  entirely  negligible  because  the  moon  on  the  tan¬ 
gents  to  the  epicycle  makes  very  little  difference  in  the  addition-subtraction; 
and  it  is  evident  that  the  true  syzygy  will  possibly  differ  from  the  mean  by  as 
much  as  the  anomalistic  differences  of  both  luminaries  put  together,  either  by 
addition  or  by  subtraction.  But  when  (according  to  the  second  cause)  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  inclination  is  the  greatest,  then  the  difference  from  the  first  cause  is  neg¬ 
ligible  because  the  entire  anomaly  is  either  nothing  or  very  little  when  the  moon 
is  at  the  epicycle's  apogee  or  perigee;  and  the  true  syzygy  will  differ  from  the 
mean  syzygy  by  the  difference  of  solar  anomaly  alone. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 


163 


(1)  Then  let  the  sun  be  assumed  to  effect  the  greatest  addition  of  2°23',  and 
also  the  moon  itself  to  effect  first  the  greatest  subtraction  of  5°T  so  that  angle 
AEB  contains  14°48',  the  double  of  the  7°24'  of  the  two  together.  And  let  the 
tangent  EH  from  E  to  the  epicycle  be  drawn,  and  the  perpendicular  BH  be 
joined;  and  also  let  DM  be  drawn  from  D  perpendicular  to  BE. 

Since,  then, 

angle  AEB  =  U^4:%' 

=  29^36' to  2  rt., 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEM, 

arc  DM  =  29^36', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 

arcDM=150°24'. 

And 

chord  DM  =  30^39', 
chord  EM  =  116^1' 

where 

hypt.  DD=120P. 

And  so 

DM  =  2^38', 

DM  =  9P59' 

where 

1.  betw.  c.  D£'=  10^19' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  DD  =  49^41'. 

And  since 


therefore,  in  length, 
and,  by  addition, 
where 


sq.  DD-sq.  DM=sq.  DM, 
DM =49^37', 

DMD  =  59^36' 


And  therefore 


epic.  rad.  DD  =  5p15'. 


where 


DD  =10^34' 


hypt.  DD=120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEH, 

arc  DM  =10^6'. 

And  therefore,  as  the  angle  of  greatest  anomalistic  difference, 

angle  BEH  =10%'  to  2  rt. 

=  5°3' 

instead  of  the  5°1'  produced  when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  apogee  A.  Therefore 
from  this  cause  the  anomalistic  difference  diverges  by  2',  which  is  an  error  of  less 
than  of  an  hour. 


164  PTOLEMY 

(2)  Again  let  the  moon  be  supposed  at 
L  the  mean  perigee,  so  that  angle  AEB  ^ 
clearly  contains  very  nearly  the  double 
of  the  sun^s  anomaly  alone,  that  is  4°46'. 

And  with  EL  joined  in  a  figure  similar  to 
the  last,  let  the  perpendiculars  LN^  DM^ 
and  FX  be  dropped  from  L,  Z),  and  F  to 
BE  produced.  And,  just  as  before,  since 
angle  at  ^J  =  4°46' 

=  9°32' to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circles  about  right  tri¬ 
angles  EDM  and  EFX, 

arc  DM  =  arc  FX  =  9°32'. 

And,  as  remainders  of  semicircles, 
arc  EM  =  Sire  EX  =170^28', 

And  therefore 

chord  DM  =  chord  FX  =  9^58', 
chord  EM  =  chord  EX  =11 9^35 


where 
And  so 


hypt.  DE  —  hypt.  EF  =120^. 


where 
and 

And  since 

therefore,  in  length, 

And  so 

and,  by  addition, 
where 

And,  in  the  same  way  also. 
And 

And  so 

and,  by  subtraction, 


DM  =  FX  =  0^51', 

EM  =  EX=10n7' 

i  .1 

DE  =  EF  = 

ecc.  rad.  DB  =  49H1\ 

sq.  BD  —  sq.  DM  =  sq.  BM, 

BM=A9H1\ 

BE  =  59^^58' 

BX  =  70n5' 

FX  =  0p51'. 

hypt.  BF  =  70n5'. 

BF  :  FX  ::BL:  LN 
BF  :BX  ::  BL:BN. 

LN=0A\ 


BN  =  5n6\ 
EN  =  54.Hy 


where 


epic.  rad.  BL  =  5H&' 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 


1G5 


and  it  was  proved 

BE  =  59^58'. 

And  since,  therefore,  the  hypotenuse  EL  differs  inappreciably  from  54^43',  it  is 
inferred  that 


LAr  =  0^8' 

where 

hypt.  EL  =120^; 

and  that,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ELN, 

arc  LN  =  0°8'. 

And,  therefore,  angle  BEL,  by  which  the  moon  differs  because  of  the  inclination 
to  F,  will  also  be  to  2  right  angles'  360°,  or  0°4'. 

So  in  this  case  the  moon's  anomalistic  difference  has  diverged  by  4',  which 
produces  no  appreciable  error  in  the  appearances  at  the  syzygies,  and  hardly 
amounts  to  3^  of  an  hour.  And  it  is  not  extraordinary  for  such  an  error  to  occur 
often  in  the  observations  themselves. 

We  have  added  all  this,  not  because  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  these  differ¬ 
ences  along  with  the  examination  of  the  syzygies,  but  because  there  is  no  ap¬ 
preciable  error  for  lis  in  the  proofs  by  means  of  the  lunar  eclipses  we  have  set 
out,  even  if  we  have  not  used  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity  in  the  developed 
form  we  give  it  in  what  follows. 


11.  On  the  Moon's  Parallaxes 

Now,  the  means  used  in  getting  the  true  passages  of  the  moon  would  be  gen¬ 
erally  speaking  these:  Since  in  the  case  of  the  moon  it  turns  out  that  the  appar¬ 
ent  passage  is  not  sensibly  the  same  as  the  true  passage  (because,  as  we  said,  the 
earth  does  not  have  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  the  radius  of  the  moon's  sphere)  it 
would  be  necessary,  and  consequent,  both  for  other  appearances  and  especially 
for  those  observed  about  the  solar  eclipses,  to  get  the  measure  of  the  parallaxes 
from  which  one  will  be  able  to  determine  the  passages  considered  from  the  ob¬ 
server's  eye — that  is,  from  some  part  of  the  earth's  surface — by  means  of  the 
true  passages  conceived  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the  earth  and  ecliptic;  and, 
conversely,  to  determine  the  true  passages  by  means  of  the  apparent. 

Since  it  is  a  necessary  condition  of  this  research  that  the  particular  magni¬ 
tudes  of  the  parallaxes  cannot  be  worked  out  without  one's  having  as  given  the 
ratio  of  the  linear  distance  nor  the  ratio  of  the  linear  distance  without  some 
parallax's  being  given,  it  is  clear  that  in  the  case  of  those  stars  having  no  sensible 
parallax  (that  is,  those  with  respect  to  which  the  earth  is  in  the  ratio  of  a  point) 
getting  the  ratio  of  the  distance  would  be  impossible.  But  only  in  the  case  of 
those  which  display  a  parallax,  as  the  moon,  would  it  be  possible  to  find  the 
ratio  of  the  distance  by  means  of  some  first-given  parallax,  because  a  parallactic 
observation  can  be  gotten  in  itself,  but  not  the  size  of  the  distance. 

Now,  Hipparchus  made  this  examination  chiefly  from  the  sun.  Since,  from 
certain  other  incidents  of  the  sun  and  moon  about  which  we  shall  give  an  ac¬ 
count  later  on,  it  follows  that  when  the  linear  distance  for  one  of  the  luminaries 
is  given  the  distance  for  the  other  is  also  given,  he  tries  by  conjecturing  the  sun's 
distance  to  demonstrate  the  moon's.  He  first  supposes  the  sun  to  display  only 
the  least  sensible  parallax  in  order  to  get  its  distance.  And  then  by  means  of  the 
solar  eclipse  recorded  by  him,  from  calculations  with  the  sun — first  as  if  dis¬ 
playing  no  sensible  parallax  and  secondly  as  if  displaying  a  sufficient  parallax— 


166 


PTOLEMY 


he  arrives  at  the  ratios  of  the  lunar  distance,  different  for  ea( 
ses,  although  not  only  is  the  magnitude  of  the  sun’s  parallax 
but  also  whether  it  displays  any  parallax  at  all. 

12.  On  the  Construction  of  an  Instrum 
FOR  Determining  Parallaxes 

To  record  nothing  unclear  in  this  research,  we  built  an  ir 
we  could  observe  as  accurately  as  possible  how  much  and 
tance  from  the  zenith  on  the  great  circle  through  the  moo: 
poles  the  moon  displays  a  parallax. 

We  made  two  four-sided  rods,  not  less  than  four  cubits  i: 
divide  them  into  a  great  many  parts,  and  proportionate  in  c 
be  bent  by  their  length,  but  to  be  extended  very  true  and  i 
each  of  their  sides.  Then  we  drew  straight  lines  on  each  of  th 
the  wider  side.  At  each  end  of  one  of  the  rods  on  the  centi 
square  right  prisms  equal  and  parallel,  each  having  a  hole  p 
middle — the  one  for  the  eye  having  a  small  hole,  the  one  fo 
hole — so  that,  when  an  eye  is  placed  at  the  prism  with  tl 
whole  moon  can  appear  through  the  other  hole  in  a  straight 

Then  we  bored  evenly  each  of  the  rods  on  the  centre  lir 
extremities;  in  the  case  of  the  rod  with  the  prisms,  near  th 
the  prism  with  the  larger  hole.  Through  them  both  we  fitted 
of  the  rods  with  the  lines  would  be  bound  together  as  if  by  a 
the  prisms  could  thus  be  turned  in  any  direction  without,  v 
rod,  the  one  without  prisms,  we  fixed  on  a  base.  On  the  cer 
we  took  points  equidistant  from  the  lower  extremities  and  as 
the  axle-centre,  dividing  the  line  so  defined  on  the-  fixed  ro 
each  of  these  into  as  many  as  possible.  And  on  the  back  of  th 
extremities,  we  placed  small  prisms  having  their  sides  in  the 
straight  line  with  each  other  and  everywhere  equidistant  frc 
line,  so  that  the  rod  could  be  stood  straight  and  without  inc 
zon’s  plane  by  hanging  a  plumb-line  through  them. 

Having  the  meridian  line  already  established  in  a  plane 
zon’s,  we  stood  the  instrument  upright  in  a  shadowless  place 
the  rods,  where  they  were  joined  together  by  the  axle,  were 
parallel  to  the  meridian  line,  and  so  that  the  rod  with  the 
without  inclination  and  fixed  without  deviation,  while  the 
revolved  around  the  axle  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian,  subje* 
added  also  another  small  thin  rod,  fitted  on  straight  for  revc 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

until  its  centre  was  sighted  through  both  holes  at  the  centre  of 
and  marking  on  the  fine  small  rod  the  distance  between  the  ends 
lines  on  the  other  rods  and  applying  it  to  the  line  of  the  upright 
been  cut  into  60  parts,  we  found  out  how  many  parts  the  chord 
has  to  the  60  of  the  radius  of  the  circle  described  by  the  rcvolutic 
ian  plane.  And  getting  the  arc  subtended  bj'  a  chortl  of  such  1 
had  the  arc  by  which  the  moon’s  apparent  centre  was  distant  f 
along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  poles  of  the  horizon  am 
centre — a  great  circle  which  at  that  time  was  the  same  as  the  ra( 
the  poles  of  the  equator  and  of  the  ecliptic. 

For  observing  the  moon’s  greatest  latitudinal  passage,  we  c 
especially  when  it  was  at  the  summer  tropic  point  and  again  a 
most  limit  of  the  moon’s  oblique  circle.  This  was  done  becaus 
points  for  some  distance  sensibl}^  the  same  latitudinal  passage  is  ( 
because  the  moon,  at  those  times  being  near  the  zenith  in  the  p 
andria  where  we  made  the  observations,  has  verj'  nearly  the 
position  as  true  position.  In  every  case  the  moon’s  centre  was  ol: 
passages  to  be  very  nearly  2)/^  from  the  zenith  so  that,  from  th 
its  greatest  latitudinal  passage  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic  Ls  d< 
be  5°.  And  this  is  almost  exactly  the  difference  between  the  23°5 
the  equatoi’  to  the  summer  tropic  point,  and  the  30°58'  from  tb 
equator  in  Alexandria  less  2]/^. 

But  for  getting  the  inquiry  into  the  parallaxes  done,  we  again  i: 
observed  the  moon  about  the  winter  tropic  for  reasons  already 
cause  also  (being  at  that  time  away  from  the  zenith  b}'  a  simila; 
the  meridian)  it  provides  a  greater  and  more  easily  observed  para 
many  parallaxes  observed  by  us  in  such  passages,  we  shall  again 
means  of  which  we  shall  at  once  both  present  the  manner  of  ( 
demonstrate  the  other  things  as  immediate  consequences. 

13.  Demonstration  of  the  Moon’s  Distance; 

For  we  observed  the  moon  culminating  in  the  year  20  of  Hadi 
wise  Athyr  13,  equatorial  hours  after  noon,  as  the  su 

set;  its  centre  appeared  to  us  through  the  instrument  at  a  distain 
M+K2)°  from  the  zenith.  The  distance  on  the  small  light  rod  \\i 
parts  to  the  60  parts  of  the  radius  of  the  circle  of  revolution,  and 
length  subtends  an  arc  of  (50+3^+3^+M^2)°-  f^ut  the  time  froi 
the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  up  to  this  observation,  is  882  Eg^'ptian 
and  5+34+H  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  b}4  he 


168 


PTOLEMY 


circle.  And  the  equator  is  30°58'  from  the  zenith  in  .Alexandria,  and  likewise 
south  of  it.  Therefore  the  moon^s  centre  was  truly  49°48'  from  the  zenith,  but 
it  appeared  to  be  50°55'  from  it.  Therefore  the  moon  displayed  a  parallax,  for 
the  distance  at  this  passage,  of  1°7'  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the 
moon  and  the  horizon’s  poles,  its  true  position  being  49°48'  from  the  zenith. 

Now  that  this  is  clear,  in  the  plane  of  the  circle  through  the  horizon’s  poles 
and  the  moon  let  the  following  great  circles 
be  drawn  concentric:  the  earth’s  great  circle 
AB;  that  through  the  moon’s  centre  at  the 
observation,  CD;  and  the  circle  EFGH  to 
which  the  earth  has  the  ratio  of  a  point. 

And  let  K  be  the  common  centre  of  them 
all,  and  RACE  the  straight  line  through  the 
zenith  points.  And  let  the  moon’s  true  posi¬ 
tion  be  supposed  at  the  point  D  49°48'  from 
the  zenith  as  in  the  preceding  instance;  and 
let  KDG  and  ADH  be  joined.  Moreover, 
from  A,  which  is  the  observer’s  eye,  let  AL 
be  drawn  perpendicular  to  KB,  and  AF 
parallel  to  KG, 

It  is  clear  that  the  moon  displays  a  par¬ 
allax  of  arc  GH  for  those  observing  from  A, 
so  that 

arcG/7=r7' 

as  gotten  by  observation.  But  since  arc  FH  is  not  appreciably  greater  than  GH 
because  of  the  whole  earth’s  being  in  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  the  circle  EFGH, 
therefore 

arcFG77m°7'. 

And  so,  again  because  the  point  A  is  indistinguishable  from  the  centre  with  re¬ 
spect  to  circle  FH, 

2ing\QFAH  =  ri' 

=  2°14'  to2rt. 


And 

angle  ADL  =  angle  FAi7  =  2°14'  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADL, 

arc  AL  =  2°14', 
chord  AL  =  2p21' 

where 

hypt.  Ai)  =  120P. 

And  DL  is  indistinguishably  less  than  AD,  Therefore 

DL=120P 

where 

AL  =  2p21'. 

Again,  since  it  is  assumed 

arc  Ci)=49°48', 

therefore,  being  at  the  centre, 

angle  CA2)  =  49°48'. 

=  99°36'  to  2  rt. 


169 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ALK^ 

arc  AL  =  99°36', 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 


arc  LK  =  80°24'. 

And  therefore 

chord  i4L  =  9lP39', 
chord  KL  =  77^27' 

where 

hypt.  AK  =  120p. 

And  so 

AL=0H&, 

KL=om' 

where,  as  the  earth’s  radius, 

AK  =  lP. 

But  it  was  shown  that 

Z)L=  120P 

where 

AL  =  2'‘2r, 

and  therefore 

Z)L= 39^6' 

where 

.4L  =  0P46'. 

And,  of  the  same  parts. 

KL  =  0m’ 

and,  as  the  earth’s  radius. 

AK=\'’. 

Therefore  the  whole  line  KLD,  embracing  the  moon’s  distance  at  the  observa¬ 
tion,  will  be  39^45'  to  the  P  of  AK^  the  earth’s  radius. 

Now  that  this  has  been  shovm,  let  there  be  the  moon’s  eccentric  circle  ABC 
with  centre  D  and  diameter  ADCy  on  which 

let  there  be  the  ecliptic’s  centre  £*,  and  the 
epicycle’s  point  of  inclination  F,  With  the 
epicycle  GHKL  drawn  about  the  point  B, 
let  the  straight  lines  GBHE^  BD,  and  BKF 
be  joined.  And  let  the  moon  in  this  obser¬ 
vation  be  supposed  at  the  point  L.  Let  LE 
and  LB  be  joined,  and  let  line  DM  be  dravm 
from  point  D,  and  FN  from  point  F,  both 
perpendicular  to  BE, 

Since,  then,  at  the  time  of  the  observa¬ 
tion  the  number  of  the  elongation  was 
78°13',  therefore,  through  things  already 
seen, 

angle  =  156^26', 
and,  as  supplementary  angles, 
angle  F£'iV  =  angle  =  23°34' 

=  47^8'  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  circles  about  these  right  tri¬ 
angles 


170 

because 


PTOLEMY 

arc  DM  =  arc  FN  =  47°8' 


DE^EF] 

and 

arc  jE'M  =  arc  =  132'^52'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DM  =  chord  DA  =  47^59' 

and 

chord  EM  =  chord  EN  =  1 10^ 

where 

hypt.  DD  =  hypt.  DD=120p. 

And  so  . 

DM  =  DA  =  4p8', 

£'M  =  DA  =  9p27'  .  .  { 

where 

D£'  =  DD=  10^19'  j 

and 

ecc.  rad.  DD  =  49^41'. 

And  since 

sq.  DD  — sq.  DM  =  sq.  jBM, 

we  shall  have,  in  length, 

BM  =  49p31',  j 

and  likewise 

BD  =  40p4'  -  . 

and,  by  subtraction, 

DA =30^37' 

where  a- 

DA  =  4p8'. 

And  since  ^  li 

sq.  DA+sq.  DA  =  sq.  BF, 

we  shall  have,  in  length, 

hypt.  5i!’  =  30P54'. 

And  so 

fiV=16P2'  '' 

where 

hypt.  DD=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DDA,  ' 

arc  DA  =  15^21'.  ’ 

And  therefore 

angle  F BN  =  15°21'  to  2  rt. 

=  7"40'. 

Therefore,  on  the  epicycle, 

arc  \ 

Again,  since  the  moon  was  262^20'  from  the  epicycle^s  mean  apogee  at  the 
time  of  the  observation,  and  clearly  the  addition  to  the  semicircle  or  82°20'  from 
the  mean  perigee  A,  therefore  also 

arc  AL  =  82°20', 


and,  by  addition. 


Therefore 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 
arc  = 


171 


angle  HBL  =  rt,  angle. 

And  so,  since  it  was  shown  that 

BE  =  4.0H' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  49HV 

and 

epic.  rad.  BL  =  5^15', 

and  since 

sq.  BL+sq,  BE  =  sq.  EL, 
we  shall  also  have,  in  length, 

£JL  =  40^25'. 

The  moon’s  linear  distance  at  the  observation  is  hence  40^25'  to  the  assumed 
5p15'  of  the  epicycle’s  radius  BL;  to  the  60^  of  EA,  the  radius  from  the  earth’s 
centre  to  the  eccentric’s  apogee;  and  to  the  39^22'  of  EC,  the  radius  from  the 
earth’s  centre  to  the  eccentric’s  perigee. 

But  it  was  shown  that  the  moon’s  distance  at  the  observation  (that  is,  the 
straight  line  EL)  was  39p45'  to  the  1^  of  the  earth’s  radius.  And,  therefore,  the 
straight  line  EA  or  the  mean  distance  at  the  syzygies  is  59^;  and  EC  or  the  mean 
distance  at  the  first  and  third  quarters  is  38^43';  and  the  epicycle’s  radius  5^10' 
to  the  39^45'  of  the  straight  line  EL,  or  the  moon’s  distance  at  the  observation. 
Which  things  it  was  required  to  show. 

And  now  that  the  moon’s  distances  have  been  shown  in  the  manner  described, 
it  would  next  be  in  order  to  demonstrate  at  the  same  time  the  sun’s  distance  too, 
since  it  is  readily  accessible  geometrically  if,  in  addition  to  the  moon’s  distances 
at  the  syzygies,  there  should  be  given  the  magnitudes  of  the  angles  at  the  eye  in 
the  syzygies,  subtended  by  the  diameters  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  shadow. 

14.  On  the  Magnitude  of  the  Apparent  Diameters  of  the  Sun,  Moon, 
AND  Shadow  during  the  Syzygies 

Of  the  methods  for  such  an  inquiry,  we  rejected  all  those  which  measure  these 
luminaries  by  means  of  waterclocks  or  the  times  of  equatorial  ascensions,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  impossibility  of  getting  what  is  proposed  by  such  means.  But  con¬ 
structing  ourself  the  four-cubit  rod  dioptra  described  by  Hipparchus,^  and 
making  observations  with  it,  we  find  the  sun’s  diameter  everyivhere  contained 

Tappus  in  his  Commentary  on  Book  v  gives  a  description  of  the  waterclock,  and  the  follow¬ 
ing  description  of  the  dioptra. 

‘Tor  let  there  be  a  rod  not  less  than  4  cubits  in  length  and  of  width  and  thickness  sufficient 

to  keep  the  rod  rigid.  Let  its  upper  lateral  surface 
be  conceived  as  the  parallelogram  AB.  And  let 
there  be  a  groove  on  it  along  the  straight  line  PO 
through  the  middle  of  it,  so  that  a  little  block  is 
easily  moved  as  we  wish  along  the  whole  length 
of  the  rod  without  falling  from  it.  And  let  a  suit¬ 
able  prism  CD  be  added  on,  perpendicular  to  the 
rod  and  stable,  having  USD  as  its  side  toward  the 
block  and  the  straight  line  CE  at  the  top  of  the 
prism.  Let  there  be  another  suitable  perpendicu¬ 
lar  prism  FG  at  one  end  of  the  rod,  and  let  it  have 
a  small  hole,  not  at  the  rod,  but  in  the  middle  like  K,  so  that,  when  our  eye  is  placed  at  it  for 


172 


PTOLEMY 


by  very  nearly  the  same  angle  with  no  variation  worthy  of  mention  resulting 
from  its  distances.  But  we  find  the  moon^s  diameter  contained  by  the  same  angle 
as  the  sun^s,  then,  only  when  during  the  full  moons  it  is  at  its  greatest  distance 
from  the  earth,  being  at  the  epicycle^s  apogee;  and  not  when  it  is  at  the  mean 
distance  as  in  the  hypotheses  of  older  astronomers.  Moreover,  we  also  found 
these  angles  a  good  deal  smaller  than  those  handed  down,  and  that  without 
using  the  measurement  on  the  rod,  but  by  calculating  with  lunar  eclipses.  For 
it  was  easy  to  see  when  each  of  the  diameters  subtends  the  same  angle,  from  the 
fact  that  no  comparative  measurement  is  available  in  such  a  situation.  But  how 
large  they  were  seemed  very  doubtful  to  us  since,  even  when  the  comparison  is 
greatest  in  the  to-and-fro  movements  of  the  covering  width  along  the  length 
from  the  eye  to  the  prism,  it  can  be  off  the  true  one.  But  once  the  moon  at  its 
greatest  distance  appeared  to  make  an  angle  at  the  eye  equal  to  the  sun’s,  by 
means  of  the  lunar  eclipses  observed  at  that  distance  we  calculated  the  angle 
subtended  by  the  moon,  and  immediately  we  had  that  of  the  sun  also.  And, 
again,  by  two  eclipses  set  out  below,  we  shall  render  the  method  of  this  general 
theory  very  understandable. 

For  in  the  year  5  of  Nabopollassar  (which  is  the  year  127  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptianwise  Athyr  27-28  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  hour)  the  moon  began  to 
be  eclipsed  in  Babjdon;  and  the  greatest  extent  of  the  eclipse  was  34  of  the  di¬ 
ameter  from  the  south.  Since,  then,  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  took  place  5 
seasonal  hours  after  midnight,  and  the  middle  very  nearly  6  hours  after  mid¬ 
night  which  in  Babylon  amounted  to  5+34+ M  equatorial  hours  because  of  the 
sun’s  true  position’s  being  27°3'  within  the  Ram,  therefore  it  is  clear  that  the 
middle  of  the  eclipse,  when  the  greatest  part  of  the  diameter  fell  within  the 
shadow,  took  place  in  Babylon  5+34+34  equatorial  hours  after  midnight,  but 
in  Alexandria  only  5  hours  after.  And  the  total  time  from  the  epoch  amounts  to 
126  Egyptian  years,  86  days,  and  17  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  in 
terms  of  mean  solar  days  16+34+34  equatorial  hours.  The  moon’s  mean  longi¬ 
tudinal  passage  was  thus  25*^32'  within  the  Balance,  and  its  true  position  27®5'; 
also  it  was  340*^7'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee  and  80^40'  from  the  northern  limit 
of  the  oblique  circle.  And  it  is  evident  that,  when  the  moon’s  centre  (the  moon 
now  being  near  its  greatest  distance)  is  934°  along  the  oblique  circle  from  the 
nodes,  and  when  the  shadow’s  centre  lies  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the 
moon  at  right  angles  to  the  oblique  circle  in  which  position  the  greatest  obscura¬ 
tions  take  place,  then  a  quarter  of  the  diameter  falls  within  the  shadow.  • 

Again,  in  the  year  7  of  Cambyses  (which  is  the  year  225  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptianwise  Phamenoth  17-18  one  hour  before  midnight)  the  moon  was 
eclipsed  in  Babylon  to  the  extent  of  a  half  of  its  diameter  from  the  north.  There¬ 
fore  the  eclipse  also  took  place  in  Alexandria  very  nearly  1+34+34  equatorial 
hours  before  midnight.  And  the  total  time  from  the  epoch  amounts  to  224 
Egyptian  years,  196  days,  and  1034  equatorial  hours  simply  considered,  but  9+ 
34+  34  hours  accurately  considered,  because  of  the  sun’s  being  18'^12'  within  the 
Crab.  And  so  the  moon’s  mean  longitudinal  position  was  20'’22'  within  the  Goat, 
but  its  true  one  18°14';  also  it  was  28°5'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee,  and  262^12' 
from  the  oblique  circle’s  northern  limit.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that,  when  the 
moon’s  centre  (the  moon  being  near  the  same  greatest  distance)  is  7^4°  along 

use,  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  it  to  the  moving  prism  CD  through  its  side  edges  can  con¬ 
tain  the  whole  apparent  diameter  of  the  sun,  touching  it  at  its  extremities.^' 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  173 

the  oblique  circle  from  the  nodes,  and  the  shadow's  centre  has  the  position  we 
jiist  described  with  respect  to  the  moon's  centre,  one  half  of  the  moon's  diame¬ 
ter  falls  within  the  shadow! 

But  if  the  moon's  centre  is  93^°  along  the  oblique  circle  from  the  nodes,  it  is 
0°483^'  from  the  ecliptic  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  itself  at  right 
angles  to  the  oblique  circle.  And  when  it  is  along  the  oblique  circle  from  the 
nodes,  it  is  0°40%'  from  the  ecliptic  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  itself 
at  right  angles  to  the  oblique  circle.  Since,  then,  the  difference  between  the  two 
eclipses  embraces  a  quarter  of  the  moon's  diameter,  and  since  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  two  distances  of  its  centre  from  the  ecliptic,  that  is  from  the  shadow's 
centre,  is  (7+3^+3^)',  therefore  it  is  evident  the  whole  diameter  of  the  moon 
subtends  an  arc  of  a  great  circle  amounting  to  0°313^'. 

It  is  immediately  easy  to  see  that  the  radius  of  the  shadow  at  the  moon's 
greatest  distance  subtends  0°40%'.  For,  when  the  moon's  centre  was  that  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  shadow's  centre,  it  was  tangent  to  the  shadow's  circle,  half  of  the 

moon's  diameter  being  eclipsed.  And  the  shadow's 
radius  is  very  little  less  than  2^  times  as  great 
as  the  moon's  radius  which  is  0°15^'.  By  means  of 
several  other  such  observations  we  got  very  nearly 
these  same  magnitudes,  and  w^e  have  used  them 
c  for  other  things  about  eclipses.  We  now  use  one 
of  them  w-hich  Hipparchus  also  followed,  for  the 
demonstration  of  the  sun's  distance  to  be  made 
in  this  same  way,  since  the  circles  intercepted  by 
the  cones  on  the  sun,  moon,  and  earth  are  not 
appreciably  different  from  the  great  circles  them¬ 
selves  described  on  those  spheres  and  their  dia¬ 
meters.^ 

15.  On  the  Sun's  Distance  and  Demon¬ 
strations  Related  Thereto 

Now^  that  these  things  are  given,  and  seeing  that 
the  moon's  greatest  distance  is  64^10'  to  the  of 
the  earth's  radius  because  it  has  been  shown  the 
mean  distance  is  59^  and  the  epicycle's  radius 
5^10',  let  us  find  out  also  how  great  is  the  sun's 
distance. 

For  let  there  be  the  great  circles  of  the  spheres 
in  the  same  plane:  ABC  the  sun's  wdth  centre  D, 
EFG  the  moon's  at  its  greatest  distance  with  cen¬ 
tre  H,  and  KLM  earth's  with  centre  N.  Of  the 
planes  through  the  centres,  let  AXC  be  that  con¬ 
taining  the  earth's  and  the  sun's,  and  ANC  that 
containing  the  sun's  and  the  moon's.  Let  there  be 
the  common  axis  DHNX;  and  let  there  be  the  par¬ 
allel  lines  through  the  points  of  tangency,  clearly 
equal  to  the  diameters  as  far  as  the  senses  are  con- 

^This  demonstration  in  all  its  details  for  the  case  of  the  moon  is  given  by  Aristarchus  in  his 
Treatise  on  the  Sizes  and  Distances  of  the  Sun  and  Moon, 


PTOLEMY 


174 

cerned:  that  of  the  sun’s  circle,  ADC;  that  of  the  moon’s  circle,  EHG;  that 
of  the  earth’s  circle,  KNM;  and  OPR  of  the  shadow’s  circle  into  which  the 
moon  falls  at  its  greatest  distance.  And  so 

HN  =  NP==Mm' 

where,  as  earth’s  radius, 

LA  =  lp. 

Then  it  is  required  to  find  what  ratio  the  line  DNy  the  sun’s  distance,  has 
to  LN,  the  earth’s  radius. 

Now  let  EGS  be  produced.  And  since  we  have  shown  that  the  moon’s 
diameter  at  the  given  greatest  distance  in  the  syzygies  subtends  an  arc 
of  0°31'20"  on  the  circle  drawn  through  the  moon  about  the  earth’s  centre,  it 
follows  that  .1 

angle  £AG  =  0°31'20"  iL 

and,  as  half  of  it,  -  i  »  .  ■ 

angle  i/iV'G  =  0°31'20"  to  2  rt.  .  .  t  r 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  HGNy 

arc  (?/7  =  0°31'20" 


and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle. 


arc  //iV  =  179°28'40". 

And  therefore 

chord  (?hr  =  0p32'48" 

where 

diam.  GN  =  120p 

and 

chord  HN  120^. 

And  so  also 

GH=^0m'33" 

where 

HN=-GinO' 

and 

earth’s  rad.  MN = I”. 

But  since,  very  nearly. 

PR:GH::  2»36' :  l^ 

therefore 

Pfi  =  0P45'38". 

Therefore 

GP+PP  =  1P3'11" 

where 

MAT = IP. 

But 

HS+PR  =  2^, 

because 

HS+PR=2MN. 

For,  as  we  said,  they  are 

all  parallel,  and 

NP=HN. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

G<S=0p56'49" 

where 


And 

THE  ALMAGEST,  V  175 

MN  :GS::CN  :CG::DN  :  DH. 

Therefore  also 

Z)//=0'>56'49" 

and,  by  subtraction. 

^Ar=0P3'll" 

where 

DN  =  l^, 

And  so  we  shall  have  also,  as  the  sun^s  distance, 


where 

DAr=1210p 

^Ar  =  64PlO' 

and 

MN  =  1K 

And  since  likewise  it  was  shown  that 


where 

Pfi=0p45'38" 

MiV  =  lP 

and  since 

therefore 

MN  :  PR::  NX:  PX, 

PX  =  0H5'38", 

and,  by  subtraction. 

ArP  =  0Pl4'22" 

where 

‘^And  therefore 

NX=1P. 

PX =203^50', 

XX=268P 

where 

ArP=64PlO' 

and 

earth’s  rad.  MN=l^. 

Therefore,  to  the  1  of  the  earth^s  radius,  we  have  concluded  that  the  moon^s 
mean  distance  in*the  syzygies  is  59,  the  sun^s  1210,  and  from  the  earth’s  centre 
to  the  vertex  of  the  shadow’s  cone  268. 

16.  On  the  Magnitudes  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth 

Furthermore,  the  ratio  of  these  solid  magnitudes  is  easily  and  immediately 
seen  from  the  diameters  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  earth. 

For  since  it  has  been  shown  that 

^  moon’s  rad.  GH  =  0p17'33", 


and  > 

HX=64P10' 

where  ^ 

and  since 

earth’s  rad.  MN=1’>, 

HN  :GH  ::DN  :  CD 


176 

therefore,  having  shown 


PTOLEMY 


DN  =  1210^, 

we  shall  also  have 

sun^s  rad.  CD  =  5J^p. 

And,  therefore,  the  ratios  of  the  diameters  will  be  the  same. 

The  earth^s  diameter  will  hence  be  very  nearly  3%,  and  the  sun^s  18^,  to  the 
moon^s  1.  Therefore  the  earth’s  diameter  is  3%  times  as  great  as  the  moon’s,  and 
the  sun’s  18^  times  as  great  as  the  moon’s,  and  very  nearly  5}/2  times  as  great 
as  the  earth’s.  Accordingly,  since  the  cube  of  1  is  1,  and  the  cube  of  3%  is  very 
nearly  3934?  fhe  cube  of  18^  likewise  very  nearly  664434?  therefore  we  have 
concluded  [Eucl.  XII,  18]  that  the  earth’s  solid  magnitude  is  3934?  and  the  sun’s 
664434?  to  the  moon’s  1.  Therefore  the  sun’s  solid  magnitude  is  very  nearly  170 
times  the  earth’s. 

17.  On  the  Particular  Parallaxes  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 

Now,  with  these  things  supposed  in  this  way,  it  would  next  follow  that  we 
show  in  addition  and  very  briefly  how  one  could  compute,  from  the  distances  of 
the  sun  and  moon,  their  particular  parallaxes — and,  first  of  all,  those  considered 
on  the  great  circle  dra\vn  through  the  zenith  and  themselves. 

Again,  then,  let  there  be  in  the  plane  of  this  great  circle  the  earth’s  great  circle 
ABj  the  circle  at  the  sun  or  moon  CD,  and 
the  circle  EFGH  to  which  the  earth  has  the 
ratio  of  a  point ;  and  let  K  be  the  centre  of 
them  all,  and  RACE  the  diameter  through 
the  zenith  points.  With  arc  CD  cut  off  from 
the  zenith  C  at  30°  as  an  example,  again  let 
KDG  and  ADH  be  joined;  and  from  A  let 
AF  be  dravm  parallel  to  XG,  and  AL  per¬ 
pendicular  to  it. 

Now,  since  the  distance  of  each  of  these 
luminaries  is  not  ahvays  the  same,  and 
since  the  difference  of  the  parallaxes  result¬ 
ing  from  this  cause  will  be,  for  the  sun,  alto¬ 
gether  small  and  imperceptible  because  its 
circle’s  eccentricity  is  small  and  its  distance 
great,  but  since  for  the  moon  it  would  be 
quite  perceptible  both  because  of  its  epicy- 
clic  motion  and  because  of  the  epicycle’s  movement  on  the  eccentric  which 
makes  a  considerable  difference  at  either  distance,  we  shall  show  the  sun’s 
parallaxes  only  in  the  one  ratio  (I  mean  the  ratio  of  1210  to  1)  and  the  moon’s 
in  those  four  ratios  which  will  be  the  more  accessible  to  successive  calculations. 
Of  these  four  distances  we  have  taken,  first,  those  two  which  result  from  the 
epicycle’s  being  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee;  and,  of  these  two,  first  the  distance  to 
the  epicycle’s  apogee  which  we  have  already  shown  to  be  64^10'  to  the  P  of  the 
earth’s  radius,  and  second  the  distance  to  the  epicycle’s  perigee  found  to  be 
53^50'.  The  remaining  two  we  have  taken  when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  eccentric’s 
perigee;  and  again,  of  these,  first  the  distance  to  the  epicycle’s  apogee  which  was 
found  (as  already  shown)  to  be  43^53'  to  the  P  of  the  earth’s  radius,  and  second 
to  the  epicycle’s  perigee  found  to  be  33^33'. 


E 


Since  then 

THE  ALMAGEST,  V  177 

arc  CD  =30°, 

therefore  also 

angle  CKD  =  30° 

=  60°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AKLj 

arc  AL  =  60° 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle. 


And  therefore 

arc  /vL  =  120°. 

chord  AL  =  60p 
chord  KL  =  103p55' 

where 

diam.  A/v  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

AL  =  0p30' 

KL  =  0^o2' 

where 

And,  for  the  sun^s  distance, 

/vLD  =  1210P; 

and,  for  the  lunar  distances,  at  the  first  term 


at  the  second  term 

A'LD  =  64^10'; 

KLD  =  53^50’; 

at  the  third  term 

KLD =4:3^53'; 

and  at  the  fourth  term 

ALZ)  =  33^33'. 

Therefore,  since  the  remainder,  line  LD,  differs  from  AD  by  an  indistinguish¬ 
able  amount,  for  the  solar  distance, 

AD  =  1209^8'; 

and  for  the  lunar  distances,  at  the  first  term 

AD  =  63^18'; 


at  the  second  term 

at  the  third  term 

AD  =  52^58'; 

and  at  the  fourth  term 

AZ)  =  43n'; 

AD  =  32i>41'. 

And  so,  in  the  same  order  to  avoid  repetition. 


and 

AL  =  0^2' o9", 

AL  =  0^56'52", 

AL=l’^7'58", 

AL=l'>23'il", 

where 

4L=1P50'9", 

hypt.  AD  =  120p. 

178 


PTOLEMY 


And,  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADL, 

arc  AL  =  0°2'50", 
arc  AL  =  0°54'18", 
arc  AL  =  r4'54", 
arc  AL  =  r20\ 

and 


arc  AL=  1°45'. 


And,  since 
therefore 


and 


angle  i4Z)5  =  angle  FAH, 

angle  F AH  =  0^2' 50"  to  2  rt., 
=  0°1'25"; 

angle  F AH  =  0%^'1S"  to  2  rt., 
=  0°27'9"; 

angle  FAH=V4'5V  to  2  rt., 
=  0°32'27"; 

angle  FAi/=r20'  to  2  rt., 

=  0°40'; 

angle  FAi/  =  r45'  to  2  rt. 

=  0'^52'30". 


And  so — since  the  point  A  is  indistinguishable  from  the  center  A,  and  arc 
FGH  is  not  appreciably  greater  than  arc  GH  because  of  the  whole  earth^s  being 
in  the  ratio  of  a  point  to  circle  EFGH — arc  GH  of  the  parallax  will  be,  for  the 
solar  distance,  0'^1'25";  and  for  the  lunar  distances,  at  the  first  term  0°27'9",  at 
the  second  term  0°32'27",  at  the  third  term  0°40',  and  at  the  fourth  term 
0°52'30".  Which  it  was  required  to  show. 

In  the  same  way,  for  the  other  distances  from  the  zenith,  we  calculated  the 
resulting  parallaxes  for  each  term  at  intervals  of  6®  up  to  the  quadrant  of  90°, 
and  we  drew  up  a  table  for  the  determination  of  parallaxes,  again  in  45  rows  and 
9  columns.  In  the  first  column  we  put  the  90°  of  the  quadrant  making  them  in¬ 
crease  by  2°;  in  the  second  column,  the  sixtieths  of  the  solar  parallaxes  corre¬ 
sponding  to  each  section;  in  the  third  column,  the  moon^s  parallaxes  at  the  first 
term;  in  the  fourth,  the  excesses  of  the  second  term's  parallaxes  over  the  first 
term's;  in  the  fifth,  the  parallaxes  at  the  third  term;  and  in  the  sixth,  the  excesses 
of  the  fourth  term's  parallaxes  over  the  third  term's. 

For  example,  compared  to  30°  there  is  the  sun's  0°1'25",  then  next  the  0°27'9" 
of  the  moon's  first  term,  and  then  0°5'18"  which  is  the  excess  of  the  second  term 
over  the  first,  then  again  the  third  term's  0°40',  and  next  0°12'30"  which  is  the 
excess  of  the  fourth  term  over  the  third.  And  in  order  to  find  easily  and  sys¬ 
tematically  the  parallaxes  in  the  distances  between  the  apogees  and  perigees 
proportionate  to  the  particular  sections,  from  the  parallaxes  at  the  four  terms, 
by  comparing  the  sixtieths,  we  added  the  remaining  three  columns  for  com¬ 
paring  such  differences  as  were  calculated  in  the  following  way: 

Let  there  be  the  moon's  epicycle  ABCD  about  E  as  centre;  and  let  F  be  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  179 

centre  of  the  earth  and  the  ecliptic.  With  AEDF  joined, 
let  FOB  be  drami,  and  BE  and  CE  joined.  And  let  BG 
be  drawn  from  B^  and  CH  from  C,  perpendicular  to  AD, 
First  let  the  moon  be  supposed  the  distance  of  arc  AB 
from  the  true  apogee  at  A  considered  relative  to  centre 
F,  And  let  the  arc  be  60°,  for  example,  so  that 
angle  BEG  =  60° 

=  120°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEG^ 
arc  BG=  120° 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  EG  =  &Q\ 

And  therefore 

chord  ^G=103°55', 
chord  £JG  =  60p 

where 

diam.  BE=\20^. 

But,  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  E  is  at  the  eccentric’s 
apogee, 

EF  :  BE  :  :  60^  :  5^15'. 

And  therefore 

BG  =  4p33', 

EG  =  2^SS\ 

GEF  =  62^38', 

where 

BE  =  5n5\ 

And,  since 

sq.  FG+sq.  BG  =  sq.  BF, 

therefore 

BF  =  62P48' 

where,  as  the  first  term’s  distance, 

AF  =  65P15', 

and,  as  the  second  term’s  distance, 

DF  =  54^45', 

and,  as  the  difference  between  the  two  terms, 

AD  =  10^30'. 

And  therefore  the  difference  at  B  vdth  respect  to  the  first  term’s  distance  is  2^27' 
to  the  whole  difference’s  10^30'. 

And  so  the  difference  at  that  time  will  be  14  to  the  whole  difference’s  60. 
Therefore  we  shall  place  this  14  in  colunrn  7  in  the  row  containing  half  the  num¬ 
ber  60  (that  is,  opposite  30)  because  the  whole  90°  in  the  first  column  of  the 
table  are  only  half  the  180°  from  A  to  D. 

In  the  same  way,  if  we  suppose 

arc  CD  =  60°, 

then  it  will  be  shown  that 

CD  =  4P33', 

EH  =  2^3S\ 

and,  by  subtraction, 

FH  =  57^22' 


180 

PTOLEMY 

where 

rad.  CE=bnb'. 

And  likewise 

hypt.  CF  =  57^33'. 

Again  subtracting  these  from  the  first  term's  65^15',  we  shall  get  the  remain¬ 
der  7^42'  which  is  44  sixtieths  of  the  whole  difference.  And  we  place  this  44  in 
the  same  column  opposite  the  number  60  because  the  arc  ABC  is  120°. 

Again,  with  the  same  things  assumed,  let  the  centre  E  be  conceived  at  the 
eccentric's  perigee,  in  which  position  the  third  and  fourth  terms  are  contained. 

Since,  then,  at  this  position 

EF  :  BE  ::  60:  8, 

therefore,  whenever  it  is  assumed 

arc  ^JS  =  60° 

or 

arc  CD  =  60°, 

then 

BG  =  6^56' 

or 

CH =6^56' 

where 

BE  =  8p 

and 

EF =60^. 

And 

II 

•0 

or 

EH =4^. 

And  so,  with 

FG =64P 

and 

FH  =  56^, 

likewise  also 

hypt.  BF  =  64m’, 
hypt.  CF  =  mm' 

where  the  third  term's 

AF  =  68^ 

and,  as  difference  between  the  third  and  fourth  term, 

AD  =  ldi\ 

Therefore,  if  we  subtract  64^23'  from  68^,  we  shall  have  left  3p37'  which  is  13 
and  33'  sixtieths  of  the  whole  difference's  16^.  And  we  shall  place  this  likewise 
opposite  the  number  30  in  column  8.  And  if  we  subtract  56^26'  from  the  same 
68p,  we  shall  have  left  11^34'  which  is  43  and  24'  sixtieths  of  the  whole  differ¬ 
ence's  16p.  And  we  shall  likewise  place  this  opposite  the  number  60  in  column  8. 

The  differences  resulting  from  the  moon's  movement  on  the  epicycle  will  be 
set  out  by  us  in  this  way,  and  we  shall  systematically  handle  those  resulting 
from  the  epicycle's  passage  on  the  eccentric  in  the  following  manner: 

Let  there  be  the  moon's  eccentric  circle  ABCD  with  centre  E  and  diameter 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V 


181 


AECj  on  which  let  there  be  conceived  the  ecliptic’s  centre  F.  And  with  BFD 
drawn,  again  let  each  of  the  angles  AFB  and  CFD  be  60°.  This  takes  place  if  the 
elongation  is  30°  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  at  and  120°  when  at  D.  And, 
with  BE  and  DE  joined,  let  the  straight  line  EG  be  drawn  from  E  perpendicular 
to  BFD. 


A 


where 

and 


1. 


Now,  since 

angle  AFB  =  120°  to  2  rt., 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EFG^ 
arc  EG  =120° 

and,  as  remainder  of  the  semicircle, 
arc  FG==00°. 

And  therefore 

chord  =103^55', 
chord  FG  =  60^. 

where 

hypt.  EF=  120^. 

And  so 

EG  =  8^50% 

FG  =  5m' 

betw.  c.  EF=10nd' 


And  since 
therefore 


ecc.  rad.  49^41'. 
sq.  BE— sq.  EG  =  sq.  BG, 


And  so,  by  addition. 


BG  =  DG  =  ^8^53\ 


BF  =  bm' 

where,  for  the  first  pair  of  limits, 

AF  =  00^ 

and,  for  the  second  pair  of  limits. 


=  39^22', 

and  the  difference  between  them  is  20^38'.  Also,  by  subtraction, 

=  43^43'. 

Since,  then,  60^  exceeds  54^3'  by  5^57'  which  is  17  18'  sixtieths  of  the  whole 
difference’s  20^38',  and  exceeds  43^43'  by  16^17'  which  is  47  21'  sixtieths  of 
20^38',  we  place  the  17  and  18'  in  column  9  opposite  number  30  of  the  elongation 
and  the  47  and  21'  opposite  the  number  120  (or,  rather,  60,  because  the  elonga¬ 
tion  of  60°  is  equal  in  distance  to  that  of  120°  when  the  perigee  is  at  90°). 

For  the  other  arcs  we  calculate  in  this  same  way  the  resulting  sixtieths  of  the 
differences  according  to  the  three  differences  just  set  out,  by  sections  of  twelve 
which  become  sections  of  six  for  the  numbers  in  the  table,  the  180  parts  from  the 
apogees  to  the  perigees  corresponding  to  the  90  parts  in  the  table.  And  we  have 
put  down  for  each  of  the  numbers  given  the  corresponding  sixtieths  all  worked 
out.  Those  corresponding  to  the  parts  in  between  these  we  have  worked  out  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  regular  increase  of  the  sixth  parts  of  the  difference;  for  there  is  no 
discrepancy  worth  mentioning  between  those  so  gotten  and  those  derived  geo¬ 
metrically  for  differences  of  this  size,  either  in  the  sixtieths  or  in  the  parallaxes 
themselves.  And  here  is  the  table: 


182 


PTOLEMY 


18.  Parallactic  Table 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Paral 

Differ- 

Paral¬ 

Differ¬ 

Sixti¬ 

Sixti¬ 

5? 

laxes 

ences 

laxes 

ences 

eths 

eths 

Sixti¬ 

rO 

Sun^s 

of  the 

of  the 

of  the 

of  the 

of  the 

of  the 

eths 

;s 

ParaU 

moon^s 

moon's 

moon's 

moon's 

epi¬ 

epi¬ 

of  the 

laxes 

first 

second 

third 

fourth 

cycle's 

cycle's 

eccen¬ 

term 

term 

term 

term 

apogee 

perigee 

tric 

2 

0 

0 

7 

0 

1 

54 

0 

0 

23 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

50 

0 

14 

0 

11 

0 

15 

4 

0 

0 

13 

0 

3 

48 

0 

0 

45 

0 

6 

0 

0 

1 

40 

0 

28 

0 

22 

0 

30 

6 

0 

0 

19 

0 

5 

41 

0 

1 

7 

0 

9 

0 

0 

2 

30 

0 

42 

0 

33 

0 

45 

8 

0 

0 

25 

0 

7 

34 

0 

1 

29 

0 

11 

40 

0 

3 

20 

1 

22 

1 

7 

1 

33 

10 

0 

0 

31 

0 

9 

27 

0 

1 

51 

0 

14 

20 

0 

4 

10 

2 

2 

1 

41 

2 

21 

12 

0 

0 

37 

0 

11 

19 

0 

2 

12 

0 

17 

0 

0 

5 

0 

2 

42 

2 

15 

3 

9 

14 

0 

0 

42 

0 

13 

10 

0 

2 

33 

0 

19 

40 

0 

5 

50 

3 

35 

3 

13 

4 

22 

16 

0 

0 

48 

0 

15 

0 

0 

2 

54 

0 

22 

20 

0 

6 

40 

4 

28 

4 

11 

5 

35 

18 

0 

0 

53 

0 

16 

49 

0 

3 

15 

0 

25 

0 

0 

7 

30 

5 

21 

5 

9 

6 

48 

20 

0 

0 

58 

0 

18 

36 

0 

3 

36 

0 

27 

40 

0 

8 

20 

6 

39 

6 

25 

8 

25 

22 

0 

1 

4 

0 

20 

22 

0 

3 

57 

0 

30 

20 

0 

9 

10 

7 

57 

7 

41 

10 

2 

24 

0 

1 

9 

0 

22 

6 

0 

4 

18 

0 

33 

0 

0 

10 

0 

9 

15 

8 

57 

11 

39 

26 

0 

1 

14 

0 

23 

49 

0 

4 

39 

0 

35 

20 

0 

10 

50 

10 

50 

10 

29 

13 

32 

28 

0 

1 

20 

0 

25 

30 

0 

4 

59 

0 

37 

40 

0 

11 

40 

12 

25 

12 

1 

15 

25 

30 

0 

1 

25 

0 

27 

9 

0 

5 

18 

0 

40 

0 

0 

12 

30 

14 

0 

13 

33 

17 

18 

32 

0 

1 

30 

0 

28 

46 

0 

5 

37 

0 

42 

20 

0 

13 

20 

15 

52 

15 

22 

19 

23 

34 

0 

1 

35 

0 

30 

21 

0 

5 

55 

0 

44 

40 

0 

14 

10 

17 

44 

17 

11 

21 

28 

36 

0 

1 

40 

0 

31 

54 

0 

6 

13 

0 

47 

0 

0 

15 

0 

19 

36 

19 

0 

23 

33 

38 

0 

1 

44 

0 

33 

24 

0 

6 

30 

0 

49 

0 

0 

15 

40 

21 

36 

20 

59 

25 

40 

40 

0 

1 

49 

0 

34 

51 

0 

6 

47 

0 

51 

0 

0 

16 

20 

23 

36 

22 

58 

27 

47 

42 

0 

1 

54 

0 

36 

14 

0 

7 

4 

0 

53 

0 

0 

17 

0 

25 

36 

24 

57 

29 

54 

44 

0 

1 

58 

0 

37 

37 

0 

7 

20 

0 

55 

0 

0 

17 

40 

27 

40 

27 

1 

32 

0 

46 

0 

2 

3 

0 

38 

57 

0 

7 

35 

0 

57 

0 

0 

18 

20 

29 

44 

29 

5 

34 

6 

48 

0 

2 

8 

0 

40 

14 

0 

7 

49 

0 

59 

0 

0 

19 

0 

31 

48 

31 

9 

36 

12 

50 

0 

2 

12 

0 

41 

28 

0 

8 

3 

1 

0 

40 

0 

19 

40 

33 

52 

33 

14 

38 

9 

52 

0 

2 

16 

0 

42 

39 

0 

8 

16 

1 

2 

20 

0 

20 

20 

35 

56 

35 

19 

40 

6 

54 

0 

2 

20 

0 

43 

45 

0 

8 

29 

1 

4 

0 

0 

21 

0 

38 

0 

37 

24 

42 

3 

56 

0 

2 

23 

0 

44 

48 

0 

8 

42 

1 

5 

20 

0 

21 

20 

40 

0 

39 

24 

43 

49 

58 

0 

2 

26 

0 

45 

48 

0 

8 

53 

1 

6 

40 

0 

21 

40 

42 

0 

41 

24 

45 

35 

60 

0 

2 

29 

0 

46 

46. 

0 

9 

3 

1 

8 

0 

0 

22 

0 

44 

0 

43 

24 

47 

21 

62 

0 

2 

32 

0 

47 

40 

0 

9 

13 

1 

9 

20 

0 

22 

20 

45 

50 

45 

13 

48 

49 

64 

0 

2 

34 

0 

48 

30 

0 

9 

22 

1 

10 

40 

0 

22 

40 

47 

40 

47 

2 

50 

17 

66 

0 

2 

36 

0 

49 

15 

0 

9 

31 

1 

12 

0 

0 

23 

0 

49 

30 

48 

51 

51 

45 

68, 

0 

2 

38 

0 

49 

57 

0 

9 

39 

1 

13 

0 

0 

23 

10 

50 

56 

50 

24 

52 

57 

70 

0 

2 

40 

0 

50 

36 

0 

9 

46 

1 

14 

0 

0 

23 

20 

52 

22 

51 

57 

54 

9 

72 

0 

2 

42 

0 

51 

11 

0 

9 

53 

1 

15 

0 

0 

23 

30 

53 

48 

53 

30 

55 

41 

74 

0 

2 

44 

0 

51 

44 

0 

9 

59 

1 

15 

40 

0 

23 

40 

54 

57 

54 

41 

56 

12 

76 

0 

2 

46 

0 

52 

12 

0 

10 

4 

1 

16 

20 

0 

23 

50 

56 

6 

55 

52 

57 

3 

78 

0 

2 

47 

0 

52 

34 

0 

10 

8 

1 

17 

0 

0 

24 

0 

57 

15 

57 

3 

57 

54 

80 

0 

2 

48 

0 

52 

53 

0 

10 

11 

1 

17 

20 

0 

24 

10 

57 

57 

57 

47 

58 

26 

82 

0 

2 

49 

0 

53 

9 

0 

10 

14 

1 

17 

40 

0 

24 

20 

58 

39 

58 

31 

58 

58 

84 

0 

2 

50 

0 

53 

21 

0 

10 

16 

1 

18 

0 

0 

24 

30 

59 

21 

59 

15 

59 

30 

86 

0 

2 

50 

0 

53 

29 

0 

10 

16 

1 

18 

20 

0 

24 

40 

59 

34 

59 

30 

59 

40 

88 

0 

2 

51 

0 

53 

33 

0 

10 

17 

1 

18 

40 

0 

24 

50 

59 

47 

59 

45 

59 

50 

90 

0 

2 

51 

0 

53 

34 

0 

10 

17 

1 

19 

0 

0 

25 

0 

60 

0 

60 

0 

60 

0 

THE  ALMAGEST,  V 


183 


19.  On  the  Determination  of  Parallaxes 

Whenever  we  vTsh  to  determine  what  parallax  the  moon  displays  in  each  of 
its  passages — first  along  the  great  circle  through  itself  and  the  zenith — we  shall 
look  to  see  how  many  equatorial  hours  it  is  from  the  meridian  of  the  given 
parallel.  And  taking  the  number  found  to  the  Table  of  Angles  of  the  proper 
parallel  and  of  the  proper  sign  [Chap.  13,  Book  ii],^  we  shall  find  in  the  second 
column  the  degrees  corresponding  to  that  hour  either  entire  or  in  proportion  to 
the  part  of  the  hour.  These  are  the  degrees  of  the  moon's  distance  from  the 
zenith  along  the  great  circle  dra\vn  through  them  both.  And  carrying  this  num¬ 
ber  to  the  Table  of  Parallaxes,  we  shall  look  to  see  what  row  of  the  first  column 
it  falls  in,  and  we  shall  note  down  each  of  the  numbers  corresponding  to  it  in 
the  four  successive  columns  following  the  solar  parallaxes— that  is,  columns 
3,  4,  5,  and  6. 

Then,  taking  the  anomalistic  number  determined  for  that  hour  mth  respect 
to  the  true  apogee,  either  the  number  itself  or  (if  it  exceeds  180®)  the  difference 
between  it  and  360®,  we  carry  the  half  of  the  number  of  the  degrees  so  obtained 
to  the  same  numbers  [in  column  1],  and  we  look  to  see  how  many  sixtieths  in 
columns  7  and  8  correspond  to  that  number.  As  many  sixtieths  as  are  found  in 
column  7,  just  so  many  sixtieths  shall  we  take  of  the  difference  in  column  4,  al¬ 
ways  adding  it  in  turn  to  the  parallax  in  column  3.  And  as  many  sixtieths  as  are 
found  in  column  8,  just  so  many  sixtieths  shall  we  take  of  the  difference  in 
column  6,  always  adding  it  in  turn  to  the  parallax  of  column  5.  And  we  shall 
set  out  the  difference  of  the  two  parallaxes  gotten  in  this  way. 

Next,  taking  the  number  of  degrees  of  the  moon's  mean  distance  either 
from  the  sun  or  from  the  point  diametrically  opposite  according  to  whichever 
yields  the  nearer  distance,  we  shall  also  carry  these  to  the  numbers  in  column 
1.  And  again,  as  many  sixtieths  as  correspond  in  the  ninth  and  last  column, 
just  so  many  sixtieths  shall  we  take  of  the  difference  between  the  paral¬ 
laxes  set  out,  always  adding  the  result  to  the  lesser  of  the  two  parallaxes — 
that  is,  to  the  parallax  determined  from  columns  3  and  4.^  And  we  shall 
have  the  total  parallax  the  moon  displays  along  the  great  circle  through  itself 
and  the  zenith. 

For  solar  echpses,  the  solar  parallax  simply  considered  is  immediately  ob¬ 
tained  at  the  similar  position  from  the  degrees  in  column  2  corresponding  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  arc  from  the  zenith. 

^To  use  this  table  with  accuracy,  the  moon  must  be  supposed  at  the  beginning  of  the  sign 

^Here,  as  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  the  procedure  is  prac¬ 
tically  true,  not  strictly  and  mathematically  true.  Ptolemy,  here 
and  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  is  supposing  that,  between  the 
smaller  parallax  at  the  greater  distance  and  the  larger  parallax  at 
the  lesser  distance,  the  differences  in  the  parallaxes  are  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  differences  in  the  distances. 

Thus,  consider  the  centre  of  the  earth  K,  the  observer's  eye  A, 
the  zenith  point  C,  and  the  three  distances  of  the  moon,  Z),  D',  and 
D"  with  the  three  corresponding  parallactic  angles  ADK,  AD'K^ 
and  AD^K.  The  supposition  is  that 
angle  AD'K  —  angle  AD''K  :  angle  ADK  —  AD^K  :  :  KD'  — 
KD  :  KD"  —  KDy  or  that 
angle  D"AD'  :  angle  D"AD  :  :  D"D'  :  D"D, 


and  to  be  on  the  ecliptic. 


184 


PTOLEMY 


Now,  to  determine  also  the  parallax  displayed  at  that  time  with  respect  to 
the  ecliptic,  longitudinally  and  latitudinally,  we  shall  take  again  the  same  equa¬ 
torial  hours  of  the  moon's  distance  from  the  meridian  to  the  same  part  of  the 
Table  of  Angles.  And  we  shall  look  for  the  number  of  degrees  corresponding  to 
the  number  of  hours,  in  column  3  if  the  moon  is  antemeridian,  but  in  column  4 
if  the  moon  is  postmeridian.  If  it  is  within  90°,  we  shall  write  it  down;  if  above 
90°,  we  shall  write  down  what  is  left  from  180°.  For  the  lesser  of  these  angles 
about  the  intersection  will  be  just  so  many  degrees  to  one  right  angle's  90°. 
Then,  doubling  the  number  of  degrees  noted  down,  we  carry  it  to  the  Table  of 
Chords,  the  number  itself  and  the  remainder  from  180°.  And  whatever  ratio  the 
chord  subtending  the  arc  of  twice  the  number  of  degrees  has  to  the  chord  sub¬ 
tending  the  remainder  of  the  semicircle,  that  ratio  the  latitudinal  parallax  has 
to  the  longitudinal,  since  arcs  of  such  size  do  not  differ  appreciably  from  their 
chords.  Then,  multiplying  the  numbers  of  the  corresponding  chords  by  the  par¬ 
allax  found  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  zenith,  and  dividing  the  result 
by  120,  we  analytically  derive  the  degrees  resulting  from  the  division  as  the  de¬ 
grees  of  the  particular  parallax. 

In  general,  in  the  case  of  the  latitudinal  parallax,  whenever  the  zenith  is 
farther  north  on  the  meridian  than  the  point  of  the  ecliptic  then  culminating, 
the  parallax  will  be  to  the  south  of  it;  and  whenever  the  zenith  is  farther  south 
than  the  point  of  the  ecliptic  culminating,  the  latitudinal  parallax  will  be  to  the 
north.  In  the  case  of  the  longitudinal  parallaxes,  since  the  magnitudes  of  the 
angles  laid  out  in  the  table  contain  the  northern  angle  of  the  two  angles  con¬ 
tained  by  the  eastward  section  of  the  ecliptic  to  either  side  of  it,  when  the  lati¬ 
tudinal  parallax  is  to  the  north  (if  the  angle  in  question  is  greater  than  a  right 
angle)  the  longitudinal  parallax  will  be  westward;  if  less  than  a  right  angle,  east¬ 
ward.  But,  contrawise,  when  the  latitudinal  parallax  is  to  the  south,  if  the  angle 
in  question  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  the  longitudinal  parallax  is  eastward ; 
if  less  than  a  right  angle,  westward. 

Now,  we  have  used  the  things  previously  demonstrated  concerning  the  sun 
as  if  it  displayed  no  sensible  parallax — not  because  we  were  unaware  that  its 
parallax  when  later  worked  out  would  make  some  difference  in  these  matters, 
but  because  we  did  not  think  any  appreciable  error  would  follow  from  this  with 
respect  to  the  appearances,  so  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  change  any  of  the  de¬ 
tails  worked  out  already  and  without  regard  to  this  small  difficulty.  Likewise, 
with  respect  to  the  moon's  parallaxes,  we  were  satisfied  with  the  arcs  and  angles 
made  with  the  ecliptic  by  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  horizon's  poles  in 
the  place  of  those  considered  with  respect  to  the  moon's  oblique  circle.  For  the 
difference  resulting  at  the  ecliptic  sj^zygies  would  be  imperceptible,  and  setting 
them  out  requires  many  proofs  and  long  calculations,  the  distances  from  the 
nodes  not  being  fixed  for  each  of  the  moon's  passages  in  the  zodiac,  but  suffering 
various  changes  in  magnitude  and  position. 

For  an  easy  understanding  of  what  has  been  said,  let  there  be  taken  the  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  ecliptic  ABCy  and  the  section  of  the  moon's  oblique  circle  AD;  and 
let  the  point  A  be  supposed  the  node,  and  D  the  moon's  centre.  From  D  let  there 
be  drawn  the  arc  DB  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic.  Let  the  point  E  be  the  hori¬ 
zon's  pole,  and  let  there  be  drawn  through  it  EDF  as  a  section  of  the  great  circle 
through  the  moon's  centre,  and  section  EB  through  B.  And  let  the  moon  display 
a  parallax  of  arc  DG,  and  let  the  arcs  GH  and  GK  be  drawn  through  G  perpen- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  185 

dicular  to  the  arcs  BD  and  BF  so  that,  of  the  lon¬ 
gitudinal  distances  from  the  node,  arc  AB  is  the 
true  one,  and  AK  the  apparent  one;  and,  of  the 
latitudinal  distances  from  the  ecliptic,  the  true  one 
is  arc  BD  and  the  apparent  one  KG;  so  that,  of  the 
parallaxes  from  DG  considered  with  respect  to  the 
ecliptic,  the  longitudinal  is  equal  to  HG  and  the 
latitudinal  to  DH. 

Now,  since  the  parallax  DG  is  found  by  the 
means  presented  above  when  arc  ED  is  given,  and 
since  each  of  the  parallaxes  DH  and  HG  is  found 
when  angle  CFE  is  given,  and  since  we  previously 
demonstrated  the  angles  and  arcs  of  the  great 
circle  through  the  zenith  with  respect  to  given  points  on  the  ecliptic  and  thus  we 
have  only  point  B  of  the  ecliptic  given,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  using  arc  EB  in¬ 
stead  of  arc  EDj  and  angle  CBE  instead  of  angle  CFE. 

Hipparchus  tried  to  make  this  correction,  and  he  appears  to  have  attacked 
the  problem  in  an  ill-considered  and  illogical  fashion.  For,  first,  he  used  one 
distance  AD,  and  not  all  or  several  distances  as  would  have  been  consequent 
upon  his  desire  to  be  exact  in  small  things.  Then,  too,  he  failed  to  notice  that  he 
was  falling  into  several  absurdities.  For  after  he  himself  has  already  demon¬ 
strated  the  arcs  and  angles  considered  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic,  and  had 


demonstrated  that,  when  arc  ED  is  given,  arc  DG  is  gotten  (for  he  demonstrates 
this  in  Book  i  of  his  Treatise  on  Parallaxes),  he  uses  arc  EF  and  angle  EFC  as 
given  for  getting  arc  ED.  Thus  in  Book  ii,  after  having  calculated  arc  FD,  he 
assumes  the  remainder  ED;  and  he  came  to  these  conclusions  because  he  did  not 
notice  that  the  point  B,  and  not  F,  is  given  on  the  ecliptic;  and  therefore  arc  EB 
is  given  and  not  arc  EF,  and  angle  EBC  is  given  and  not  EFC.  Therefore,  to 
make  a  partial  correction,  he  had  upset  everything.  For  there  is  quite  a  sensible 
difference  between  arcs  ED  and  EF,  the  latter  being  much  less  given  than  the 
former.  But  since  actually  BE  is  given,  the  difference  with  respect  to  ED  will  be 
at  most  only  the  magnitude  of  arc  BD  for  each  of  the  distances  from  the  node.^ 

Now  we  can  see  what  follows  from  the  correction  rightly  made,  in  this  way: 

^For  BD  would  always  be  less  than  DF,  and  BE  in  nearly  all  cases  would  differ  from  DE 
by  less  than  BD, 


186 


PTOLEMY 


Let  there  be  the  ecliptic  ABC  and  the  circle  DBE  at  right  angles  to  it.  And 
let  the  moon,  either  at  D  or  at  E,  be  distant  from  the  ecliptic  ABC  by  a  given 
arc,  such  as  BD  and  BEj  so  that  the  arcs  from  the  zenith  to  the  ecliptic  point  B 
and  the  angles  at  B  are  given,  and  the  arcs  and  angles  with  respect  to  D  or  E 
are  sought.  - 

If,  then,  the  ecliptic  has  a  position  such  that  it  is  at  right  angles  to  the  great 
circle  drawn  through  the  point  B  and  the  point  F,  which  is  to  be  taken  at  the 
horizon^s  pole  (for  example  the  great  circle  FB),  then,  clearly,  it  will  coincide 
with  arc  DEj  and  the  angle  considered  at  D  and  E  will  be  no  different  from  that 
supposed  at  B.  For  they  are  right  angles  and  therefore  relative  to  the  ecliptic. 
And  arc  FD  will  be  less  than  arc  FB  by  arc  BD, 
and  arc  FE  greater  by  arc  BE,  with  arcs  BD  and 
BE  given. 

Furthermore,  if  the  ecliptic  ABC  coincides  with 
the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  zenith,  and  if 
(assuming  A  to  be  the  horizon^s  pole)  we  join  the 
arcs  AD  and  AE,  they  will  differ  from  arc  AB,  and 
the  angles  BAD  and  BAE  will  differ  from  the  angle 
which  in  the  former  case  did  not  exist.  But  arcs 
AD  and  AE  are  given,  since  they  are  as  straight 
lines  very  nearly,  from  arcs  AB,  and  BD  and  BE 
which  are  given.  For  the  sums  of  their  squares  give 
the  squares  on  AD  and  AE.  And  angles  BAD  and 
BAE  follow  from  them. 

But  with  the  ecliptic's  position  inclined,  if  from  F  the  horizon's  pole  we  join 
FB,  FGD,  and  FEH,  then  both  arc  FB  and  angle  ABF  are  given;  and  again, 
certainly,  arcs  BD  and  BE.  And  arcs  FD  and  FE,  and  angles  AGF  and  AHF 

must  be  given;  and  they  are  given,  once  DK  and 
EL  are  drawn  perpendicular  to  FB. 

For,  since  angle  ABF  is  given  and  angle  ABE  is 
always  a  right  angle,  the  right  triangles  BKD  and 
BLE  are  given  and  also  the  ratio  of  FB  to  the  sides 
about  the  right  angles,  since  it  is  given  relative  to 
the  hypotenuses  DB  and  BE.  And  so  the  hypote¬ 
nuses  FD  and  FE  are  given,  and  therefore  also 
angles  DFK  and  EFL  which  are  the  differences 
with  the  angles  desired.  For  angle  AGF  is  greater 
than  angle  ABF  by  angle  DFB;  and  angle  AHF  is 
less  than  angle  ABF  by  angle  EFL. 

It  is  clear  that,  with  the  same  latitudinal  dis¬ 
tance  supposed,  the  greatest  difference  between 
the  angles  occurs  when  the  point  B  itself  is  the  zenith.  For  with  no  angle  at  B, 
the  arcs  from  the  zenith  to  D  and  E  make  right  angles  with  the  ecliptic.  The 
greatest  difference  between  the  arcs  occurs  when  the  position  is  the  same;  for 
again,  with  no  arc  at  B,  the  arcs  at  D  and  E  will  be  as  great  as  those  of  the 
moon's  latitudinal  passage;  and  also  when  the  great  circle  through  the  zenith  is 
at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic.  For,  again,  arcs  FD  and  FE  will  differ  from  FB  by 
the  whole  latitudinal  passage.  But  in  the  other  positions  with  DE  inclined  to 
FB,  the  differences  of  both  the  arcs  and  angles  will  come  to  less.  Therefore,  when 


A 


THE  ALMAGEST,  V  187 

the  moon  is  distant  5°  in  latitude  from  the  ecliptic,  the  greatest  difference  of  the 
parallaxes  will  be  very  nearly  10  sixtieths,  the  5°  of  the  greatest  difference  in  arcs 
making  just  this  many  sixtieths  of  parallax  in  the  case  of  the  greatest  excesses 
and  least  distances.  But  when  the  moon  is  at  its  greatest  distance  in  the  solar 
eclipses  and  the  latitudinal  passage  is  very  nearly  13^°,  then  the  difference  of 
parallax  will  be  the  same  number  of  sixtieths,  13^,  which  rarely  happens. 

Now,  the  method  for  the  correction  of  the  angles  and  arcs  (for  those  who  wish 
it  for  such  small  ratios)  would  be  available  as  follows:  In  general,  doubling  the 
number  of  the  angles,  we  take  it  to  the  Table  of  Chords;  and  multiplying  the 
numbers  corresponding  to  it  and  to  its  supplement  by  the  degrees  of  latitude, 
we  write  down  )^20  of  each.^  And  we  subtract  the  resulting  number  for  the 
first  angle  from  the  given  arc  from  the  zenith  when  the  moon  is  on  the  same  side 
of  the  ecliptic  as  the  zenith;  and  we  shall  add  when  it  is  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  ecliptic.  And  squaring  the  result  and  adding  to  the  square  from  the  supple¬ 
ment,  we  shall  have  the  arc  required  by  taking  the  square  root  of  this  sum. 

Then  multiplying  the  numbers  of  the  second  or  supplementary  angle  by  120, 
and  dividing  the  results  by  the  arcs  just  found,  we  take  the  halves  of  the  arcs 
corresponding  to  these  numbers  in  the  Table  of  Chords  and  add  them  to  the  arcs 
of  the  original  angle  if  the  corrected  arc  is  greater ;  and  we  subtract,  if  less.  And 
thus  we  have  the  corrected  angle. 

As  an  example,  let  the  arc  FB  of  the  last  figure  be  supposed  45°,  the  angle 
ABF  30°,  and  each  of  the  arcs  DB  and  BE  5°  in  latitude. 

Now,  since  a  chord  of  60^  corresponds  to  double  30°,  or  60°,  and  a  chord  of 
very  nearly  104^  to  the  supplement  or  120°,  therefore 
BL:BE::BK:DK::m:  120 

where 

hypt.  =  120. 

Then,  multiplying  each  of  the  numbers  by  the  5°  of  the  hypotenuse  and  taking 
3^20  results,  we  have 

arc  BK  =  aYC  jBL  =  2°30', 
arc  DK  =  arc  KL  =  4°20'. 

Then  first  we  subtract  the  2°30',  if  the  moon  is  supposed  at  point  E,  from  the 
45°  of  arc  FB  because  the  moon’s  latitudinal  distance  is  on  the  same  side  as  the 
zenith — that  is,  because  they  are  both  either  north  or  south  of  the  ecliptic.  And 
we  have 

arc  i^L  =  42°30'. 

And  if  the  moon  is  at  Z),  we  add  to  it  because  of  the  contrary  situation,  and  we 
have 

arc  =  47°30'. 

Then,  adding  the  square  of  FL  to  the  square  of  LF,  and  the  square  of  FK  to  the 
square  of  DK  (that  is,  the  square  of  4°20'  to  the  square  of  42°30',  and  the  square 

^For  in  the  last  figure  angle  LEB  equals  angle  AFB,  angle  LBE  equals  90°  less  angle  AFB. 
If  we  now  conceive  a  circle  about  right  triangle  BLE,  considering  it  to  be  rectilinear  for  the 
small  arcs,  we  shall  have  the  values  of  BL  and  LE  in  terms  of  the  chords  where  BE  equals  120. 
Let  BL  be  s.  But  we  know  BE  is  so  many  degrees  of  arc,  say  n.  Therefore,  if  x  is  the  number 
of  degrees  of  BL  to  be  found, 

X  :  n  =  s  :  120. 

Whence 

120  X  =  n  •  s. 

The  same  kind  of  calculation  is  used  in  the  next  paragraph. 


188 


PTOLEMY 


of  4°20'  to  the  square  of  47°30')  and  taking  the  square  roots  of  the  results,  we 
have 


arc  =  42^46', 

arc  Z)F  =  47°44'. 

Finally,  multiplying  4°20'  by  120  and  dividing  separately  by  42°46'  and  by 
47°44',  we  have 


chord  jE'Lm2p8' 


where 

and 

where 


hypt.  £'F=120P; 
chord  (lO+i^+M)^ 


hypt.  DF=  120P. 

An  arc  of  11%°  corresponds  to  the  chord  of  12p8',  and  an  arc  of  very  nearly 
10%°  corresponds  to  the  chord  of  (10+%+%)^.  Taking  the  halves  of  these 
arcs,  on  the  one  hand  we  subtract  the  of  angle  EFL  from  the  30°  of  angle 
ABF,  because  arc  EF  is  less  than  arc  BF,  and  we  have 

angle  AHF  =  24}i\ 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  add  it  to  the  same  30°  because  arc  DF  is  greater  than 
arc  BF,  we  have 

angle  AGF  =  35%°. 

Which  it  was  required  to  work  out  systematically. 


BOOK  SIX 


1.  On  Conjunctions  and  Full  Moons 

The  treatment  of  the  ecliptic  syzygies  of  the  sun  and  moon  comes  next  in  order, 
and  this  in  turn  is  preceded  by  the  examination  of  the  conjunctions  and  full 
moons  truly  considered.  For  a  first  understanding  of  such  things,  we  think  that 
the  periodic  and  irregular  movements  already  demonstrated  for  each  of  the 
luminaries  are  sufficient.  By  means  of  these  it  is  possible,  for  anyone  sufficiently 
industrious,  to  determine  their  particular  positions  each  time,  and  to  calculate 
the  places  and  times  of  the  future  syzygies — both  those  taken  with  respect  to 
mean  movements  and  the  true  ones  with  the  anomaly.  Nevertheless,  to  have 
them  at  hand  systematically,  we  first  set  out  the  times  and  places  of  the  periodic 
conjunctions  and  full  moons,  and  the  moon's  anomalistic  and  latitudinal  posi¬ 
tions  at  the  mid-eclipses.  For  by  means  of  these  last  the  correction  for  the  true 
syzygies  is  effected,  and  from  these  the  correction  for  the  ecliptic  syzygies.  And 
we  built  tables  of  the  following  kind  for  such  an  examination. 

2.  Construction  of  the  Tables  of  the  Mean  Syzygies 

First,  to  establish  the  epochs  of  the  months  (like  the  other  epochs,  from  the 
year  1  of  Nabonassar),  we  took  the  surplus  of  the  noon  elongation,  70°37',  al¬ 
ready  demonstrated  for  the  first  of  the  Egyptians'  Thoth,  and  we  found  5  days 
47'  33"  of  mean  movement  of  elongation  corresponding  to  it;  so  that  by  just  so 
much  time  had  the  mean  conjunction  preceded  noon  of  the  first  day  of  Thoth. 
And  the  next  one,  therefore,  took  place  very  nearly  23  days  44'  17"  after  that 
same  midday — that  is,  44'  17"  of  a  day  after  noon  of  the  24th.  But  in  23  days  44' 
17"  the  sun's  mean  movement  is  23°23'  50",  and  the  moon  moves  310°  8'  13"  of 
anomaly  and  314°  2'  21"  in  latitude.  Furthermore,  at  noon  of  the  first  of  Thoth, 
the  sun's  mean  position  was  0°  45'  within  the  Fishes  and,  for  greater  facility, 
265°  15'  from  its  apogee,  while  the  moon's  position  in  anomaly  was  268°49'  from 
the  epicycle's  apogee,  and  354°  15'  in  latitude  from  the  oblique  circle's  northern 
limit.  Therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  mean  conjunction  after  the  first  of  the  month, 
the  sun  and  moon  were  both  288°38'50"  in  mean  movement  from  the  sun's  apo¬ 
gee — that  is,  5°30'  within  the  Twins;  and  the  moon  was  218°57'15"  of  anomaly 
from  the  apogee  and  308°17'21"  in  latitude  from  the  northern  limit. 

Now,  we  shall  first  arrange  a  synodic  table,  again  in  45  rows  and  5  columns. 
For  the  first  row  we  shall  place,  in  the  first  column,  the  first  year  of  Nabonassar; 
and,  in  the  second  column,  the  24  days  44' 17"  of  Thoth  since  the  extra  sixtieths 
are  from  noon  of  the  24th.  In  the  third  column  we  shall  place  the  288°38'50"  of 
the  mean  position  from  the  sun's  apogee;  in  the  fourth,  the  218°57'15"  from  the 
apogee  of  the  lunar  anomaly;  and,  in  the  fifth,  the  308°17'21"  from  the  northern 
limit  of  latitude. 

Since,  moreover,  in  half  a  mean  month's  time  there  are  contained  very  nearly 


189 


190  PTOLEMY 

14  days  45^55",  14°33'12"  of  solar  position,  192°54'30"  of  lunar  anomaly,  and 
195°20'6"  of  latitude,  we  shall  subtract  these  numbers  from  those  of  the  con¬ 
junction  first  given;  and  we  shall  arrange  the  remainders  in  a  second  and  similar 
table,  which  will  be  plenilunar,  in  the  same  way  as  before.  And  there  are  left  9 
days  58'22",  274°5'38"  from  the  sun's  apogee,  26°2'45"  of  anomaly  from  the 
moon's  apogee,  and  112°57'15"  in  latitude  from  the  northern  limit. 

And  since,  in  25  Egyptian  years,  whole  months  less  2 '47  ^^5'"  of  a  day  very 
nearly  are  completed,  and  the  sun  adds  on  in  mean  movement  (once  and  above 
complete  circles)  353°52'34''13”S  and  the  moon  57°21'44'U'"  of  anomaly  and 
]  17°1249"54"'  in  latitude,  we  shall  increase  the  first  columns  of  the  two  tables 
by  successive  additions  of  25  years,  the  second  columns  we  shall  successively  de¬ 
crease  by  0°2^7''5“^  and  of  the  rest  we  shall  successively  increase  the  third  by 
353®52'34"13"S  the  fourth  by  57°2m4"l'",  and  the  fifth  by  117°1249"54'". 

Following  these,  we  shall  arrange  a  table  by  years  in  24  rows  and  another  by 
months  in  12  rows,  each  of  them  with  as  many  columns  as  the  first  tables.  And, 
in  the  case  of  the  table  by  months,  for  the  first  row,  we  place  in  the  first  column 
the  first  month;  in  the  second  column  the  29  days  31'50''8'"20'^;  in  the  third  the 
total  29°6'23“1"'  of  the  sun  for  that  much  time;  in  the  fourth  the  25°49'0”8"* 
of  the  moon's  anomaly;  and  in  the  fifth  the  30'^40'14”9"'  in  latitude.  And  we 
successively  increase  these  by  these  same  numbers  of  the  first  row. 

In  the  case  of  the  table  by  years,  for  the  first  row,  we  place  in  the  first  column 
the  first  year;  in  the  second  the  18  days  53'52'^8'"  additional  in  13  months;  in 
the  third  the  18°22*59"18"*  of  the  solar  surplus  for  that  much  time;  in  the  fourth 
the  335°37'1"51"'  of  lunar  anomaly;  and  in  the  fifth  the  38°43'3"51”'  in  latitude. 
With  a  view  to  setting  out  the  first  syzygy  following  upon  the  whole  Egyptian 
years,  we  also  successively  increase  at  one  time  by  the  thirteen-month  surplus 
already  given,  and  at  another  by  the  twelve-month  surplus  which  comes  to  354 
days  22'1"40"*,  to  349°16'36"16"'  in  solar  position,  to  309'^48'1'^2'”  in  lunar 
anomaly,  and  to  8°2^9'^2'“  in  latitude.  Nevertheless  it  will  suffice  to  take  the 
tabulated  numbers  out  to  the  second  sixtieths.  And  here  is  the  result  reduced 
to  tables: 


I 

)-Tear 

eriods 

1 

26 

51 

76 

101 

126 

151 

176 

201 

226 

251 

276 

301 

326 

351 

376 

401 

426 

451 

476 

501 

526 

551 

576 

601 

626 

651 

676 

701 

726 

751 

776 

801 

826 

851 

876 

901 

926 

951 

976 


THE  AL^^IAGEST,  VI  191 

3.  Table  of  Conjunctions 


2 

3 

Days  of 

Degrees  of 

Thoth 

Solar  Position 

o 

/ 

n 

24 

44 

17 

288 

38 

50 

24 

41 

30 

282 

31 

24 

24 

38 

43 

276 

23 

58 

24 

35 

56 

270 

16 

33 

24 

33 

9 

264 

9 

7 

24 

30 

22 

258 

1 

41 

24 

27 

35 

251 

54 

15 

24 

24 

47 

245 

46 

50 

24 

22 

0 

239 

39 

24 

24 

19 

13 

233 

31 

58 

24 

16 

26 

227 

24 

32 

24 

13 

39 

221 

17 

6 

24 

10 

52 

215 

9 

41 

24 

8 

5 

209 

2 

15 

24 

5 

18 

202 

54 

49 

24 

2 

31 

196 

47 

23 

23 

59 

44 

190 

39 

57 

23 

56 

57 

184 

32 

32 

23 

54 

10 

178 

25 

6 

23 

51 

23 

172 

17 

40 

23 

48 

35 

166 

10 

14 

23 

45 

48 

160 

2 

49 

23 

43 

1 

153 

55 

23 

23 

40 

14 

147 

47 

57 

23 

37 

27 

141 

40 

31 

23 

34 

40 

135 

33 

5 

23 

31 

53 

129 

25 

40 

23 

29 

6 

123 

18 

14 

23 

26 

19 

117 

10 

48 

23 

23 

32 

111 

3 

22 

23 

20 

45 

104 

55 

57 

23 

17 

57 

98 

48 

31 

23 

15 

10 

92 

41 

5 

23 

12 

23 

86 

33 

39 

23 

9 

36 

80 

26 

13 

23 

6 

49 

74 

18 

48 

23 

4 

2 

68 

11 

22 

23 

1 

15 

62 

3 

56 

22 

58 

28 

55 

56 

30 

22 

55 

41 

49 

49 

4 

22 

52 

54 

43 

41 

39 

22 

50 

7 

37 

34 

13 

22 

47 

20 

31 

26 

47 

22 

44 

32 

25 

19 

21 

22 

41 

45 

19 

11 

56 

4 

5 

Degrees  of 

Degrees  of 

Lunar  Anomaly 

Latitude 

o 

t 

n 

o 

If 

218 

57 

15 

308 

17 

21 

276 

18 

59 

65 

30 

11 

333 

40 

43 

182 

43 

1 

31 

2 

27 

299 

55 

51 

88 

24 

11 

57 

8 

41 

145 

45 

55 

174 

21 

31 

203 

7 

39 

291 

34 

20 

260 

29 

23 

48 

47 

10 

317 

51 

7 

166 

0 

0 

15 

12 

51 

283 

12 

50 

72 

34 

35 

40 

25 

40 

129 

56 

19 

157 

38 

30 

187 

18 

3 

274 

51 

20 

244 

39 

47 

32 

4 

10 

302 

1 

31 

149 

17 

0 

359 

23 

15 

266 

29 

50 

56 

44 

59 

23 

42 

39 

114 

6 

43 

140 

55 

29 

171 

28 

27 

258 

8 

19 

228 

50 

11 

15 

21 

9 

286 

11 

55 

132 

33 

59 

343 

33 

39 

249 

46 

49 

40 

55 

23 

6 

59 

39 

98 

17 

7 

124 

12 

29 

155 

38 

51 

241 

25 

19 

213 

0 

35 

358 

38 

9 

270 

22 

19 

115 

50 

58 

327 

44 

3 

233 

3 

48 

25 

5 

47 

350 

16 

38 

82 

27 

31 

107 

29 

28 

139 

49 

16 

224 

42 

18 

197 

11 

0 

341 

55 

8 

254 

32 

44 

99 

7 

58 

311 

54 

28 

216 

20 

48 

9 

16 

12 

333 

33 

38 

66 

37 

56 

90 

46 

28 

123 

59 

40 

207 

59 

17 

181 

21 

24 

325 

12 

7 

238 

43 

8 

82 

24 

57 

296 

4 

52 

199 

37 

47 

353 

26 

36 

316 

50 

37 

50 

48 

20 

74 

3 

27 

108 

10 

4 

191 

16 

17 

165 

31 

48 

308 

29 

7 

222 

53 

32 

65 

41 

57 

1 

-Year 

mods 

1 

26 

51 

76 

101 

126 

151 

176 

201 

226 

251 

276 

301 

326 

351 

376 

401 

426 

451 

476 

501 

526 

551 

576 

601 

626 

651 

676 

701 

726 

751 

776 

801 

826 

851 

876 

901 

926 

951 

976 


15 

5 

55 

45 

35 

25 

14 

4 

54 

44 

34 

24 

14 

4 

54 

44 

33 

23 

13 

3 

53 

43 

33 

23 

13 

3 

52 

42 

32 

22 

12 

2 

52 

42 

32 

22 

11 

1 

51 

41 

31 

21 

11 

1 

51 


PTOLEMY 


Table  of  Full  Moons 


2 

3 

4 

Days  of 
Thoth 

Degrees  of 
Solar  Position 

Degrees  of 
Lunar  Anomaly 

o 

/ 

// 

o 

f 

tt 

9 

58 

22 

274 

5 

38 

26 

2 

45 

9 

55 

35 

267 

58 

12 

83 

24 

29 

9 

52 

48 

261 

50 

46 

140 

46 

13 

9 

50 

1 

255 

43 

21 

198 

7 

57 

9 

47 

14 

249 

35 

55 

255 

29 

41 

9 

44 

27 

243 

28 

29 

312 

51 

25 

9 

41 

40 

237 

21 

3 

10 

13 

9 

9 

38 

52 

231 

13 

38 

67 

34 

53 

9 

36 

5 

225 

6 

12 

124 

56 

37 

9 

33 

18 

218 

58 

46 

182 

18 

21 

9 

30 

31 

212 

51 

20 

239 

40 

5 

9 

27 

44 

206 

43 

54 

297 

1 

49 

9 

24 

57 

200 

36 

29 

354 

23 

33 

9 

22 

10 

194 

29 

3 

51 

45 

17 

9 

19 

23 

188 

21 

37 

109 

7 

1 

9 

16 

36 

182 

14 

11 

166 

28 

45 

9 

13 

49 

176 

6 

45 

223 

50 

29 

9 

11 

2 

169 

59 

20 

281 

12 

13 

9 

8 

15 

163 

51 

54 

338 

33 

57 

9 

5 

27 

157 

44 

28 

35 

55 

41 

9 

2 

40 

151 

37 

2 

93 

17 

25 

8 

59 

53 

145 

29 

37 

150 

39 

9 

8 

57 

6 

139 

22 

11 

208 

0 

53 

8 

54 

19 

133 

14 

45 

265 

22 

37 

8 

51 

32 

127 

7 

19 

322 

44 

21 

8 

48 

45 

120 

59 

53 

20 

6 

5 

8 

45 

58 

114 

52 

28 

77 

27 

49 

8 

43 

11 

108 

45 

2 

134 

49 

33 

8 

40 

24 

102 

37 

36 

192 

11 

17 

8 

37 

37 

96 

30 

10 

249 

33 

1 

8 

34 

50 

90 

22 

45 

306 

54 

45 

8 

32 

2 

84 

15 

19 

4 

16 

29 

8 

29 

15 

78 

7 

53 

61 

38 

14 

8 

26 

28 

72 

0 

27 

118 

59 

58 

8 

23 

41 

65 

53 

1 

176 

21 

42 

8 

20 

54 

59 

45 

36 

233 

43 

26 

8 

18 

7 

53 

38 

10 

291 

5 

10 

8 

15 

20 

47 

30 

44 

348 

26 

54 

8 

12 

33 

41 

23 

18 

45 

48 

38 

8 

9 

46 

35 

15 

52 

103 

10 

22 

8 

6 

59 

29 

8 

27 

160 

32 

6 

8 

4 

12 

23 

1 

1 

217 

53 

50 

8 

1 

25 

16 

53 

35 

275 

15 

34 

7 

58 

37 

10 

46 

9 

332 

37 

18 

7 

55 

50 

4 

38 

44 

29 

59 

2 

I 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

Yearly  Surpluses  at  Conjunctions  and  Full  moons 


193 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Single 

Degrees  of 

Degrees  of 

Degrees  of 

Years 

Days 

Solar  Position 

Lunar  Anomaly 

Latitude 

o 

/ 

// 

o 

t 

// 

o 

t 

It 

1 

18 

53 

52 

18 

22 

59 

335 

37 

2 

38 

43 

4 

2 

8 

15 

53 

7 

39 

36 

285 

25 

4 

46 

45 

54 

3 

27 

9 

45 

26 

2 

35 

261 

2 

5 

85 

28 

57 

4 

16 

31 

47 

15 

19 

11 

210 

50 

7 

93 

31 

47 

5 

5 

53 

49 

4 

35 

47 

160 

38 

9 

101 

34 

37 

6 

24 

47 

40 

22 

58 

47 

136 

15 

11 

140 

17 

41 

7 

14 

9 

42 

12 

15 

23 

86 

3 

12 

148 

20 

30 

8 

3 

31 

44 

1 

31 

59 

35 

51 

14 

156 

23 

20 

9 

22 

25 

36 

19 

54 

59 

11 

28 

16 

195 

6 

24 

10 

11 

47 

37 

9 

11 

35 

321 

16 

18 

203 

9 

14 

11 

1 

9 

39 

358 

28 

11 

271 

4 

19 

211 

12 

3 

12 

20 

3 

31 

16 

51 

10 

246 

41 

21 

249 

55 

7 

13 

9 

25 

32 

6 

7 

47 

196 

29 

23 

257 

57 

57 

14 

28 

19 

24 

24 

30 

46 

172 

6 

25 

296 

41 

1 

15 

17 

41 

26 

13 

47 

22 

121 

54 

27 

304 

43 

50 

16 

7 

3 

28 

3 

3 

59 

71 

42 

28 

312 

46 

40 

17 

25 

57 

19 

21 

26 

58 

47 

19 

30 

351 

29 

44 

18 

15 

19 

21 

10 

43 

34 

357 

7 

32 

359 

32 

34 

19 

4 

41 

23 

0 

0 

10 

306 

55 

33 

7 

35 

23 

20 

23 

35 

14 

18 

23 

10 

282 

32 

35 

46 

18 

27 

21 

12 

57 

16 

7 

39 

46 

232 

20 

37 

54 

21 

17 

22 

2 

19 

18 

356 

56 

22 

182 

8 

39 

62 

24 

7 

23 

21 

13 

10 

15 

19 

22 

157 

45 

41 

101 

7 

10 

24 

10 

35 

11 

4 

35 

58 

107 

33 

42 

109 

10 

0 

(Solar  limits  from  69°19'  to  101°22'  and  from  258°38'  to  290°41' 
Mean  Passages  < 

I  Lunar  limits  from  74®48'  to  105°12'  and  from  254°48'  to  285°12' 


Months 

Days 

Solar  Position 

Lunar  Anomaly 

Latitude 

1 

29 

31 

50 

29 

6 

23 

25 

49 

0 

30 

40 

14 

2 

59 

3 

40 

58 

12 

46 

51 

38 

0 

61 

20 

28 

3 

88 

35 

30 

87 

19 

9 

77 

27 

0 

92 

0 

42 

4 

118 

7 

21 

116 

25 

32 

103 

16 

1 

122 

40 

57 

5 

147 

39 

11 

145 

31 

55 

129 

5 

1 

153 

21 

11 

6 

187 

11 

1 

174 

38 

18 

154 

54 

1 

184 

1 

25 

7 

206 

42 

51 

203 

44 

41 

180 

43 

1 

214 

41 

39 

8 

236 

14 

41 

232 

51 

4 

206 

32 

1 

245 

21 

53 

9 

265 

46 

31 

261 

57 

27 

232 

21 

1 

276 

2 

7 

10 

295 

18 

21 

291 

3 

50 

258 

10 

1 

306 

42 

21 

11 

324 

50 

12 

320 

10 

13 

283 

59 

2 

337 

22 

36 

12 

354 

22 

2 

349 

16 

36 

309 

48 

2 

8 

2 

50 

194 


PTOLEMY 


4.  How  TO  Locate  the  Periodic  and  True  Syzygies 

Now,  whenever  we  wish  to  get  the  mean  syzygies  for  some  one  of  the  required 
years,  we  calculate  how  far  the  supposed  year  is  from  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar. 
And  looking  to  see  which  rows  of  either  of  the  first  two  25-year  tables  together 
with  the  third  tablets  years  contain  that  number  of  years,  we  add  the  corre¬ 
sponding  numbers  in  each  of  the  columns  of  the  two  rows:  for  the  synodic  syzy¬ 
gies  those  from  the  first  table  to  those  from  the  third,  and,  for  the  plenilunar 
syzygies,  those  from  the  second  table  to  those  from  the  third.  From  the  sums  in 
the  second  column  we  shall  have  the  time  of  the  syzygy  from  the  beginning  of 
that  year:  for  instance,  if  they  add  up  to  24  days  44',  then  44  sixtieths  of  a  day 
after  midday  of  Thoth  24;  and  again,  if  they  add  up  to  34  days  44',  then  the 
same  sixtieths  of  a  day  after  midday  of  Pleophi  4.  From  the  third  column  we 
shall  have  the  degrees  from  the  sun's  apogee;  from  the  fourth,  the  degrees  from 
the  apogee  of  the  moon's  anomaly;  and,  from  the  fifth,  the  degrees  from  the 
northern  limit  of  latitude. 

Accordingly,  we  can  readily  calculate  those  that  follow,  whether  we  wish  to 
get  them  all  or  some  of  them,  through  the  proper  sums  in  the  fourth  or  monthly 
table,  having  changed  the  times,  for  greater  facility,  from  the  sixtieths  of  a  day 
to  equatorial  hours.  The  resulting  surplus  of  hours  will  be  as  of  regular  solar 
days,  for  the  surplus  taken  seasonally  is  not  always  the  same,  but  as  of  irregular 
solar  days.  And  then  we  shall  correct  this  by  estimating  the  difference,  sub¬ 
tracting  it  from  the  mean  sum  if  the  surplus  of  time  for  the  irregular  interval  is 
greater,  and  adding  it  to  it  if  it  is  less. 

Now,  once  the  synodic  or  plenilunar  date  considered  with  respect  to  mean 
passages  has  been  gotten  in  this  way  along  with  the  anomalies  for  each  of  the 
luminaries,  it  will  be  very  easy  to  get  the  date  and  place  of  the  true  syzygy,  and 
even  the  moon's  latitudinal  passage,  from  the  combination  of  both  anomalies. 
For  in  each  case  we  examine  the  true  passage  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  latitude  at 
that  periodic  time  by  means  of  the  addition-subtraction  obtained.  And  if  they 
are  found  to  be  at  the  same  degree  or  directly  opposite,  we  also  have  the  time  of 
the  true  syzygy;  and  if  not,  taking  the  degrees  of  the  interval  between  them  and 
adding  to  them  a  twelfth  of  them\  we  see  in  how  many  equatorial  hours  the 
moon  will  move  that  number  of  degrees.  If  the  moon's  true  passage  is  less  than 
the  sun's,  we  add  that  number  of  hours  to  the  periodic  time;  and  if  greater,  we 
subtract  it.  And  thus,  if  the  moon's  true  passage  at  the  periodic  time  is  less  than 
the  sun's,  we  add  the  degrees  of  the  interval  between,  together  with  the  twelfth 
of  them  to  the  moon's  true  passage  both  in  longitude  and  latitude;  and  if  greater, 
we  subtract  them.  In  this  way  we  shall  have  the  time  of  the  true  syzygy  and 
very  nearly  the  moon's  true  passage  on  its  oblique  circles. 

Now,  the  moon's  hourly  irregular  movement  at  the  syzygies  is  each  time 
gotten  in  this  way.  Carrying  the  number  of  anomalistic  degrees  for  the  supposed 
date  to  the  Table  of  the  Moon's  Anomaly,  we  take  from  the  excess  of  the  addi¬ 
tion-subtractions  lying  opposite  it  the  difference  belonging  to  one  degree  of  anom- 

^That  is,  the  number  of  degrees  between  them  if  the  syzygy  is  synodic;  between  one  of 
them  and  the  point  opposite  the  others,  if  the  syzygy  is  plenilunar.  Now  while  the  moon 
moves  along  the  echptic  nearly  13°,  the  sun  moves  nearly  1°,  or  the  moon  moves  thirteen 
times  as  fast.  And  while  the  moon  moves  that  1°  the  sun  again  1/13°.  Therefore,  for  all 
practical  purposes,  1/13°  is  1/12  of  the  original  13°.  This  approximation  is  even  truer  for  the 
smaller  numbers  involved  here.  See  Chapter  5. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI  195 

aly.  This  difference  we  multiply  by  the  hourly  mean  movement  of  anomaly 
which  is  0°32'40"0“^  If  the  anomalistic  number  is  in  the  rows  above  the  greatest 
addition-subtraction,  we  subtract  this  product  from  the  hourly  mean  movement 
in  longitude  which  is  0°32*56"0‘“;  and  if  it  is  below,  we  add  it.  And  we  have,  as 
a  result,  how  much  the  moon  moves  irregularly  in  longitude  in  one  equatorial 
hour  at  that  particular  timeL 

The  time  of  the  true  syzygies  for  Alexandria  will  be  gotten  systematically  by 
us  in  this  way,  because  all  the  epochs  have  their  hours  established  with  respect 
to  the  meridian  through  Alexandria.  And  it  is  easy  from  the  times  in  Alexandria 
to  find  the  times  which  will  result  in  any  region  for  the  same  syzygy,  given  the 
number  of  hours  of  its  distance  from  that  meridian.  For,  if,  from  the  difference 
of  the  localities,  we  consider  the  meridian  through  the  place  required,  then,  by 
as  many  degrees  as  it  differs  from  that  through  Alexandria,  by  just  so  much  time 
later  will  the  appearance  seem  to  be  observed  if  the  meridian  through  the  place 
required  is  east  of  that  through  Alexandria;  but  by  so  much  earlier  if  west  of  it, 
with  fifteen  time-degrees  still  making,  of  course,  one  equatorial  hour. 

5.  On  the  Ecliptic  Limits  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  worked  out,  the  next  job  it  to  present  those 
matters  having  to  do  with  the  ecliptic  limits  of  the  occultations  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  so  that,  even  if  we  do  not  choose  to  compute  all  the  periodic  syzygies  but 
only  those  which  can  fall  within  the  zone  of  ecliptic  markings,  we  can  have  ready 
to  hand  a  discrimination  of  this  kind  from  the  moon’s  mean  latitudinal  passage 
for  each  of  the  periodic  syzygies. 

Now,  in  the  preceding  Book,  we  have  shown  that  the  moon’s  diameter  sub¬ 
tends  at  its  greatest  an  arc  of  the  great  circle  drawn  about  the  ecliptic’s  centre 
equal  to  0°31'20",  calculating  it  to  be  such  by  two  eclipses  which  occured  at  the 
apogee  of  its  epicycle.  Since  we  now  wish  to  get  the  greatest  limits  of  the  ecliptic 
syzygies,  and  since  these  occur  when  the  moon  is  about  the  perigee  of  its  epi¬ 
cycle,  we  shall  show  by  means  of  two  eclipses  observed  near  the  perigee  (for  the 
proof  of  these  things  would  be  more  certain  by  means  of  their  appearances) 

^This  description  of  the  method  by  Ptolemy  is  far  from  clear.  Theo  of  Alexandria  in  his 
Commentary  on  Book  V  gives  a  better  one  as  follows: 

“For  taking  the  anomalistic  number  ...  he  carries  it  to  the  Table  of  the  Moon^s  Simple 
Anomaly.  And  taking  the  difference  of  the  numbers  lying  in  a  Une  with  the  nearest  anomalistic 
numbers  greater  and  less  than  it,  he  divides  it  by  the  difference  of  the  common  [i.e.,  anomaUs- 
tic]  numbers.  For  example,  if  the  anomalistic  number  is  33®,  taking  the  2°  19'  corresponding 
to  30°  and  the  2°44'  corresponding  to  36°,  he  finds  their  difference  which  is  0°25'.  And  dividing 
this  0°25'  by  the  difference  between  30°  and  36°  (that  is,  by  6)  he  gets  0°4'24";  and  this  is  the 
difference  belonging  to  one  degree  of  the  anomaly.  And  multiplying  0°4'24''  by  the  0°32'40" 
of  the  mean  hourly  movement  of  anomaly,  we  subtract  the  product  from  the  hourly  mean 
movement  in  longitude  of  0°32'56''  if  the  given  anomafistic  number  is  in  the  rows  above  the 
greatest  addition-subtraction — that  is,  from  1  to  96  and  from  264  to  360.  But  if  it  is  from 
96  to  180  and  from  180  to  264,  or  in  the  rows  below  the  greatest  addition-subtraction,  we  shall 
add  it  to  the  0°32' 

Theo  of  Alexandria  goes  on  to  give  the  reasoning  behind  this  method.  But  it  is  clear  from 
the  method  itself.  One  finds  the  average  change  along  the  ecfiptic  affected  by  a  degree  of 
anomaly  for  the  section  of  the  anomaly  the  moon  happens  to  be  at.  This,  being  multiphed  by 
the  number  of  degrees  of  anomaly  the  moon  moves  in  one  hour,  becomes  the  change  produced 
along  the  ecliptic  for  an  hour's  movement  in  anomaly  at  that  particular  section  of  the  epicycle. 
It  can,  of  course,  only  be  approximate.  This  hourly  change  is  then  added  to  or  subtracted 
from,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  moon's  mean  movement  along  the  ecliptic. 


196 


PTOLEMY 


how  much  of  an  arc  the  moon's  diameter  likewise  intercepts  at  this  point. 

In  the  year  7  of  Philometor  then,  {i.  6.,  the  year  574  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptian- 
wise  Phamenoth  27-28  from  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  hour  to  the  end  of  the 
tenth  hour),  in  Alexandria  the  moon  was  eclipsed  up  to  7  digits  from  the  north. 
Now,  the  middle  occurred  23^  seasonal  hours  after  midnight  (or  2J^  equatorial 
hours,  because  of  the  sun's  true  position's  being  6°4'  within  the  Bull).  And  the 
time  from  the  epoch  to  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  comes  to  573  Egyptian  years, 
206  days,  and  14J^  equatorial  hours  simply  considered  but  only  14  with  respect 
to  regular  solar  days.  And  for  this  much  time  the  mean  position  of  the  moon's 
centre  was  7°49'  within  the  Scorpion  but  its  true  position  and  its  centre 
was  163°40'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee  and  98^^20'  from  the  northern  limit  of  the 
oblique  circle.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that,  when  the  moon's  centre,  being  near 
its  least  distance,  is  8°20'  from  the  nodes  along  the  oblique  circle,  and  the  shad¬ 
ow's  centre  is  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  moon's  centre  at  right  angles 
to  the  oblique  circle  at  which  passage  the  greatest  shadowings  are  effected,  then 
3^+K2  oi  its  diameter  falls  within  the  shadow. 

Once  again,  in  the  year  37  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period  (which  is  the  year  607 
of  Nabonassar,  Egyptian  wise  Tybi  2-3),  the  moon  began  to  be  Eclipsed  at  the 
beginning  of  the  fifth  hour  in  Rhodes  and  was  obscured  at  the  most  3  digits  from 
the  south.  Here  once  more  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  occurred  two  seasonal 
hours  before  midnight,  which  were  2J^  equatorial  hours  both  in  Rhodes  and  in 
Alexandria  because  of  the  sun's  true  position's  being  5®8'  within  the  Water 
Bearer,  and  the  middle  (when  it  was  obscured  the  most)  occurred  very  nearly 
l+H+3^  equatorial  hours  before  midnight.  And  here  the  time  from  the  epoch 
to  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  adds  up  to  606  Egyptian  years,  121  days,  and  10 
equatorial  hours  considered  both  simply  and  with  respect  to  regular  solar  days. 
And  for  this  much  time  the  mean  position  of  the  moon's  centre  was  5°  16'  within 
the  Lion,  but  its  true  position  5°8';  and  its  centre  was  178°46'  from  the  epicycle's 
apogee  and  280°36'  from  the  northern  limit  on  the  oblique  circle.  It  is  therefore 
evident  that,  when  the  moon's  centre,  being  near  its  same  least  distance,  is 
10°36'  from  the  nodes  along  the  oblique  circle,  with  the  shadow's  centre  situated 
on  the  common  section  of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the 
moon's  centre  at  right  angles  to  the  oblique  circle,  then  the  fourth  part  of  the 
moon's  diameter  will  fall  within  the  shadow. 

But  if  the  moon's  centre  is  from  the  nodes  along  the  oblique  circle,  it  is 
433^0  sixtieths  of  one  degree  [t.  c.,  43'3"]  from  the  ecliptic  along  the  great  circle 
drawn  through  the  oblique  circle's  poles;  and,  when  it  is  10^°  from  the  nodes 
along  the  oblique  circle,  it  is  54 +3^ +3^  sixtieths  of  one  degree  from  the  ecliptic 
along  the  great  circle  draA\m  through  the  oblique  circle's  poles.  Now,  since  the 
difference  between  the  two  eclipses  contains  a  third  of  the  moon's  diameter,  and 
since  the  difference  of  the  two  distances  of  its  centre  along  the  same  great  circle 
from  the  same  ecliptic  point  (that  is,  from  the  shadow's  centre)  is  0®11'47",  it  is 
clear  that  the  moon's  whole  diameter,  at  its  least  distance,  subtends  an  arc  of 
very  nearly  353^  sixtieths  of  one  degree  on  the  great  circle  drawn  about  the 
ecliptic's  centre.  And  since  also  in  the  second  of  the  eclipses  (in  which  3^  of  the 
moon's  diameter  was  eclipsed)  the  moon's  centre  was  54 +3^ +3^  sixtieths  from 
the  shadow's  centre,  and  34  of  the  moon's  diameter  or  8+34+34  sixtieths  from 
the  point  where  the  line  joining  their  centres  cuts  the  shadow's  circumference, 
it  is  immediately  evident  that  the  shadow's  radius  at  the  moon's  least  distance 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI  197 

is  the  remainder,  46  sixtieths.  This  is  hardly  greater  than  two  and  three-fifths 
times  the  moon's  radius,  which  is  But  the  sun's  radius  likewise  subtends 

an  arc  of  0°15'40"  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  sun  about  the  ecliptic's 
centre.  For  the  sun  and  moon  were  shown  to  measure  off  equally  on  their  circles 
in  the  syzygies  at  the  greatest  distance.  Therefore,  when  the  moon's  apparent 
centre  is  0°33'20"  from  the  sun's  centre  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic,  it  will  first 
be  possible  for  the  moon's  apparent  position  to  be  one  of  tangency  to  the  sun. 

For  example,  if  we  conceive  arc  AB  oi  the  ecliptic  and  arc  CD  of  the  moon's 
oblique  circle  as  being  sensibly  parallel  as  far  as  the  pas¬ 
sages  at  eclipse  times,  and  if  we  draw  arc  AEC  of  the 
great  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  oblique  circle,  and 
conceive  the  sun's  semicircle  about  point  A  and  the 
moon's  apparent  semicircle  about  E  so  that  it  is  just 
touching  the  sun's  at  point  F,  then  arc  AE,  the  distance 
of  the  moon's  apparent  centre  E  from  the  sun's  centre  A, 
can  become  the  0°33'20"  just  given. 

But  in  the  places  from  Meroe,  where  the  longest  day 
is  13  equatorial  hours,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Borysthenes, 
where  the  longest  day  is  16  equatorial  hours,  the  moon, 
at  its  least  distance  in  the  syzygies,  displays  a  northward 
parallax  of  at  most  very  nearly  0°8'  (the  sun's  parallax  being  taken  into  ac¬ 
count),  and  likewise  a  southward  parallax  of  at  most  0°58'.  And  when  it  displays 
its  northward  parallax  of  0°8',  it  displays  its  greatest  longitudinal  parallax  of 
very  nearly  0°30'  about  the  Lion  and  the  Twins;  but  when  it  displays  its  greatest 
southward  parallax,  it  displays  its  greatest  longitudinal  of  very  nearly  0°15' 
about  the  Scorpion  and  the  Fishes. 

Therefore — if  we  suppose  the  moon's  true  centre  at  D  and  we  join  the  DE  of 
the  whole  parallax — the  arc  CD  will  be  very  nearly  the  arc  of  the  longitudinal 
parallax,  and  CE  that  of  the  latitudinal.  And  so,  whenever  the  moon  is  north  of 
the  sun  and  displays  its  greatest  southward  parallax, 

arc  (7i)  =  0°15', 
arc  AFC=r31'. 

Since  the  ratio  of  the  arc  from  the  node  to  C  to  the  arc  AC  at  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  ecliptic  limit  is  that  which  113^2  has  to  1  (this  being  easily  understood 
from  things  already  demonstrated  on  the  obliquity  of  the  lunar  circle),  the  arc 
from  the  node  to  C  will  be  17°26',  and  added  to  CD  it  will  be  17°41'.  But  when 
it  is  south  of  the  sun  and  displays  its  greatest  northward  parallax, 

arc  CD  =  0^30', 
arc  AFC  =  0^41; 

and  for  the  same  reasons  the  arc  from  the  node  to  C  will  be  7°52',  and  added  to 
CD  it  will  be  8°22'.  Therefore,  whenever  the  moon's  centre  is  truly  17°41'  from 
either  of  the  nodes  north  ward  along  the  oblique  circle,  first  in  the  given  places  of 
the  inhabited  world  can  its  apparent  position  become  one  of  tangency  to  the  sun. 

Again,  inasmuch  as  the  greatest  difference  of  solar  anomaly  was  demonstrated 
to  be  2°23',  and  the  greatest  difference  of  lunar  anomaly  about  the  syzygies  5®1', 
it  is  possible  at  times  for  the  moon  to  be  truly  7°24'  from  the  sun  at  the  periodic 
syzygies.  But  while  the  moon  is  traversing  that  many  degrees,  the  sun  will  tra¬ 
verse  Ks  that  many,  or  very  nearly  0°34';  and  again,  while  the  moon  moves 
these  0°34',  the  sun  will  traverse  also  3^3  that  many,  or  very  nearly  0°3';  and 


198  PTOLEMY 

Ms  of  this  is  not  worthy  of  mention.  If,  therefore,  we  add  to  the  2®23'  of  solar 
anomaly  the  total  of  0°37'  which  is  M2  of  the  original  7°24',  we  shall  then  have  the 
3*"  by  which  the  true  syzygies  differ  very  nearly  the  most  from  the  mean  longi¬ 
tudinal  and  latitudinal  passages  in  the  periodic  syzygies.  Consequently,  when¬ 
ever  the  mean  passage  of  the  moon^s  centre  is  20°41'  from  the  nodes  northward 
along  the  oblique  circle  and  11®22'  southward,  then  first,  in  the  given  places  of 
the  inhabited  world,  can  its  apparent  position  become  one  of  tangency  to  the 
sun.  Therefore,  whenever  the  number  of  degrees  from  the  northern  limit  of  the 
moon^s  oblique  circle  corresponding  to  the  periodic  syzygies  falls  between  69°19' 
and  10r22'  or  between  258°38'  and  209°41',  then  only  in  the  given  places  can 
the  proposed  thing  happen. 

Yet  again,  respecting  the  moon^s  ecliptic  limits:  since  the  moon^s  radius  at  its 
least  distance  was  shown  to  subtend  an  arc  of  0°17'40",  and  since  the  shadow^s 
radius  (being  very  nearly  two  and  three  fifths  times  as  large  as  the  moon^s) 
comes  to  45^56',  it  is  also  clear  that,  whenever  the  moon^s  centre  is  truly  1°3'36" 
from  the  shadow's  centre  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic  along  the  great  circle 
drawn  through  the  centres  and  the  oblique  circle's  poles,  and  is  very  nearly 
12°12'  from  either  of  the  nodes  along  the  moon's  oblique  circle  (according  to  the 
ratio  of  1  to  113^)  then  first  can  the  moon  be  tangent  to  the  shadow.  For  the 
same  reasons  as  already  demonstrated  concerning  the  anomaly,  whenever  the 
moon's  centre  taken  at  the  mean  passage  is  15°12'  from  the  nodes  along  the 
oblique  circle — so  that,  for  numbers  indicating  distance  from  the  northern  limit, 
it  falls  between  74°48'  and  105°12'  and  between  254^^48'  and  285°12',  then  first 
can  the  moon  be  tangent  to  the  shadow. 

We  shall  now  place  beside  the  appointed  tables  of  the  syzygies  the  numbers 
belonging  to  the  solar  and  lunar  limits  of  the  moon's  latitude  so  that  we  can 
readily  judge  those  capable  of  falling  within  an  eclipse. 

6.  On  the  Interval  of  Ecliptic  Months 

And  to  these  things  it  would  be  useful  to  add  how  many  months  apart, 
in  general,  the  ecliptic  syzygies  can  occur,  so  that,  if  we  take  the  position 
of  one  ecliptic  syzygy,  by  an  examination  of  the  terms  we  may  get  not  all  the 
syzygies  which  follow  but  only  those  at  month-intervals  in  which  an  eclipse  can 
occur. 

Now,  it  would  be  immediately  clear  that  the  sun  and  moon  can  be  eclipsed  at 
six-month  intervals,  since  the  moon's  mean  latitudinal  passage  comes  to 
184°1'25"  in  six  months,  and  since  the  arcs  between  the  ecliptic  limits,  both  for 
the  sun  and  moon,  embrace  fewer  degrees  than  this  when  they  are  within  a  semi¬ 
circle  and  more  when  they  are  above  a  semicircle.  For,  as  demonstrated,  since 
the  solar  limits  cut  off  20°41'  from  either  of  the  nodes  northward  along  the 
moon's  oblique  circle,  and  southward  11°22',  the  northern  anecliptic  arc  is 
138°38',  and  the  southern  is  157*^16'.  As  the  lunar  limits  cut  off  to  either  side  of 
the  ecliptic  15°12'  from  the  nodes  along  the  same  circle,  each  of  the  anecliptic 
arcs  comes  to  149°36'. 

That  by  means  of  these  hypotheses  it  is  possible  for  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  to 
occur  at  an  interval  of  the  greatest  five  months — that  is,  when  the  sun  is  making 
its  greatest  passage  and  the  moon  its  least — we  can  see  as  follows: 

Since  in  the  mean  five-month  interval  we  find  the  longitudinal  passage  of  each 
luminary  adding  on  145^32'  in  terms  of  mean  movement,  and  the  moon  129°5' 


THE  AL^UGEST,  \T  199 

of  anomaly  on  the  epicycle;  since  at  its  greatest  passage  either  side  of  the  peri¬ 
gee  the  sun^s  145^32'  add  4°3S'  to  the  mean  passage;  and  since  at  its  least  pas¬ 
sage  either  side  of  the  apogee  the  129''5'of  the  moon's  epicycle,  subtract  S"'40' 
from  the  mean  passage,  it  follows  that  in  the  time  of  the  mean  five-month  period, 
whenever  the  sun  effects  its  greatest  and  the  moon  its  least  passage,  the  moon 
will  be  west  of  the  sun  by  the  combined  anomalies  of  both:  13^18'.  Again,  taking 
of  this  for  reasons  already  demonstrated,  we  shall  have  ver>'  nearly  the  TG' 
which  the  sun  moves  fonv’ard  until  it  is  overtaken  by  the  moon. 

Now,  since  it  had  added  on  4'^3S'  from  its  own  anomaly  and  another  from 
the  time  required  for  overtaking  at  the  true  syzyg>-,  the  greatest  five-month  in¬ 
terval  vnll  have  added  on  5°44'  in  longitude  beyond  the  mean.  Therefore  the 
moon's  latitudinal  passage  along  the  oblique  circle  will  have  added  on  just  that 
many  degrees  to  very  nearly  153"’21'  in  latitude  resulting  for  the  five-month 
interv'aL  .And  so  the  latitudinal  passage,  truly  considered  in  the  greatest  five- 
month  interval,  will  come  to  159^5'. 

But  the  moon's  ecliptic  limits  either  side  of  the  ecliptic  circle,  at  the  moon’s 
mean  distance,  embrace  veiy-  nearly  1®  on  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the 
poles  of  the  oblique  circle,  since  at  the  least  distance  it  is  1^3'36"'  and  at  the 
greatest  distance  0®56'24'';  and  they  embrace  11®30'  from  the  nodes  along  the 
oblique  circle.  Therefore  the  anecliptic  arc  between  them  comes  to  157^,  which 
for  the  greatest  five-month  interval  is  less  by  2^5'  than  the  additional  159 '’5' 
of  the  oblique  circle.  Now,  it  is  clear  for  these  reasons  that  it  is  possible 
for  the  moon,  within  the  greatest  five-month  interval,  to  be  eclipsed  at  the 
first  full  moon  in  its  withdrawal  from  either  node,  and  to  be  eclipsed  again 
at  the  last  full  moon  in  its  approach  to  the  opposite  node.  For  in  both  eclipses 
the  occultation  occurs  on  the  same  side  of  the  ecliptic,  and  never  on  oppo¬ 
site  sides. 

In  this  way  we  have  seen  how  the  greatest  five-month  period  can  produce  two 
lunar  eclipses.  And  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  same  thing  to  happen  in  a  seven- 
month  interval  even  if  we  suppose  the  least  seven-month  inter\'al  (that  is,  dur¬ 
ing  which  the  sun  effects  its  least  passage  and  the  moon  its  greatest)  we  can  see 
by  working  in  the  same  way  as  before. 

For  since,  again,  in  the  mean  seven-month  interval,  the  mean  longitudinal 
passage  of  both  luminaries  takes  on  an  additional  203®45',  that  of  the  moon  on 
its  epicycle  180°43';  since  the  sun's  103®45'  at  its  least  passage  either  side  of  the 
apogee  subtracts  4®42'  from  the  mean  movement;  and  since  the  180^43'  of  the 
moon's  epicycle  at  its  greatest  passage  either  side  of  the  perigee  adds  9'^58'  to 
the  mean  movement,  it  follows  that  in  the  time  of  a  mean  seven-month  inter^^al, 
whenever  the  sun  effects  its  least  passage  and  the  moon  its  greatest,  the  moon 
will  have  passed  the  sun  by  the  combined  14®40'  of  both  anomalies.  For  the 
same  reasons,  taking  of  this  and  adding  it  to  the  4^42^  of  the  subtractive 
solar  anomaly,  we  shall  have  all  told  very  nearly  5°55'  by  which  the  longitudinal 
passage  in  the  least  seven-month  interval  will  lag  behind  that  in  the  mean,  and 
just  so  will  the  latitudinal  passage  fail  of  the  total  214®42'  for  the  mean  seven- 
month  interval.  Therefore  in  the  least  seven-month  interval  the  moon  will  have 
added  on  208°47'  in  latitude  along  the  oblique  circle,  whereas  the  whole  greatest 
arc  on  the  oblique  circle  between  the  moon's  ecliptic  limits  at  its  mean  distance, 
from  the  approach  to  one  of  the  nodes  to  the  ^\■ithdrawal  from  the  opposite 
node,  is  203®.  It  is  consequently  not  possible  for  the  moon,  in  the  least  seven- 


200  PTOLEMY 

month  interval,  to  be  eclipsed  ever  so  little  at  the  first  full  moon  and  again  at 
the  last. 

Then  again  it  must  be  shown  that  it  is  possible  for  the  sun  to  be  eclipsed 
twice  in  the  greatest  five-month  interval  for  the  same  people  and  in  all  parts  of 
the  world  inhabited  by  us. 

For  we  demonstrated  the  moon’s  latitudinal  passage  in  the  greatest  five- 
month  interval  to  be  while  the  anecliptic  arc  for  the  sun,  at  the  moon’s 

mean  distance,  is  167°36'.  For  the  ecliptic  limits  are  0®32'20"  from  the  ecliptic 
along  the  oblique  circle.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that,  if  the  moon  displays  no  paral¬ 
lax,  the  required  result  Ls  impo.ssible,  because  the  anecliptic  arc  is  greater  than 
the  passage  in  the  greatest  five-month  interval  by  8^31'  along  the  oblique  circle, 
and  by  very  nearly  0^45'  along  the  circle  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic,  but  that, 
wherever  it  can  display  a  parallax  such  that  the  parallaxes  in  either  of  the  ex¬ 
treme  conjunctions  or  the  parallaxes  of  both  together  exceed  0°45',  in  such  a 
place  both  of  the  extreme  conjunctions  can  be  ecliptic. 

Now,  since  we  showed  that,  in  the  time  of  the  greatest  five-month  interval, 
w’henever  the  moon  effects  its  least  passage  and  the  sun  effects  its  greatest  from 
two-thirds  within  the  Virgin  to  two-thirds  within  the  Water  Bearer,  the  moon 
falls  west  of  the  sun  by  the  13°18'  of  both  anomalies,  and  since  the  moon  moves 
in  mean  terms  this  much  and  M2  ^  much  more  in  1  day  and  2M  hours,  it  is 
clear  that,  while  the  time  of  the  mean  five-month  interval  is  147  days  and  very 
nearly  15+3^+M  hours,  the  time  of  the  greatest  five-month  interval  is  148 
days  and  18  hours.  And,  for  this  reason,  if  the  first  conjunction  is  nearly  two- 
thirds  within  the  Virgin,  the  last  one  nearly  two-thirds  within  the  Water  Bearer 
will  be  earlier  by  the  six  hours  lacking  to  fill  out  the  whole  days.  Therefore  one 
must  seek  where  and  when  the  moon  can  display  a  parallax  of  more  than  these 
0®45',  either  in  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  dodecatemories  or  in  both,  at  a  po¬ 
sition  6  hours  earlier  in  the  Water  Bearer  than  in  the  Virgin. 

Now  nowhere  in  the  world  inhabited  by  us  is  the  moon  found  to  display  such 
a  parallax  northward,  as  we  have  said.  Whence  it  is  impossible  for  the  sun  to  be 
twice  eclipsed  in  the  greatest  five-month  interval  with  the  moon’s  passage  south 
of  the  ecliptic — that  Ls,  whenever  the  moon  at  the  first  conjunction  Ls  withdraw¬ 
ing  from  the  descending  node  and  at  the  last  conjunction  is  approaching  the 
ascending  node.  But  it  can  dLsplay  just  such  a  parallax  southward,  for  those 
living  below  the  equator  northward,  in  both  these  dodecatemories  at  a  position 
six  hours  earlier  whenever  two-thirds  the  Virgin  is  supposed  setting  at  the  first 
conjunction  and  two-thirds  the  Water  Bearer  is  culminating  at  the  second.  For 
in  such  positions  we  find  the  moon,  in  its  mean  distance,  displaying  a  southward 
parallax  (the  sun’s  parallax  being  accounted  for)  of  very  nearly  0®22'  at  the 
equator  when  it  Ls  in  the  Virgin,  and  of  0^14'  when  it  is  in  the  Water  Bearer; 
but  where  the  longest  day  is  123^  hours,  0°27'  when  it  is  in  the  Virgin,  and  0°22' 
when  it  Ls  in  the  Water  Bearer;  so  that  in  thLs  case  the  two  parallaxes  together 
exceed  the  0°45'  by  4  sixtieths.  And  since  the  southw^ard  parallax  becomes 
greater  for  the  still  more  northern  places,  therefore  it  is  evident  that  it  will  be 
even  more  possible  for  the  sun  to  appear  twice  eclipsed  in  the  least  five-month 
interval  for  those  inhabiting  these  places,  but  only  at  the  moon’s  passage  north 
of  the  ecliptic — that  is,  when  the  moon  in  the  first  eclipse  withdraws  from  the 
ascending  node  and,  in  the  second,  approaches  the  descending  node. 


201 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

Thus  I  sa}"  again  that,  also  in  tlie  least  seven-month  interval,  it  is  possible  for 
the  sun  to  be  Uvice  eclipsed  for  the  same  people.  For  in  the  least  seven-month 
interval  we  demonstrated  the  moon’s  latitudinal  passage  to  be  208°47'.  And 
since  the  greatest  arc  of  the  oblique  circle  cut  off  between  the  ecliptic  limits  is 
that  from  the  limit  at  the  approach  to  one  node  to  the  limit  at  the  withdrawal 
from  the  other,  therefore,  in  the  case  of  the  sun  this  distance  vn\\  come  to  192®24' 
at  the  moon’s  mean  distance.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that,  if  the  moon  displays  no 
parallax,  the  required  appearance  will  be  impossible,  because  the  oblique  circle’s 
arc  of  the  least  seven-month  interval  is  greater  than  the  greatest  arc  cut  off  by 
the  sun’s  ecliptic  limits  which  is  16°23'  along  the  oblique  circle  and  1®25'  along 
the  circle  drawn  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles.  But  wherever  it  can  display  a  par¬ 
allax  such  that  the  parallaxes  in  either  of  the  extreme  conjunctions  or  both  par¬ 
allaxes  together  exceed  this  1®25',  in  such  a  place  can  both  extreme  conjunctions 
be  echptic. 

Now  since  we  showed  that,  in  the  time  of  the  mean  seven-month  interval, 
whenever  the  moon  effects  its  greatest  passage,  and  the  sun  its  least  passage 
from  the  last  part  of  the  Water  Bearer  to  the  middle  of  the  Virgin,  the  moon  has 
already  truly  passed  the  sun  by  14°40'.  Since  the  moon  moves  in  mean  terms 
just  that  many  degrees  together  wdth  K2  them  in  1  day  and  5  hours,  there¬ 
fore  it  is  evident  that,  while  the  time  of  the  mean  seven-month  interv^al  em¬ 
braces  206  days  and  very  nearly  17  hours,  the  time  of  the  least  seven-month 
interval  ^\dll  be  205  days  and  12  hours.  For  this  reason  the  time  of  the  last  con¬ 
junction  near  the  middle  of  the  Virgin  will  be  12  hours  later  than  the  first  near 
the  end  of  the  Water  Bearer.  Therefore  one  must  seek  where  and  when  the  moon 
can  display  a  parallax  of  more  than  V2o\  either  in  one  or  the  other  of  the  given 
dodecatemories  or  in  both  at  positions  12  hours  apart — that  is,  when  the  one  is 
setting  and  the  other  is  rising.  For  not  otherwise  could  both  eclipses  occur  above 
the  earth. 

No\v  again,  in  the  world  inhabited  by  us,  the  moon  is  nowhere  found  in  any 
position  displaying  such  a  parallax  northward;  and  even  to  those  living  under 
the  equator  a  parallax  of  not  more  than  the  23  sixtieths  of  the  latitudinal  paral¬ 
lax  at  the  greatest  distance.  Whence  it  is  impossible  for  the  sun  to  be  t^\^ce 
eclipsed  in  the  least  seven-month  interval  with  the  moon’s  passage  south  of  the 
ecliptic;  that  is,  whenever  it  approaches  the  ascending  node  at  the  first  conjunc¬ 
tion  and  withdraws  from  the  descending  node  at  the  last.  But  w*e  find  such  a 
parallax  effected  southw'ard  from  around  the  parallel  through  Rhodes  w^henever 
the  last  of  the  Water  Bearer  is  rising  and  the  middle  of  the  Virgin  setting.  For  at 
its  mean  distance  in  Rhodes  and  in  places  under  the  same  parallel,  the  moon  dis¬ 
plays  in  either  position  a  southward  parallax  (the  solar  parallax  being  sub¬ 
tracted)  up  to  very  nearly  0'^4r)',  so  that  the  parallaxes  at  both  conjunctions  are 
together  greater  than  the  l®25'.  Now’,  since  the  southw’ard  parallax  is  even 
greater  in  those  places  north  of  this  parallel,  it  is  e\'ident  that,  for  those  inhabit¬ 
ing  these  places,  it  is  possible  for  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  to  appear  twdce  in  the 
least  seven-month  interval,  but  again  only  at  the  moon’s  passage  north  of  the 
ecliptic — that  is,  w’hen  the  moon  in  the  first  eclipse  approaches  the  descending 
node  and  in  the  second  wdthdraw^s  from  the  ascending  node. 

It  remains  further  to  be  shown,  moreover,  that  at  an  interval  of  one  month 
it  is  not  possible  for  the  sun  to  be  tw'ice  eclipsed  in  the  wnrld  inhabited  by  us, 
either  in  the  same  parallel  or  in  different  parallels,  even  if  one  supposes  all  to- 


202  PTOLEMY 

gether  those  things  which  cannot  concur,  but  as  combined  to  make  the  required 
appearance  possible;  I  mean,  even  if  we  suppose  the  moon  at  its  least  distance 
so  that  it  may  display  a  parallax  (the  month  the  least  so  that  the  monthly  lati¬ 
tudinal  passage  may  be  greater,  by  as  little  as  possible)  that  is  greater  than  that 
embraced  by  the  sun^s  ecliptic  limits,  using  indifferently  hours  and  dodecate- 
mories  in  which  it  appears  to  make  the  greatest  parallaxes. 

Since,  then,  in  the  mean  month  the  longitudinal  passage  of  each  of  the  lumi¬ 
naries  takes  on  29°6'  in  mean  terms,  and  the  passage  on  the  moon’s  epicycle 
takes  on  25°49';  and  since  of  these  the  sun’s  29°6'  at  its  least  passage  either  side 
of  the  apogee  subtract  1°8'  from  the  mean,  and  the  25°49'  of  the  moon’s  epicycle 
at  its  greatest  passage  either  side  of  the  perigee  add  2°28'  to  the  mean — ^if,  ac¬ 
cording  to  what  has  already  been  demonstrated,  we  combine  the  addition-sub¬ 
tractions  of  both  anomalies  which  come  to  3°36'  and  add  on  a  twelfth  or  0°18' 
to  what  the  sun  lacked,  we  shall  have  1°26’.  And  by  just  this  amount  we  shall 
have  the  least  month’s  passage  less  than  the  longitudinal  and  latitudinal  in  the 
mean  month.  And  so,  since  the  mean  month’s  latitudinal  passage  is  30^40',  the 
least  month’s  passage  is  29°14',  which  makes  very  nearly  2‘^33'  along  the  great 
circle  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic.  But  the  whole  passage  of  the  sun’s  ecliptic 
limits  comes  to  1°6'  when  the  moon  is  at  its  least  distance,  so  that  the  least 
month’s  passage  is  greater  by  1°27'. 

Now,  if  the  sun  were  to  be  twice  eclipsed  in  one  month,  it  would  be  absolutely 
necessary,  either  that  the  moon  display  no  parallax  at  one  of  the  conjunctions 
and  one  greater  than  1°27'  at  the  other;  or  that  it  display  parallaxes  in  the  same 
direction  at  both  conjunctions  with  the  difference  between  the  parallaxes  greater 
than  1°27';  or  that  both  parallaxes  come  to  something  greater  when  the  parallax 
at  one  conjunction  is  northward  and  at  the  other  southward.  But  nowhere  on 
the  earth  in  the  syzygies — ^not  even  at  its  least  distance — will  the  moon  display 
(the  sun’s  parallax  being  accounted  for)  a  parallax  greater  than  one  degree. 
Therefore  it  is  not  possible  in  the  least  month  for  the  sun  to  be  twice  eclipsed, 
either  when  the  moon  displays  no  parallax  at  one  of  the  conjunctions,  or  when 
it  displays  one  in  the  same  direction  at  both,  since  their  difference  is  never 
greater  than  one  degree  although  it  needs  to  be  greater  than  1°27'. 

The  required  appearance  could  happen  only  if  the  total  number  of  degrees 
from  both  parallaxes,  one  being  in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  other,  should 
total  more  than  1°27'.  And  this  is  possible  in  different  regions  because  the  moon 
can  display,  to  those  north  of  the  equator  in  the  regions  inhabited  by  us,  a 
southward  parallax,  and  to  those  south  of  the  equator  in  what  is  called  the 
antichthones,  a  northward  parallax  of  from  0°25'  to  1®  beyond  the  sun’s  paral¬ 
lax.  But  this  could  never  happen  for  the  same  region.  Because  the  moon  displays 
in  like  manner  a  greatest  parallax  north w’ard  and  southward  of  not  more  than 
0°25'  for  those  under  the  equator;  and  to  the  most  northern  and  most  southern 
not  more  than  the  stated  1°  in  the  opposite  directions,  so  that  in  this  way  both 
parallaxes  still  total  less  than  1°27'.  Inasmuch  as  each  of  the  opposite  parallaxes 
would  always  be  much  less  in  the  case  of  regions  between  the  equator  and  one  of 
the  limits,  the  impossibility  would  be  even  greater  for  them. 

Nowhere  on  the  earth  for  the  same  latitude,  therefore,  can  the  sun  be  twice 
eclipsed  in  one  month;  and  for  different  latitudes  nowhere  in  the  same  inhabited 
region.  Which  things  we  were  required  to  show. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 


203 


7.  CONSTliUCTION  OF  i^^CLIPTrC  1'aHLES 

It  has  now  become  clear  to  us  what  intervals  of  syzygies  we  must  take  for  a 
research  into  the  eclipses.  In  order  that,  when  the  mean  times  at  them  have  been 
distinguished  and  the  moon’s  passages  for  those  times  calculated  both  in  the 
case  of  the  apparent  conjunctive  syzygies  and  in  the  case  of  the  true  plenilunar 
ones  we  might  (by  means  of  the  moon’s  latitudinal  positions)  be  able  easily  to 
review  those  of  the  syzygies  certain  to  be  ecliptic,  their  magnitudes,  and  the 
times  of  the  obscurities,  we  constructed  tables  for  so  distinguishing  them:  two 
for  solar  eclipses  and  two  for  lunar  ones,  both  at  the  moon’s  greatest  and  least 
distance,  supposing  the  increase  of  the  obscurations  through  twelve  parts  of  the 
obscured  diameter  of  each  of  the  luminaries. 

Now,  the  first  table  of  the  solar  eclipses,  which  contains  the  ecliptic  limits  at 
the  moon’s  greatest  distance,  we  have  arranged  in  25  rows  and  4  columns.  The 
first  two  columns  contain  the  moon’s  apparent  latitudinal  passage  along  the  ob¬ 
lique  circle  for  each  of  the  obscurations.  Since  the  sun’s  diameter  is  0®31'20", 
and  the  moon’s  was  shown  to  be  also  0°31'20"  at  its  greatest  distance — and 
since,  therefore,  whenever  the  moon’s  apparent  centre  was  0®31'20"  from  the 
sun’s  centre  along  the  great  circle  through  both  centres,  and  6®  from  the  node 
along  the  oblique  circle  according  to  the  ratio  previously  set  out  of  to  1, 
then  first  will  the  moon  be  in  a  position  of  tangency  to  the  sun,  therefore,  in  the 
first  rows  of  the  columns  we  shall  place  84°  for  the  first,  and  206°  for  the  second; 
and,  in  the  last  rows,  96°  for  the  first,  and  264°  for  the  second.  And  since  very 
nearly  30  sixtieths  of  one  degree  along  the  oblique  circle  correspond  to  one- 
twelfth  of  the  sun’s  diameter,  we  shall  continually  increase  and  decrease  these 
two  columns  by  just  so  much,  beginning  from  the  extremes  and  going  to  the 
middle.  At  the  middle  rows  we  shall  put  90°  and  270°.  The  third  column  will 
contain  the  magnitudes  of  the  obscurations:  in  the  case  of  the  end  rows,  the  cor¬ 
responding  zero  of  tangency;  and  in  those  following  them  one  digit  for  each  }/i2 
of  the  diameter;  and  thus  for  the  rest  a  continual  increase  of  one  digit  to  the 
middle  row,  to  which  the  number  of  twelve  digits  will  correspond.  And  the 
fourth  column  will  contain  the  resulting  passages  of  the  moon’s  centre  for  each 
obscuration,  without  any  calculations  of  the  added  movements  of  the  sun  or  of 
the  added  parallaxes  of  the  moon. 

The  second  table  of  solar  eclipses,  which  contains  the  ecliptic  limits  at  the 
moon’s  least  distance,  we  shall  arrange  as  to  other  things  like  the  first,  but  in 
27  rows  and  4  columns.  Because  the  moon’s  radius  at  its  least  distance  has  been 
shown  to  be  17°40'  to  the  15°40'  of  the  sun’s  radius;  and  whenever  the  moon  first 
becomes  tangent  to  the  sun,  then  its  apparent  centre  is  0°33'20"  from  the  sun’s 
centre  and  6°24'  from  the  nodes  along  the  oblique  circle.  The  numbers  of  appar¬ 
ent  latitude  in  the  end  rows  are  83°36'  and  206°24'  and  again  96°24'  and  263°36', 
and  for  the  middle  row  of  the  digits,  the  number  is  twelve  digits  and,  because  of 
a  like  excess,  four  fifths  of  a  digit  for  the  delay  of  occultation. 

Each  of  the  two  lunar  tables  Is  arranged  in  45  rows  and  5  columns,  the  first 
table  being  furnished  with  latitudinal  numbers  as  of  the  moon  at  its  greatest  dis¬ 
tance.  For,  since  the  moon’s  radius  was  shown  to  be  0°15'40"  at  its  greatest 
distance  and  the  shadow’s  radius  0°40'44"  (so  that,  whenever  the  moon  is  first 
tangent  to  the  shadow,  its  centre  is  0°56'24"  from  the  shadow’s  centre  along  the 
great  circle  through  both  centres,  and  1°48'  from  the  nodes  along  the  oblique 


204  PTOLEMY 

circle),  therefore,  in  the  first  rows  we  shall  place  the  numbers  79°12'  and  280°48', 
and,  in  the  last  rows,  the  numbers  100°48'  and  259°12'.  For  the  same  reasons  as 
the  first  we  shall  continually  increase  and  decrease  them  by  the  30  sixtieths  cor¬ 
responding  to  K2  of  the  lunar  diameter  at  that  time. 

The  second  table  we  shall  furnish  with  latitudinal  numbers  as  of  the  moon  at 
its  least  distance,  at  which  distance  its  radius  was  shown  to  be  0°17'40"  and  the 
shadow’s  radius  0°45'56"  so  that,  whenever  the  moon  first  touches  the  shadow, 
then  its  centre  is  likewise  1°3'36"  from  the  shadow’s  centre  and  12°12'  from  the 
node  along  the  oblique  circle.  Now,  therefore,  putting  the  numbers  77°48'  and 
282°12'  in  the  first  rows,  and  the  numbers  202°12'  and  257°48'  in  the  last,  we 
shall  again  continually  increase  and  decrease  them  by  the  34  sixtieths  corre¬ 
sponding  to  of  the  lunar  diameter  at  that  time. 

And  they  will  contain  third  columns  of  digits  like  the  solar  tables;  and  like¬ 
wise  succeeding  columns  containing  the  moon’s  passages  for  each  obscuration, 
those  of  immersion  and  those  of  emersion,  and  further  those  of  half  the  delay  of 
occultation. 

We  calculated  geometrically  for  each  obscuration  the  given  passages  of  the 
moon.  But  we  treated  the  proofs  as  if  in  one  plane  and  in  straight  lines,  because 
arcs  of  that  magnitude  differ  insensibly  from  their  chords,  and  the  moon’s  pas¬ 
sage  along  the  oblique  circle  differs  hardly  at  all  from  that  considered  along  the 
ecliptic.  Let  no  one  suppose  that  we  do  not  know  that,  in  general,  with  respect 
to  the  moon’s  latitudinal  passage,  there  is  a  difference  in  using  the  arcs  of  the 
oblique  circle  for  those  of  the  ecliptic;  furthermore  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
times  of  the  syzygies  are  exactly  the  same  as  the  mid-eclipses. 

For  if  we  cut  off  from  the  node  A  two  equal  arcs  AB  and  AC  of  the  proposed 
circles,  and,  joining  BC,  draw  BD  from 
B  at  right  angles  to  AC,  then  it  will  be 
immediately  evident  that,  with  the  moon 
supposed  at  B,  if  we  use  arc  AC  of  the 
ecliptic  instead  of  the  AD  used  because 
of  considering  the  passages  relative  to  it 
with  respect  to  circles  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles,  then  the  difference  due  to  the 
inclination  of  the  lunar  circle  will  be  CD,  Again,  if  the  sun  or  the  shadow’s  centre 
is  conceived  at  B,  the  time  of  the  syzygy,  in  accordance  with  the  little  difference 
between  the  circles,  will  be  when  the  moon  is  at  C;  and  the  mid-eclipse  will  be 
when  the  moon  is  at  D,  because  the  mid-times  of  the  obscurations  are  considered 
with  respect  to  the  circles  through  the  poles  of  the  lunar  circle.  And  the  time  of 
the  syzygy  will  differ  from  the  mid-eclipse  by  arc  CD. 

The  cause  of  our  not  calculating  these  arcs  in  detail  is  that  their  differences 
are  small  and  insensible,  and  that  (while  not  knowing  this  is  absurd)  yet,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  difficulty  in  working  out  each  case,  this  willing  neglect  of  something 
which  can  be  overlooked  both  in  the  hypotheses  and  the  observations  makes  the 
greatest  difference  in  the  usefulness  of  a  simple  method,  and  no  difference  or 
very  little  in  the  discrepancy  with  appearances.  Now,  we  find  the  arc  similar  to 
CD  to  be,  in  general,  not  greater  than  5  sixtieths  of  one  degree.  This  is  proved 
by  the  same  theorem  as  that  by  which  we  calculated  the  differences  of  the  equa¬ 
torial  arcs  with  respect  to  those  of  the  ecliptic  for  circles  drawn  through  the 
equator’s  poles.  But  in  the  case  of  the  eclipses  we  find  it  to  be  not  greater  than 
2  sixtieths,  since  BD  is  almost  1°  to  the  12  °  of  each  of  the  arcs  AB  and  AC.  For 
the  moon’s  passages  at  eclipses  reach  almost  that  far.  Therefore  arc  AD  is  very 


205 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 


nearly  11®58',  and  that  leaves  CD  equal  to  2  sixtieths  of  a  degree,  which  does 
not  make  one  sixteenth  of  an  equatorial  hour.  Concern  over  such  a  fractional 
degree  is  more  vanity  than  love  of  truth. 

Now,  by  these  means,  we  also  worked  out  the  required  passages  of  the  moon^s 
obscurations  as  if  the  circles  differed  insensibly.  And  our  calculation  for  one  or 
two  examples  is  as  follows: 

Let  there  be  the  sun’s  or  the  shadow’s  centre  A,  and  the  straight  line  BCD  in 
place  of  the  lunar  circle’s  arc.  And  let  B  be  supposed 
the  moon’s  centre  when  it  first  touches  the  sun  or 
shadow  as  it  approaches;  and  D  as  it  withdraws.  And 
with  AB  and  AD  joined,  let  AC  be  drawn  from  A 
perpendicular  to  BD. 

Now,  that  the  mid-time  of  the  eclipse  and  the 
greatest  obscuration  occurs  when  the  moon’s  centre 
is  at  C  is  evident  from  A^’s  being  equal  to  AD;  and, 
therefore,  the  passage  BC^s  being  equal  to  CD,  and  from  AC’s  being  less  than 
all  the  lines  joining  the  two  centres  to  BD,  It  is  clear  also  that  either  of  the 
lines  AB  and  AD  contains  both  the  radius  of  the  moon  and  of  the  sun  or 
shadow,  and  that  line  AC  is  less  than  either  of  them  by  that  part  of  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  the  body  being  eclipsed  which  is  cut  off  by  the  obscuration. 

With  these  things  so,  let  the  obscuration  be  3  digits  as  an  example,  and  let  A 
be  first  supposed  the  sun’s  centre.  Now,  therefore,  when  the  moon  is  at  its  great¬ 
est  distance, 

A^  =  31'20", 


and 


And 


sq.  A5  =  981'47". 


AC  =  23'30", 

for  it  is  less  than  AB  by  the  3  twelfths  of  the  sun’s  diameter,  or  7^50'.  And 

sq.  AC  =  552'15". 

And  so 


sq.  BC  =  429'32", 

and,  in  length, 

BC=.20'43", 

which  we  shall  place  in  the  first  table  of  the  solar  eclipses  beside  the  3  digits  in 
the  fourth  column. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  the  moon’s  least  distance, 

A5  =  33'20", 

and 

sq.  A5  =  11117"; 

and 

AC  =  25'30", 
sq.  AC  =  650'15"; 

and,  by  subtraction, 

sq.  BC  =  460'52", 

and  therefore,  in  length, 

^C  =  21'28" 

which  we  shall  place  in  the  second  table  of  the  solar  eclipses  beside  the  3  digits 
in  the  fourth  column. 

Yet  again,  let  A  be  supposed  the  shadow’s  centre  and  the  obscuration  the 


206 


PTOLEMY 


same  34  of  the  moon^s  diameter.  Therefore,  for  the  moon's  greatest  distance, 

AS  =  56'24" 


and 

And 


sq.  A5  =  3180'58". 


AC  =  48'34", 


for  it  is  less  than  A  5  by  34  of  the  lunar  diameter  or,  at  the  greatest  distance,  by 
7'50".  And 


And  so,  by  subtraction, 
and,  in  length. 


sq.  AC  =  2358'43". 
sq.  5(7  =  822'15", 
£(7  =  28'41", 


which  we  shall  place  in  the  first  of  the  lunar  tables  beside  the  3  digits  in  the 
fourth  column  and  which  contain  the  passage  of  immersion,  sensibly  the  same  as 
that  of  emersion. 

And,  in  the  case  of  the  least  distance, 


A5  =  63'36" 


and 

sq.  A5  =  4044'58". 

And 

A(7  =  54'46", 

for  the  8'50"  difference  is  again  34  of  the  lunar  diameter  at  the  least  distance. 
And 

sq.  A(7  =  2999'23". 

And  so,  by  subtraction, 

sq.  5C=1045'35", 

and,  in  length, 

BC  =  32'20'\ 

which  we  shall  place  likeAvise  beside  the  3  digits  in  the  fourth  colunrn  in  the 
second  of  the  lunar  tables. 

Once  more,  because  the  lunar  obscurations  have  a  time  of  delay,  let  the  point 
A  be  the  shadow's  centre,  and  let  the  straight 
line  BCDEF  be  in  place  of  the  arc  of  the 
moon's  oblique  circle.  Let  B  be  supposed  the 
point  where  the  moon's  centre  will  be  when 
the  moon,  as  approaching,  first  touches  the 
shadow  from  without;  and  C  where  the  moon's 
centre  will  be  when  the  totally  eclipsed  moon 
will  first  touch  the  shadow's  circle  from  within.  And  let  E  be  the  point  where  the 
moon's  centre  will  be  again  when  the  moon,  as  withdrawing,  first  touches  the 
shadow's  circle  from  within;  and  7^  where  the  moon's  centre  will  be  when,  taking 
its  departure,  it  touches  the  shadow  from  without  for  the  last  time.  And  again 
let  AD  be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  BE. 

Now,  given  here  those  things  already  demonstrated  as  remaining  true,  it  is 
also  evident  that  either  of  the  straight  lines  AC  and  AE  bounds  the  difference 
by  which  the  shadow's  radius  exceeds  the  moon's  radius,  so  that  the  passage  CD 
equals  the  passage  DE^  and  each  contains  half  the  delay,  and  the  remainder  BC 
of  immersion  is  equal  to  the  remainder  EF  of  emersion. 

So  let  there  be  supposed  an  eclipse  in  which  15  digits  of  the  moon  are  available 


207 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 


!  — that  is,  in  which  its  centre  D  is  within  the  bound  of  the  ecliptic  limits  by  one 
1  lunar  diameter  plus  a  fourth  of  it;  in  other  words  when  AD  is  less  than  either 
'  AB  ov  AF  hy  the  given  one  lunar  diameter  plus  a  fourth  of  it,  and  less  than 
either  AC  or  AE  hy  fourth  of  one  lunar  diameter. 

Therefore,  when  the  moon  is  at  its  greatest  distance, 

^5  =  56'24" 

and 

sq.  45  =  3180'58". 

And 

AC  =  25'4", 

for  the  moon^s  diameter  at  its  greatest  distance  is  31'20".  And 

sq.  AC=628'20". 

And  like\vise 


AZ)  =  17'14" 

and 

sq.  AZ)  =  396'59". 

.  And  so,  by  subtraction, 

sq.  J5Z)  =  2883'59" 

and,  in  length, 

jBZ)  =  53'42". 

And,  by  subtraction, 

sq.  CZ)  =  331'21" 

and,  in  length, 

CD  =  18'12"; 

!  and,  by  subtraction, 

DC  =  35'30". 

I  Now  we  shall  place  these  35'30"  of  immersion,  equal  to  those  of  emersion,  be- 
I  side  the  number  of  15  digits,  in  the  fourth  column  of  the  first  table  of  lunar 
^  eclipses;  and  the  18T2"  of  the  half-time  of  delay,  in  the  fifth  column. 

When  the  moon  is  at  its  least  distance,  then  again 

AD  =  63'36" 

I  and 

1  sq.  AD  =  4044'56". 

!  And 


I 

I: 

! 


AC  =  28'16", 

for  the  moon’s  diameter  at  the  least  distance  was  shown  to  be  35'20".  And 

sq.  AC  =  799'. 


And  likewise 


AD  =  19'26" 


'  and 

I  And  so  also,  by  subtraction, 
and,  in  length. 

And,  by  subtraction, 
and,  in  length, 

.  And,  by  subtraction. 


sq.  AD  =  377'39". 
sq.  DD  =  3667'19" 
DD  =  60'34". 
CD  =  421'21" 
CD  =  20'32". 
DC  =  40'2". 


208  PTOLEMY 

Therefore  we  shall  also  place  these  40'2"  of  immersion,  again  equal  to  those  of 
emersion,  beside  the  number  of  15  digits,  in  the  fourth  column  of  the  second 
table  of  lunar  eclipses;  and  the  20'32"  of  the  half-time  of  delay  in  the  fifth  col¬ 
umn. 

But,  for  the  moon’s  passages  on  its  epicycle  between  the  greatest  and  least 
distances,  in  order  that  we  might  easily  obtain  by  the  method  of  sixtieths  the 
corresponding  parts  of  the  whole  difference  for  each  passage,  we  placed  under 
the  foregoing  tables  another  short  table  containing  the  numbers  of  the  passage 
on  the  epicycle  and  the  corresponding  sixtieths  for  each  of  the  apparent  excesses 
from  the  first  and  second  tables  of  the  eclipses.  And  the  quantity  of  these  six¬ 
tieths  has  been  worked  out  by  us  and  placed  in  the  seventh  column  of  the  moon’s 
Parallactic  Table,  for  the  epicycle  is  assumed  to  be  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee 
throughout  the  syzygies. 

Since  most  of  those  who  observe  the  ecliptic  markings  do  not  measure  the 
magnitudes  of  the  obscurations  by  the  circles’  diameters  but  in  general  by  the 
whole  plane  figures  (the  eye  comparing  in  a  rough  way  the  whole  apparent  part 
with  that  not  appearing),  we  have  added  to  these  also  another  short  table  of  12 
rows  and  3  columns.  In  the  first  column  we  placed  the  12  digits,  each  digit  con¬ 
taining  K2  of  fhe  diameter  of  each  luminary  as  in  the  ecliptic  tables;  and  in  the 
next  columns  in  turn  the  twelfths  of  the  whole  areas  corresponding  to  them — in 
the  second  the  sun’s,  in  the  third  the  moon’s.  These  impositions  we  calculated 
only  for  the  magnitudes  of  the  moon’s  mean  distance  (for  very  nearly  the  same 
ratio  is  established  for  such  increases  and  decreases  of  the  diameters)  and  with 
the  ratio  of  the  circumferences  to  the  diameters  being  as  3p8'30'‘'  to  1^.  For  this 
ratio  is  between  (very  nearly)  a  triple  plus  a  seventh  part  and  a  triple  plus  ten 
seventy-firsts,  both  of  which  Archimedes  used  for  greater  simplicity. 

Then  first,  for  the  solar  eclipses,  let  there  be  the  sun’s  circle  ABCD  about 
centre  E;  and  the  moon’s  circle,  as  its  mean 
distance,  AFCG  about  centre  H  cutting  the 
sun’s  circle  at  points  A  and  C.  And  vith 
BEHG  joined,  let  it  be  supposed  that  }/i  of 
the  sun’s  diameter  has  been  eclipsed,  so  that 
FD  =  Z^ 

where 

diam.  BF>  — 12^ 

and 

moon’s  diam.  FG  =12^20' 
in  the  ratio  of  15^40'  to  16^40'.  And  therefore 

FLr  =  9PlO', 

With  the  perimeters  in  the  ratio  of  P  to  3p8'30",  that  of  the  sun’s  circle  is  37p42', 
and  that  of  the  moon’s  38p46'.  Likewise  of  the  whole  areas,  since  the  radius 
multiplied  by  the  perimeter  gives  twice  the  circle’s  area,  that  of  the  sun’s  circle 
will  come  to  113^6',  and  that  of  the  moon’s  to  119^32'. 

Then,  these  things  being  so,  it  is  required  to  find  how  great  is  the  area  con¬ 
tained  by  ADCF  where  the  whole  area  of  the  sun’s  circle  is  12p. 

Let  AE  and  AH,  and  CE  and  CH  be  joined,  and  further  the  perpendicular 
ARC. 

Now,  since  it  is  supposed 

AE  =  CE^^^, 

A^  =  C/7  =  6P10' 


where 

THE  ALMAGEST,  VI  209 

EH=<dno' 

and  the  angle  at  K  is  right,  therefore,  if  we  apply  the  excess  by  which  the  square 
on  exceeds  the  square  on  AE^  or  to  the  line  EH^  we  shall  have  the 
difference  between  EK  and  HK  of  And 

£’/v=4p28', 


and  therefore 

///i  =  4p42'; 

AK  =  CKH4p, 

And  consequently  we  shall  have 


and 

trgl.  /1£C=  17P52', 

Again,  since 

trgl. /i//C'=18P48'. 

AC  =  i'> 

where 

diam.  BD=\2^ 

and  likewise 

and  hence 

diam.  FG  =12^'20', 

AC  =  m^ 

where 

and 

diam.  fiZ>  =  120'>, 

^(7  =  77^50' 

where 

therefore 

diam.  FG=  120^, 

arc  ADC  =  SS^S7' 

^vdlere  circle  ABCD  is  360®,  and 

arc  AFC  =  80®52' 

where  circle  AFCG  is  360®. 

And  so,  since  the  ratio  of  circles  to  arcs  is  the  same  as  the  circles’  areas  to  the 
areas  of  the  sectors  of  the  arcs,  therefore 

sect.  AECD  =  2Q^l& 


where  it  was  shown 

circle  =  113^6'; 

and 

sect.  A//CF =26^51' 

for 

circle  AFCG  =  119^32'. 

But  it  was  shown  also  that 

trgl.  AFC  =17^52' 

and  likewise 

trgl.  AFC  =18^48'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have 

seg.  ADCK  =  S^2A\ 
seg.  AFCK  =  m'. 

And  therefore  the  whole  area  contained  by  arcs  AF,  CD  is  16^27'  where  the  area 
^Application  is  here  equivalent  to  division.  The  geometric  proof  of  this  statement  is  simple. 


210 


PTOLEMY 


of  circle  ABCD  is  supposed  113^6'.  Thus,  where  the  area  of  the  sun’s  circle  is  12, 
the  area  contained  by  the  eclipsed  segment  is  very  nearly  1^  which  we  shall 
place  in  the  table  just  mentioned,  along  the  3-digits  row,  in  the  second  column. 

Again,  in  the  same  figure  for  the  lunar  eclipses,  let  ABCD  be  supposed  the 
moon’s  circle,  and  AFCG  the  shadow’s  circle  at  mean  distance.  And  likewise 
let  there  be  an  eclipse  to  }/i  of  the  moon’s  diameter  so  that,  where  diameter  BD 
is  12p,  diameter  DF  of  the  eclipse  is  3^  and  diameter  FG  of  the  shadow  is  31^12' 
according  to  the  ratio  of  1^  to  2^36'.  And  therefore 

And  therefore  again,  of  the  perimeters,  that  of  the  lunar  circle  is  37^42'  and  that 
of  the  shadow’s  98^1';  and,  of  the  areas,  that  of  the  lunar  circle  113^6'  and  that 
of  the  shadow’s  764^32'. 

Now,  since  here  it  is  supposed 

AE  =  CE  =  ^^, 

AH  =  CH-=\bm' 

where 

=  18^36', 

therefore,  if  likewise  we  apply  to  EH  the  excess  by  which  AH  exceeds  AE^  we 
shall  have 

^^-£^=11^8'. 

And  so 

£A  =  3P44', 

=  14^52', 

and  therefore 

AA:  =  Cif  =  4P42'. 

And  consequently  we  shall  have 


trgl.  AEC=nm' 

and 

trgl.  AHC =69'>52'. 

Again,  since 

4C=9p24' 

where 

diam.  BD  =  12^ 

and  likewise 

diam.  FG =3in2', 

and 

4(7=94'' 

where 

diam.  BZ)  =  120p, 

and 

4C'=36‘'9' 

where 

diam.  F(?=120'’, 

therefore 

arc  4I>C'=103°8' 

where  circle  ABCD  is  360°,  and 

arc  Ai^C  =  35°4' 

where  circle  AFCG  is  360°. 

And  so,  by  means  of  things  already  said,  we  shall  have 

sect.  =  32^24' 


where  it  was  shown 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 


211 


and 


circle  A5(72)  =  113^6' ; 
sect.  AC/7/^  =  74^28' 


for 


circle  ^FCG  =  764^32'. 


But  it  was  shown  also 
and  likewise 


trgl.  AJ5;C  =  17p33' 


trgl.  =  69^52'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have 

seg.  ADC/C  =  14^51', 
seg.  AFCK  =  4^36'. 

Consequently,  the  whole  area  contained  by  arcs  AF,  CD  is  19^27'  where  the  area 
of  circle  ABCD  is  supposed  113^6'.  Where  the  area  of  the  moon's  circle  is  12, 
therefore,  that  contained  by  the  eclipsed  segment  will  be  very  nearly 
which  we  shall  place  in  the  same  table,  along  the  3-digits  row,  in  the  third  col¬ 
umn  belonging  to  the  moon.  And  here  is  the  exposition  of  the  tables: 


8.  Table  of  Solar  Eclipses 


At  Greatest  Distance 

At  Least  Distance 

Fraction  of 

Fraction  of 

Numbers  < 

of  Latitude 

Digits 

Immersion 

Numbers  of  Latitude 

Digits 

Immersion 

1 

2 

3 

4 

1 

2 

3 

4 

84 

0 

276 

0 

0 

0 

0 

83 

36 

276 

24 

0 

0 

0 

84 

30 

275 

30 

1 

12 

32 

84 

6 

275 

54 

1 

12 

57 

85 

0 

275 

0 

2 

17 

19 

84 

36 

275 

24 

2 

17 

54 

85 

30 

274 

30 

3 

20 

43 

85 

6 

274 

54 

3 

21 

28 

86 

0 

274 

0 

4 

23 

27 

85 

36 

274 

24 

4 

24 

14 

86 

SO 

273 

30 

5 

25 

38 

86 

6 

273 

54 

5 

26 

27 

87 

0 

273 

0 

6 

27 

8 

86 

36 

273 

24 

6 

28 

16 

87 

30 

272 

30 

7 

28 

29 

87 

6 

272 

54 

7 

29 

45 

88 

0 

272 

0 

8 

29 

32 

87 

36 

272 

24 

8 

30 

55 

88 

SO 

271 

30 

9 

30 

20 

88 

6 

271 

54 

9 

31 

51 

89 

0 

271 

0 

10 

30 

54 

88 

36 

271 

24 

10 

32 

33 

89 

30 

270 

30 

11 

31 

13 

89 

6 

270 

54 

11 

33 

1 

90 

0 

270 

0 

12 

31 

20 

89 

36 

270 

24 

12 

33 

16 

90 

30 

269 

30 

11 

31 

13 

90 

0 

270 

0 

12 

33 

22 

91 

0 

269 

0 

10 

30 

54 

90 

24 

269 

36 

12 

33 

16 

91 

30 

268 

30 

9 

30 

20 

90 

54 

269 

6 

11 

33 

1 

92 

0 

268 

0 

8 

29 

32 

91 

24 

268 

36 

10 

32 

33 

92 

30 

267 

30 

7 

28 

29 

91 

54 

268 

6 

9 

31 

51 

93 

0 

267 

0 

6 

27 

8 

92 

24 

267 

36 

8 

30 

55 

93 

30 

266 

30 

5 

25 

38 

92 

54 

267 

6 

7 

29 

45 

94 

0 

266 

0 

4 

23 

27 

93 

24 

266 

36 

6 

28 

16 

94 

30 

265 

30 

3 

20 

43 

93 

54 

266 

6 

5 

26 

27 

95 

0 

265 

0 

2 

17 

19 

94 

24 

265 

36 

4 

24 

14 

95 

30 

264 

30 

1 

12 

32 

94 

54 

265 

6 

3 

21 

28 

96 

0 

264 

0 

0 

0 

0 

95 

24 

264 

36 

2 

17 

54 

95 

54 

264 

6 

1 

12 

57 

96 

24 

263 

36 

0 

0 

0 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

12 

42 

0 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 

18 

48 


34 

17 

32 

58 

49 

1 

13 

42 

12 

6 

12 

42 

13 

1 

49 

58 

32 

17 

34 


PTOLEMY 


Table  of  Lunar  Eclipses 


its 

3 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

Com¬ 

plete 

21 

20 

19 

18 

17 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

11 

10 

9 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 


Distance 

At  Least  Distance 

Fraction 

Fraction 

-  of  Im- 

Half 

Numbers  of 

Dig- 

of  Im¬ 

mersion 

Delay 

Latitude 

its 

mersion 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

0 

0 

77 

48 

282 

12 

0 

0 

0 

16 

59 

78 

22 

281 

38 

1 

19 

9 

23 

43 

78 

56 

281 

4 

2 

26 

45 

28 

41 

79 

30 

280 

30 

3 

32 

20 

32 

42 

80 

4 

279 

56 

4 

36 

53 

36 

6 

80 

38 

279 

22 

5 

40 

42 

39 

1 

81 

12 

278 

48 

6 

43 

59 

41 

34 

81 

46 

278 

14 

7 

46 

53 

43 

50 

82 

20 

277 

40 

8 

49 

25 

45 

48 

82 

54 

277 

6 

9 

51 

40 

47 

35 

83 

28 

276 

32 

10 

53 

39 

49 

9 

84 

2 

275 

58 

11 

55 

25 

50 

31 

84 

36 

275 

24 

12 

57 

59 

40 

35 

11 

9 

85 

10 

274 

50 

13 

45 

47 

37 

28 

15 

20 

85 

44 

274 

16 

14 

42 

15 

35 

30 

18 

12 

86 

18 

273 

42 

15 

40 

2 

34 

6 

20 

22 

86 

52 

273 

8 

16 

38 

28 

33 

7 

22 

0 

87 

26 

272 

34 

17 

37 

20 

32 

23 

23 

14 

88 

0 

272 

0 

18 

36 

37 

31 

51 

24 

8 

88 

34 

271 

26 

19 

35 

55 

31 

32 

24 

43 

89 

8 

270 

52 

20 

35 

34 

31 

22 

23 

1 

89 

42 

270 

18 

21 

35 

22 

:  31 

20 

23 

4 

90 

0 

270 

0 

Com¬ 

plete 

35 

20 

31 

22 

23 

1 

90 

18 

269 

42 

21 

35 

22 

31 

32 

24 

43 

90 

52 

269 

8 

20 

35 

34 

31 

51 

24 

8 

91 

26 

268 

34 

19 

35 

55 

32 

23 

23 

14 

92 

0 

268 

0 

18 

36 

37 

33 

7 

22 

0 

92 

34 

267 

26 

17 

37 

20 

34 

6 

20 

22 

93 

8 

266 

52 

16 

38 

28 

35 

30 

18 

12 

93 

42 

266 

18 

15 

40 

2 

37 

28 

15 

20 

94 

16 

265 

44 

14 

42 

15 

40 

35 

11 

9 

94 

50 

265 

10 

13 

45 

47 

50 

31 

95 

24 

264 

36 

12 

57 

59 

49 

9 

95 

58 

264 

2 

11 

55 

25 

47 

35 

96 

32 

263 

28 

10 

53 

39 

45 

48 

97 

6 

262 

54 

9 

51 

40 

43 

50 

97 

40 

262 

20 

8 

49 

25 

41 

34 

98 

14 

261 

46 

7 

46 

53 

39 

1 

98 

48 

261 

12 

6 

43 

59 

36 

6 

99 

22 

260 

38 

5 

40 

42 

32 

42 

99 

56 

260 

4 

4 

36 

53 

28 

41 

100 

30 

259 

30 

3 

32 

20 

23 

43 

101 

4 

258 

56 

2 

26 

45 

16 

59 

101 

38 

258 

22 

1 

19 

9 

0 

0 

102 

12 

257 

48 

0 

0 

0 

213 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

Table  of  Sun^s  and 
Table  of  Correction  Moon’s  Magnitude 


Numbers 

Numbers 

of 

of 

Sixtieths  of 

Digits 

Digits  of 

Digits  of 

Anomaly 

Anomaly 

Differences 

Sun 

Moon 

1 

2 

3 

6 

354 

0 

21 

1 

m 

0% 

12 

348 

0 

42 

2 

1 

1% 

18 

342 

1 

42 

3 

iM 

2i^ 

24 

336 

2 

42 

4 

2% 

3% 

30 

330 

4 

1 

5 

3% 

4% 

36 

324 

5 

21 

6 

4% 

5% 

42 

318 

7 

18 

7 

5% 

6M 

48 

312 

9 

15 

8 

7 

8 

54 

306 

11 

37 

9 

m 

9% 

60 

300 

14 

0 

10 

9% 

10% 

66 

294 

16 

48 

11 

10% 

11% 

72 

288 

19 

36 

12 

12 

12 

78 

282 

22 

36 

84 

276 

25 

36 

90 

270 

28 

42 

96 

264 

31 

48 

102 

258 

34 

54 

108 

252 

38 

0 

114 

246 

41 

0 

120 

240 

44 

0 

126 

234 

46 

45 

132 

228 

49 

30 

138 

222 

51 

39 

144 

216 

53 

48 

150 

210 

55 

32 

156 

204 

57 

15 

162 

198 

58 

18 

168 

192 

59 

21 

174 

186 

59 

41 

180 

180 

60 

0 

9.  Determination  of  Lunar  Eclipses 
Now,  with  these  things  set  out  beforehand,  we  shall  study  the  lunar  eclipses 
in  this  way.  For  we  set  out  the  resulting  number  of  degrees  of  the  required  full 
moon  for  the  hour  of  the  mid-syzygy  in  Alexandria,  both  the  number  of  degrees 
from  the  so-called  anomalistic  epicycle’s  apogee  and  the  number  of  degrees  in 
latitude  from  the  northern  limit  after  determination  of  the  addition-subtraction. 
We  first  carry  the  latitudinal  number  to  the  Tables  of  Lunar  Eclipses,  and,  if  it 
falls  in  the  numbers  of  the  first  two  columns,  we  take  down  separately  each  of 
those  lying  in  the  row  with  the  latitudinal  number  in  either  table,  both  those  in 
the  columns  of  passages  and  those  in  the  columns  of  digits.  Then  we  carry  the 
anomalistic  number  to  the  Table  of  Correction.  And  as  many  sixtieths  as  lie  in 
the  same  row  with  it,  just  so  many  do  we  take  of  the  difference  between  the 
digits  and  sixtieths  taken  down  for  either  table,  and  we  add  this  to  the  numbers 
gotten  from  the  first  Table.  If  it  happens  that  the  latitudinal  number  falls  onlv 


214  PTOLEMY 

in  the  second  Table,  we  set  out  that  number  of  sixtieths  of  the  digits  and  frac¬ 
tions  lying  in  a  row  with  them.^ 

Whatever  number  of  digits  we  get  from  this  correction,  we  say  the  obscur¬ 
ation  of  the  moon^s  diameter  at  mid-eclipse  embraces  just  so  many  twelfths. 
And  to  the  resulting  sixtieths  in  the  same  correction  we  always  add  M2  of  them 
for  the  sun^s  added  movement.  Dividing  them  by  the  moon^s  hourly  irregular 
movement  at  that  time,  to  whatever  the  division  comes,  just  so  many  equatorial 
hours  shall  we  have  for  each  passage-time  of  the  eclipse:  those  calculated  from 
the  fourth  table  giving  separately  the  time  of  immersion  and  the  time  of  emer¬ 
sion,  those  from  the  fifth  the  time  of  half  the  delay  of  occultation.  The  hour- 
positions  at  the  beginnings  and  ends  of  incidence  and  restoration  are  immediate¬ 
ly  evident  from  the  addition-subtraction  of  particular  passages  wdth  respect  to 
the  middle  of  the  delay — that  is,  very  nearly  the  time  of  the  true  full  moon.  And 
immediately,  if  we  carry  the  twelfths  of  the  diameter  to  the  shortest  table,  we 
shall  also  find  the  twelfths  of  the  whole  areas  of  the  moon  from  the  correspond¬ 
ing  numbers  in  the  third  column,  and  likewise  those  of  the  sun^s  in  the  second 
column. 

Now,  reason  proves  that  the  time  from  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse  to  the 
middle  is  not  always  equal  to  the  time  from  the  middle  to  the  end,  because  of 
the  irregularity  of  the  sun  and  moon.  Equal  passages  are  effected  for  that  reason 
in  unequal  times.  But  supposing  these  times  not  unequal  would  work  no  dis¬ 
crepancy  perceptible  to  sense  in  the  appearances.  For  even  if  they  were  near  the 
mean  courses  where  the  differences  of  the  increases  are  greater,  a  passage  for  the 
number  of  hours  of  a  whole  eclipse  would  make  the  difference  of  the  excess  in 
no  way  sensible. 

But  we  would  think  that  probably  w^e  find  the  moon^s  latitudinal  period 
shown  by  Hipparchus  to  be  mistaken,  since,  by  his  hypothesis,  the  surplus  is  less 
than  the  surplus  between  the  given  eclipses  but  greater  taken  according  to  our 
calculations,  although  we  start  from  the  same  things. 

For  he  takes  for  this  demonstration  two  lunar  eclipses  which  occurred  at  an 
interval  of  7,160  months,  in  both  of  which  the  quarter  of  the  moon^s  diameter 
was  eclipsed  at  the  same  passage  from  the  ascending  node:  the  first  having  been 
observed  in  the  year  2  of  Mardokempad,  and  the  second  in  the  year  37  of  the 
Third  Callippic  Period.  Hipparchus  avails  himself  of  the  same  latitudinal  pas¬ 
sage's  being  contained  consistently  in  either  eclipse  Avith  respect  to  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  return,  because  of  the  fact  that  the  first  eclipse  occurred  with  the 
moon  at  the  epicycle’s  apogee  and  the  second  Avith  it  at  the  perigee,  and  there¬ 
fore  of  no  anomalistic  difference’s  having  resulted  as  he  thought.  But  he  is  mis¬ 
taken  first  to  this  extent  that,  since  an  appreciable  difference  results  from  the 
irregularity,  the  regular  passage  is  found  greater  than  the  true  by  an  amount  not 

^The  obscurity  here  is  cleared  up  by  Theo’s  Commentary.  If  the  latitudinal  number  falls 
only  in  the  second  Table,  we  carry  the  anomalistic  number  to  the  Table  of  Correction  as  be¬ 
fore;  but  we  take  the  number  of  sixtieths,  not  of  the  difference  which  does  not  exist  in  this 
second  case,  but  of  the  digits  and  fraction  of  immersion  found  in  the  second  Table.  In  the  first 
case,  we  added  the  result  to  the  digits  and  fraction  of  the  first  Table;  here  we  simply  take  that 
fraction  of  the  second  Table's  numbers.  This  method  is  valid  here  because,  for  a  latitudinal 
number  to  fall  only  in  the  second  Table,  the  anomahstic  number  must  lie  between  150  and 
210.  The  corresponding  fraction  for  such  numbers  must  lie  between  55/60  and  1.  Then  if  we 
let  a  represent  the  digits  or  immersion  at  the  least  distance  and  h  those  at  the  greatest,  by  the 
first  method  we  should  have  55/60  (a  —  h)  -f-  5  or  55/60  a  +  5/60  6;  and  by  the  second 
method  55/60a.  But  h  does  not  exist,  therefore  the  two  methods  give  the  same  resuU 


215 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

equal  in  the  two  eclipses.  But  in  the  first  it  is  by  very  nearly  1®  and  in  the  second 
1^®,  so  that  according  to  this  the  latitudinal  period  lacks  of  whole  returns 
where  the  moon^s  oblique  circle  is  360®. 

Next  he  did  not  calculate  the  difference  occurring  in  the  magnitudes  of  the 
obscurations  because  of  the  moon's  distances.  And  the  greatest  possible  of  these 
differences  occurred  in  the  case  of  these  eclipses  because  the  first  took  place  with. 
the  moon  at  its  greatest  distance,  and  the  second  vdth  it  at  its  least.  For  neces¬ 
sarily  the  obscuration  of  the  same  quarter  part  followed  at  a  less  distance  from 
the  ascending  node  at  the  first  eclipse  and  at  a  greater  at  the  second.  We  demon¬ 
strated  that  the  difference  between  them  amounts  to  Ij^®  [Tables  of  Lunar 
Eclipses],  so  that  in  this  case  the  latitudinal  period  added  just  that  much  to 
complete  returns.  Now  the  periodic  return  in  latitude  would  have  erred  by  the 
approximately  2®  of  both  mistakes  together  if  both  had  happened  to  involve  a 
difference  towards  the  greater  or  towards  the  less.  But  since,  by  happy  chance, 
the  one  makes  the  return  fail  of  completion  and  the  other  makes  it  exceed,  the 
result  obtained  appeared  greater  than  the  return  by  only  the  J^®  of  the  excess 
of  one  error  over  the  other. 

10.  Determination  of  Solar  Eclipses 

Now,  the  study  of  lunar  eclipses  would  proceed  soundly,  therefore,  only  in  the 
ways  we  have  described,  with  the  calculations  made  accurate.  But  next  we  shall 
make  a  determination  of  the  solar  eclipses — a  much  harder  thing  to  do  because 
of  the  moon's  parallaxes. 

First  we  look  up  the  time  of  the  true  conjunction  in  Alexandria  to  see  how 
many  equatorial  hours  before  or  after  midday  it  occurred.  Then,  if  the  supposed 
longitude  of  the  required  region  is  different — that  is,  if  its  meridian  is  not  the 
same  as  that  through  Alexandria — we  add  or  subtract  the  longitudinal  differ¬ 
ence  in  equatorial  hours  between  the  two  meridians.  And  since  we  know  how 
many  equatorial  hours  before  or  after  this  the  time  of  the  true  conjunction  fell, 
we  determine  first  the  time  of  the  apparent  conjunction  for  the  required  longi¬ 
tude,  which  will  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  the  middle  of  the  eclipse,  by  the 
method  of  parallaxes  already  explained.  For  we  take  out  of  the  Table  of  Angles 
and  the  Table  of  Parallaxes  its  parallax  first  along  the  great  circle  drawm  through 
the  zenith  and  the  moon's  centre  and  proper  to  the  latitude,  to  the  hour-interval 
from  the  meridian,  and  further  to  the  conjunctive  part  of  the  ecliptic,  and  in 
addition  to  the  moon's  distance.  Always  subtracting  from  this  the  sun's  parallax 
lying  in  the  same  row,  we  determine  within  the  remainder,  as  we  have  shown, 
by  means  of  the  angle  obtained  at  the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  great 
circle  through  the  zenith,  the  parallax  computed  vdth  respect  to  the  longitudinal 
passage  alone.  And  we  always  add  to  this  the  difference  of  added  parallax  cor¬ 
responding  to  the  equatorial  time  embraced  by  the  first,  that  is  of  the  excess, 
obtained  in  the  same  table,  between  the  two  parallaxes — one  corresponding  to 
the  first  interval  of  the  zenith,  and  the  other  to  the  interval  vdth  the  addition  of 
the  equatorial  time,  again  using  only  the  parts  belonging  to  the  longitudinal 
parallax  alone,  together  with  as  great  a  part  of  them  (if  it  is  sensible)  as  they  are 
of  the  first  parallax.^  And  to  the  degrees  of  the  whole  longitudinal  parallax  thus 

^First  the  moon’s  longitudinal  parallax  at  the  true  conjunction  is  computed.  The  problem 
is  to  find  the  length  of  time  to  the  apparent  conjunction.  The  moon  must  move  the  distance 
of  this  parallax  plus  the  difference  between  this  parallax  and  the  different  parallax  it  will  have 


216  PTOLEAIY 

combined  we  shall  again  add  H2  them  for  the  sun’s  movement,  and  we  shall 
reduce  the  result  to  equatorial  hours  by  dividing  by  the  degrees  of  the  moon’s 
irregular  hourly  courses  about  the  conjunction  (for  we  have  shown  above  how 
we  obtain  this  determination).  If  the  longitudinal  parallax  is  eastward,  we  sub¬ 
tract  the  degrees  we  reduced  to  equatorial  hours  from  the  moon’s  degrees  al¬ 
ready  determined  separately  for  longitude,  latitude,  and  anomaly  at  the  true 
time  of  the  conjunction,  and  we  shall  have  the  moon’s  true  passages  at  the  time 
of  the  apparent  conjunction.  And  we  shall  have  found  the  number  of  hours  by 
which  the  apparent  conjunction  precedes  the  true.  But  if  the  longitudinal  paral¬ 
lax  is  found  to  be  westward,  we  shall  then  add  the  degrees  to  the  passages  al¬ 
ready  determined  separately  for  longitude,  latitude,  and  anomaly  at  the  true 
time  of  the  conjunction;  and  we  shall  have  the  hours  by  which  the  apparent  con¬ 
junction  will  follow  the  true. 

Now  again,  by  the  same  methods,  we  look  to  see  first  how  great  a  parallax  the 
moon  displays  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  itself  and  the  zenith,  at  the 
apparent  conjunction’s  interval  of  equatorial  hours  from  the  meridian.  And  sub¬ 
tracting  from  the  number  of  degrees  found  the  sun’s  parallax  lying  in  the  row 
vdth  that  same  number,  we  determine  within  the  remainder  (like^\fise  by  means 
of  the  angle  found  for  that  time  at  the  intersection  of  the  circles)  the  latitudinal 
parallax  lying  along  the  circle  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic.  The  resulting  num¬ 
ber  of  degrees  we  change  to  the  corresponding  number  along  the  oblique  circle — 
that  is,  we  multiply  them  by  12.  And  if  the  latitudinal  parallax  is  effected  to  the 
north  of  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  add  the  product  to  the  latitudinal  passage  already 
determined  for  the  time  of  the  apparent  conjunction,  when  the  moon  is  about 
the  ascending  node;  but  we  subtract  it  likewise  when  it  is  about  the  descending 
node.  And  if  the  latitudinal  parallax  is  effected  to  the  south  of  the  ecliptic,  con¬ 
trariwise  we  subtract  the  degrees  resulting  from  the  parallax  from  the  degrees 
in  latitude  already  determined  at  the  time  of  the  apparent  conjunction,  when 
the  moon  is  about  the  ascending  node;  but  we  likewise  add  when  it  is  about  the 
descending  node.  Thus  we  shall  have  the  number  of  apparent  latitude  at  the 
time  of  the  apparent  conjunction.  And  carrying  this  to  the  Tables  of  Solar  Eclip¬ 
ses,  if  it  falls  in  the  numbers  of  the  first  two  columns,  we  shall  say  there  will  be 
an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  whose  mid-time  very  nearly  coincides  with  the  apparent 
conjunction.  Now  we  set  out  the  quantity  of  digits  lying  in  the  row  with  that 
number  of  apparent  latitude,  and  also  the  degrees  of  immersion  and  emersion 
separately  from  each  table.  And  we  carry  the  number  representing  the  degrees 
from  the  apogee  of  lunar  anomaly  to  the  Table  of  Correction.  And  taking  as 
many  sixtieths  of  each  excess  noted  down  as  lie  in  the  row  with  this  number, 
we  always  add  that  much  to  the  numbers  taken  from  the  first  Table.  By  this 
correction  we  shall  have  the  resulting  digits,  and  in  turn  for  that  many  twelfths 
of  the  sun’s  diameter  there  will  be  an  obscuration,  at  very  nearly  the  mid-eclipse. 
Again,  adding  to  the  degrees  of  each  passage  M2  them  for  the  sun’s  move¬ 
ment,  and  changing  this  sum  into  equatorial  hours  by  means  of  the  moon’s  ir¬ 
regular  movement,  we  shall  have  just  so  much  time  for  immersion  and  emersion 
each,  supposing  no  difference  occurs  for  that  time  because  of  the  parallaxes. 

But  since  there  is  a  sensible  inequality  about  these  times,  because  of  the 

when  it  has  moved  the  first  parallax;  and  so  on  in  an  unending  series.  The  approximation  is 
good  enough  after  the  first  or  second  time.  To  this,  of  course,  must  be  added  also  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun  during  this  time. 


217 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

moon’s  parallaxes  and  not  because  of  the  luminaries’  irregularity,  according  to 
which  both  the  immersions  and  emersions  predicted  turn  out  to  be  greater  and 
in  general  unequal  to  each  other,  we  shall  not  know  this,  even  if  it  happens  to  be 
small.  Now  this  circumstance  arises  from  there  always  being  in  the  moon’s  ap¬ 
parent  passage  certain  regressive  appearances  due  to  the  parallaxes,  as  if  it 
were  not  shifted  by  its  proper  movement  forward  to  the  east.  For  if  it  appears  to 
be  passing  before  the  meridian,  rising  little  by  little  and  displaying  a  continually 
shorter  parallax  eastward,  it  appears  to  move  more  slowl\"  forward  to  the  east. 
And  if  it  be  passing  beyond  the  meridian,  descending  now  little  by  little  and 
displaying  a  continually  longer  parallax  westward,  likewise  it  will  again  appear 
to  move  more  slowly  forward  to  the  east.  Now,  because  of  this,  the  aforesaid 
times  ^\dll  always  be  greater  than  those  taken  simply.  And  since  the  difference 
in  the  excesses  of  the  parallaxes  is  always  greater  in  the  passages  nearer  the 
meridian,  the  times  of  the  eclipses  near  the  meridian  are  fulfilled  more  slowly. 
For  this  reason,  whenever  the  mid-eclipse  falls  at  midday,  then  only  is  the  time 
of  immersion  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  emersion,  since  the  regressive  ap¬ 
pearance  due  to  the  parallaxes  happens  then  to  be  very  nearly  equal  on  either 
side.  But,  when  it  precedes  midday,  then  the  time  of  emersion  being  nearer  the 
meridian  becomes  greater;  and  when  it  follows  midday,  then  the  time  of  im¬ 
mersion  being  nearer  the  meridian  becomes  greater. 

Now,  in  order  to  make  this  correction  of  the  times,  we  shall  look,  in  the  way 
we  demonstrated,  for  the  time  worked  out  before  this  correction  for  each  of  the 
passages  set  out,  and  for  the  distance  from  the  zenith  at  the  mid-eclipse. 

For  example,  let  either  time  be  one  equatorial  hour  and  the  distance  from  the 
zenith  75°.  Now  we  shall  look  in  the  Parallactic  Table  for  the  sixtieths  of  paral¬ 
lax  corresponding  to  the  number  of  75°,  with  the  moon,  for  instance,  at  its 
greatest  distance,  at  which  distance  those  in  the  third  column  are  taken.  And 
we  find  52  sixtieths  corresponding  to  75°.  Since  both  the  time  of  immersion  and 
the  time  of  emersion  are  supposed  one  equatorial  hour  considered  in  mean 
terms,  or  15°  in  time,  therefore  subtracting  these  from  the  75°  of  the  distance, 
we  find,  in  the  same  column,  47  sixtieths  of  parallax  corresponding  to  the  re¬ 
maining  60°,  so  that  at  the  mid-passage  near  the  meridian  there  results  from  the 
parallax  a  regression  of  5  sixtieths.  Now  adding  these  to  the  75°  we  find  in  the 
same  column,  corresponding  to  the  sum  of  90°,  the  533^  sixtieths  of  the  whole 
parallax,  so  that  here  the  regression  of  the  passage  near  the  horizon  comes  to 
13^  sixtieths.  Now  taking  from  these  differences  the  correspondences  in  longi¬ 
tude,  and  reducing  each  in  turn  to  a  part  of  an  equatorial  hour  by  means  of  the 
moon’s  irregular  movement,  as  sho^^^l,  we  shall  add  the  result  from  each,  proper¬ 
ly  to  each  of  the  times  taken  in  mean  and  simple  terms,  the  greater  to  the  time 
at  the  passage  nearer  the  meridian  and  the  less  to  the  time  at  the  passage  nearer 
the  horizon.  And  it  is  clear  that  the  difference  of  these  times  was  33^  sixtieths  or 
very  nearly  of  one  equatorial  hour,  for  the  moon  will  move  just  that  many 
sixtieths  of  mean  movement  in  that  much  time.  There  is  then  left  the  easy  task, 
if  we  wish,  of  reducing  the  equatorial  hours  for  each  interval  to  the  particular 
seasonal  hours  in  the  way  we  have  already  sho^^ll  above. 

11.  On  the  Directions  in  the  Eclipses 

The  examination  of  the  directions  of  the  obscurations  comes  next.  And  this 
studj^  is  established  both  from  the  direction  of  the  obscurations  with  respect  to 


218  PTOLEMY 

the  ecliptic,  and  from  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  to  the  horizon.  Either  of 
these  in  each  of  the  ecliptic  times  would  suffer  the  greatest  indefinite  variation 
at  the  shifts  if  one  wished  to  work  out  the  inclinations  which  would  take  place 
during  the  whole  time;  but  such  prediction  is  neither  necessary  nor  useful.  For 
the  ecliptic’s  configuration  relative  to  the  horizon  is  considered  from  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  its  rising  and  setting  points  at  the  horizon;  and  necessarily  throughout 
the  time  of  the  eclipse,  as  different  parts  of  the  ecliptic  become  continuously 
rising  and  setting,  the  sections  of  the  horizon  bounded  by  them  become  con¬ 
tinuously  different.  Likewise  the  inclination  of  the  obscurations  relative  to  the 
ecliptic  is  considered  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  both  centres,  the 
moon’s  and  the  sun’s  or  shadow’s ;  and  again  necessarily,  throughout  the  passage 
of  the  moon’s  centre  at  the  time  of  the  eclipse,  the  circle  drawn  through  both 
centres  also  takes  a  position  continuously  other  relative  to  the  ecliptic  and 
makes  the  angles  contained  by  their  intersection  continuously  unequal. 

Now,  since  this  examination  will  be  sufficient  if  it  is  taken  for  only  the  ob¬ 
scurations  having  some  significance  and  more  generally  for  the  arcs  considered 
relative  to  the  horizon,  it  will  be  possible  for  those  appraising  the  situation  with 
their  eyes  to  estimate  immediately  the  particular  directions  by  attending  to  both 
inclinations.  For,  as  we  said,  in  these  matters  a  general  judgment  is  sufficient. 
Yet,  not  to  pass  over  this  subject  entirely,  we  shall  try  to  expound  ways  as  easy 
as  possible  for  getting  at  this. 

Of  the  obscurations,  we  have  chosen  as  significant  markings  that  of  the  first 
part  eclipsed,  which  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  whole  time  of  eclipse;  that 
of  the  last  part  eclipsed,  which  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  time  of  delay;  that 
of  the  greatest  part  eclipsed,  which  occurs  at  the  mid-eclipse  without  the  delay; 
that  of  the  first  part  restored,  which  occurs  at  the  end  of  the  whole  time  of  delay; 
and  that  of  the  last  part  restored  which  occurs  at  the  end  of  the  whole  time  of 
eclipse.  And  of  the  directions  we  have  chosen  again,  as  the  more  reasonable  and 
expressible,  those  defined  by  the  meridian  and  by  the  risings  and  settings  of  the 
ecliptic’s  equinoxial  and  tropic  points.  For  the  principle  of  directions  could  be 
differently  understood  by  many  people  at  many  times,  and  could,  if  one  wished, 
be  designated  by  the  given  angles  of  the  horizon.  Now  of  the  intersections  of  the 
meridian  with  the  horizon,  let  us  understand  by  apKTOL  the  northern,  and  by 
pear} jjifip Los  the  southern;  and  of  the  rising  and  setting  intersections,  let  us  under¬ 
stand  by  equatorial  rising  and  setting  those  intersections  made  with  the  horizon 
by  the  beginning  of  the  Ram  and  of  the  Balance  and  which  are  always  an  equal 
quadrant  from  those  produced  at  the  meridian;  by  summer  rising  and  setting, 
those  made  by  the  beginning  of  the  Crab;  and,  by  winter  rising  and  setting, 
those  made  by  the  beginning  of  the  Goat.  These  intervals  are  different  according 
to  latitude,  and  the  determination  of  the  directions  is  sufficient  when  they  have 
been  shown  to  be  either  at  or  between  these  limits. 

Therefore,  to  have  every  configuration  of  the  ecliptic  with  the  horizon,  we  cal¬ 
culated  (in  the  first  part  of  the  Composition  as  already  shown)  the  intervals 
produced  on  the  horizon  at  risings  and  settings  by  the  beginning  of  each  one  of 
the  dodecatemories  either  side  of  the  intersections  produced  by  the  equator  and 
for  each  latitude  from  the  Borysthenes  to  Meroe  for  which  we  laid  out  the 
angles.  And,  for  an  easy  understanding,  we  have  drawn,  instead  of  a  table,  8 
concentric  circles  conceived  in  the  horizon’s  plane  and  containing  the  intervals 
and  names  of  the  7  latitudes.  Then,  drawing  two  straight  lines  through  all  the 


219 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

circles  at  right  angles  to  each  other — ^the  horizontal  one  as  the  common  section 
of  the  planes  of  the  horizon  and  equator,  and  the  vertical  one  as  the  common 
section  of  the  planes  of  the  horizon  and  meridian — we  have  designated  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  the  horizontal  line  at  the  outside  circles  as  equatorial  rising  and 
equatorial  setting;  and  of  the  vertical  line  as  north  and  south.  Likewise  we  have 
dra^vn  straight  lines  at  equal  intervals  on  either  side  of  the  equatorial  line  and 
again  through  all  the  circles,  and  we  have  placed  on  the  lines  within  the  seven 
intervals  the  distances,  found  for  each  latitude,  of  the  tropic  points  from  the 
equator  along  the  horizon,  a  quadrant  being  90"^.  On  those  at  the  inner  extremi¬ 
ties  of  the  circles  we  have  placed,  to  the  south,  winter  rising  and  winter  setting; 
and  to  the  north,  summer  rising  and  summer  setting.  For  the  intervening  do- 
decatemories  (further  inserting,  within  each  of  the  four  intervals,  two  other 
lines)  we  have  placed  on  these  also  the  distances  along  the  horizon  from  the 
equator  for  the  particular  dodecatemories,  with  the  name  of  each  written  at  the 
outside  circle.  And  about  the  meridian  line  we  have  indicated  the  names  of  the 
parallels,  the  hourly  magnitudes,  and  the  heights  of  the  pole,  making  the  list  in 
order  of  northerliness  from  the  greater  and  encompassing  circle. 

In  order  that  we  may  also  have  set  out  the  apparent  directions  of  the  ob¬ 
scurations  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic  (that  is,  the  angles  produced  at  each  of 
the  aforesaid  markings  by  the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  great  circle 
through  both  the  centres  indicated),  we  calculated  them  for  each  of  the  moon’s 
passages  for  differences  of  1  digit  of  obscuration,  and  only  for  those  at  the  mean 
distance  as  being  sufficient.  And  it  is  supposed  the  arcs  of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the 
moon’s  oblique  circle  are  sensibly  parallel  in  the  obscurations. 

For,  again  as  an  example,  let  there  be  the  straight  line  AB  in  place  of  the 

_ ___B  ecliptic’s  arc,  and  on  it  let  A  be  supposed  the 

^  — —  centre  of  the  sun  or  shadow.  And  let  there  be 

the  straight  line  CDE  in  place  of  the  arc  of  the 
moon’s  oblique  circle.  And  let  C  be  the  point 
Nv  where  the  moon’s  centre  lies  at  mid-eclipse;  D 

the  point  where  again  its  centre  will  be  when 
the  whole  moon  is  first  eclipsed  or  first  begins 
\ to  be  restored  (that  is,  when  it  touches  the 
^  shadow’s  circle  from  within) ;  and  E  the  point 
where  its  centre  lies  when  either  the  sun  or 
moon  first  begins  to  be  eclipsed  or  finishes 
being  restored — that  is,  when  the  circles  touch  each  other  from  without.  And 
let  AC,  AD,  and  AE  be  joined. 

Now,  it  is  evident  that  the  angles  BAC  and  AGE  embracing  the  mid-eclipses 
are  sensibly  right,  that  angle  BAE  contains  that  at  the  first  part  eclipsed  and 
the  last  part  restored,  and  that  angle  BAD  contains  that  at  the  last  part  eclipsed 
and  the  first  part  restored.  It  is  also  immediately  clear  that  the  line  AE  em¬ 
braces  the  radii  of  both  circles,  and  AD  their  difference. 

Now  as  an  example,  let  the  eclipse  be  supposed  one  in  which  at  the  middle  the 
half  of  the  sun’s  diameter  will  be  obscured.  And  let  A  be  the  sun’s  centre,  so 
that,  by  supposing  the  moon  at  its  mean  distance, 

AD  =  32^20'; 

and,  since  it  is  less  by  half  the  sun’s  diameter, 

AC=  16^40'. 


220 


PTOLEMY 


Since,  then,  according  to  the  given  magnitude  of  the  obscuration, 

AC  =  16^40' 


where 


therefore 

where 


hypt.  AJ5  =  32p20', 
AC  =  6lP51' 


hypt.  A£7=120p; 

and,  where  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ACE  is  360®, 

arc  AC  =  62°2'. 


And  so  also 


angle  =  angle  AEC 
=  62®2'  to  2  rt. 

=  31®!'. 

Again,  for  the  lunar  eclipses,  let  A  be  the  shadow's  centre,  so  that,  since  the 
moon's  mean's  distance  is  likewise  supposed,  always 

AE  =  m^, 

and  likewise 


AZ)  =  26^40'. 


And  let  the  moon  be  eclipsed  to  18  digits,  so  that  again  AC  is  less  than  AD  by 
half  the  diameter,  and  by  subtraction 

AC=10p. 


Since,  then. 


AC  =  20p 


where 


hypt.  A^^=  120p, 

and,  where  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ACE  is  360®, 

arc  AC=19°12'; 


therefore 


And,  likewise,  since 


angle  jBAJ5/  =  angle  A£'C 

=  19®12'  to2rt. 
=  9®36'. 


AC  =  45P 


where 


hypt.  AZ)  =  120p, 

and,  where  the  circle  about  right  triangle  A  CD  is  360®, 

arc  AC  =  44®2'; 


therefore 


angle  DAD  =  angle  ADC 
=  44®2'  to  2  rt. 
=  22®1'. 


Then,  in  the  same  way,  in  the  case  of  the  other  digits  taking  the  sizes  of  the 
angles  less  than  a  right  angle  which  is  90®  (and  which  is  also  what  a  quadrant  of 
the  horizon  is  taken  to  be),  we  arranged  a  table  in  22  rows  and  4  columns.  The 
first  column  contains  the  digits  of  the  diameter's  obscuration  found  at  the  mid¬ 
eclipse;  the  second  contains  the  angles  produced  in  solar  eclipses  at  the  time  of 
the  first  part  eclipsed  and  the  last  part  restored;  the  third  contains  the  angles 
produced  in  lunar  eclipses  at  the  time  of  the  first  part  eclipsed  and  the  last  part 


221 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VI 

restored;  and  the  fourth  contains  the  angles  produced,  again  in  lunar  eclipses  at 
the  time  of  the  last  part  eclipsed  and  the  first  part  restored.  And  here  are  the 
diagrams  of  the  table  and  of  the  circles: 


12.  Exposition  of  the  Diagrams  for  the  Directions 


1 

2 

3 

4 

Sun^s 

Moon'S 

First  Point  of 

First  Point  of 

Last  Point  of 

Eclipse  and  Last 

Eclipse  and  Last 

Eclipse  and  First 

Digits 

Point  of  Emersion 

Point  of  Emersion 

Point  of  Emersion 

0 

90 

0 

90 

0 

1 

66 

50 

72 

30 

2 

56 

59 

65 

10 

> 

3 

49 

16 

59 

27 

4 

42 

36 

54 

27 

5 

36 

35 

50 

14 

6 

31 

1 

46 

15 

7 

25 

46 

42 

31 

8 

20 

44 

39 

2 

9 

15 

51 

35 

42 

10 

11 

6 

32 

29 

11 

6 

25 

29 

23 

12 

1 

47 

26 

23 

90 

0 

13 

23 

28 

63 

37 

14 

20 

36 

52 

24 

15 

17 

48 

43 

26 

16 

15 

1 

35 

41 

17 

12 

18 

28 

38 

18 

9 

36 

22 

1 

19 

6 

55 

15 

43 

20 

4 

15 

9 

36 

21 

1 

36 

3 

35 

13.  Determination  of  Directions 

We  now  have  in  our  hands,  already  determined  in  the  way  we  showed,  the 
times  of  each  of  the  given  markings;  from  the  times,  of  course,  the  ecliptic^s  ris¬ 
ing  and  setting  parts  at  those  times;  and  from  the  figure,  their  positions  on  the 
horizon.  And  whenever  the  moon^s  centre  (either  the  apparent  as  for  the  solar 
eclipses,  or  the  true  as  for  the  lunar)  is  on  the  ecliptic,  we  shall  have,  from  the 
horizon-position  of  the  part  then  setting,  the  direction  of  the  sun’s  first  part 
eclipsed  and,  further,  the  direction  at  the  moon’s  last  part  eclipsed  and  restored. 
Moreover,  from  the  horizon-position  of  the  part  then  rising,  we  shall  have  the 
direction  of  the  sun’s  last  part  restored  and,  further,  the  direction  of  the  moon’s 
first  part  eclipsed  and  restored. 

But  whenever  the  moon’s  centre  is  not  on  the  ecliptic,  we  take  the  numbers  of 
the  angles  lying  in  the  same  row  and  proper  to  the  number  of  digits,  counting 
them  from  the  common  sections  of  the  horizon  and  ecliptic.  If  the  moon’s  centre 
is  north  of  the  ecliptic,  for  the  sun’s  first  part  eclipsed  and  for  the  moon’s  last 


NORTH 


222 


PTOLEMY 


QtGREES  OF  RlSISlc 


Balonce  Ram 


CA 

O 


c 

-* 

X 


part  eclipsed,  we  count  them  northward  from  the  setting  intersection;  for  the 
sun's  last  part  restored  and  the  moon's  first  part  restored,  northward  from  the 
rising  intersection;  and  again,  for  the  moon's  first  part  eclipsed,  southward  from 
the  rising  intersection,  and,  for  the  moon's  last  part  restored,  southward  from 
the  setting  intersection.  And  if  the  moon's  centre  is  south  of  the  ecliptic,  for  the 
sun's  first  part  eclipsed  and  the  moon's  last  part  eclipsed,  we  count  them  south¬ 
ward  from  the  setting  intersection;  for  the  sun's  last  part  restored  and  the 
moon's  first  part  restored,  southward  from  the  rising  intersection;  and  again, 
for  the  moon's  first  part  eclipsed,  northward  from  the  rising  intersection,  and, 
for  the  moon's  last  part  restored,  northward  from  the  setting  intersection.  We 
shall  thus  have,  established  from  this  correction,  that  part  of  the  horizon  in  gen¬ 
eral  to  which  are  directed  the  parts  of  the  luminaries  receiving  the  first  and  last 
markings  of  the  eclipses  and  restorations. 


BOOK  SEVEN 


1.  That  the  Fixed  Stars  Always  Keep  the  Same  Position 
WITH  Respect  to  Each  Other 

So  far  in  this  treatise,  Syrus,  we  have  gone  through  the  accidents  relative  to 
the  right  and  oblique  sphere,  and  then  those  relative  to  the  hypotheses  of  the 
movements  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  of  the  configurations  considered  according 
to  those  movements.  Now,  for  the  theory  to  follow,  we  shall  begin  a  discussion 
of  the  stars — and  first,  naturally,  of  those  called  fixed. 

This  must  first  of  all  be  understood:  that,  as  far  as  this  term  is  concerned,  be¬ 
cause  the  stars  always  appear  to  keep  similar  figures  and  equal  distances  with 
respect  to  each  other,  we  would  do  well  to  call  them  “fixed.”  But,  because  the 
whole  sphere  of  them,  on  which  they  hang  (as  it  were)  and  revolve,  appears  it¬ 
self  to  move  eastward  toward  the  prime  movement’s  rising  with  a  proper  ordered 
motion,  it  would  not  be  right  to  call  that  sphere  “fixed.”  For  we  find  both  of 
these  views  to  be  true,  judging  from  the  results  of  a  great  stretch  of  time.  And 
Hipparchus  first,  from  the  appearances  he  had,  suspected  both  of  these  things; 
but  for  the  most  part  conjectured  rather  than  affirmed  them  because  of  the  very 
few  observations  on  the  fixed  stars  that  had  been  made  before  him,  which  were 
only  those  recorded  by  Aristyllus  and  Timocharis  and  which  were  uncertain  and 
not  worked  over.  And  we,  from  a  comparison  of  what  is  observed  now  with  what 
was  observed  then,  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion,  but  more  sure  because 
the  examination  has  taken  place  over  a  longer  time,  and  because  Hipparchus’ 
own  laborious  records  concerning  the  fixed  stars  (with  respect  to  which  we,  for 
the  most  part,  made  the  comparisons)  have  been  furnished  us. 

If  the  present  appearances  agree  with  the  records  of  Hipparchus,  then  it 
would  be  clear  to  anyone  wishing  to  pursue  the  investigation  and  truthfully 
examine,  that  no  change  has  hitherto  taken  place  in  their  position  with  respect 
to  each  other,  but  the  configurations  observed  by  Hipparchus  are  seen  to  be 
absolutely  the  same  now.  This  is  true  not  only  of  those  inside  the  zodiac  with 
respect  to  each  other  or  those  outside  (which  would  be  the  case  if,  as  Hipparchus 
first  supposed,  only  those  stars  around  the  zodiac  made  an  eastward  change  in 
the  order  of  the  signs)  but  also  of  those  inside  with  respect  to  those  outside  and 
far  off. 

And  we  shall  now  set  out  here,  for  an  easy  test,  a  few  of  the  records  which  can 
be  most  readily  grasped  and  which  can  bring  to  view  the  complete  comparison 
by  which  it  is  shown  that  the  observed  configurations  contained  by  those  out¬ 
side  are  the  same  with  respect  to  each  other  and  those  inside  the  zodiac. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Crab,  he  writes  that  the  star  in  the  southern 
claw  of  the  Crab,  the  bright  star  west  of  this  and  of  the  head  of  the  Water  Snake 
[Hydra],  and  the  bright  star  among  those  in  the  Little  Dog  [Procyon]  are  very 
nearly  on  the  same  straight  line.  For  the  middle  one  lies  to  the  north  and  east 


223 


224  PTOLEMY 

of  the  straight  line  between  the  ends  of  13^  digit,  and  the  distances  between  are 
equal. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Lion,  he  writes  that,  of  the  four  in  the  Lion^s 
head,  the  eastern  two  and  the  one  at  the  beginning  of  the  Water  Snake^s  neck 
are  on  the  same  straight  line;  and  again,  that  the  straight  line  dra^ra  through 
the  Lion^s  tail  and  the  star  at  the  tip  of  the  Beards  tail  leaves  the  bright  star 
under  the  Bear’s  tail  1  digit  to  the  west ;  likewise  that  the  straight  line  through 
the  star  under  the  Bear’s  tail  and  through  the  Lion’s  tail  joins  the  western  stars 
in  Berenice’s  Hair. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Virgin,  he  says  that,  between  the  Virgin’s 
northern  foot  and  the  Ploughman’s  [Bootes]  right  foot,  lie  two  stars  of  which 
the  southern  and  bright  one  (like  that  in  the  Ploughman’s  foot)  lies  west  of  the 
straight  line  through  the  feet,  and  the  northern  and  half  bright  one  is  on  a 
straight  line  with  the  feet.  He  further  says  that,  west  of  the  half  bright  one  of 
these  two,  there  are  two  bright  ones  making  with  it  an  isosceles  triangle  whose 
vertex  is  the  half  bright  one;  and  they  are  on  a  straight  line  with  Arcturus  and 
the  Virgin’s  southern  foot.  Again,  he  says  that  between  Spica  and  the  second 
from  the  end  of  the  Water  Snake’s  tail  lie  three  stars  in  a  straight  line  with  one 
another;  and  the  middle  one  of  these  is  in  a  straight  line  with  Spica  and  the 
second  star  from  the  end  of  the  Water  Snake’s  tail. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Balance  [Le.,  the  claws  of  the  Scorpion],  he  says 
that  very  nearly  in  a  straight  line  with  the  bright  stars  of  the  Balance,  to  the 
north,  is  a  bright  triple  star.  For  on  each  side  of  it  lies  a  small  one. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  of  the  Scorpion,  he  says  that  the  straight  line  drawn 
through  the  eastern  one  in  the  center  of  the  Scorpion  and  through  the  right  knee 
of  Serpentarius  bisects  the  distance  between  the  western  stars  in  the  right  foot 
of  Serpentarius.  He  also  says  that  the  fifth  and  seventh  joints  are  in  a  straight 
line  with  the  bright  star  in  the  middle  of  the  Censer  [Ara] ;  moreover,  that  the 
more  northern  of  those  in  the  Censer’s  base  is  almost  in  a  straight  line  with  the 
fifth  joint  and  the  star  in  the  middle  of  the  Censer,  being  nearly  equidistant 
from  both. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Archer,  he  says  that  in  the  Circle  [Southern 
Crown]  under  the  Archer  toward  the  east  lie  two  bright  stars  about  three  cubits 
from  each  other;  moreover,  that  the  more  southern  and  brighter,  in  the  Archer’s 
foot,  is  very  nearly  in  a  straight  line  with  the  middle  star  of  those  three  bright 
ones  in  the  Circle  lying  eastward  and  with  the  eastern  star  of  the  opposite 
bright  ones  in  the  Quadrilateral;  and  the  two  distances  between  them  are  equal. 
The  northern  one  of  them  is  off  the  straight  line  to  the  east,  but  is  in  a  straight 
line  with  the  bright  and  opposite  ones  in  the  Quadrilateral. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Water  Bearer,  he  says  that  the  two  consecutive 
stars  in  the  Horse’s  head  and  the  eastern  shoulder  of  the  Water  Bearer  are  very 
nearly  in  a  straight  line,  to  which  is  parallel  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the 
western  shoulder  of  the  Water  Bearer  to  the  star  in  the  Horse’s  jaws.  And  again 
he  says  that  the  Water  Bearer’s  western  shoulder  and  the  bright  star  of  the  two 
in  the  Horse’s  [Pegasus]  throat  and  the  star  in  the  horse’s  navel  are  in  a  straight 
line,  and  the  distances  equal;  and  that  the  straight  line  through  the  Horse’s 
muzzle  and  through  the  eastern  star  of  the  four  in  the  Urn  very  nearly  bisects  at 
right  angles  the  straight  line  between  the  two  consecutive  stars  in  the  Horse’s 
head. 


225 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Fishes,  he  says  that  the  star  in  the  mouth  of  the 
southern  Fish,  the  bright  star  in  the  Horse's  shoulders,  and  the  bright  star  in  his 
breast  are  in  a  straight  line. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Ram,  he  says  that  the  western  star  of  the  Tri¬ 
angle's  base  lies  one  digit  east  of  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  star  in  the 
Ram's  jaw  and  the  left  foot  of  Andromeda;  and  also  that  the  western  stars  in 
the  Ram's  head  and  the  midpoint  of  the  Triangle's  base  are  in  a  straight  line. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Bull,  he  says  that  the  eastern  stars  of  the  Hyades 
and  the  sixth  star,  counting  from  the  south,  of  the  hide  which  Orion  holds  in  his 
left  hand  are  in  a  straight  line;  and  that  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the 
Bull's  western  eye  and  the  seventh  from  the  south  of  those  in  the  hide  leaves  the 
bright  star  of  the  Hyades  a  digit  to  the  north. 

In  the  case  of  the  stars  in  the  Tvdns,  he  says  that  in  a  straight  fine  with  the 
Twin's  heads  there  is  a  star  east  of  the  eastern  head  by  a  distance  three  times 
that  between  the  heads,  and  that  this  same  star  is  in  a  straight  line  with  the 
more  southern  of  those  about  the  little  nebula. 

Now,  in  these  and  similar  configurations  affording  a  comparison  for  nearly 
the  whole  sphere  we  see  nothing  changed  up  to  now.  And  such  a  change  would 
have  been  certainly  sensible  in  the  intervening  two  hundred  and  sixty  years  if 
only  those  stars  about  the  ecliptic  had  made  a  movement  to  the  east. 

In  order  that  those  after  us  may  make  a  comparison  over  a  longer  time  from 
more  configurations  of  the  same  kind,  beginning  with  the  stars  in  the  Ram,  we 
shall  also  set  out  those  configurations  most  easily  grasped  of  all  those  not  given 
in  the  older  record  but  obtained  by  us. 

Now,  of  the  three  stars  in  the  Ram's  head  the  more  northern  two,  the  bright 
one  in  the  southern  knee  of  Perseus  and  the  star  called  Capella  are  in  a  straight 
line.  Again  the  straight  line  joining  Capella  and  the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades 
[Aldebaran]  leaves  a  little  to  the  east  the  star  in  the  Charioteer's  [Auriga]  west¬ 
ern  foot.  And  Capella,  and  the  star  common  to  the  Charioteer's  eastern  foot  and 
the  northern  end  of  the  Bull's  horns,  and  the  star  in  Orion's  western  shoulder 
are  in  a  straight  line.  Again,  the  bright  stars  in  the  Tuvins'  heads  and  the  bright 
star  in  the  Water  Snake's  throat  are  very  nearly  in  a  straight  line.  Yet  again, 
the  two  consecutive  stars  in  the  Bear's  forefoot,  the  star  at  the  top  of  the  Scor¬ 
pion's  northern  claw,  and  the  more  southern  of  the  Asses  are  in  a  straight  line. 
Likewise  the  southern  Ass,  the  bright  star  in  the  Little  Dog  [Procyon],  and  the 
bright  star  between  them,  west  of  the  Water  Snake's  head,  are  very  nearly  in  a 
straight  line.  Furthermore,  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  middle  star  of  the 
bright  ones  in  the  Lion's  throat  to  the  bright  star  in  the  Water  Snake  leaves  the 
star  of  the  Lion's  heart  a  little  to  the  east.  The  straight  line  from  the  bright  star 
in  the  Lion's  loin  to  the  bright  star  in  the  back  of  the  Bear's  thigh,  which  is  south 
of  the  eastern  side  of  the  quadrilateral,  leaves  a  little  to  the  west  the  two  con¬ 
secutive  stars  in  the  Bear's  eastern  foot.  Again,  the  straight  line  from  the  star 
in  the  back  of  the  Virgin's  thigh  to  the  second  star  from  the  end  of  the  Water 
Snake's  tail  leaves  a  bit  to  the  west  the  star  called  Spica.  The  straight  line  from 
Spica  to  the  star  in  the  Ploughman's  head  leaves  Arcturus  a  bit  to  the  east, 
^pica  and  the  stars  on  the  Raven's  wings  are  in  a  straight  line.  Spica,  the  star 
in  the  back  of  the  Virgin's  thigh,  and  the  bright  northern  star  in  the  Plough¬ 
man's  western  calf  are  in  a  straight  line.  Again,  the  bright  stars  in  the  Balance 
and  the  star  at  the  tip  of  the  Water  Snake's  tail  are  very  nearly  in  a  straight 


226  PTOLEMY 

line.  The  bright  star  in  the  southern  Claw,  Arcturus,  and  the  middle  star  of  the 
three  in  the  Big  Beards  tail  are  in  a  straight  line.  The  bright  star  in  the  northern 
Claw,  Arcturus,  and  the  star  in  the  back  of  the  Beards  thigh  are  in  a  straight  line. 
Again  the  star  on  the  eastern  shin  of  Scrpentarius,  the  star  in  the  Scorpion^s 
fifth  joint,  and  the  western  star  of  the  two  consecutive  ones  in  its  centre  are  in  a 
straight  line.  The  western  star  of  the  three  in  the  Scorpion^s  breast  and  the  two 
in  Serpentarius^  knees  makes  an  isosceles  triangle,  whose  vertex  is  the  western 
star  of  the  three  in  the  breast.  Again,  the  star  on  the  Archer^s  southern  and 
forward  ankle  and  of  second  magnitude,  the  star  on  the  barb,  and  the  star  in 
Serpentarius^  eastern  knee  are  in  a  straight  line.  The  star  in  the  knee  of  the 
Archer’s  same  foot,  near  the  Crown,  the  star  on  the  barb,  and  the  star  in  Ser- 
pentarius’  western  knee  are  in  a  straight  line.  Again,  the  straight  line  joined 
from  the  bright  star  [Vega]  in  the  Lyre  to  the  star  in  the  Goat’s  [Capricorn] 
horns  leaves  a  little  to  the  east  the  bright  star  in  the  Eagle  [Aquila].  The  straight 
line  from  the  bright  star  in  the  Eagle  to  the  star  of  the  first  magnitude  in  the 
mouth  of  the  southern  Fish  nearly  bisects  the  distance  between  the  two  bright 
stars  in  the  Goat’s  tail.  Moreover,  the  straight  line  from  the  star  of  the  first 
magnitude  in  the  mouth  of  the  southern  Fish  to  the  star  in  the  Horse’s  muzzle 
leaves  a  little  to  the  east  the  bright  star  in  the  Water  Bearer’s  eastern  shoulder. 
Again,  the  stars  in  the  mouths  of  the  two  southern  Fishes  and  the  western  stars 
of  the  square  in  the  Horse  are  in  a  straight  line. 

And  finally,  if  one  should  compare  these  configurations  with  those  of  the  con¬ 
stellations  on  Hipparchus’  solid  sphere,  he  would  find  the  positions  gotten  by 
the  observations  of  that  time  and  recorded  on  the  sphere  to  be  very  nearly  the 
same  as  those  gotten  now. 

2.  That  the  Sphere  of  the  Fixed  Stars  Makes  a  Movement 
Eastward  on  the  Ecliptic 

By  means  of  the  foregoing  and  similar  comparisons  we  can  show  that  the  re¬ 
lation  and  movement  of  the  so-called  fixed  stars  is  one  and  the  same.  And  that 
their  sphere  makes  its  own  proper  movement  in  the  direction  contrary  to  the 
motion  of  the  whole — that  is,  eastward  in  the  order  of  the  signs  from  the  great 
circle  drawn  through  both  sets  of  poles,  those  of  the  equator  and  those  of  the 
ecliptic — becomes  evident  to  us  especially  through  the  fact  that  the  same  stars 
do  not  keep  the  same  distances  formerly  and  in  our  time  with  respect  to  the 
tropic  and  equinoctial  points,  but  are  always  found  in  later  times  to  be  a  greater 
distance  eastward  than  the  first  from  those  same  points. 

For  Hipparchus,  in  his  treatise  On  the  Precession  of  the  Tropic  and  Equinoctial 
Points,  compares  the  lunar  eclipses  from  those  carefully  observed  by  him  and 
from  those  observed  earlier  by  Timocharis,  and  he  calculates  that  Spica  is  6° 
west  of  the  autumn  equinox  in  his  time,  but  very  nearly  8°  in  the  time  of 
Timocharis.  Finally  he  says  this:  ^Tf  then,  for  example,  Spica  was  formerly  8°  in 
longitude  west  of  the  fall  equinox,  and  is  now  G°  west”  and  so  forth.  And  simi¬ 
larly,  in  the  case  of  the  other  planets  of  which  he  made  a  comparison,  he  shows 
just  about  the  same  eastward  shift  accomplished.  And  we,  comparing  the  ap¬ 
parent  distances  of  the  fixed  stars  relative  to  the  tropic  and  equinoctial  points, 
in  our  time  with  those  observed  and  recorded  by  Hipparchus,  find  their  shift 
eastward  along  the  ecliptic  the  same  proportionately  to  the  foregoing  one.  This 
research  we  have  made  by  means  of  the  instrument  we  prepared  for  the  obser- 


227 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 

vation  of  the  moon^s  particular  elongations  from  the  sun,  placing  one  circle  of 
the  astrolabe  at  the  moon^s  apparent  passage  falling  at  the  hour  of  the  observa¬ 
tion,  and  carrying  the  other  circle  to  the  star  being  sighted  so  that  the  moon  and 
star  may  be  sighted  together  in  their  proper  places.  And  thus,  from  its  distance 
to  the  moon,  we  get  the  position  of  each  one  of  the  bright  stars. 

For  one  example,  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Eg^’ptianwise  Pharmouthi  9,  as 
the  sun  was  about  to  set  in  Alexandria  and  the  last  section  of  the  Bull  was  cul¬ 
minating  (that  is,  53^  equatorial  hours  after  noon  of  the  ninth)  we  observed  the 
apparent  moon  to  be  923^°  from  the  sun  which  was  sighted  about  3°  within  the 
Fishes.  And  a  half  hour  after  the  sun  had  set,  with  the  first  quarter  of  the  Twins 
culminating  and  the  apparent  moon  sighted  in  the  same  position  as  before,  the 
star  in  the  Lion's  heart  [Regulus]  appeared,  with  the  aid  of  the  other  circle  of 
the  astrolabe,  to  be  573^®  from  the  moon  eastward  along  the  ecliptic.  But  in  the 
first  observation  the  sun's  true  position  was  very  nearly  3^0°  within  the  Fishes, 
so  that  the  apparent  moon  was  then  a  distance  of  923^°  eastward  or  very  nearly 
53^°  within  the  Twins,  where,  according  to  our  hypotheses,  it  should  have  been. 
A  half  hour  later,  the  moon  must  have  moved  eastward  very  nearly  and 
have  displayed  a  westward  parallax  of  very  nearly  3^2°  at  the  first  position. 
Therefore  the  half  hour  after  the  apparent  moon  was  53^°  within  the  Twins,  so 
that  the  star  in  the  heart  (since  it  appeared  to  be  573^°  eastward  from  it)  was 
situated  2]/2°  within  the  Lion,  and  was  a  distance  of  323^°  from  the  summer 
tropic. 

But  in  the  year  50  of  the  Third  Callippic  Period,  as  Hipparchus  observes  and 
records,  it  [Regulus]  was  then  (29 +3^ +3^)®  eastward  from  the  same  summer 
tropic  point.  Therefore,  the  star  in  the  Lion's  heart  had  shifted  eastward  along 
the  ecliptic  2%°  in  the  years  from  Hipparchus'  observation  to  the  beginning  of 
Antonine's  reign  when  we  observed  most  of  the  passages  of  the  fixed  stars,  a 
period  which  comes  to  about  265  years.  And  so  from  this  it  is  found  that  there  is 
an  eastward  shift  of  1°  in  very  nearly  100  years,  as  Hipparchus  seems  to  have 
guessed  when  he  says  his  treatise  On  the  Magnitude  of  the  Solar  Year:  ‘Tf  for  this 
cause  the  tropics  and  equinoxes  shifted  westward  not  less  than  3^oo°  hi  a  year, 
then  they  would  have  to  shift  not  less  than  3°  in  300  years."  And  having  sighted 
Spica  and  the  brightest  stars  about  the  ecliptic  in  their  distance  from  the  moon 
in  this  same  way,  then  finally  from  these  more  accessible  ones  the  other  also,  we 
find  their  distances  with  respect  to  each  other  very  nearly  the  same  as  those 
observed  by  Hipparchus  but  their  distances  with  respect  to  the  tropic  and  equi¬ 
noctial  points  to  have  shifted  eastward  very  nearly  23^°  compared  to  the  record 
of  Hipparchus. 

3.  That  the  Eastward  Movement  of  the  Sphere  of  the  Fixed  Stars 
Takes  Place  About  the  Pole  of  the  Ecliptic^ 

It  has  now  become  clear  to  us  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  makes  an 
eastward  motion  of  very  nearly  this  amount.  And  the  next  thing  is  to  find  out 
the  direction  of  this  movement — that  is,  whether  it  takes  place  about  the  poles 
of  equator  or  of  the  ecliptic.  And  this  would  become  evident  to  us  from  the 

^The  history  of  the  interpretation  of  the  appearance  called  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes 
is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  in  the  development  of  astronomy  and  physics. 

In  the  Copernican  theory,  it  is  explained  by  having  the  restoration  of  the  annual  decUna- 
tion  of  the  earth’s  axis  with  respect  to  the  plane  through  the  earth  and  the  sun  anticipate  the 


228 


PTOLEMY 


longitudinal  shift.  For  the  great  circles  dra^vui  through  the  poles  of  one  of  these 
cut  off  unequal  arcs  on  the  other  unless  the  difference  due  to  this  cause  should 
be  altogether  indistinguishable  to  the  senses  because  of  such  a  small  shift^s 
taking  place  in  this  amount  of  time.  But  it  would  be  very  easily  gotten  from 
their  latitudinal  shift  then  and  now.  For  with  respect  to  whichever  of  the  circles, 
the  equator  or  ecliptic,  they  always  appear  to  keep  their  latitudinal  distances, 
it  is  clear  that  the  movement  of  the  sphere  will  be  effected  about  that  circle. 

Now  Hipparchus  also  agrees  to  the  movement's  being  about  the  ecliptic^s 
poles.  For  in  his  treatise  On  the  Precession  of  the  Tropic  and  Equinoctial  Points 
he  in  turn  concludes,  from  the  things  observed  by  Timocharis  and  by  himself, 
that  Spica  keeps  unchanged;  not  relative  to  the  equator,  but  relative  to  the 
ecliptic,  the  magnitude  of  its  latitudinal  distance  of  2°  south  of  the  ecliptic. 
Therefore  in  his  treatise  On  the  Magnitude  of  the  Solar  Year  he  supposes  only  the 
movement  about  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic.  And  yet  he  still  has  doubts,  as  he  him¬ 
self  says,  because  the  trustworthy  observations  of  Timocharis  have  not  been 
taken  in  a  general  enough  way  and  because  the  intervening  time  has  not  been 
long  enough  for  a  conclusive  observation. 

However,  since  we  find  over  a  longer  time  and  for  nearly  all  the  fixed  stars 
just  this  thing,  we  can  reasonably  suppose  their  movement  about  the  poles  of 
the  ecliptic  to  be  fairly  sure.  For,  observing  the  latitudinal  distance  of  each  on 
the  great  circle  drawn  through  its  poles,  we  find  nearly  the  same  distances  con¬ 
tained  as  were  recorded  and  brought  together  by  Hipparchus,  or  else  disagreeing 
so  little  that  the  discrepancy  could  be  neglected  as  the  result  of  the  observations 
themselves.  But  in  the  case  of  the  distances  observed  with  respect  to  the  equator 
along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  its  poles,  neither  do  we  find  those  gotten 
by  us  agreeing  with  those  recorded  in  the  same  way  by  Hipparchus,  nor  these 
with  those  gotten  still  earlier  by  Timocharis.  And  from  these  themselves  we 
find  even  more  thoroughly  confirmed  the  identity  of  the  latitude  with  respect  to 
the  ecliptic.  For  the  stars  in  the  hemisphere  from  the  winter  tropic  through  the 
spring  equinox  to  the  summer  tropic  are  always  found  farther  north  than  the 
earlier  distance  mth  respect  to  the  equator;  but  those  in  the  opposite  hemi¬ 
sphere  farther  south,  those  near  the  equinoctial  points  having  greater  differ¬ 
ences,  and  those  near  the  tropic  points  having  less — almost  in  proportion  as  the 
ecliptic^s  eastward  sections  in  their  longitudinal  progression  get  farther  north 
or  farther  south  of  the  equator. 

restoration  of  the  earth^s  centre  in  its  revolution  about  the  sun.  Copernicus  thought  there 
was  an  irregularity  in  the  rate  of  the  precession.  Neither  Ptolemy  nor  the  moderns  find  this 
appearance. 

In  Newton’s  Pririciples,  the  precession  is  deduced  by  an  extraordinar\^  analogy  with  the 
three  body  problem  in  the  famous  Proposition  66  of  Book  I,  particularly  in  the  first  eleven 
corollaries  and  in  Corollaries  20,  21,  and  22. 

It  is  in  this  last  corollary  also  that  it  is  brought  out  that  from  Newtonian  principles  it  must 
follow  that  the  rotation  of  a  body  on  its  axis  is  a  regular  motion  and  no  centripetal  force  will 
change  the  velocit}^  of  this  rotation.  Thus  the  Ptolemaic  assumption  of  the  regularity  of  the 
two  motions  which  made  up  the  apparent  motion  of  the  fixed  stars  is,  at  least  for  the  first  one, 
in  effect  the  same  as  the  Newtonian.  The  astronomers  before  Hipparchus  had  simply  con¬ 
sidered  the  revolution  of  the  fixed  stars  as  regular. 

The  choice  of  regular  motion  is  one  that  is  arbitrary.  But  the  very  fact  that  one  can  and 
must  choose  a  regular  motion,  and  that  the  apparent  motions  are  so  ambiguous  as  to  allow 
any  one  of  them  to  be  chosen  as  such  is  the  sign  for  St.  Augustine  that  points  to  a  non-sensible 
theorj^  of  time  and  of  memory.  See  the  Confessions,  Books  x  and  xi. 


229 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 

In  order  to  state  this  more  clearly  in  a  few  easily  understood  cases,  we  shall 
set  out,  for  either  hemisphere,  their  recorded  latitudinal  distances  from  the 
equator  along  the  great  circle  drawn  through  its  poles,  those  gotten  by  Tim- 
ocharis,  those  by  Hipparchus,  and  those  gotten  in  the  same  way  by  ourselves. 

Now,  Timocharis  records  the  bright  star  in  the  Eagle  [Altair]  as  being 
north  of  the  equator,  and  Hipparchus  the  same;  but  we  find  it  to  be  (5+3^+ 
3/^)®.  And  Timocharis  records  the  centre  of  the  Pleiades  as  being  143^°  north  of 
the  equator,  Hipparchus  153^°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  1634°-  Again,  Timocharis 
records  the  bright  star  of  the  Hj^ades  [Aldebaran]  as  being  (8+3/2+34)°  north 
of  the  equator,  and  Hipparchus  (9+ J4+34)°>  and  we  find  it  to  be  11°.  Aristyllus 
records  the  brightest  star  in  the  Charioteer,  called  the  Goat  [Capella]  as  being 
40°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  40%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  413/^°.  Tim¬ 
ocharis  records  the  star  in  the  western  shoulder  of  Orion  as  being  1%°  north  of 
the  equator,  Hipparchus  1%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  2%°.  Timocharis  records  the 
star  in  the  eastern  shoulder  of  Orion  [Betelgeuse]  as  being  (3 +3/^ +34)°  north  of 
the  equator,  Hipparchus  434°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  534°*  Timocharis  records  the 
bright  star  in  the  Dog’s  mouth  [Sirius]  as  being  16J4°  south  of  the  equator, 
Hipparchus  16°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  (15+34+34)°-  Aristyllus  records  the 
western  star  of  the  bright  ones  in  the  T\^dns’  heads  [Castor]  to  be  33°  north  of 
the  equator,  Hipparchus  33J4°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  33%°.  And  Aristyllus  re¬ 
cords  the  eastern  one  [Pollux]  as  being  30°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  the 
same,  and  we  find  it  to  be  3034°- 

Of  all  these  distances  intercepted  longitudinally  within  the  hemisphere  con¬ 
taining  the  spring  equinox,  the  later  ones  have  become  all  more  northern  in  lati¬ 
tude  with  respect  to  the  equator  than  the  earlier  ones,  those  near  the  tropic 
sections  by  a  very  small  amount  and  those  near  the  equinoctial  sections  by  a 
considerable  amount.  This  is  consequent  upon  the  precession  eastward  about 
the  ecliptic’s  poles,  because  the  eastward  sections  of  this  semicircle  always  get 
more  northern  than  the  western,  those  near  the  equinoctial  points  ^\dth  greater 
differences  and  those  near  the  tropic  points  with  smaller. 

In  the  opposite  hemisphere,  Timocharis  records  the  star  in  the  Lion’s  heart 
[Regulus]  as  being  21%°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  20%°,  and  we  find 
it  to  be  (19+34  +  34)°-  Timocharis  records  Spica  as  being  1%°  north  of  the 
equator,  Hipparchus  only  %°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  34°  south  of  the  equator. 
Aristyllus  records  that  of  the  three  stars  in  the  Big  Bear’s  tail  the  one  at  the  tip 
is  61%°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  (60+%+34)°>  find  it  to  be 

59%°.  Aristyllus  records  the  second  from  the  end,  in  the  middle  of  the  tail,  as 
being  6734°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  66%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  65°. 
Aristyllus  records  the  third  from  the  end,  at  the  beginning  of  the  tail,  as  being 
68%°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  67%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  6634°-  Tim¬ 
ocharis  records  Arcturus  as  being  31%°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  31°, 
and  we  find  it  to  be  (29+%+%)°.  Timocharis  records  that,  of  the  bright  stars 
in  the  Scorpion’s  claws,  the  one  in  the  southern  tip  is  5°  south  of  the  equator, 
Hipparchus  5%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  7%°.  Timocharis  records  the  star  in  the 
tip  of  the  northern  claw  as  being  1%°  north  of  the  equator,  Hipparchus  only 
%°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  1°  south  of  the  equator.  And  Timocharis  records  the 
bright  star  in  the  Scorpion’s  breast,  called  Antares,  as  being  18%°  south  of  the 
equator,  Hipparchus  19°,  and  we  find  it  to  be  2034°- 

Now,  of  all  these  passages,  in  t.he  ODDOsite  way,  the  later  have  become  propor- 


230 


PTOLEMY 


tionately  more  southern  in  latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator  than  the  earlier. 
Therefore  it  could  be  concluded  that  the  eastward  longitudinal  shift  of  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  1°,  as  we  said  before,  in  very  nearly  100  years,  and 
2%^  in  the  265  years  between  the  observation  of  Hipparchus  and  our  own.  And 
this  conclusion  is  reached  through  the  latitudinal  difference  found  for  those  stars 
about  the  equinoctial  points. 

For  the  centre  star  of  the  Pleiades,  found  by  Hipparchus  to  be  15 north 
of  the  equator  and  by  us  1634°>  lias  become  more  northern  in  the  intervening 
time  by  1^2°-  the  on  the  ecliptic  for  stars  at  the  end  of  the  Ram,  re¬ 
sulting  from  the  eastward  longitudinal  shift  over  the  same  amount  of  time, 
gives  just  that  difference  in  latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator.  Again,  the  star 
called  Goat  [Capella],  found  by  Hipparchus  to  be  40%°  north  of  the  equator 
and  by  us  41%°,  has  become  more  northern  by  %°,  the  2%°  on  the  ecliptic  for 
stars  at  the  middle  of  the  Bull  again  giving  just  that  difference  in  latitude  with 
respect  to  the  equator.  In  the  western  shoulder  of  Orion,  the  star  found  by  Hip¬ 
parchus  to  be  1%°  north  of  the  equator  and  by  us  2%°  has  become  more  north¬ 
ern  by  very  nearly  %°,  the  2%°  on  the  ecliptic  for  stars  two-thirds  within  the 
Bull  giving  just  that  difference  in  latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator. 

Likewise  for  the  opposite  hemisphere,  Spica,  found  by  Hipparchus  to  be  %° 
north  of  the  equator  and  by  us  %°  south,  has  become  more  southern  by  iKo"^* 
Again,  the  2%°  on  the  ecliptic  for  stars  at  the  end  of  the  Virgin  give  just  that 
difference  in  latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator.  The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  Big 
Beards  tail,  found  by  Hipparchus  to  be  60%°  north  of  the  equator  and  by  us 
59%°,  has  become  more  southern  by  1K2°;  and  the  2%°  on  the  ecliptic  for  stars 
at  the  beginning  of  the  dodecatemory  of  the  Balance  give  just  this  difference  in 
latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator.  And  Arcturus,  found  by  Hipparchus  to  be 
31°  north  of  the  equator  and  by  us  (29+%+%)°,  has  become  more  southern  by 
1%°,  the  2%°  on  the  ecliptic  for  stars  at  the  beginning  of  the  Balance  likewise 
giving  very  nearly  this  difference  in  latitude  with  respect  to  the  equator. 

And  what  is  required  will  be  even  clearer  to  us  from  the  following  observa¬ 
tions. 

For  Timocharis,  having  observed  these  things  in  Alexandria,  records  that  in 
the  year  47  of  the  first  Callippic  Period  of  76  years  (Anthesterion  8,  Egyptian- 
wise  Athyr  29),  at  the  end  of  the  third  hour,  the  southern  half  of  the  moon  ap¬ 
peared  to  have  advanced  eastward  one-third  or  one-half  the  way  through  the 
Pleiades,  in  true  position.  And  this  date  is  the  year  465  of  Nabonassar,  Egyp- 
tianwise  Athyr  29-30,  3  seasonal  hours  before  midnight  and  3%  equatorial 
hours.  For  the  sun  was  7°  within  the  Water  Bearer,  and  with  respect  to  regular 
solar  days  the  amount  of  time  before  midnight  adds  up  to  that  many  hours. 
According  to  hypotheses  already  demonstrated  by  us,  the  moon  at  that  hour 
had  its  true  position  0°20'  within  the  Bull-— that  is,  it  was  30°20'  from  the  spring 
equinox  and  3°45'  north  of  the  ecliptic.  In  Alexandria  it  appeared  to  be  29°20' 
within  the  Ram  in  longitude,  and  3°35'  north  of  the  ecliptic,  since  the  second 
third  of  the  Twins  was  culminating.  Therefore,  the  eastern  limit  of  the  Pleiades 
was  then  very  nearly  29%°  east  of  the  spring  equinox,  since  the  moon^s  centre 
was  still  west  of  it  and  very  nearly  3%°  north  of  the  ecliptic.  For  this  limit  was, 
in  turn,  a  little  more  north  than  the  moon^s  centre. 

And  Agrippa  who  observed  in  Bithynia  records  that,  in  the  year  12  of  Domi- 
tian  (in  their  fashion  Metroius  7),  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  hour  of  the 


231 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 

night,  the  moon  occulted  \vith  its  southern  horn  the  southeastern  part  of  the 
Pleiades.  This  date  is  the  year  840  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Tybi  2-3,  4 
seasonal  hours  before  midnight,  and  5  equatorial  hours.  Because  the  sun  was  6° 
within  the  Archer.  Therefore,  with  respect  to  the  meridian  of  Alexandria,  the 
observation  was  53^  equatorial  hours  before  midnight,  and  relative  to  regular 
solar  days  5^  hours,  at  which  time  the  true  position  of  the  moon^s  centre  was 
3°7'  within  the  Bull  and  (4+3^+3/^)°  north  of  the  ecliptic.  In  Bithynia  it  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  3°  15'  in  longitude  within  the  Bull  and  4°  north  of  the  ecliptic  be¬ 
cause  the  point  t^vo-thirds  within  the  Fishes  was  culminating.  Therefore  the 
eastern  part  of  the  Pleiades  was  then  3334°  of  the  spring  equinox  and  3^4° 
north  of  the  ecliptic.  So  it  is  evident  that,  in  latitude,  the  eastern  part  of  the 
Pleiades  w^as  then  and  now  north  of  the  ecliptic  along  the  great  circle  dra^vn 
through  its  poles,  and,  in  longitude,  has  moved  3°45'  eastward  from  the  spring 
equinox.  Because  at  the  first  observation  it  w^as  29^4°  from  it,  and  at  the  second 
3334°  J  the  time  betw^een  the  tw^o  observations  embraces  365  years.  And, 
therefore,  the  eastern  part  of  the  Pleiades  has  moved  eastward  1*^  in  100  years. 

Again  having  observed  in  Alexandria,  Timocharis  records  that  in  the  year  36 
of  the  First  Callippic  Period  (Elaphebolion  15  or  Tybi  5),  at  the  beginning  of  the 
third  hour,  the  moon  reached  Spica  with  the  midpoint  of  its  disc  tow^ard  the 
equatorial  rising,  and  Spica  went  behind  it  cutting  off  exactly  one-third  of  the 
diameter  tow^ards  the  north.  And  this  date  is  the  year  454  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptianwise  Tybi  5-6,  very  nearly  4  seasonal  and  equatorial  hours  before  mid¬ 
night,  because  the  sun  was  about  15°  wfithin  the  Fishes.  With  respect  to  regular 
solar  days,  the  determination  comes  to  just  about  that  many  hours  before.  And 
at  that  hour  the  true  position  of  the  moon's  centre  was  again  21°21'  in  longitude 
within  the  Virgin — that  is,  it  w^as  81°21'  east  of  the  summer  tropic  and  (1+34+ 
34)°  south  of  the  ecliptic.  But  it  appeared  to  be  82°12'  in  longitude  from  the 
summer  tropic  and  very  nearly  2°  south  of  the  ecliptic.  For  the  middle  of  the 
Crab  w'as  culminating.  And  therefore,  for  these  reasons,  Spica  was  at  that  time 
8234°  from  the  summer  tropic  and  2°  south  of  the  ecliptic. 

Timocharis  likewise  says  that  in  the  year  48  of  the  same  period  (on  the  sixth 
of  Pyanepsion  weaning,  or  Thoth  7),  at  half-past  the  ninth  hour,  the  moon  hav¬ 
ing  risen  above  the  horizon,  Spica  appeared  to  be  exactly  touching  the  northern 
part  of  it.  And  this  date  is  the  year  466  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwfise  Thoth  7-8, 
as  he  himself  says,  334  seasonal  hours  after  midnight,  and  very  nearly  334  equa¬ 
torial  hours,  since  the  sun  w^as  near  the  middle  of  the  Scorpion.  Consequently, 
it  w^as  234  hours  after  midnight.  For  at  just  that  many  equatorial  hours  after 
midnight  the  point  2234°  within  the  Twins  was  culminating,  and  about  the  same 
point  within  the  Virgin  was  rising.  And  the  moon  was  in  this  position  when  it 
rose,  as  he  sa^^s.  With  respect  to  regular  solar  days  w^e  find  it  to  be  only  2  equa¬ 
torial  hours  after  midnight.  Again,  at  this  time  the  true  position  of  the  moon's 
centre  was  81°30'  from  the  summer  equinoxes  and  234°  south  of  the  ecliptic; 
but  it  appeared  to  be  82°30'  in  longitude  aw^ay  from  it  and  234°  south  of  the 
ecliptic.  And  therefore  Spica,  by  this  observation,  was  in  turn  very  nearly  2° 
south  of  the  ecliptic  and  8234°  from  the  summer  tropic.  Consequently,  in  the 
12  years  between  the  two  observations,  it  has  moved  very  nearly  34°  eastw^ard 
from  the  summer  tropic. 

And  Menelaus,  the  geometer,  says  that  he  observed  in  Rome,  in  the  year  1  of 
Trajan  (Mechir  15-16),  at  the  end  of  the  tenth  hour,  Spica  occulted  by  the 


PTOLEMY 


232 

moon;  for  it  could  not  be  seen;  but  that  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  hour  he  ob¬ 
served  it  west  of  the  moon^s  centre  equally  distant  from  the  horns  by  less  than  a 
diameter.  And  this  date  is  the  year  845  of  Nabonassar,  Eg>q)tiamvise  Mechir 
15-16,  4  seasonal  hours  after  midnight  when  the  moon’s  centre  overtook  Spica, 
but  5  equatorial  hours  because  the  sun  was  20°  within  the  Goat;  with  respect  to 
the  meridian  through  Alexandria,  it  was  6}^  hours  after,  and  vdth  respect  to 
regular  solar  days  w^as  634  hours  after  or  a  little  more.  At  this  hour  the  true 
position  of  the  moon’s  centre  was  85^°  from  the  summer  tropic  and  very  nearly 
1  south  of  the  ecliptic,  but  it  appeared  to  be  8634°  in  longitude  from  it  and  2° 
south.  For  the  first  quarter  of  the  Balance  was  culminating.  Therefore  Spica 
had  that  position  at  that  time. 

It  is  clear  that,  according  both  to  Timocharis  and  to  ourselves,  Spica  was  the 
same  distance  south  of  the  ecliptic  (that  is,  2°)  but  that  since  the  observation  in 
the  year  36  it  has  shifted  3°55'  during  the  391  intervening  years;  and,  since  the 
observation  in  the  year  48,  3°45'  during  the  379  intervening  years.  And  so,  from 
this  the  eastward  shift  of  Spica  in  100  years  comes  to  very  nearly  1°. 

Again,  Timocharis  says  he  observed  in  Alexandria  that  in  the  year  36  of  the 
First  Callippic  Period  (Poseidon  25,  or  Phaophi  16),  exactly  at  the  beginning  of 
the  tenth  hour,  the  moon  appeared  to  overtake  with  its  northern  arc  the  north¬ 
ern  star  of  those  in  the  Scorpion’s  forehead.  And  this  date  is  the  year  454  of 
Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Phaophi  16-17,  3  seasonal  hours  after  midnight  and 
3%  equatorial  hours,  because  the  sun  was  26°  within  the  Archer,  but  334  hours 
with  respect  to  regular  solar  days.  At  that  hour  the  true  position  of  the  moon’s 
centre  w^as  3134°  from  the  autumn  equinox  and  134°  north  of  the  ecliptic,  but  it 
appeared  to  be  32°  in  longitude  and  1°12'  north  of  the  ecliptic.  For  the  middle 
of  the  Lion  w^as  culminating.  And,  therefore,  the  northernmost  star  in  the  Scor¬ 
pion’s  forehead  was  at  that  time  32°  in  longitude  from  the  autumn  equinox  and 
very  nearly  134°  north  of  the  ecliptic. 

Likew^ise  Menelaus  says  he  observed  in  Rome  that  in  the  year  1  of  Trajan, 
Mechir  18-19,  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  hour,  the  moon’s  southern  horn  ap¬ 
peared  in  a  straight  line  with  the  middle  and  southern  stars  of  those  in  the 
Scorpion’s  forehead.  But  its  centre  lay  east  of  this  line  and  w^as  as  far  from  the 
middle  star  as  the  middle  star  was  from  the  southern  star;  and  its  centre  seemed 
to  have  overtaken  the  northern  star  of  those  in  the  forehead.  For  it  made  no 
appearance  w^hatsoever.  This  date  is  again  the  year  845  of  Nabonassar,  Egyp- 
tianwdse  Mechir  18-19,  5  seasonal  hours  after  midnight  and  634  equatorial  hours, 
because  the  sun  w^as  23°  within  the  Goat;  but  734  hours  after  with  respect  to  the 
meridian  through  Alexandria,  and  very  nearly  the  same  with  respect  to  regular 
solar  days.  At  this  hour  the  true  position  of  the  moon’s  centre  w'as  3534°  from 
the  autum  equinox  and  234°  north  of  the  ecliptic.  But  it  appeared  to  be  35°55'  in 
longitude  and  134°  north.  For  the  end  of  the  Balance  w^as  culminating.  There¬ 
fore,  the  northernmost  star  in  the  Scorpion’s  forehead,  at  that  time,  had  very 
nearly  that  same  position. 

It  is  thus  evident  that  also  in  the  case  of  this  star  the  same  latitudinal  dis¬ 
tance  has  been  observed  then  and  now^,  but  that  the  longitudinal  distance  has 
shifted  3°55'  eastw^ard  from  the  autumn  equinox  for  the  total  of  391  years  be- 
tw’een  the  observations.  Again  it  follow^s  from  this  that  the  eastw^ard  shift  of  the 
star  is  1°  in  100  years. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 


233 


4.  On  the  Manner  of  Recording  the  Fixed  Stars 

And  now,  from  the  similar  observation  and  comparison  of  these  and  other 
bright  stars  and  from  the  constant  distance  of  the  rest  with  respect  to  the  stars 
observed,  we  find  it  certain,  to  the  extent  that  the  time  elapsed  allows,  that  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  makes  a  shift  of  this  amount  eastward  from  the  tropic 
and  equinoctial  points,  and  moreover  that  this  movement  is  effected  about  the 
poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  not  about  the  poles  of  the  equator— that  is,  those  of  the 
prime  movement.  We  therefore  thought  it  proper,  for  each  of  these  and  of  the 
other  fixed  stars,  to  make  observations  and  records  of  their  epochs  ol)served  at 
the  present  time,  considered  in  longitude  and  latitude,  not  with  r(‘spect  to  the 
equator  but  defined  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic  by  the  great  circles  drawn 
through  its  poles  and  each  one  of  the  stars.  In  accord  with  the  gi\'en  hypothesis 
on  the  movement,  it  is  necessary  that  their  latitudinal  passages  with  respect  to 
the  ecliptic  remain  always  the  same,  and  that  the  longitudinal  shifts  eastward 
cut  off  equal  arcs  in  equal  times.  And  so  again,  using  the  same  instrument,  by 
the  turning  of  the  armillary  circles  in  it  about  the  ecliptic's  poles  we  observed 
as  many  stars  as  we  could,  up  to  those  of  the  sixth  magnitude.  We  always 
directed  one  of  these  armillary  circles  towards  one  of  the  bright  stars  gotten  by 
means  of  the  moon,  according  to  its  proper  section  on  the  ecliptic;  another 
armillary  circle,  graduated  and  capable  of  turning  on  the  ecliptic’s  poles,  we 
directed  towards  the  desired  star  until,  like  the  first  one,  it  also  was  sighted 
through  the  hole  of  its  o^vm  proper  circle.  When  this  took  place,  both  passages 
of  the  stars  desired  were  immediately  evident  to  us  on  the  armillary  circle,  since 
the  longitudinal  position  was  defined  by  its  intersection  with  the  ecliptic  and  the 
latitudinal  positions  by  the  arc  on  it  cut  off  between  this  intersection  and  the 
upper  hole. 

Now,  to  have  the  solid  sphere’s  arrangement  of  constellations  expounded  in 
this  way,  we  set  it  up  tablewise  in  4  parts,  placing  in  the  first  part  the  configura¬ 
tions  for  each  one  of  the  stars  by  constellation.  In  the  second  we  placed  the 
positions  according  to  longitude  within  the  dodecatemories  as  they  are  gotten 
from  observations  at  the  start  of  Antonine’s  reign,  the  beginning  of  the  quad¬ 
rants  again  being  taken  at  the  tropic  and  equinoctial  points.  In  the  third  we 
placed  the  latitudinal  distances  from  the  ecliptic  for  both  the  northern  and 
southern  sides.  And  in  the  fourth  we  placed  the  order  of  magnitude.  Now,  the 
latitudinal  distances  are  alwa3’'s  the  same.  But  the  longitudinal  positions  can 
easily  provide  the  passage  for  other  dates,  if  we  subtract  the  degrees  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  time  between  the  date  of  the  position  and  the  date  sought,  at  the 
rate  of  1°  in  a  hundred  \^ears,  from  the  degrees  of  tlie  position  in  the  case  of  an 
earlier  date;  and  if  we  add  in  the  case  of  a  later  date. 

The  designations  by  configurations,  therefore,  must  be  understood  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  convention  of  constellations  and  b}^  the  determinations  of  the 
ecliptic’s  poles.  For  by  “stars  preceding  certain  stars”  and  by  “stars  following 
certain  stars”  we  mean  those  having  their  positions  in  the  preceding^  \\es tern  or 
following  eastern  sections  of  the  ecliptic;  and  by  more  southern  or  more 
northern”  we  mean  those  nearer  the  corresponding  pole  of  the  ecliptic. 

We  have  not  used  for  each  of  the  stars  altogether  the  same  formations  as  our 
predecessors,  just  as  they  did  not  use  the  same  as  their  predecessors.  But  often 
we  use  others  according  to  the  greater  propriety  and  fittingness  of  the  configura- 


234 


PTOLEMY 


tions — as,  for  example,  when  those  stars  which  Hipparchus  places  in  the  shoul¬ 
ders  of  the  Virgin,  we  call  her  sides  because  their  distance  from  the  stars  in  the 
head  appears  greater  than  that  from  the  hands,  and  thus  they  better  fit  the 
sides  and  are  quite  different  from  the  shoulders.  But  the  correspondence  of  the 
differently  designated  stars  would  be  easy  to  ascertain  by  the  comparison  of 
their  recorded  positions.  And  here  is  the  exposition  of  the  records: 


5.  Tabular  Exposition  of  the  Constellations  of  the 
Northern  Hemisphere 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

Constellation  of  the  Little  Bear 

The  star  on  the  tip  of  the  tail 

Twins 

N66® 

3 

The  next  one  in  the  tail 

Twins 

2K° 

N70® 

4 

The  next  one,  before  the  beginning  of  the  tail 

Twins  16° 

N74K° 

4 

The  southern  one  on  the  western  side  of  the  rectangle 

Twins 

N75?^® 

4 

The  northern  one  on  the  same  side 

Crab 

N77?i® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  those  on  the  eastern  side 

Crab 

N725^® 

2 

The  northern  one  on  the  same  side 

Crab 

26K° 

N74%® 

2 

In  all,  7  stars  of  which  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude. 

1  of  3rd,  4  of  4th. 

The  unfigured  star  near  it,  that  is  the  more  southern 

star  of  first  magnitude  in  a  straight  fine  with 

those  on  the  eastern  side 

Crab 

13° 

N71H^ 

4 

Constellation  of  the  Big  Bear 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  muzzle 

Twins  25M° 

N395^® 

4 

The  western  star  of  those  in  the  two  eyes 

Twins  25 

N43® 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Twins  26 

N43® 

5 

The  western  star  of  the  two  in  the  forehead 

Twins  26K° 

N47.K" 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Twins  26  J^® 

N47® 

5 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  western  ear 

Twins 

28K° 

N50J^® 

5 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  neck 

Crab 

V2‘ 

N435^® 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Crab 

2K° 

N44H‘’ 

4 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  in  the  breast 

Crab 

9° 

N42® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Crab 

11° 

N44® 

4- 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Crab 

10?i° 

N35® 

3 

The  northern  star  at  the  end  of  the  left  forefoot 

Crab 

N29H‘’ 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Crab 

6M° 

N28}i® 

3 

The  star  above  the  right  knee 

Crab 

N36® 

4 

The  star  below  the  right  knee 

Crab 

N33® 

4 

Of  those  in  the  quadrilateral,  the  star  on  the 

Crab 

17^° 

N49® 

2 

back 

Of  these,  the  star  on  the  flank 

Crab 

22M° 

N44i^® 

2 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  tail 

Lion 

3}4° 

N51® 

3 

The  remaining  star  in  the  left  thigh 

Lion 

3° 

N46}^® 

2 

The  western  star  of  those  at  the  end  of  the  left  hind- 

foot 

Crab 

22?i° 

N29H® 

3 

The  star  east  of  this  one 

Crab 

24H° 

N28I^® 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  ham 

Lion 

m° 

N35M° 

4+ 

The  northern  star  of  those  at  the  end  of  the  right 

hindfoot 

Lion 

9J^° 

N25M" 

3 

The  southern  star  of  these 

Lion 

lOM" 

N25® 

3 

The  first  star  of  the  3  in  the  tail  after  the  begin- 

Lion 

12H“ 

N53H° 

2 

ning 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion 

18° 

N55?^® 

2 

The  third  one  at  the  end  of  the  tail 

Lion 

295^° 

N25® 

3 

In  all,  27  stars  of  which  6  are  of  2nd  magnitude, 
8  of  3rd,  8  of  4th,  5  of  5th. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII  235 


Configurations 

Of  the  Unfigured  Stars  beneath  it 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  star  under  the  tail  far  to  the  south 

Lion 

27%° 

N39J^® 

3 

The  dimmer  star  west  of  it 

The  more  southern  star  of  those  between  the  forefeet 

Lion 

20%° 

N41M" 

5 

of  the  Bear  and  the  head  of  the  Lion 

Crab 

15° 

N1734® 

4 

The  star  north  of  this 

Crab 

13%° 

N19K° 

4 

The  star  east  of  the  other  3  dim  ones 

Crab 

16%° 

N20® 

dim 

The  star  west  of  tliis  last 

Crab 

12%° 

N22^® 

dim 

The  star  still  farther  west  than  this  last 

Crab 

11%° 

N23® 

dim 

The  star  between  the  forefeet  and  the  Twins 

In  all,  8  unfigured  stars  of  which  1  is  of  3rd  mag¬ 
nitude,  2  of  4th,  1  of  5th,  and  4  dim. 

Constellation  of  the  Dragon 

Crab 

0° 

N22Ji® 

dim 

The  star  on  the  tongue 

Balance  26J|® 

N76K® 

4 

The  star  in  the  mouth 

Scorpion  11 

N7834® 

4  + 

The  star  above  the  eye 

Scorpion  133^° 

N75Ji® 

3 

The  star  in  the  jaw 

Scorpion  27 

N80M° 

4 

The  star  above  the  head 

The  northern  star  of  the  3  in  a  straight  line  in  the 

Scorpion  29^° 

i. 

N75J^® 

3 

first  fold  of  the  neck 

Archer 

24%° 

N82i^® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Goat 

2%° 

N78Ji® 

4 

The  middle  star  of  these 

Archer 

28%° 

N803^® 

4 

The  star  east  of  this  one 

The  southern  star  of  the  western  side  of  the  square 

Goat 

19%° 

N813^® 

4 

in  the  next  turn 

Fishes 

8° 

N81%® 

4 

The  northern  star  of  the  western  side 

Fishes 

20%° 

N83® 

4 

The  northern  star  of  the  eastern  side 

Ram 

7%° 

N78^® 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  eastern  side 

Fishes 

22%° 

N77^® 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  triangle  in  the  next  turn 

Ram 

10%° 

N80}^® 

5 

The  western  star  of  the  remaining  2  of  the  triangle 

Ram 

21%° 

N8134® 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  these 

The  eastern  star  of  those  in  the  next  triangle  west 

Ram 

26%° 

N80M° 

5 

of  this 

Twins 

13%° 

N84J^® 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  remaining  2  of  the  triangle 

BuD 

20%° 

N87K® 

4 

The  northern  star  of  the  remaining  two 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  small  stars  west  of  the 

BuU 

11%° 

N84^° 

4 

triangle 

Crab 

28%° 

N87H° 

6 

The  western  one  of  these 

Crab 

21%° 

N865^® 

6 

The  more  northern  of  the  next  3  in  a  straight  line 

Virgin 

9° 

N8134° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

9%° 

N803^® 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

8%° 

N84^® 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  next  2  to  the  west 

Virgin 

10° 

N78® 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  w^estem  star  of  those  to  the  west  in  the  turn 

Virgin 

10%° 

N74%® 

4  + 

near  the  tail 

The  w^estem  star  of  the  2  rather  distant  from  the 

Virgin 

12%° 

N70® 

3 

last  one 

Lion 

7%° 

N64%® 

4 

The  eastern  star  of  these 

Lion 

11%° 

N653^® 

3 

The  star  near  them  by  the  tail 

Crab 

19%° 

3 

The  remaining  star  at  the  end  of  the  tail 

In  all,  31  stars  of  which  8  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 

16  of  4th,  5  of  5th,  2  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  Cepheus 

Crab 

13%° 

N56M° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  foot 

BuU 

5° 

N75?i® 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  foot 

BuU 

3° 

N6434‘* 

4 

The  star  under  the  belt  on  the  right  side 

Ram 

7%° 

N71K‘' 

4 

236 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  star  touching  the  right  shoulder  from  above 

Fishes 

16%° 

N69° 

3 

The  star  touching  the  right  elbow  from  above 

Fishes 

9%° 

N72° 

4 

The  star  touching  the  same  elbow  from  below 

Fishes 

10° 

N74° 

4 

The  star  in  the  chest 

Fishes 

28%° 

N65%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  arm 

Ram 

7%° 

N62%° 

4  + 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  in  the  tiara 

Fishes 

16%° 

N60%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Fishes 

17%° 

N61%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  3 

Fishes 

19° 

N61%° 

5 

In  all,  11  stars  of  which  1  is  of  3rd  magnitude. 

7  of  4th,  3  of  5th. 

Of  the  Unfigured  Stars  About  Cepheus 

The  star  west  of  the  tiara 

Fishes 

13%° 

N64° 

5 

The  star  east  of  the  tiara 

Fishes 

21%° 

N59%° 

4 

In  all,  2  unfigured  stars  of  which  1  is  of  4th  mag¬ 

nitude,  1  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  the  Ploughman 

The  star  west  of  the  3  in  the  left  hand 

Virgin 

2%° 

N58%° 

5 

The  middle  and  southern  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

4%° 

N58%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

5%° 

N60%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

Virgin 

9%° 

N54%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Virgin 

19%° 

N49° 

3 

The  star  in  the  head 

Virgin 

26%° 

N53%° 

4-f 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

Balance 

5%° 

N48%° 

4  + 

The  star  north  of  these  and  in  the  crook 

Balance 

5%° 

N53%° 

4 

The  star  north  of  this  at  the  tip  of  the  crook 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  below  the  shoulder  in  the 

Balance 

5° 

N57%° 

4 

cudgel 

Balance 

7%° 

N46%° 

4  + 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Balance 

8%° 

N45%° 

5 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  right  hand 

Balance 

8%° 

N41%° 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  wrist 

Balance 

6%° 

N41%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Balance 

7° 

N42%° 

5 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  crook^s  haft 

Balance 

7%° 

N40%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  thigh  in  the  girdle 

Balance 

0° 

N40%° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  the  two  in  the  girdle 

Virgin 

25%° 

N41%° 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

Virgin 

25° 

N42%^ 

4  + 

The  star  in  the  right  heel 

Balance 

5%° 

N28° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  the  left  shank 

Virgin 

21%° 

N28° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

20%° 

N26%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

21%° 

N25° 

4 

In  all,  22  stars  of  which  4  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

9  of  4th,  9  of  5th 

One  Unfigured  Star  Under  This  of  1st  Mag. 

The  fiery  star  called  Arcturus  between  the  thighs 

Virgin 

27° 

N31%° 

1 

Constellation  of  the  Northern  Crown 

The  bright  star  in  the  Crown 

Balance  14J^® 

N44%° 

2  + 

The  most  western  of  all 

Balance 

N46%° 

4  + 

The  one  east  and  north  of  this  one 

Balance  11?^° 

N48° 

5 

The  one  again  east  and  north  of  this  last 

Balance  13%° 

N50%° 

6 

The  star  east  of  the  bright  one  southwards 

Balance  17%° 

N44%° 

4 

The  star  east  of  this  last  and  nearby 

Balance  19%° 

N44%° 

4 

The  star  still  east  of  these 

Balance  21%° 

N46%° 

4 

The  star  east  of  all  those  in  the  Crown 

Balance  21%° 

N49%° 

4 

In  all,  8  stars  of  which  1  is  of  2nd  magnitude, 
5  of  4th,  1  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 


THE  ALMAGEST, 

VII 

237 

Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

Constellation  of  Man  Kneeling 

The  star  in  the  head 

Scorpion  17^° 

N373^° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder  beside  the  armpit 

Scorpion  3?^° 

N43° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  arm 

Scorpion  1 

N403^° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

Balance  28° 

N373^° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Scorpion  16^° 

X48° 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  arm 

Scorpion  22° 

i\493^° 

4  + 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

Scorpion  27?^° 

N52° 

4  + 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  left  wTist 

Archer  5H° 

X52>g° 

4  + 

The  northern  one  of  the  remaining  2 

Archer  1?^° 

X54° 

4  + 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Archer  13/^° 

X53° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  side 

Scorpion  3J^° 

X50?i° 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  side 

Scorpion  103^° 

X533^° 

5 

The  one  north  of  this  last  in  the  left  buttock 

Scorpion  10° 

X563^° 

5 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  same  thigh 

Scorpion  113^° 

X583^° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  left  thigh 

Scorpion  14° 

X59M° 

4 

The  one  east  of  this  last 

Scorpion  153^° 

X60H° 

4 

The  star  again  east  of  this  one 

Scorpion  163^° 

X61}i° 

4-f 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Archer 

X61° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shin 

Scorpion  223^° 

X693^° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  foot 

Scorpion  153^° 

X70}i° 

6 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Scorpion  16^° 

X7134^ 

6 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  19?^° 

X7234° 

6 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  right  thigh 

Scorpion 

X6034° 

4+ 

The  one  north  of  this  and  in  the  same  thigh 

Balance  253^° 

X63° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  knee 

Balance  15^° 

X653^° 

4+ 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  under  the  right  knee 

Balance  13?^° 

X63%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Balance  103^° 

X6434° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  shank 

Balance  113^° 

X60° 

4 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  right  foot  which  is  the 
same  as  that  at  the  tip  of  the  crook 
Except  for  this  last,  in  all  28  stars  oi  which  6  are 
of  3rd  magnitude,  17  of  4th,  2  of  5th,  3  of  6th. 

The  Unfigured  Star  Beyond  This 


The  star  south  of  that  in  the  right  arm 

In  all  1  star  of  5th  magnitude. 

Scorpion  2^^° 

X3834" 

5 

Constellation  of  the  Lyre 

The  bright  star  on  the  shell  called  the  Lyre 

Archer 

17H^ 

X62° 

1 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  lying  next  it 

Archer 

20H“ 

X62%° 

4  + 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  star  east  of  these  and  at  the  beginning  of  the 

Archer 

203^° 

X61° 

4+ 

horns 

The  northern  one  of  the  two  near  the  eastern  side  of 

Archer 

23?i° 

X60° 

4 

the  shell 

Goat 

2° 

X6134° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  northern  one  of  the  two  western  stars  in  the 

Goat 

X6034° 

4 

crossbar 

Archer 

21° 

X5634** 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Archer 

20J^° 

X55° 

4- 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  cross-bar 

Archer 

2434** 

N55H° 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

In  aU,  10  stars  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 

2  of  3rd,  7  of  4th. 

Archer 

24° 

X54K° 

4- 

Constellation  of  the  Bird 

The  star  in  the  beak 

Goat 

N49° 

3 

The  one  east  of  this  and  in  the  head 

Goat 

9° 

N50K° 

5 

238 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  throat 

The  star  in  the  breast 

The  bright  star  in  the  tail 

The  star  in  the  elbow  of  the  right  wing 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  in  the  right  wing-spread 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

The  northern  one  at  the  edge  of  the  wing-spread 
The  star  in  the  elbow  of  the  left  wing 
The  star  north  of  these  and  in  the  middle  of  the 
same  wing 

The  star  at  the  edge  of  the  left  wing-spread 

The  star  in  the  left  foot 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  right  foot 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  star  in  the  nebula  of  the  right  knee 

In  all,  17  stars  of  which  1  is  of  2nd  magnitude, 

5  of  3rd,  9  of  4th,  2  of  5th. 

The  JJnfigured  Stars  About  It 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  under  the  left  wing 

The  northern  one  of  these 

In  all,  2  stars  of  4th  magnitude. 

Constellation  of  Cassiopeia 

The  star  in  the  head 

The  star  in  the  breast 

The  star  north  of  this  and  in  the  girdle 

The  star  above  the  chair  along  the  thighs 

The  star  in  the  knees 

The  star  in  the  shank 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  foot 

The  star  in  the  left  arm 

The  star  below  the  left  elbow 

The  star  in  the  right  forearm 

The  star  above  the  foot  of  the  throne 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  back  of  the  chair 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  back 

In  all,  13  stars,  of  which  4  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 

6  of  4th,  1  of  5th,  2  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  Perseus 

The  nebula  in  the  right  hand 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

The  star  in  the  head 

The  star  in  the  broad  of  the  back 

The  bright  star  in  the  right  side 

The  western  one  of  the  3  after  the  one  in  the  side 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

The  bright  star  in  the  Gorgon^s  head 

The  star  east  of  this 

The  star  west  of  the  bright  one 

The  star  left  farther  west  than  this 

The  star  in  the  right  knee 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

Goat  16}^° 

N54%° 

4  + 

Goat  28 

N57%° 

3 

Water  Bearer 

N60° 

2 

Goat  19ji® 

N64%° 

3 

Goat  22^° 

N69%° 

4 

Goat  21 K** 

N71%° 

4  + 

Goat  16%° 

N74° 

4  + 

Water  Bearer  %° 

N49%° 

3 

Water  Bearer  3%° 

N52%° 

4+ 

Water  Bearer  6%° 

N44° 

3 

Water  Bearer  10° 

N55%° 

4+ 

Water  Bearer  14%° 

N57° 

4+ 

Water  Bearer  1  %° 

N64° 

4 

Water  Bearer  2%° 

N64%° 

4 

Water  Bearer  12%° 

N64%° 

5 

Water  Bearer  10%° 

N49%” 

4+ 

Water  Bearer  13%° 

4+ 

Ram 

N45%° 

4+ 

Ram 

10%“ 

N46%° 

3 

Ram 

13° 

N47%° 

4 

Ram 

16%° 

N49° 

3+ 

Ram 

20%° 

N45%° 

3 

Ram 

27° 

N47%° 

4 

BuU 

1%° 

N47%° 

4 

Ram 

14%° 

N44%° 

4 

Ram 

17%° 

N45° 

5 

Ram 

2%° 

N50° 

6 

Ram 

15° 

N52%° 

4- 

Ram 

7%° 

N51%° 

3 

Ram 

3%° 

N51%° 

6 

Ram 

26%° 

N40%° 

neb. 

Bull 

1%° 

N37%° 

4 

Bull 

2%° 

N34%° 

3- 

Ram 

27%° 

N32%° 

4 

BuU 

%° 

N34%° 

4 

BuU 

1%° 

N31%° 

4 

BuU 

4%° 

N30° 

2 

BuU 

5%° 

N27%° 

4 

BuU 

7° 

N27%° 

4 

BuU 

7%° 

N27%° 

3 

BuU 

%° 

N27° 

4 

Ram 

29%° 

N23° 

2 

Ram 

29%° 

N21° 

4 

Ram 

27%° 

N21° 

4 

Ram 

26%° 

N22%° 

4 

BuU 

14%° 

N28° 

4 

239 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  star  west  of  tliis  and  above  the  knee 

BuU 

13° 

N28>^° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  above  the  joint 

Bull 

N25° 

4 

The  eastern  one  in  the  joint  itself 

Bull 

14° 

N26M‘’ 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  calf 

Bull 

14>^° 

N24^’’ 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  ankle 

Bull 

mi" 

N18M^ 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  thigh 

BuU 

N21%° 

4+ 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Bull 

8%° 

N19M'’ 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  shank 

Bull 

8Ji° 

N14^® 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  heel 

Bull 

4J^° 

N12° 

3- 

The  star  east  of  it  in  the  left  foot 

Bull 

6J^° 

mr 

3+ 

In  all,  26  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude. 


5  of  3rd,  16  of  4th,  2  of  5th,  a  nebula. 


The  Unfigured  Stars  about  Perseus 

The  star  east  of  the  one  in  the  knee 

BuU 

iij^“ 

N18‘’ 

5 

The  star  north  of  those  in  the  right  knee 

BuU 

15° 

N3r 

5 

The  western  star  of  those  in  the  Gorgon’s  Head 

Ram 

24?^° 

N20H‘' 

dim 

In  all,  3  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  5th  magnitude, 


1  indistinct. 


Constellation  of  the  Charioteer 


The  southern  one  of  the  2  at  the  head 

Twins 

N30‘’ 

4 

The  northern  one  and  above  the  head 

Twins 

N31^° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder  culled  Capella 

BuU 

25° 

N22>^° 

1 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

Twins 

2%° 

N20° 

2 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

Twins 

N15K'' 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  wrist 

Twins 

2^° 

N13H" 

4+ 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  in  the  left  wrist  caUed  the 

BuU 

22° 

N20%^ 

4+ 

Kids 

BuU 

22}^° 

N18° 

4+ 

The  western  one  of  these 

BuU 

22° 

N18° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  ankle 

BuU 

19%° 

NlOK" 

3- 

The  star  common  to  the  right  ankle  and  the  horn 

BuU 

25%° 

N5° 

3+ 

The  star  north  of  this  near  the  foot 

BuU 

26° 

5 

The  star  stiU  north  of  this  in  the  buttock 

Bull 

26%° 

5 

The  Httle  star  above  the  left  foot 

BuU 

20%° 

N16^ 

6 

In  all,  14  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude. 


1  of  2nd,  2  of  3rd,  7  of  4th,  2  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 


Constellation  of  Serpentarius 

The  star  in  the  head 

Scorpion  24^® 

N36° 

3  + 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  right  shoulder 

Scorpion  28° 

N27%° 

44- 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scoipion  29° 

N26%° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  left  shoulder 

Scorpion  133^° 

N33° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  14%° 

N31%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

Scorpion  8%° 

N24%° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  left  hand 

Scorpion  5° 

N17° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  6° 

N16%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

Scorpion  26%° 

N15° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  right  hand 

Archer  2%° 

N13%° 

4- 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Archer  3%° 

N14%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  knee 

Scorpion  21%° 

N7%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  shank 

Scorpion  26%° 

N2%° 

44- 

The  western  star  of  the  4  in  the  right  foot 

Scorpion  23° 

S2%° 

4 

The  one  east  of  this  one 

Scorpion  24%° 

Sl%° 

44- 

The  star  still  east  of  this  last 

Scorpion  25° 

s%° 

4 

The  remaining  and  easternmost  of  the  4 

Scorpion  25%° 

s%° 

o 

The  one  east  of  these  and  toucliing  the  heel 

Scorpion  27%° 

Nl° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Scorpion  12%° 

Nll%° 

3 

240 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  a  straight  line  in  the 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

left  shank 

Scorpion 

N5H° 

5  + 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Scorpion  10?^® 

N3K^ 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  3 

Scorpion  9?^® 

NIJ^® 

5  + 

The  star  in  the  left  heel 

Scorpion  12 

N^® 

5 

The  star  toucliing  the  hollow  of  the  left  foot 

Scorpion  10  ?i® 

4 

In  all,  24  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 
13  of  4th,  6  of  5th. 


The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Serpentarius 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  east  of  the  right  shoulder 

Archer 

2° 

N28K® 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Archer 

N26M° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Archer 

3° 

N25® 

4 

The  star  east  of  the  3  above  the  middle  one 

Archer 

N27® 

4 

The  lone  star  north  of  the  4 

Archer 

4%° 

N33® 

4 

In  all,  5  stars  of  4th  magnitude. 

Constellation  of  the  Serpent  of  Serpentarius 
Of  the  square  in  the  head,  the  star  at  the  end  of 


the  jaw 

Balance  18^® 

N38® 

4 

The  star  touching  the  nostrils 

Balance  21%® 

N40® 

4 

The  star  in  the  temple 

Balance  24^° 

N36® 

3 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  throat 

Balance  22® 

N34%® 

3 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  square  and  in  the  jaw 

Balance  21}^® 

N37%® 

4 

The  star  outside  and  north  of  the  head 

Balance  26}^® 

N42%® 

4 

The  star  after  the  first  curve  of  the  neck 

Balance  21?^® 

N29M° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  following  this 

Balance  24^^® 

N26%® 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Balance  24  J^® 

N25%® 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  star  after  the  next  curve,  west  of  the  Serpen¬ 

Balance  20^^^ 

N24® 

3 

tarius’  left  hand 

Balance  28%® 

N16%® 

4 

The  star  east  of  those  in  the  hand 

Scorpion  8%® 

N13M® 

5 

The  star  after  the  Serpentarius’  right  thigh 

Scorpion  23  %® 

N10%® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  east  of  this 

Scorpion  27® 

N8%® 

4+ 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  27%  ® 

N10%® 

4 

The  star  after  the  right  hand  in  the  tail’s  curve 

Archer  3%® 

N20® 

4 

The  star  east  of  this  likewise  in  the  tail 

Archer  8%® 

N21%® 

4  + 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

Archer  18%® 

N27® 

4 

In  all,  18  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 


12  of  4th,  1  of  5th. 


Constellation  of  the  Arrow 


The  lone  star  in  the  point 

Goat 

N39%® 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  shaft 

Goat 

N39%® 

6 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Goat 

N39%® 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

Goat 

N39® 

5 

The  star  at  the  extremity  of  the  notched  end 

In  all,  5  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  4th  magnitude, 

3  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 

Goat 

N38%® 

5 

Constellation  of  the  Eagle 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  head 

Goat 

N26%® 

4 

The  star  west  of  this  and  in  the  neck 

The  bright  one  in  the  broad  of  the  back  called  the 

Goat 

N27%® 

3 

Eagle 

Goat 

N29%® 

2  + 

The  one  near  this  to  the  north 

Goat 

4M” 

N30® 

3- 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  left  shoulder 

Goat 

3J^“ 

N31%® 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

6° 

N31%® 

5 

THE  ALMAGEST,  VII 

241 

Configu  rations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  right  shoulder 

Archer  29J^° 

N2SJi® 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  star  farther  off  under  the  Eagle’s  tail  touching 

Goat 

1^° 

N26%® 

5+ 

the  Milky  Way 

Archer  22%^ 

N36J^® 

3 

In  all,  9  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  2nd  magnitude, 

4  of  3rd,  1  of  4th,  3  of  5th. 

The  Un figured  Stars  about  the  Eagle 

The  western  star  of  the  2  south  of  the  Eagle’s  head 

Goat 

N21?^® 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

N19M‘* 

3 

The  star  southwest  of  the  Eagle’s  right  shoulder 

Archer  26® 

N25® 

4+ 

The  star  south  of  this 

Archer  28}^® 

N20® 

3 

The  star  still  south  of  this 

Archer  29  %® 

N153^® 

5 

The  star  west  of  all  these 

Archer 

21 

NISH** 

3 

In  all,  6  stars,  of  which  4  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

1  of  4th,  1  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  the  Dolphin 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  tail 

Goat 

17%“ 

N29H** 

3- 

The  northern  one  of  the  remaining  2 

Goat 

18?^° 

N29® 

4- 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  southern  one  of  the  western  side  of  those  stars 

Goat 

18%° 

N27M‘* 

4 

in  the  rhomboidal  figure  of  4  sides 

Goat 

18%° 

N32® 

3- 

The  northern  one  of  the  western  side 

Goat 

20%° 

N33H® 

3- 

The  southern  one  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  rhombus 

Goat 

21%° 

N32® 

3- 

The  northern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

The  southern  one  of  the  3  between  the  tail  and  the 

Goat 

23%° 

N33H° 

3- 

rhombus 

Goat 

17%° 

N30H** 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  remaining  2  northern  ones 

Goat 

17%° 

N31H" 

6 

The  remaining  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

19° 

N31H** 

6 

In  all,  10  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

2  of  4th,  3  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  Forepart  of  Horse 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  head 

Goat 

26%° 

N20Lr 

dim 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

28° 

N20H® 

dim 

The  w'estern  one  of  the  2  in  the  jaw 

Goat 

26%° 

N25H** 

dim 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

27%° 

N25® 

dim 

In  all,  4  dim  stars. 

Constellation  of  the  Horse 

The  star  common  to  the  Horse’s  navel  and  Andro¬ 

meda’s  head 

Fishes 

17%° 

N26° 

2- 

The  star  in  the  loin  and  at  the  end  of  the  wing 

Fishes  12J^® 

N12H** 

2- 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder  and  at  the  beginning 
of  the  foot 

The  star  in  the  broad  of  the  back,  and  shoulder  of 

Fishes 

2%° 

N31® 

2- 

the  wing 

Water  Bearer  26?^® 

N19H‘* 

2- 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  body  under  the  wdng 

F’ishes 

4%° 

N25H** 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Fishes 

5° 

N25® 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  right  knee 

Water  Bearer  29® 

N35® 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  28}^® 

N34H" 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  2  close  together  in  the  chest 

Water  Bearer  26  }4® 

N29® 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  27® 

N29H° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  2  close  together  in  the  neck 

Water  Bearer  18J^® 

N18® 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  20  >^® 

N19® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  mane 

Water  Bearer  21  }^® 

N15® 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  20}4° 

N16® 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  close  together  in  the  heiid 

Water  Bearer 

9%° 

N16H** 

3 

242 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer 

8° 

N16®. 

4 

The  star  in  the  muzzle 

Water  Bearer 

N2234^ 

3  + 

The  star  in  the  right  ankle 

Water  Bearer  233^° 

N4134" 

4+ 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Water  Bearer  17 

N3434° 

4  + 

The  star  in  the  left  ankle 

Water  Bearer  123^® 

N363^° 

4+ 

In  all,  20  stars,  of  which  4  are  of  2n(i  magnitude, 

4  of  3rd,  9  of  4th,  3  of  5th. 

i  r 

T 

Constellation  of  Andromeda 

C 

The  star  in  the  broad  of  the  back 

Fishes  25  3<^® 

N2434" 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

Fishes  2634® 

N27® 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Fishes  24  }i® 

N23® 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  in  the  right  arm 

Fishes  23?i® 

N32® 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Fishes  2434° 

N33J4° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Fishes  25® 

N3234® 

5 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  at  the  end  of  the  right 

hand 

Fishes  1934° 

N4r 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Fishes  2034^ 

N42® 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  three 

Fishes  2234° 

N44® 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  arm 

Fishes  2434° 

N17>4° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  elbow 

1  Fishes  2534° 

N1534" 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  3  above  the  girdle 

Ram 

N26J4^ 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Ram 

N30® 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  n 

Ram 

2» 

N3234" 

4 

The  star  above  the  left  foot 

Ram 

N28° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  foot 

Ram 

N3734^ 

4- 

The  star  south  of  this  one 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  left  bend  of  the 

Ram 

15Ve’’ 

N3534° 

4  + 

knee 

Ram 

12M° 

N29° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Ram 

12° 

N28® 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  knee 

Ram 

N35}4‘^ 

,  5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  train 

Ram 

12%° 

N3434° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Ram 

14%° 

N3234‘' 

5 

The  star  outside  and  west  of  the  3  in  the  right  hand 

Fishes 

11%° 

N44®  'i’ 

3^' 

In  all,  23  stars,  of  which  4  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 

-■  r  [' 

15  of  4th,  4  of  5th. 

1 

Constellation  of  the  Triangle  ' 

The  star  at  the  vertex  of  the  Triangle 

Ram 

11° 

NI614® 

3 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  base 

Ram 

16° 

^"2034*" 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Ram 

16%° 

N1934‘’ 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Ram 

16%° 

N19® 

3 

In  all,  4  stars,  of  which  3  of  3rd  magnitude,  1  of  4th. 

— Thus,  in  all,  360  stars  for  the  northern  part. 

n, 

of  which  3  are  of  1st  magnitude,  18  of  2nd, 

81  of  3rd,  177  of  4th,  58  of  5th,  13  of  6th, 

9  dim,  1  nebular. 

Constellations  of  the  Stars  in  the  Zodiac 

Constellation  of  the  Ram 

f. 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  horn 

Ram 

6%“ 

N7}4" 

3- 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Ram 

7%“ 

N834° 

3 

The  northeni  one  of  the  2  in  the  muzzle 

Ram 

11° 

N734“ 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Ram 

11%° 

N6® 

5 

The  star  in  the  neck 

Ram 

6%° 

N534° 

5 

The  star  in  the  loins 

Ram 

17%° 

N6® 

6 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  tail 

Ram 

21%° 

N434® 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  tail 

Ram 

23%° 

N134° 

4 

Tte  middle  one  of  the  3 

Ram 

25%° 

N2H" 

4 

THE  ALMAGEST, 

VII 

243 

Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Ram  27° 

4 

The  star  in  the  calf 

Ram  19%° 

5 

The  star  under  the  bend  of  the  knee 

Ram  18° 

5 

The  star  in  the  hind-foot 

Ram  15° 

S5%° 

4+ 

In  all,  13  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 

4  of  4th,  6  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Ram 

The  star  above  the  head  which  Hipparchus  placed 
in  the  muzzle 

Ram  10%° 

N10%° 

3-1- 

The  eastern  and  brightest  one  of  the  4  above  the 
loins 

Ram  21%° 

N10%° 

4  ^ 

The  northern  one  of  the  remaining  fainter  3 

Ram  21%° 

N12%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Ram  19%° 

Nll%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Ram  19%° 

N10%° 

5 

In  all,  5  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  3rd  magnitude, 
1  of  4th,  3  of  5th. 


Constellation  of  the  Bull 


The  northern  star  of  the  4  in  the  section  i/’  ■ 

Ram  26%° 

S6° 

4 

The  one  next  it 

Ram  26° 

S7%° 

4 

The  one  again  next  to  this  last 

Ram  24%° 

S8%° 

4 

The  southernmost  one  of  the  4 

Ram  24%° 

S9%° 

4 

The  one  east  of  these  in  the  right  shoulder  blade 

Ram  29%° 

S9%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  chest 

Bull  3%° 

S8° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  Imee 

Bull  6%° 

S12%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  ankle 

Bull  3° 

S14%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Bull  12%° 

SIO*^ 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  forearm 

Of  those  in  the  face  called  the  Hyades,  the  one  on 

BuU  13° 

S13° 

4 

the  nostrils 

Bull  9° 

S5%° 

3- 

The  star  between  this  last  and  the  northern  eye 

BuU  10%° 

S4%° 

3- 

The  star  between  this  last  one  and  the  southern  eye 

Bull  10%° 

S5%° 

3- 

The  bright  red  star  of  the  Hyades  in  the  southern  eye 

BuU  12%° 

S5%° 

1 

The  other  one  in  the  northern  eye 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  southern  horn  and  .  '' 

BuU  11%° 

S3° 

3- 

the  ear  ’’ ' 

BuU  17%° 

S4° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  southern  hpm 

BuU  20%° 

S5° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these  "  ^ 

BuU  20° 

S3%° 

5 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  southern  horn 

BuU  27%° 

S2%° 

3 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  northern  horn 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  northern  horn  the  same  as 

BuU  15%° 

s%^ 

4 

the  one  in  the  Charioteer’s  right  foot 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  close  together  in  the 

BuU  25%° 

N5° 

3 

northern  ear 

BuU  12° 

N%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

BuU  11%° 

N%° 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  2  small  ones  in  the  neck 

BuU  7° 

N%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  southern  one  of  the  western  side  of  the  square 

BuU  9° 

Sl° 

6 

in  the  neck 

BuU  8° 

N5° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  western  side 

BuU  8%° 

N7%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

BuU  12° 

N3° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  eastern  side  1 ' 

BuU  11%° 

N5° 

5 

The  northern  hmit  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  Pleiads 

BuU  2%° 

N4%° 

5 

The  southern  limit  of  the  eastern  side 

BuU  2%° 

N3%° 

5 

The  eastern  and  narrowest  Hmit  of  the  Pleiads 

BuU  3%° 

N3%° 

5 

The  small  star  outside  and  north  of  the  Pleiads 

BuU  3%° 

N5‘’ 

4 

In  aU,  33  stars,  of  which  1  of  1st  magnitude,  7  of 
3rd,  11  of  4th,  13  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 


244 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Bull 

The  star  below  the  right  foot  and  the  shoulder-blade 

Ram  25® 

S17%® 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3  above  the  southern  horn 

Bull  20® 

S2® 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

BuU  21® 

Sl%® 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  below  the  tip  of  the 

BuU  26® 

S2® 

5 

southern  horn 

BuU  29® 

S6%® 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  western  star  of  the  5  eastern  ones  under  the 

BuU  29® 

S7%® 

5 

northern  horn 

BuU  27® 

5 

The  one  east  of  this 

BuU  29® 

Nl® 

5 

The  one  again  east  of  this 

Twins  1® 

NIM® 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  remaining  eastern  ones 

Twins  23^® 

N3%® 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Twins  3}^® 

Nl%® 

5 

In  all,  11  stars,  of  which  10  of  4th  magnitude, 

1  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  the  Twins 

The  star  in  the  head  of  the  western  Twin 

Twins  23>^® 

N9%® 

2 

The  red  star  in  the  head  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  26^® 

N6%® 

2 

The  star  in  the  left  forearm  of  the  western  Twin 

Twins  16^® 

NIO® 

4 

The  star  in  the  same  arm 

Twins  18?^® 

N7i4“ 

4 

The  star  east  of  this  one  and  in  the  broad  of  the  back 

The  one  east  of  this  in  the  right  shoulder  of  the  same 

Twins  22° 

NSH” 

4 

Twin 

Twins  24® 

4 

The  star  in  the  eastern  shoulder  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  26%® 

N2%“ 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  side  of  the  w'estem  Twin 

Twins  21  %® 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  side  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  23  %® 

NM' 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  knee  of  the  w^estem  Twin 

Twins  13® 

3 

The  star  under  the  left  knee  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  18  %® 

821/^“ 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  testicle  of  the  eastern  Tw’in 

The  star  under  the  bend  of  the  right  knee  of  the 

Twins  21%® 

3 

same  Twin 

Twins  21%® 

S6° 

3 

The  star  in  the  forward  foot  of  the  western  Twin 

Twins  6%® 

SIH" 

4  + 

The  star  east  of  this  in  the  same  foot 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  right  foot  of  the  w^estem 

Twins  8%® 

SIM" 

44- 

Twin 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  left  foot  of  the  eastern 

Twins  10  %® 

83^“ 

4  + 

Twin 

Twins  12® 

S7H” 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  foot  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  14  %® 

810H° 

4 

In  all,  18  stars,  of  w’hich  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude. 

5  of  3rd,  9  of  4th,  2  of  5th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Twins 

The  western  star  of  the  forward  foot  of  the  western 

Twin 

Twins  4%® 

4 

The  bright  w’estern  star  of  the  western  knee 

Twins  6%® 

4+ 

The  w^estern  star  of  the  left  knee  of  the  eastern  Twin 

The  northern  star  of  the  3  in  a  straight  hne  east  of 

Twins  15%® 

S2K° 

5 

the  right  hand  of  the  eastern  Twin 

Twins  28%® 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

The  southern  one  of  these  between  the  forearm  and 

Twins  26  %® 

83H° 

5 

hand 

Twins  26® 

5 

The  bright  one  east  of  these  3 

Crab  %® 

82?i“ 

4 

In  all,  7  stars,  of  which  3  are  of  4th  magnitude, 
4  of  5th. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VII  245 


Configurations 

Constellation  of  the  Crab 

The  middle  of  the  nebula  called  the  Crab,  in  the 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

breast 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  western  ones  of  the  square 

Crab  103^® 

neb. 

about  the  nebula 

Crab  7%" 

N1K° 

4- 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  western  ones 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  eastern  ones  of  the  square 

Crab  8° 

S1K° 

4- 

called  the  Asses 

Crab  lOYz^ 

4+ 

The  southern  one  of  these  2 

Crab  llYzf 

4-f 

The  star  in  the  southern  claw 

Crab  IGH"* 

4 

The  star  in  the  northern  claw 

Crab  8M" 

Nll^r 

4 

The  star  in  the  northern  hind-foot 

Crab  2%° 

Nr 

5 

The  star  in  the  southern  hind-foot 

In  all,  9  stars,  of  which  7  are  of  4th  magnitude, 

1  of  5th,  1  nebula. 

Crab  7Y& 

871^° 

> 

4-1- 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Crab 

The  star  above  the  joint  of  the  southern  claw 

Crab 

S23^° 

4- 

The  star  east  of  the  tip  of  the  southern  claw 

Crab  2lYef 

S5%° 

4- 

The  western  star  of  the  2  above  the  nebula 

Crab  14° 

N4%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

In  all,  4  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  4th  magnitude, 

2  of  5th. 

Crab  17° 

N7%° 

5 

Constellation  of  the  Lion 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  nostril 

Crab  183^° 

N10° 

4 

The  star  in  the  open  mouth 

Crab  213^° 

N7%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  head 

Crab  243^° 

N12° 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Crab  243^° 

N9%° 

3-i- 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  the  throat 

Lion  3^° 

Nll° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  the  3,  nearby 

Lion  2Yf 

N83^° 

2 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Lion  3i° 

N43^° 

3 

The  one  at  the  heart  called  Regulus 

Lion  23^° 

N%° 

1 

The  one  south  of  this,  in  the  chest 

Lion  334° 

Sl%“ 

4 

The  star  a  little  west  of  the  one  in  the  heart 

Lion  0° 

S4° 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  knee 

Crab  273^° 

0° 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  foreclaw 

Crab  243^° 

S3%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  foreclaw 

Crab  273^° 

S43^° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Lion  2^° 

S4%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  armpit 

Lion  93^° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  belly 

Lion  7° 

N4° 

6 

The  northern  one  of  the  other  eastern  2 

Lion  103^° 

N5%° 

6 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Lion  123^° 

N23^° 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  loin 

Lion  113^® 

N123^‘‘ 

6 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Lion  143^° 

N13%° 

2- 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  buttocks 

Lion  143^° 

Nll%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Lion  163^° 

N9%° 

3 

'rhe  star  in  the  calfs  of  the  legs 

Lion  203^° 

N5%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  hind-leg  joints 

Lion  21%° 

Nl%° 

4 

The  star  south  of  this  one,  in  the  forelegs 

The  star  in  the  hind-claws 

Lion  24%° 

4 

Lion  273^° 

S33^r 

5 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

In  all,  27  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  1st  magnitude, 

2  of  2nd,  6  of  3rd,  8  of  4th,  5  of  5th,  4  of  6th. 

Lion  243^° 

Nll%° 

1- 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Lion 

The  western  star  of  the  2  above  the  back 

Lion  6° 

N133^° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Lion  83^° 

N15%° 

5 

246 


PTOLEMY 


r 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  above  the  flank 

Lion 

17M“ 

N13^® 

4- 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion 

17H° 

SH'’ 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Lion 

18° 

S2^° 

5 

The  northernmost  part  of  the  nebula  called  the  Hair, 

lying  between  the  extremities  of  the  Lion  and 

the  Bear 

Lion 

24^° 

N30® 

dim 

The  western  one  of  the  eminent  southern  stars  of 

the  Hair 

Lion 

24Ji° 

N25® 

dim 

The  eastern  one  of  those  in  the  figure  of  the  ivy  leaf 

Lion 

28J^° 

N25H® 

dim 

In  all,  5  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  4th  magnitude, 

4  of  5th,  and  the  Hair. 

Constellation  of  the  Virgin 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  in  the  tip  of  the  skull 

Lion 

26M° 

mye 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Lion 

27° 

N5Ji® 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  face  east  of  these 

Virgin 

N8® 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

N5M® 

5 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  southern  and  left  wing 

Lion 

29° 

N}i® 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  4  in  the  left  wing 

Virgin 

8M” 

Nl^® 

..  3 

The  one  east  of  this 

Virgin 

13M° 

N2^® 

3 

The  star  east  of  this  again 

Virgin 

17M° 

N2}^® 

5 

The  last  and  eastern  one  of  these  4  ; . 

Virgin 

21° 

Nl^® 

The  star  in  the  right  side  under  the  girdle 

Virgin 

N83^® 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  right  and  northern 

wing 

Virgin 

8MV 

N13}^® 

5 

The  southern  of  the  2  remaining  ones 

Virgin 

10H° 

Nll%® 

6 

The  northern  one  of  these  called  Vindemiatrix 

Virgin 

12>^° 

N15K° 

3+ 

The  star  in  the  left  hand  called  Spica 

Virgin 

26?^° 

S2® 

1 

The  star  under  the  girdle  on  the  right  buttock 

Virgin 

24^° 

N8K^ 

3 

The  northern  star  of  the  western  side  of  the  square  , . 

in  the  left  thigh 

Virgin 

26^“ 

N3M" 

5 

The  southern  star  of  the  western  side 

Virgin 

27M° 

NM°  . 

6 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  of  the  eastern  side 

Balance 

0° 

N1M“ 

4- 

The  southern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

Virgin 

28° 

S3° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  knee 

Balance 

S1M“ 

5 

The  star  in  the.  hinder  part  of  the  right  thigh 

Virgin 

28° 

NSH” 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3  in  the  train  about  the  feet 

Balance 

6M° 

NTH" 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Balance 

7K“ 

N2%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  3 

Balance 

8M° 

Nll%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  and  southern  foot 

Balance  10® 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  and  northern  foot 

Balance 

12%® 

NgH" 

4 

In  all,  26  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude,  6  of 

3rd,  7  of  4th,  10  of  5th,  2  of  6th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Virgin 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  a  straight  line  under 

the  left  forearm 

Virgin 

S3J^° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Virgin 

19° 

S3}^° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

22M° 

S3M° 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  a  straight  line  under 

Spica 

Virgin 

27K° 

S7K° 

6 

The  middle  one  of  these  which  is  double 

Virgin 

28K" 

S8M° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Balance  5® 

S7M° 

6 

In  all,  6  stars,  of  which  4  are  of  5th  magnitude,  2  of  6th. 


BOOK  EIGHT 


1.  Tabular  Exposition  of  the  Constellations  of  the 
Southern  Hemisphere 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

Constellation  of  the  Balance 

The  bright  star  at  the  end  of  the  southern  claw  (of 

the  Scorpion) 

Balance  18® 

N?^® 

2 

The  one  north  of  and  dimmer  than  this  last 

The  bright  star  of  those  at  the  end  of  the  northern 

Balance  17® 

N23^® 

5 

claw 

Balance  223^° 

N8^® 

2 

The  dim  one  west  of  this 

Balance  17?^® 

N83^® 

5 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  southern  claw 

Balance  24® 

Sl^® 

4 

The  star  west  of  this  in  the  same  claw 

Balance  21 

N13i® 

4 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  northern  claw 

Balance  27%® 

N4?i® 

4 

The  one  east  of  this  in  the  same  claw 

Scorpion  3® 

N3}i® 

4- 

In  all,  8  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude, 

4  of  4th,  2  of  5th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Balance 

The  western  star  of  the  3  northern  ones  in  the 

northern  claw 

Balance  26 J/^® 

N9® 

5 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  eastern  ones 

Scorpion  3J^® 

N6?i® 

4- 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  4}^® 

N93i® 

4- 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  between  the  claws 

Scorpion  3^® 

N3^® 

6 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  remaining  eastern  ones 

Scorpion  J|® 

N3^® 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

The  western  star  of  the  more  southern  3  of  the 

Scorpion  1}^® 

Sl^® 

4 

southern  claw 

Balance  23® 

S73^® 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  remaining  eastern  ones 

Scorpion 

S8}^® 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

In  all,  9  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  3rd  magnitude, 

5  of  4th,  2  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 

Scorpion  2® 

S9%® 

4 

f* 

Constellation  of  the  Scorpion 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  bright  ones  in  the  forehead 

Scorpion  6}^*" 

N1M° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Scorpion  5%® 

3 

The  southern  of  the  3 

Scorpion 

S5“ 

3 

The  star  south  of  this  again,  in  one  of  the  feet 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  lying  beside  the  northern¬ 

Scorpion  6° 

3 

most  of  the  bright  ones 

Scorpion  7° 

NlJi” 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  63^® 

NK° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  3  bright  ones  in  the  body 

Scorpion  10  Ji® 

S3M° 

3 

The  red  middle  one  of  these  called  Antares 

Scorpion  12%® 

S4° 

2 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

The  western  one  of  the  2  beneath  these  in  the  farthest 

Scorpion  143^® 

3 

foot 

Scorpion  93^® 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  10J^° 

5 

The  star  in  the  first  joint  from  the  body 

Scorpion  183^® 

Sir 

3 

The  star  after  this  one  in  the  2nd  joint 

Scorpion  18?^® 

S15° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  double  star  in  the  3rd  joint 

Scorpion  20° 

S18^ 

4 

247 


248 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  southern  one  of  the  double 

Scorpion  20  3^° 

S18° 

4 

The  next  one  in  the  4th  joint 

Scorpion  23}^° 

S19}^° 

3 

The  star  after  this  one  in  the  5th  joint 

Scorpion  28J^° 

S18%° 

3 

The  star  next  to  this  last  in  the  6th  joint 

Archer 

Sl6?i° 

3 

The  star  in  the  7th  joint  near  the  center 

Scorpion  29° 

S15K° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  in  the  center 

Scorpion  27J/2° 

S13M° 

3 

The  western  one  of  these 

Scorpion  27° 

Sl3i^° 

4 

In  all,  21  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  2nd  magnitude, 

13  of  3rd,  5  of  4th,  2  of  oth. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Scorpion 

The  nebula  east  of  the  center 

Archer 

S13M° 

neb. 

The  western  star  of  the  2  north  of  the  center 

Scorpion  25J^° 

S6>^° 

5+ 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  253^° 

S4%° 

5 

In  all,  3  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  5th  magnitude. 

a  nebula. 

Constellation  of  the  Archer 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  arrow 

Archer 

4H° 

S6,%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  grip  of  the  left  hand 

Archer 

S6%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  southern  part  of  the  bow 

The  southern  star  of  those  in  the  northern  part  of 

Archer 

8° 

S10%° 

3 

the  bow 

Archer 

9° 

Sl%° 

3 

The  northern  of  these,  at  the  tip  of  the  bow 

Archer 

N2%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Archer 

15H° 

S3%° 

3 

The  star  west  of  this  in  the  arrow 

Archer 

13° 

S33^° 

4 

The  nebular  and  double  star  in  the  eye 

Archer 

15H° 

N%» 

neb. 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  head 

Archer 

15^° 

X2%° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Archer 

17%° 

Xl%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

The  southern  one  of  the  3  in  the  northern  part  of 

Archer 

193^° 

N2° 

4 

cloak 

Archer 

21%° 

N2%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Archer 

22%° 

N4%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  3 

Archer 

22%° 

N6%° 

4 

The  dim  one  east  of  these  3 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  southern  part  of 

Archer 

25%° 

N5%° 

6 

cloak 

Archer 

29%° 

X5%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Archer 

27%° 

N2° 

6 

The  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

Archer 

22%° 

Sl%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

Archer 

24%° 

S2%» 

4 

Of  the  3  in  the  back,  the  star  in  the  broad  of  the  back 

Archer 

20° 

S2,%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these  in  the  shoulder  blade 

Archer 

17%° 

S4%» 

4-f* 

The  remaining  one  below  the  armpit 

Archer 

16%° 

S6%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  fore-ankle 

Archer 

17%° 

S23° 

2 

The  star  in  the  knee  of  the  same  foot 

Archer 

17° 

S18° 

2- 

The  star  in  the  right  fore-ankle 

Archer 

6%° 

S13° 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  thigh 

Archer 

27%° 

S13%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  forearm  behind 

The  western  star  of  the  northern  side  of  the  4  at  the 

Archer 

23%° 

S20%° 

3 

beginning  of  the  tail 

Archer 

27%° 

S4%° 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  the  northern  side 

Archer 

28%° 

S4%° 

5 

The  western  star  of  the  southern  side 

Archer 

28%° 

85^6° 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  the  southern  side 

Archer 

29%° 

S6%° 

5 

In  all,  31  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude. 

9  of  3rd,  9  of  4th,  8  of  5th,  2  of  6th,  a  nebula. 

Constellation  of  the  Goat 

The  northern  star  of  3  in  the  eastern  horn 

Goat 

7%° 

N7%° 

3 

The  middle  star  of  these 

Goat 

7%“ 

N6%° 

6 

THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII  249 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  southern  one  of  the  3 

Goat 

N5° 

3 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  western  horn 

Goat 

5° 

N8° 

6 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  in  the  muzzle 

Goat 

9° 

N%° 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  remaining  2 

Goat 

Nl%° 

6 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

Nl%° 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  3  under  the  right  eye 

Goat 

6^" 

N%° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  neck 

Goat 

11^° 

N3%° 

6 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Goat 

11%° 

N%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  bent  knee 

Goat 

11%° 

S8%° 

4 

The  star  under  the  right  knee 

Goat 

10%° 

S6%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

The  western  star  of  the  2  close  together  under  the 

Goat 

16%° 

S7%° 

4 

belly 

Goat 

20%° 

S6%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

20%° 

S6° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  middle  of  the  body 

Goat 

18%° 

S4%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  remaining  western  stars 

Goat 

16%° 

S4° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Goat 

16%° 

S2%° 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  back 

Goat 

16%° 

0° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  southern  part  of  the 

Goat 

21° 

s%° 

4 

thorn 

Goat 

23%° 

S4%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Goat 

25° 

S4%° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  near  the  tail 

Goat 

24%° 

S2%° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  western  one  of  the  4  in  the  northern  part  of  the 

Goat 

26%° 

S2° 

3 

tail 

Goat 

26%° 

N%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  remaining  3 

Goat 

28%° 

0° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Goat 

27%° 

N2%° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these  at  the  tail  end 

Goat 

28%° 

N4%° 

5 

In  all,  28  stars,  of  which  4  of  3rd  magnitude,  9  of 

4th,  9  of  5th,  6  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  the  Water  Bearer 

The  star  in  the  head  of  the  Water  Bearer 

Water  Bearer 

%° 

N15%° 

5 

The  brighter  of  the  2  in  the  riglit  shoulder 

Water  Bearer 

6%° 

Nll° 

3 

The  dimmer  one  beneath  this 

Water  Bearer 

5%° 

N9%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Goat 

26%° 

N8%° 

3 

The  star  under  it  in  the  back,  as  if  under  the  armpit 

Goat 

27%° 

N6%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  left  hand  in  the  strap 

Goat 

17%° 

N5%° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Goat 

16%° 

N8° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

Goat 

14%° 

‘  N8%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  right  forearm 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  the  end  of  the  right 

Water  Bearer 

9%° 

N8%° 

3 

hand 

Water  Bearer  11%° 

N10%° 

3 

The  western  one  of  the  remaining  2  northern  ones 

Water  Bearer  12° 

N9° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  13%° 

N8%° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  close  together  in  the  right 

socket 

Water  Bearer 

6%° 

N3° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer 

7° 

N3%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  right  buttock 

Water  Bearer 

8%° 

s%° 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  in  the  left  buttock 

Water  Bearer 

1%° 

Sl%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer 

3%° 

6 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  in  the  right  shin 

Water  Bearer  11%° 

S7%° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  these  below  the  bend  of  the  loiee 

Water  Bearer  11%° 

S5° 

4 

The  star  in  the  left  calf 

Water  Bearer 

4%° 

S5%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  left  shin 

Water  Bearer 

8%° 

S10° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  these  under  the  knee 

The  western  one  of  those  in  the  flow  of  water  from 

Water  Bearer 

7%° 

S9° 

5 

the  hand 

Water  Bearer  15° 

N2° 

4  ' 

250  PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn 

The  star  near  this  last  southwards 

Water  Bearer  15%° 

N%° 

4 

The  star  near  this  last  after  the  curve 

Water  Bearer  17%° 

si%° 

4 

The  star  still  east  of  this 

Water  Bearer  20° 

s%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  curve  south  of  this  last 

Water  Bearer  20%° 

Sl%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  south  of  this 

Water  Bearer  19° 

S3%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2 

Water  Bearer  19%° 

S4%° 

4 

The  lone  star  distant  from  these  towards  the  south 

Water  Bearer  20%° 

S8%° 

5 

The  western  star  of  the  2  close  together  after  this  one 

Water  Bearer  22%° 

Sll° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  23%° 

S10%° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  the  nearby  stream 

Water  Bearer  21%° 

S14° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Water  Bearer  22%° 

S14%° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  23%° 

S15%° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  next  3,  in  like  manner 

Water  Bearer  17° 

S14%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  3 

Water  Bearer  18%° 

S15%° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  17%° 

S15° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  remaining  stream 

Water  Bearer  11%° 

S14%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  remaining  2 

Water  Bearer  12%° 

S15%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

The  last  star  in  the  water  and  in  the  southern  Fishes 

Water  Bearer  13%° 

S14° 

4 

mouth 

In  all,  42  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 

Water  Bearer  7° 

S20%° 

1 

9  of  3rd,  18  of  4th,  13  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Water  Bearer 

The  western  star  of  the  3  stars  east  of  the  water^s 

curve 

Water  Bearer  26%° 

S15%° 

4-j- 

The  northern  one  of  the  remaining  2 

Water  Bearer  29%° 

S14%° 

4-1- 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  29° 

S18%° 

4+ 

In  all,  3  stars  of  4th  magnitude. 

Constellation  of  the  Fishes 

The  star  in  the  mouth  of  the  western  Fish 

Water  Bearer  21%° 

N9%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  top  of  his  head 

Water  Bearer  24%° 

N7%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  26° 

N9%° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  back 

Water  Bearer  28%° 

N9%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Fishes  %° 

N7%° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  belly 

Water  Bearer  26° 

N4%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer  29%° 

N3%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  tail  of  the  same  Fish 

Fishes  6° 

N6%° 

4 

The  first  star  from  the  tail,  in  the  cord 

Fishes  11° 

N5%° 

6 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Fishes  13° 

N3%° 

6 

The  western  star  of  the  3  bright  ones  following 

Fishes  17%° 

N2%° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Fishes  20%° 

Nl%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  little  ones  in  the  curve 

Fishes  23° 

s%^ 

4 

under  these 

Fishes  22%° 

S2° 

6 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Fishes  23° 

S5° 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  3  after  the  curve 

Fishes  26%° 

S2%° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Fishes  28%° 

S4%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Ram  %° 

S7%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  knot  of  the  2  cords 

Ram  2%° 

S8%° 

3 

The  star  west  of  the  knot,  in  the  northern  cord 

Ram  %° 

Sl%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  next  3  after  it 

Ram  %° 

Nl%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Ram  %° 

N5%° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  3,  and  at  the  tail’s  end 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  mouth  of  the  eastern 

Ram  %° 

N9° 

4 

Fish 

Ram  2° 

N21%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Ram  1  %° 

N21%° 

5 

The  eastern  of  the  3  little  ones  in  the  head 

Fishes  28%° 

N20° 

6 

251 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Fishes  27?i° 

N19%° 

6 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  southern  fin  after 

Fishes  27° 

N20%° 

6 

the  star  in  Andromeda’s  elbow 

Fishes  25?^° 

N14%° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Fishes  26Ji° 

N13%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Fishes  27%° 

N12° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  belly 

Ram  2%° 

N17° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Fishes  29%° 

N15%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  eastern  fin  near  the  tail 

In  all,  34  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  the  3rd  magnitude, 

22  of  the  4th,  3  of  the  5th,  7  of  the  6th, 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Fishes 

The  western  star  of  the  2  northern  ones  of  the  square 

Ram  0° 

Nll%° 

4 

under  the  western  Fish 

Fishes  1  %° 

S2%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Fishes  2%° 

S2%° 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  southern  side 

Fishes  %° 

S5i^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  southern  side 

In  all  4  stars  of  4th  magnitude. 

— Thus,  in  all,  346  stars  of  the  zodiac,  of  which 

5  are  of  1st  magnitude,  9  of  2nd,  64  of  3rd, 

133  of  4th,  105  of  5th,  27  of  6th,  3  nebulae, 
and  the  Hair. 

Fishes  2%° 

85^“ 

4 

Constellation  of  the  Sea-Monster 


The  star  at  the  nostril  tip 

The  eastern  star  of  the  3  in  the  muzzle,  at  the  tip  of 

Ram  17%° 

S7%° 

4 

the  jaw 

Ram  17%° 

S12%° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these  in  the  middle  of  the  mouth 

Ram  12%° 

Sll%° 

3 

The  western  one  of  the  3,  in  the  cheek 

Ram  10%° 

S14° 

3 

The  star  in  the  brow  and  eye 

Ram  10%° 

S8%° 

4 

The  star  north  of  this  in  the  hair  of  the  head 

Ram  12%° 

S6%° 

4 

The  star  west  of  these  in  the  flowing  hair 

The  northern  star  of  the  western  side  of  the  square 

Ram  7%° 

S4%° 

4 

in  the  chest 

Ram  3° 

S24%° 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  western  side 

Ram  3%° 

S28° 

4 

The  northern  star  of  the  eastern  side 

Ram  6%° 

S25%° 

4 

The  southern  star  of  the  eastern  side 

Ram  7° 

S27%° 

3 

The  noiiddle  one  of  the  3  in  the  body 

Fishes  22° 

S25%° 

3 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Fishes  23° 

S30%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  3 

Fishes  25° 

S20° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  near  the  tail 

Fishes  19%° 

S15%° 

3 

The  western  one  of  these 

The  northern  star  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  square 

Fishes  15° 

S15%° 

3 

near  the  tail 

Fishes  11° 

S13%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

Fishes  10%° 

S14%° 

5 

The  northern  star  of  the  western  side 

Fishes  9%° 

S13° 

5+ 

The  southern  one  of  the  western  side 

Fishes  9° 

S14° 

5+ 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  at  the  tail’s  tip 

Fishes  4%° 

S9%° 

3- 

The  star  at  the  tail’s  southern  end 

Fishes  5%° 

S20%° 

3 

In  all,  22  stars,  of  which  10  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

8  of  4th,  4  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  Orion 

The  nebula  in  Orion’s  head 

Bull  27° 

S13%° 

neb. 

The  bright  red  star  in  the  right  shoulder 

Twins  2° 

S17° 

1- 

The  star  in  the  left  shoulder 

Bull  24° 

S17%° 

2 

The  eastern  star  below  this 

BuU  25° 

4- 

252 


PTOLEMY 


Config^urations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  star  in  the  right  elbow 

T\\ins 

4^° 

814}^° 

4 

The  star  in  the  right  forearm 

The  eastern  double  star  of  the  southern  side  of  the 

T\rins 

siijr 

6 

square  in  the  right  hand 

Twins 

SIO*’ 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  southern  side 

Twins 

6° 

4 

The  eastern  star  of  the  northern  side 

Twins 

S8^° 

6 

The  western  star  of  the  northern  side 

Twins 

S8M‘’ 

6 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  club 

Twins 

S3M° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  eastern  one  of  the  4  stars  in  a  straight  line  in 

Twins 

4%° 

S4M° 

5 

the  back 

BuU 

27H° 

S19%" 

4 

The  star  west  of  this  one 

Bull 

26H° 

820° 

6 

The  star  still  west  of  this  last 

Bull 

25 

8203^° 

6 

The  last  and  western  one  of  the  4 

The  northern  one  of  those  in  the  skin  held  by  the  left 

Bull 

24M° 

820?i° 

5 

hand 

Bull 

20H° 

88° 

4 

The  2nd  one  from  the  northernmost 

Bull 

88 

4 

The  3rd  from  the  northernmost 

BuU 

18“ 

81034° 

4 

The  4th  from  the  northernmost 

Bull 

16M° 

8l2jr 

4 

The  5th  from  the  northernmost 

BuU 

15M° 

814}4° 

4 

The  6th  from  the  northernmost 

Bull 

14^“ 

815^° 

3 

The  7th  from  the  northernmost 

BuU 

14^^ 

81734° 

3 

The  8th  from  the  northernmost 

BuU 

15^° 

820H° 

3 

The  last  and  southernmost  of  those  in  the  skin 

Bull 

16^“ 

82134° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  the  belt 

BuU 

25^“ 

S24>^° 

2 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Bull 

27H‘ 

824^r 

2 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Bull 

28}4° 

S25?i° 

2 

The  star  in  the  handle  of  the  dagger 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  bunched  at  the  tip  of  the 

BuU 

23H° 

8255^^ 

3 

dagger 

Bull 

26M° 

82834° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

BuU 

26%“ 

829)4° 

3- 

The  southern  one  of  the  3 

BuU 

27“ 

829?^^° 

3 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  under  the  tip  of  the  handle 

BuU 

27%“ 

830K° 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

The  bright  star  in  the  left  foot  common  with  the 

Bull 

26%“ 

830^6° 

4 

Water 

The  northern  one  of  those  above  the  ball  of  the 

Bull 

19%“ 

831)4° 

1 

ankle  joint  in  the  shin 

Bull 

21“ 

830)4° 

4  + 

The  star  outside  under  the  left  heel 

Bull 

23%“ 

831)4° 

4 

The  star  under  the  right  and  eastern  knee 

In  all,  38  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  the  1st  magni¬ 
tude,  4  of  the  2nd,  8  of  the  3rd,  15  of  the  4th, 

3  of  the  5th,  5  of  the  6th,  a  nebula. 

Constellation  of  the  River 

The  star  after  the  star  in  the  foot  of  Orion  at  the 

Twins 

%° 

833)4° 

3  + 

beginning  of  the  River 

The  star  north  of  this  one  in  the  bend  near  Orion’s 

BuU 

O 

00 

831^° 

4-f 

shin 

Bull 

18%“ 

82834° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  after  this  one 

BuU 

18“ 

829^r 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

BuU 

14%“ 

828)4° 

4 

Again  the  eastern  one  of  the  next  2 

Bull 

13%“ 

825^° 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

Bull 

10%“ 

825)4° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  after  this  last 

BuU 

6%“ 

826° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Bull 

5%° 

827° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

Bull 

2%“ 

827^4° 

4 

The  eastern  star  of  the  4  in  the  next  interval 

Ram 

27“ 

832 

3 

The  star  west  of  this  one 

Ram 

24%“ 

831° 

4 

The  star  west  again  of  this  last 

Ram 

24%“ 

828^° 

3 

THE  ALMAGEST,  VUI 


253 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  western  one  of  the  4 

Ram 

22° 

S28® 

3 

Likewise  the  eastern  one  of  the  4  in  the  next  interval 

Ram 

17 

8251^® 

3 

The  star  west  of  this  last 

Ram 

823^6** 

4 

The  star  again  west  of  this 

Ram 

12M° 

823 K** 

3 

The  western  one  of  the  4 

The  first  star  in  the  bend  of  the  River  and  touching 

Ram 

10M° 

823 

4 

the  chest  of  the  Sea-Monster 

Ram 

8323^" 

4 

The  star  east  of  this 

Ram 

S34>6" 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  next  3 

Ram 

838  i/i" 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Ram 

1356° 

S38H" 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

The  northern  one  of  the  western  side  of  the  4  in  a 

Ram 

175^° 

839° 

4 

trapezium 

Ram 

215^° 

841 H'’ 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  western  side 

Ram 

21 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  eastern  side 

Ram 

22 

S43M° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  this  side  and  last  of  the  4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  distant  stars  to  the  east 

Ram 

24%° 

S43H° 

4 

and  close  together 

Bull 

4%° 

850H° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Bull 

0° 

SolH" 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  next  2  after  the  turn 

Ram 

28%° 

S53J6" 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

Ram 

255^° 

8533^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  next  interv'al 

Ram 

175^° 

853° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Ram 

14%° 

S53H° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

Ram 

11%° 

8523^° 

4 

The  last  and  bright  star  of  the  River 

Ram 

%° 

8533^° 

1 

In  all,  34  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 
5  of  3rd,  26  of  4th,  2  of  5th. 


Cmstellation  of  the  Hare 

The  northern  star  of  the  western  side  of  the  square 


down  over  the  ears 

Bull  19M° 

835° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  western  side 

Bull  19J^° 

8363^° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

Bull  213^° 

835%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  eastern  side 

BuU  21>^° 

836%° 

5 

The  star  in  the  chin 

Bull  19H° 

8393^° 

4+ 

The  star  in  the  left  forefoot 

Bull  163^° 

845%° 

4  + 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  body 

Bull 

8413^0° 

3 

The  star  under  the  belly 

Bull  24^° 

844 3i° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  hind-feet 

Twins  1° 

8443^° 

44- 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Bull  29° 

845%° 

4-h 

The  star  in  the  loin 

T\sins  0° 

838%° 

44- 

The  star  at  the  tail’s  tip 

Twins  2J^° 

8383^° 

44* 

In  all,  12  stars,  of  wMch  2  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

6  of  4th,  4  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  the  Dog 

The  brightest  and  red  star  in  the  face  called  the  Dog 

Twins  17J^° 

8393^° 

1 

The  star  in  the  ears 

Twins  19?^° 

835° 

4 

The  star  in  the  head 

Twins  213^° 

8363^° 

0 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  neck 

Twins  23  H° 

837%° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Twins  253^° 

840° 

4 

The  star  in  the  chest 

Twins  203^° 

842%° 

5 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  right  knee 

Twins  163^°’ 

841%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Tw’ins  16° 

84234° 

5 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  forefoot 

Twins  11° 

841%° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  left  knee 

Twins  14?'3° 

84634** 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Twins  163^° 

845%° 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  in  the  left  shoulder 

Twins  24^° 

84634" 

4 

The  western  one  of  these 

Twins  21%° 

847° 

5 

254 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  left  thigh 

Twins  26^® 

S48Ji° 

3- 

The  star  under  the  belly  betwen  the  thighs 

Twins  23?^° 

S51H° 

3 

The  star  in  the  joint  of  the  right  foot 

Twins  23° 

S55K" 

4 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  right  foot 

Twins  9Ji° 

S53Ji° 

3 

The  star  in  the  tail 

In  all,  18  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 

5  of  3rd,  5  of  4th,  7  of  5th. 

Crab  2K° 

S50?^° 

3- 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Dog 

The  star  north  of  the  Dog’s  head 

The  southernmost  one  of  the  4  in  a  straight  line 

Twins  19J^° 

S25M® 

4 

under  the  hind-feet 

Twins  10° 

S61H° 

4 

The  star  north  of  this 

Twins  llJi° 

858^** 

4 

The  star  still  north  of  this 

Twins  13° 

S57° 

4 

The  last  and  northern  star  of  the  4 

The  western  star  of  the  3  in  a  straight  line  east  of 

Twins  14}^° 

S56° 

4 

these  4 

BuU  28° 

S553^° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Twins  3^° 

S57J^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Twins  2J^° 

S59%° 

4 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  bright  ones  under  these 

Bull  29° 

S59?i° 

2 

The  western  star  of  these 

Bull  26° 

S57^° 

2 

The  last  and  southern  star  of  the  foregoing 

In  all,  11  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  2nd  magnitude, 

9  of  4th. 

Bull  22K® 

S59H° 

4 

Constellation  of  Procyon  {Little  Dog) 

The  star  in  the  neck 

Twins  25° 

S14* 

4 

The  bright  star  in  the  hinder  parts  called  Procyon 

In  all,  2  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 

1  of  4th. 

Twins  29}4° 

S16H“ 

1 

Constellation  of  the  Argus 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  stern-post  ornament 

Crab  lOH^ 

S423^° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  close  together  above  the 

Crab  14H° 

S43}i° 

3 

Shield  in  the  stern 

Crab  8%° 

S45° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Crab  8^° 

S46H" 

4 

The  star  west  of  these 

Crab  5M° 

S45M° 

4 

The  bright  star  in  the  middle  of  the  Shield 

Crab 

S47K" 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  3  below  the  Shield 

Crab  5H° 

849^^* 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Crab  93^° 

849H° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Crab  8}^° 

849K“ 

4 

The  star  in  the  goose  neck  of  the  stern 

Crab  14° 

849%° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  in  the  stern-keel 

Crab  4° 

853° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Crab  4° 

858%° 

3 

The  northern  of  those  in  the  deck  of  the  poop 

Crab  10 

855%° 

5 

The  western  one  of  the  next  3 

Crab  12  H° 

858%° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Crab  13?^° 

857%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Crab  16M° 

857%° 

4 

The  bright  one  east  of  these,  on  the  deck 

The  western  one  of  the  2  dim  stars  under  the  bright 

Crab  21 

858%° 

2 

one 

Crab  ISH"* 

860° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Crab  21° 

859%° 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  above  the  bright  one 

Crab  23H° 

856%° 

5 

The  western  one  of  these 

The  northern  star  of  the  3  in  the  shields  near  the 

Crab  24^*^ 

857%° 

5 

mastholder 

Lion  5  ?^° 

851%° 

4  + 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion  6  K° 

855%° 

4  + 

The  southern  one  of  the  3 

Lion  4° 

857%° 

4+ 

THE  ALMAGEST, 

VIII 

255 

Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

M  agn. 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  close  together  under  these 

Lion 

S60° 

4+ 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Lion 

9° 

S61Ji° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  middle  of  the  mast 

Lion 

S51^° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Crab 

29>i° 

S49° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  near  the  tip  of  the  mast 

Crab 

28° 

S43J^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Crab 

29° 

S433^° 

4 

The  star  below  the  3rd  and  eastern  shield 

Lion 

14K° 

S543^° 

2  i- 

The  star  on  the  section  of  the  deck 

Lion 

17^° 

S51K" 

2- 

The  star  between  the  oars  in  the  keel 

Crab 

S63° 

4 

The  dim  star  east  of  this 

Crab 

19° 

S64J^° 

6 

The  bright  star  east  of  this  below  the  deck 

Lion 

0° 

S63^° 

2 

The  bright  star  south  of  this  in  the  lower  keel 

Lion 

S69%° 

2 

The  western  star  of  the  3  east  of  this 

Lion 

S65?i° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion 

21H° 

S65^° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Of  the  2  east  of  these,  the  western  one  near  the 

Lion 

26° 

S67M° 

2 

section 

Virgin 

1° 

S62%^ 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  northern  and  western 

Virgin 

8° 

S62)i° 

3 

oar 

Twins 

4° 

S655^° 

4+ 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Of  the  2  in  the  remaining  oar  the  western  star  called 

Twins 

20K“ 

S65?i° 

3+ 

Canopus 

Twins 

S75° 

1 

The  last  and  eastern  one  of  these 

In  all,  45  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 

6  of  2nd,  11  of  3rd,  19  of  4th,  7  of  5th,  1  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  the  Water-Snake 

Of  the  2  western  stars  in  the  head,  the  southern  one 

Twins 

29° 

S713^° 

3+ 

in  the  nostrils 

Crab 

14° 

S15° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these,  above  the  eye 

Of  the  2  stars  east  of  these,  the  northern  one  near  the 

Crab 

S133^° 

4 

top  of  the  head 

Crab 

15H° 

S113^° 

4  i 

The  southern  one  of  these,  in  the  open  mouth 

Crab 

15M° 

S14Ji° 

4 

The  star  east  of  them  all  in  the  jaw 

Crab 

17H° 

S12K° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  2  at  the  beginning  of  the  neck 

Crab 

20M° 

Sll^° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Crab 

233^° 

Sl3?i° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  next  3  in  the  curve  of  the  neck 

Crab 

28^° 

S153^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Lion 

S145^° 

4 

The  southernmost  of  these 

The  dim  northern  star  of  the  2  close  together  in  the 

Crab 

28>^° 

S17>^° 

4 

south 

Crab 

29H° 

S19M° 

6 

The  bright  one  of  these  2 

Lion 

0° 

S20}^° 

2 

The  western  star  of  the  3  east  of  the  curve 

Lion 

6° 

S26i^° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion 

S26° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

The  western  one  of  the  next  3  almost  in  a  straight 

Lion 

11K° 

S23K® 

4 

line 

Lion 

18° 

S24^° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Lion 

20° 

823^** 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Lion 

23° 

S22H° 

3 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  after  the  base  of  the  Bowl 

Virgin 

13^° 

825^** 

4+ 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

2H° 

8303^° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  triangle  after  these 

Virgin 

12K° 

831H° 

4 

The  middle  and  southern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

143^" 

8333^° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Virgin 

163^° 

S313^° 

3 

The  star  behind  the  Raven  near  the  tail 

Balance 

0° 

8l3Ji° 

4+ 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

In  all,  25  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  2nd  magnitude, 

3  of  3rd,  19  of  4th,  1  of  5th,  1  of  6th, 

Balance  13}^° 

817%° 

44- 

256 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Water-Snake 

The  star  in  the  southern  part  of  the  head 

Crab 

12H° 

823^° 

3 

The  star  far  east  of  those  in  the  neck 

Lion 

11° 

S16H° 

3 

In  all,  2  stars  of  3rd  magnitude. 

Constellation  of  the  Bowl 

The  star  in  the  base  of  the  Bowl  common  to  the 

Water-Snake 

Lion 

S23° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  the  middle  of  the  Bowl 

Virgin 

23^° 

S19K° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Virgin 

0° 

S18° 

4 

The  star  on  the  southern  edge  of  the  face 

Virgin 

7° 

smA” 

4  + 

The  star  on  the  northern  edge 

Lion 

29H" 

snA” 

4 

The  star  on  the  southern  handle 

Virgin 

9H° 

S16K° 

4- 

The  star  on  the  northern  handle 

Virgin 

SUA" 

4 

In  all,  7  stars  of  4th  magnitude. 

Constellation  of  the  Raven 

The  star  in  the  beak  and  common  with  the  Water- 

snake 

Virgin 

S2l%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  neck  near  the  head 

Virgin 

14M° 

S19%“ 

3 

The  star  in  the  breast 

Virgin 

16J^° 

S18M° 

5 

The  star  in  the  western  and  right  wing 

Virgin 

13K° 

S14%“ 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  in  the  eastern  wing 

Virgin 

16?i° 

SUA” 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  foot,  common  with  the 

Virgin 

17° 

S11H° 

4 

Water-Snake 

In  all,  7  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  3rd  magnitude. 

Virgin 

20H^ 

S18K° 

3 

1  of  4th,  1  of  5th. 

Constellation  of  the  Centaur 

The  southernmost  of  the  4  in  the  head 

Balance  10 

S21A° 

5  + 

The  northernmost  of  these 

Balance  10® 

818^° 

54- 

The  western  star  of  the  remaining  2  middles  ones 

Balance 

9H° 

S20H° 

44- 

The  eastern  and  last  one  of  these  4 

Balance  10° 

820° 

54“ 

The  star  on  the  left  and  western  shoulder 

Balance 

6K° 

825%° 

3 

The  star  on  the  right  shoulder 

Balance  15?^° 

S22A° 

3 

The  star  on  the  left  shoulder  blade 

The  northern  star  of  the  2  western  ones  of  the  4  in 

Balance 

S27A’’ 

4 

the  wand 

Balance  18 

S22A° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Balance  19}^° 

823M° 

4 

Of  the  remaining  2,  the  star  at  the  tip  of  the  wand 

Balance  22° 

818}^° 

4 

The  remaining  one  south  of  this 

Balance  22J^° 

820%° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3  in  the  right  side 

Balance  13}^° 

828%° 

44- 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Balance  14° 

829%° 

44“ 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Balance  15}^° 

828° 

44* 

The  star  in  the  right  arm 

Balance  16}^° 

826%° 

4+ 

The  star  in  the  right  forearm 

Balance  22^° 

825%° 

3 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  right  hand 

Balance  27}^° 

824%° 

4 

The  bright  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  human  body 

Balance  18° 

833%° 

34- 

The  eastern  star  of  the  2  dim  stars  north  of  this  one 

Balance  17?^° 

831° 

5 

The  western  one  of  these 

Balance  16J^° 

833° 

5 

The  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  back 

Balance  123^° 

S34%° 

5 

The  star  west  of  this  last  on  the  horse’s  back 

Balance 

9° 

837%° 

5 

The  eastern  star  of  the  3  in  the  loins 

Balance 

840° 

3 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Balance 

5° 

843° 

4 

The  western  one  of  the  3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  close  together  in  the  right 

Balance 

2%- 

841° 

5 

thigh 

Balance 

846%° 

3 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Balance 

3M° 

846%° 

4 

257 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Magn, 

The  star  in  the  chest  under  the  horse^s  armpit 

Balance 

mA° 

8403^’’ 

4 

The  western  star  of  the  2  under  the  belly 

Balance 

843** 

2 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Balance 

843 

3 

The  star  in  the  bend  of  the  right  foot 

Balance 

10° 

8513^’’ 

2 

The  star  in  the  ankle  of  the  same  foot 

Balance 

15}^° 

851%° 

2 

The  star  under  the  ankle  of  the  left  foot 

Balance 

855%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  frog  of  the  same  foot 

Balance 

11K° 

S55%° 

2 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  right  forefoot 

Scorpion 

8^° 

S41%° 

1 

The  star  in  the  knee  of  the  left  foot 

Balance 

241^° 

S45%° 

2 

The  star  outside  under  the  right  hind-foot 

Balance 

849%° 

4 

In  all,  37  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  1st  magnitude, 
5  of  2nd,  7  of  3rd,  16  of  4th,  8  of  5th. 


Constellation  of  the  Wild  Beast  (Lupus) 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  hind-foot  near  the  Cen- 


taur’s  hand 

Balance  28° 

824%° 

3 

The  star  in  the  hand  of  the  same  foot 

Balance  25%° 

S29M° 

3 

The  western  star  of  the  2  on  the  shoulder-blade 

Scorpion  1° 

S21M° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  4%° 

821° 

4 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  Wild  Beast^s  body 

Scorpion  3° 

S25K° 

4 

The  star  in  the  beUy  under  the  flank 

Scorpion  %° 

827° 

5 

The  star  in  the  thigh 

The  northern  one  of  the  2  near  the  beginning  of  the 

Scorpion  %° 

829° 

5 

thigh 

Scorpion  4%° 

828 J^° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  3%° 

830}^° 

5 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  loins 

Scorpion  5%° 

833 J^° 

5 

The  southern  star  of  the  3  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

Balance  22° 

831 Ji° 

5 

The  middle  one  of  the  3 

Balance  21%° 

830 J^° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Balance  23° 

8291^° 

4+ 

The  southern  star  of  the  2  in  the  neck 

Scorpion  8%° 

817° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  9%° 

815Ji° 

4+ 

The  western  one  of  the  2  in  the  muzzle 

Scorpion  5%° 

813M° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  6%° 

S11J^° 

4 

The  southern  one  of  the  2  in  fore-foot 

Balance  27%° 

811%° 

4+ 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Balance  26%° 

810° 

4+ 

In  all,  19  stars,  of  which  2  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 


11  of  4th,  6  of  5th. 


Constellation  of  the  Censer  (Ara) 


The  northern  star  of  the  2  in  the  base 

Scorpion  27%° 

S22%° 

6 

The  southern  one  of  these 

Archer  3° 

S25%° 

4 

The  star  in  the  middle  of  the  altar-like  vessel 

Scorpion  26%° 

S26%° 

4+ 

The  northern  one  of  the  3  in  the  brazier 

Scorpion  20%° 

si%° 

5 

The  southern  one  of  the  remaining  2  contiguous  ones 

Scorpion  25%° 

S34%° 

4-f 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Scorpion  25° 

S33%° 

4 

The  star  at  the  end  of  the  burning 

Scorpion  20%° 

S34%° 

4 

In  all,  7  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  4th  magnitude, 
2  of  5th. 


Constellation  of  the  Southern  Crown 

The  outside  westein  star  of  the  southern  edge 

Archer 

9^” 

S21%° 

4 

The  eastern  star  of  those  on  the  Crown 

Archer 

11%° 

S21° 

5 

The  star  east  of  this  one 

Archer 

13%° 

S23° 

5 

The  star  again  east  of  this  one 

Archer 

14%° 

S20° 

4 

The  star  after  this  one  in  front  of  the  Archer’s  groin 

Archer 

16%° 

S18%° 

5 

The  star  after  this  one  and  north  of  the  bright  one 
in  the  knee 

Archer 

17° 

S17%° 

4 

The  star  north  of  this  one 

Archer 

16%° 

S16° 

4 

The  star  still  north  of  this  one 

Archer 

16%° 

S15%° 

4 

258 


PTOLEMY 


Configurations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

M  agn. 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  western  ones  following  this 

last  on  the  northern  edge 

Archer  153^° 

S15Ji° 

6 

The  w'estem  one  of  these  2  dim  ones 

Archer  14?i° 

S14%° 

6 

The  star  rather  w^est  of  this  one 

Archer  11 

5 

The  star  still  west  of  this 

Archer 

SISK" 

5 

The  last  one  south  of  this  last 

Archer 

9K° 

S18i^° 

5 

In  all,  13  stars,  of  which  5  are  of  4th  magnitude, 

6  of  5th,  2  of  6th. 

Constellation  of  the  Southern  Fish 

The  star  in  the  mouth,  the  same  as  that  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Water 

The  w^estern  star  of  the  3  at  the  southern  edge  of 

Water  Bearer 

7“ 

S20H° 

1 

the  head 

Water  Bearer 

w 

S20K° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Water  Bearer 

4^° 

S22M° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Water  Bearer 

S22K° 

4 

The  star  near  the  gills 

Water  Bearer 

4M° 

4  + 

The  star  in  the  southern  spinal  fin 

Goat 

S19i^° 

5 

The  eastern  one  of  the  2  in  the  belly 

Water  Bearer 

8151^° 

5 

The  w^estern  one  of  these 

Goat 

28J^° 

SU%° 

4 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3  in  the  northern  fin 

Goat 

815° 

4 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Goat 

2\H-> 

816^° 

4 

The  w'estern  one  of  the  3 

Goat 

21° 

818M° 

4 

The  star  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

Goat 

20M° 

822M° 

4 

In  all,  12  stars,  of  which  1  is  of  the  1st  magnitude, 

9  of  4th,  2  of  5th. 

The  Unfigured  Stars  about  the  Southern  Fish 

The  western  one  of  the  3  bright  stars  west  of  the  Fish 

Goat 

8° 

8221^° 

3- 

The  middle  one  of  these 

Goat 

11 

822K° 

3- 

The  eastern  one  of  the  3 

Goat 

11° 

821J^° 

3- 

The  dim  star  west  of  this 

Goat 

12° 

820%° 

5 

The  southern  star  of  the  remaining  2  to  the  north 

Goat 

13f«° 

817° 

4 

The  northern  one  of  these 

Goat 

13J^“ 

814%° 

4 

In  all,  6  stars,  of  which  3  are  of  3rd  magnitude, 
2  of  4th,  1  of  5th. 


Thus  there  are  316  stars  in  the  southern  part,  of  which  7  are  of  1st  magnitude,  18  of  2nd, 
63  of  3rd,  164  of  4th,  54  of  5th,  9  of  6th,  and  1  nebula. 

Thus  altogether  there  are  1022  stars,  of  which  15  are  of  1st  magnitude,  45  of  2nd,  208  of 
3rd,  474  of  4th,  217  of  5th,  49  of  6th,  9  dim  ones,  5  nebulae,  and  the  Hair. 

2.  On  the  Position  of  the  Milky  Way 

Now  this  is  the  exposition  we  give  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  next  we  add  on  the 
things  having  to  do  with  the  position  of  the  Milky  Way  as  far  as  we  can  and  to 
the  extent  we  have  observed  each  of  its  parts,  trying  to  represent  its  particular 
appearances. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  Milky  Way  is  not  simply  a  circle  but  a  zone  having 
quite  the  color  of  milk,  whence  its  name;  and  that  it  is  not  regular  and  ordered, 
but  different  in  width,  color,  density,  and  position;  and  that  in  one  part  it  is 
double.  These  particulars  we  find  needing  careful  observation. 

Now,  the  double  part  of  this  zone  has  one  of  its  junctions  near  the  Censer 
[Ara]  and  the  other  at  the  Bird  [Cygnus].  The  western  zone  nowhere  touches 
the  other,  for  it  divides  at  the  junction  at  the  Censer  and  at  the  junction  at  the 
Bird,  the  eastern  zone  joining  the  other  part  of  the  Milky  Way  and  making  one 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII  259 

zone  which  the  great  circle  dra^\^l  in  its  middle  would  traverse.  We  shall  first 
discuss  this  zone  beginning  with  its  southernmost  parts. 

These  parts  go  through  the  Centaur's  feet,  and  are  thinner  and  fainter.  The 
star  in  the  bend  of  the  right  hind-foot  is  a  little  south  of  the  northern  line  of  the 
Milky  Way;  likewise  the  star  in  the  left  fore-knee  and  the  star  under  the  right 
hind-ankle.  The  star  in  the  left  hind  shank  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  Milky  Way, 
the  star  in  the  same  ankle  and  the  star  in  the  right  fore-ankle  being  very  nearly 
2®  north  of  the  southern  arc.  And  the  parts  about  the  hind-feet  are  rather 
denser. 

Next,  the  northern  arc  of  the  Milky  Way  is  very  nearly  1}^°  from  the  star  in 
the  loin  of  the  Beast  [Lupus],  and  the  southern  arc  intercepts  the  star  at  the 
Censer's  ember,  touching  the  more  northern  of  the  two  consecutive  stars  in  the 
brazier,  and  the  more  southern  of  the  two  in  the  base.  The  star  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  brazier  and  the  star  in  the  middle  of  the  brazier  lie  in  the  Milky  Way 
itself.  And  these  parts  are  thinner. 

Next,  the  northern  part  of  the  iMilky  Way  intercepts  the  three  joints  pre¬ 
ceding  the  Scorpion's  centre  and  the  nebular  mass  following  the  centre.  The 
southern  arc  touches  the  star  in  the  Archer's  right  fore-ankle  and  intercepts  the 
star  in  his  left  hand.  The  star  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Archer  is  outside  the 
Milky  Way,  and  the  star  at  the  arrow's  point  is  in  the  middle  of  it.  In  the  north¬ 
ern  part  of  the  Archer  each  of  the  stars  lies  a  little  more  than  1®  from  either  arc: 
the  southern  one  from  the  southern  arc,  and  the  northern  one  from  the  opposite 
arc.  And  the  parts  about  the  three  joints  are  slightly  denser,  the  parts  about  the 
arrow's  point  appearing  quite  dense  and  smoky. 

The  following  parts  are  slightly  thinner,  and  extend  along  the  Eagle,  keeping 
the  same  width.  The  star  in  the  tip  of  the  tail  of  the  Serpent,  which  the  Serpen- 
tarius  [Ophiouchus]  holds,  lies  in  the  open  sky  a  little  more  than  I®  from  the 
western  arc  of  the  IMilky  Way.  The  two  western  stars  of  the  bright  ones  Ijdng 
under  it  lie  in  the  Milky  Way  itself,  the  more  southern  one  1®  from  the  eastern 
arc  and  the  more  northern  2®.  Of  those  in  the  Eagle's  right  shoulder  the  eastern 
star  touches  the  same  arc;  and  the  western  one  is  cut  off  ^\^thin  it,  and  likewise 
the  bright  western  star  of  those  in  the  left  vdng.  And  the  bright  star  in  the  back 
and  the  two  in  a  straight  line  vdth  it  just  fail  to  touch  the  same  arc. 

After  these  parts,  the  whole  Arrow  [Sagitta]  is  enclosed  in  the  Alilky  Way,  and 
the  star  at  the  point  is  1®  from  the  eastern  arc,  and  the  star  at  the  notched  end 
is  2®  from  the  western  arc.  The  parts  near  the  Eagle  are  slightly  denser,  and  the 
rest  slightly  thinner. 

The  Milky  Way  next  passes  through  the  Bird.  The  northerwestem  arc  is 
bounded  in  its  curve  by  the  star  in  the  Bird's  southern  shoulder,  by  the  star 
under  it  in  the  ^^dng,  and  by  the  two  stars  in  the  southern  foot.  The  southeastern 
arc  is  bounded  by  the  star  in  the  tip  of  the  southern  flat  of  the  T\dng  and  it  en¬ 
closes  within  itself  the  two  figured  stars  under  the  same  ^^ing  which  are  nearly 
2®  from  it.  The  parts  about  the  wings  are  slightly  thicker. 

The  parts  following  are  included  in  this  zone  and  are  much  denser  and  as  if 
coming  from  another  beginning.  For  they  lean  to  the  extreme  parts  of  the  other 
zone,  and,  making  a  gap  vdth  it  on  the  southern  side,  they  now  join  with  the 
zone  we  have  just  spoken  of  which  is  very  thin  at  the  junction.  After  the  gap  in 
density  with  respect  to  the  other  zone,  they  begin  from  the  bright  star  in  the 
Bird's  rump  and  from  the  nebular  mass  in  the  northern  knee.  Then,  turning 


260  PTOLEMY 

slightly  as  far  as  the  star  in  the  southern  knee,  they  extend 
thinned  out,  as  far  as  the  tiara  of  Cepheus,  and  are  bound* 
side  by  the  southern  star  of  the  three  in  the  tiara  and  by  th 
three  at  which  they  make  two  eminences,  one  pointing  to 
other  to  the  southeast. 

After  these  parts,  the  Milky  Way  encloses  the  whole  of  Cs 
star  at  the  tip  of  the  foot.  The  southern  arc  is  bounded  by 
peia’s  head,  and  the  northern  arc  by  the  star  in  the  foot  ol 
star  in  Cassiopeia’s  calf.  The  other  stars  about  her  all  lie  i 
Near  the  arcs  the  parts  are  of  a  thinner  mass,  while  thos 
Cassiopeia  show  an  extended  density. 

And  next,  the  right  side  of  Perseus  is  enveloped  by  the  M 
star  outside  Perseus’  right  knee  bounds  the  northern  side  wf 
and  the  bright  star  in  the  right  rib  and  the  two  eastern  stan 
of  it  bound  the  southern  side  which  is  the  densest.  The  n 
handle,  the  star  in  the  head,  the  star  in  the  right  shoulder, 
right  elbow  are  all  enveloped  in  it.  The  quadrilateral  in  the  ri 
the  star  in  the  calf  of  the  same  leg  lie  in  the  middle  of  the  IV 
in  the  right  heel  being  itself  a  little  within  the  southern  sid* 

And  after  these  parts  the  zone,  showing  a  slightly  thinner 
the  Charioteer.  The  star  in  the  right  shoulder  called  the  Gos 
two  in  the  right  forearm  just  fail  to  touch  the  northeaster: 
Way.  The  little  star  above  the  left  foot  in  the  part  around  1 
southwestern  side,  and  the  star  above  the  right  foot  is  w: 
In  the  left  forearm  the  two  consecutive  stars,  called  the  Kic 
of  the  zone. 

And,  next,  the  Milky  Way  goes  through  the  feet  of  the 
rather  extensive  density  below  the  stars  in  the  tip  of  the  fee 
of  the  three  in  a  straight  line  under  the  right  foot  of  the  Cha 
star  of  the  two  in  Orion’s  club,  and  the  northern  stars  of  the 
bound  the  western  arc  of  the  Milky  Way.  The  bright  sta 
oteer’s  right  hand  and  the  star  in  the  eastern  foot  of  the  easi 
nearly  1°  within  the  eastern  side.  And  the  stars  in  the  other 
feet  lie  in  the  middle  of  the  Milky  Way. 

From  there  the  zone  passes  by  the  Little  Dog  and  the  Dog 
of  the  Little  Dog  quite  far  outside  the  Milky  Way  to  the 
almost  wholly  outside  to  the  west.  For  a  cloud  here  enveh 
back,  and  next  it  almost  touches  the  three  east  of  it  in  the  L 
lone  star  above  the  Dog’s  head,  outside  and  farther  off,  is  ver 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 

side,  and  the  two  bright  stars  in  the  same  piece  of  the  keel  arc 
2°  Avithin  the  western  arc. 

From  these  the  Milky  Way  now  joins  with  the  zone  through  t 
feet.  And  the  mass  through  the  Argus  is  rather  light,  but  the  pa 
little  shield  are  thicker  than  it,  and  likewise  those  about  the  s; 
about  the  segment  of  the  keel. 

The  zone  we  have  just  spoken  of,  diA'iding  off  as  we  said  from 
scribed  at  the  Censer  and  beginning  from  these,  envelops  the  three 
Scorpion’s  body  and  leaves  the  eastern  star  of  the  three  in  the  bo 
the  western  arc.  And  the  star  in  the  fourth  joint  lies  in  the  clear  s 
the  tAvo  zones,  nearly  equidistant  from  both  and  a  little  more  thar 

And  after  this,  the  Avestern  zone  turns  eastAA'ard  1°  likeAvdse,  an 
Avestern  side  of  the  Milky  Way  A\dth  the  star  in  the  right  knee  of  0 
the  eastern  side  Avith  the  star  in  the  same  shin.  The  western  star  in  i 
same  foot  touches  the  same  side.  And  next  again  the  star  under  th 
of  the  Serpentarius  bounds  the  AA^estern  arc,  and  the  principal  star 
the  tip  of  the  same  hand  bounds  the  eastern  arc.  At  the  point  the 
large  gap  of  clear  space  in  Avhich  lie  the  tAvo  stars  in  the  Serpent’s 
one  in  the  tip.  And  the  Av^hole  part  of  the  zone  just  given  is  a  mass  c 
air-like  except  for  the  part  enveloping  the  three  joints.  For  that  pj 
dense. 

And  after  this  gap  the  Milky  Way  again  begins  from  the  four  st£ 
right  shoulder  of  the  Serpentarius,  and  the  bright  line  star  touchin 
tail  bounds  the  eastern  arc  of  this  zone,  the  farthest  aAvay  to  the 
four  stars  spoken  of  above  bounding  the  opposite  arc. 

From  here  the  zone,  after  this,  narroAvs  into  the  Avestern  parts 
beak  so  that  it  giA^es  the  appearance  of  a  gap.  But  the  rest  of  it  fro 
the  Bird’s  beak  to  the  star  in  the  Bird’s  breast  is  rather  wider  anc 
star  in  the  Bird’s  throat  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  concentration.  Bu 
runs  northAA’ard  from  the  stars  in  the  breast  to  the  star  in  the  sh 
right  AAung  and  the  two  consecutive  stars  in  the  tip  of  the  right  foot : 
as  we  said  before,  there  is  a  clear  gap  relative  to  the  other  zone  fr( 
mentioned  stars  of  the  Bird  to  the  bright  star  in  the  Rump. 

3.  On  the  Construction  of  the  Solid  Sphere 

Now,  the  appearances  of  the  Milky  Way  have  this  position.  And 
we  may  construct,  by  means  of  a  solid  sphere,  a  model  in  accord 
potheses  demonstrated  AAith  respect  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  star 
to  AA'hich  it  appeared  to  be  revolved,  along  Avith  the  planets,  by  the 


262 


PTOLEMY 


many  sections  as  appear  feasible.  Then,  making  out  of  a  strong  tensile  material 
two  circles  mth  surfaces  at  right  angles  and  everywhere  accurately  turned  (the 
lesser  everywhere  touching  the  curved  surface  of  the  sphere,  and  the  other  a  bit 
larger)  we  shall  draw  lines  in  the  middle  of  the  curved  surface  of  each,  dividing 
their  widths  exactly  in  two.  By  means  of  these  lines,  cutting  one  or  the  other  of 
the  sides  so  defined  into  semicircles,  we  shall  divide  the  semicircles  resulting 
from  these  cuts  into  180  sections.  This  done,  we  suppose  the  lesser  circle  always 
to  be  through  both  sets  of  poles — that  is,  of  the  equator  and  of  the  ecliptic,  and 
also  through  the  tropic  points  on  the  surface  of  this  cut.  Boring  it  in  the  middle 
diametrically  opposite  at  the  limits  of  the  cut,  we  shall  fit  it  on  pins  at  the  poles 
of  the  ecliptic  taken  on  the  sphere  so  that  it  can  revolve  over  the  whole  spherical 
surface. 

Now,  to  get  some  constant  beginning  for  the  constellations  of  the  fixed  stars, 
since  it  is  not  plausible  to  mark  the  tropic  and  equinoctial  points  on  the  sphere’s 
ecliptic  (for  the  distance  of  the  constellations  to  them  is  not  preserved),  we 
shall  mark  the  brightest  of  them,  I  mean  the  star  in  the  Dog’s  mouth  [Sirius],  on 
the  circle  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic  at  the  section  beginning  the  di¬ 
vision,  at  the  given  latitude  from  the  ecliptic  in  the  direction  of  its  south  pole. 
For  each  of  the  other  fixed  stars,  according  to  the  sequence  of  the  Catalogue,  we 
shall  make  marks  by  the  turning  the  circle  which  is  divided  by  the  cut,  about 
the  ecliptic’s  poles.  For  we  always  carry  the  surface  of  its  cut  side  to  the  point  on 
the  ecliptic  as  many  degrees  away  from  the  beginning  of  the  numbers  at  the 
section  of  the  Dog  as  the  desired  star  is  in  longitude  from  the  Dog  according  to 
the  Catalogue.  And  we  go  to  the  point  of  the  side  which  has  been  divided  and 
swung  about,  according  as  the  star  in  the  Catalogue  is  either  towards  the  north 
or  south  pole  of  the  ecliptic.  And  there  we  mark  the  point  of  the  star,  affixing  a 
yellow  or  some  other  distinct  color  in  proportion  and  in  accordance  with  the 
size  of  the  magnitudes  of  each. 

Now,  we  shall  make  the  figures  of  each  of  the  constellations  as  simple  as  pos¬ 
sible,  enclosing  the  stars  under  the  same  contour,  only  with  lines  not  differing 
much  from  the  color  of  the  whole  sphere  so  that  the  advantage  in  distinguishing 
them  may  not  be  lost  and  the  juxtaposition  of  many  colors  may  not  blot  out  the 
likeness  to  the  true  picture;  and  so  that  we  may  easily  retain  the  comparison 
made  in  our  observations  when  we  have  become  habituated  to  the  original  image 
of  the  stars  in  the  spherical  representation. 

We  also  arrange  the  position  of  the  Milky  Way  in  accordance  with  the  places 
and  figures  and  further  in  accordance  with  the  densities  and  gaps,  already  ex¬ 
plained.  And  we  fit  the  greater  circle,  which  is  always  to  be  the  meridian,  on  the 
smaller  one  which  is  enveloping  the  sphere,  about  the  same  poles  as  those  of  the 
equator.  And  the  pole-points  are  inserted,  diametrically  opposite,  in  the  greater 
circle  or  meridian,  at  the  extremities  of  the  side  which  has  been  cut  and  divided 
and  which  is  to  lie  above.  But  the  pole-points  are  inserted  in  the  smaller  circle, 
which  passes  through  both  sets  of  poles,  at  the  extremities  diametrically  oppo¬ 
site  of  arcs  extending  the  23^^51'  of  inclination  either  side  of  the  ecliptic’s  poles. 
And  little  solids  are  put  at  the  cuts  of  the  circle  where  the  holes  of  the  poles  areL 

^The  smaller  circle  is  attached  to  the  solid  sphere,  and  these  poles  are  the  ecliptic's  and  do 
not  change  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars.  But  the  larger  circle  is  attached  to  the  smaller  at 
points  23°51'  away  from  these.  These  are  tV»o  poles  of  the  equator  which  change  with  respect 
to  the  fixed  stars. 


263 


THE  AL^L4GEST,  VIII 

Each  time  we  place  the  cut  side  of  the  smaller  circle,  which  is  always  the  same  of 
course  as  the  meridian  through  the  tropic  points,  at  that  point  of  division  of  the 
ecliptic  which  is  as  far  away  from  the  beginning  of  the  Dog  as  the  Dog  at  the 
given  time  is  from  the  summer  tropic.  At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Antonine 
that  is  123^°  west.  We  fit  the  meridian  circle  at  right  angles  to  the  horizon, 
which  is  the  base  plane,  so  that  it  cuts  its  apparent  surface  in  two  and  can  re¬ 
volve  in  its  o\vn  plane  in  such  a  way  that  each  time  we  can  raise  the  north  pole 
above  the  horizon  by  the  amount  proper  to  the  given  latitudes.  And  this  is  done 
with  the  help  of  the  division  of  the  meridian  circle. 

It  makes  no  difference  if  we  cannot  put  the  equator  and  tropic  points  on  the 
sphere  itself.  For  the  point  on  the  divided  side  of  the  meridian  circle,  between 
the  poles  of  the  equator  and  lying  the  90°  of  a  quadrant^s  distance  from  either 
one,  vdll  serve  the  same  purpose  as  the  points  of  the  equator.  And  the  points 
lying  23°51'  either  side  of  this  point  vdll  serve  the  same  purpose  as  either  of  the 
tropics,  the  northern  one  the  same  as  the  summer  tropic,  and  the  southern 
one  the  same  as  the  vdnter  tropic.  And  so,  when  the  desired  stars  are  carried  by 
the  prime  east-west  revolution  to  the  divided  side  of  the  meridian  circle,  then, 
by  means  of  that  division,  their  distances  \vith  respect  to  the  equator  and 
tropics  can  be  gotten  as  if  on  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  equator. 

4.  On  the  Configurations  Proper  to  the  Fixed  Stars 

Now  that  the  character  of  the  constellations  of  the  fixed  stars  has  been  dem¬ 
onstrated,  there  remains  the  discussion  of  their  configurations.  Of  the  configura¬ 
tions  concerning  the  fixed  stars  besides  those  dealing  only  with  their  relations  to 
each  other  (as  when  they  are  in  a  straight  line  or  in  a  triangular  figure  or  some 
such  thing),  there  are  those  which  are  considered  vdth  respect  only  to  the  planets 
and  sun  and  moon  or  parts  of  the  ecliptic,  and  those  which  are  considered  with 
respect  only  to  the  earth.  And  then  there  are  those  which  are  considered  mth 
respect  to  the  earth,  and  at  the  same  time  ^vith  respect  to  the  planets  and  sun 
and  moon  or  parts  of  the  ecliptic. 

Those  configurations  of  the  fixed  stars  which  are  with  respect  only  to  the 
planets  and  parts  of  the  ecliptic,  are  gotten  in  general  whenever  the  fixed  stars 
and  the  planets  are  on  one  and  the  same  great  circle  dra^ra  through  the  ecliptic^s 
poles,  or  on  a  different  one  but  forming  triangular  or  tetragonal  or  hexagonal 
distances — that  is,  forming  an  angle  which  is  either  right  or  greater  or  less  than 
the  third  of  a  right  angle.  And  they  are  gotten  in  particular  in  the  case  of  those 
fixed  stars  over  which  some  one  of  the  planets  can  pass  (and  these  are  those  ar¬ 
ranged  in  the  band  of  the  zodiac  containing  the  latitudinal  passages  of  the 
I  planets):  with  respect  to  the  five  planets,  at  their  apparent  appulses  or  occulta- 
I  tions,  and  with  respect  to  the  sun  and  moon,  at  the  hehacal  or  lunar  settings, 
conjunctions,  and  heliacal  or  lunar  risings.  We  call  heliacal  or  lunar  setting  any 
<  star  begins  to  disappear  in  the  rays  of  the  luminaries;  conjunction  whenever 
I  the  star  is  in  a  straight  line  with  the  centre;  and  heliacal  or  lunar  rising  when- 
!  ever  it  begins  to  appear  from  the  rays. 

I  There  are  four  configurations  of  the  fixed  stars  with  respect  to  the  earth 
1  alone:  by  some  they  are  called  in  general  “centres,^^  and  in  particular,  they  are 
rising,  upper  culmination,  setting,  and  lower  culmination.  Where  the  equator  is 
»  at  the  zenith,  all  the  fixed  stars  both  rise  and  set,  and  once  at  each  revolution 
.  have  an  upper  and  lower  culmination;  for  then  the  equator^s  poles  touch  the 


264  PTOLEMY 

horizon,  making  none  of  the  parallel  circles  either  one  of  perpetual  apparition 
or  one  of  perpetual  occultation.  Where  the  poles  are  at  the  zenith,  no  one  of  the 
fixed  stars  either  rises  or  sets;  for  then  the  equator  has  the  horizon^s  position 
and  one  of  the  hemispheres  formed  by  it  revolves  always  above  the  earth  and 
the  other  always  below  the  earth,  so  that  each  of  the  fixed  stars  culminates 
twice  in  one  revolution,  those  above  the  earth  and  those  below.  In  the  other 
latitudes  between  these,  where  there  are  some  circles  always  visible  and  some 
always  invisible,  the  stars  enclosed  by  these  relative  to  the  poles  neither  rise  nor 
set,  and  two  culminations  are  effected  at  each  revolution — those  within  the 
circle  of  perpetual  apparition  above  the  earth,  and  those  vdthin  the  circle  of  per¬ 
petual  occultation  below  the  earth.  And  the  rest  on  the  greater  parallels  both 
rise  and  set,  culminating  once  above  and  once  below  in  each  revolution. 

And  their  time  from  one  of  these  centres  back  again  to  the  same  is  always  the 
same.  For  it  embraces  sensibly  one  revolution.  And  the  time  from  one  of  the 
centres  to  the  diametrically  opposite  one  relative  to  the  meridian  is  always  the 
same,  for  it  embraces  half  a  revolution.  WTth  respect  to  the  horizon,  when  the 
equator  is  at  the  zenith,  the  same  is  again  true.  For  the  time  of  each  embraces 
half  a  revolution,  since  each  of  the  parallels  is  bisected  not  only  by  the  meridian 
but  also  by  the  horizon.  But  in  the  case  of  the  other  inclinations  neither  the  time 
above  nor  the  time  below  is  itself  equal  for  all,  nor  in  each  case  is  the  time  above 
equal  to  the  time  below,  except  for  those  on  the  equator  itself  which  alone  in  the 
oblique  sphere  is  bisected  by  the  horizon;  for  all  the  other  parallels  are  cut  in 
dissimilar  and  unequal  arcs.  Consequently,  the  time  from  the  rising  or  setting 
to  one  of  the  culminations  is  in  each  case  equal  to  the  time  from  the  same  cul¬ 
mination  to  the  rising  or  setting,  because  the  meridian  divides  the  sections  of 
the  parallels  above  the  earth  and  those  below  into  equal  parts.  But  the  times 
from  the  rising  or  setting  to  either  culmination  are  unequal  in  the  inclined 
sphere,  and  equal  in  the  right  sphere,  since  there  only  are  the  lower  sections 
equal  to  the  upper  sections.  Therefore,  in  the  right  sphere,  the  stars  which  cul¬ 
minate  together  always  rise  and  set  together  in  so  far  as  their  shift  about  the 
poles  of  the  ecliptic  is  imperceptible.  But  in  the  oblique  sphere  those  stars 
which  culminate  together  neither  rise  nor  set  together,  the  more  southern  always 
rising  later  than  the  more  northern  and  set  earlier. 

And  the  configurations  of  the  fixed  stars,  considered  with  respect  to  the  earth 
or  planets  or  parts  of  the  ecliptic  together,  are  gotten  in  general  from  the  simul¬ 
taneous  risings  or  culminations  or  settings  either  with  one  of  the  planets  or  with 
some  part  of  the  ecliptic;  and  in  particular  they  are  considered  with  respect  to 
the  sun  according  to  nine  kinds. 

The  first  kind  of  configuration,  called  early  morning  east  wind,  is  when  the 
star  at  rising  is  with  the  sun.  And  of  this  there  is  a  kind  called  invisible  morning 
after-rising  when  the  star,  beginning  its  heliacal  setting,  rises  immediately  after 
the  sun.  And  there  is  a  kind  called  true  morning  co-rising  when  the  star  rises 
together  vdth  and  at  the  same  time  as  the  sun  on  the  horizon.  And  there  is  a 
kind  called  visible  morning  fore-rising  when  the  star,  beginning  its  heliacal  ris¬ 
ing,  rises  before  the  sun. 

The  second  configuration,  called  early  morning  culmination,  is  when  the  star, 
with  the  sun  rising  at  the  horizon,  is  culminating  either  above  or  below  the 
earth.  And  again  of  this  there  is  a  kind  called  invisible  morning  after-culmina¬ 
tion  when  the  star  culminates  immediately  after  sunrise.  And  there  is  a  kind 


265 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 

called  true  morning  co-culmination  when  the  star  culminates  as  the  sun  rises. 
And  there  is  a  kind  called  morning  fore-culmination  w’hen  the  sun  rises  imme¬ 
diately  after  the  star’s  culmination. 

The  third  kind  of  configuration,  called  early  morning  west  Tvfind,  is  when  the 
star  is  on  the  western  horizon  while  the  sun  is  on  the  eastern.  Again  of  this  there 
is  a  kind  called  invisible  morning  after-setting  when  the  star  sets  immediately 
after  the  sun  rises.  And  there  is  a  kind  called  true  morning  co-setting  when  the 
star  sets  at  the  same  time  the  sun  rises.  And  there  is  a  kind  called  visible  morn¬ 
ing  fore-setting  when  the  sun  rises  immediately  after  the  star  sets. 

The  fourth  configuration,  called  noontide  east  vfind,  is  when  the  star  is  on  the 
eastern  horizon  while  the  sun  is  on  the  meridian.  And  again  of  this  there  is  a 
kind  called  invisible  daytime  when  the  star  rises  as  the  sun  culminates  above 
the  earth;  and  a  kind  called  visible  night  time  when  the  star  rises  as  the  sun 
culminates  below  the  earth. 

The  fifth  configuration  called  noontide  culmination  is  when  the  sun  and  star 
are  on  the  meridian  together.  And  of  this  there  are  two  invisible  daytime  kinds 
when,  with  the  sun  culminating  above  the  earth,  the  star  either  culminates  with 
it  above  the  earth  or  culminates  diametrically  opposite  below  the  earth.  And 
there  are  two  night-time  kinds  with  the  sun  culminating  below  the  earth.  Of 
these  there  is  the  invisible  when  the  star  culminates  with  the  sun  below  the 
earth,  and  the  visible  when  the  star  culminates  diametrically  opposite  above 
the  earth. 

The  sixth  configuration,  called  noontide  west  vdnd,  is  when  the  star  is  on  the 
western  horizon  while  the  sun  is  on  the  meridian.  And  again  of  this  there  is  the 
invisible  daytime  kind  when  the  star  sets  as  the  sun  culminates  above  the 
earth,  and  there  is  the  visible  night-time  kind  when  the  star  sets  as  the  sun 
culminates  below  the  earth. 

The  seventh  configuration,  called  late  east  wind,  is  when  the  star  is  on  the 
eastern  horizon  while  the  sun  is  on  the  western.  And  again  of  this  there  is  the 
kind  called  visible  evening  after-rising  when  the  star  rises  immediately  after 
sunset.  And  there  is  the  kind  called  true  evening  co-rising  when  the  star  rises 
exactly  as  the  sun  sets.  And  there  is  the  kind  called  invisible  evening  fore-rising 
when  the  sun  sets  immediately  after  the  star  rises. 

The  eighth  configuration,  called  late  culmination,  is  when,  with  the  sun  on 
the  western  horizon,  the  star  is  on  the  meridian  either  above  or  below  the  earth. 
And  of  this  again  there  is  the  kind  called  visible  evening  after-culmination  when 
the  star  culminates  immediately  after  sunset.  And  there  is  the  kind  called  true 
evening  co-culmination  when  the  star  culminates  exactly  as  the  sun  sets.  And 
there  is  the  kind  called  in\fisible  evening  fore-culmination  when  the  sun  sets  im¬ 
mediately  after  the  star  culminates. 

The  ninth  configuration,  called  late  west  vdnd,  is  when  the  star  is  on  the 
western  horizon  together  with  the  sun.  And  of  this  kind  again  there  is  the  kind 
called  visible  evening  fore-setting  when  the  star,  beginning  its  heliacal  setting, 
sets  immediately  after  the  sun.  And  there  is  the  kind  called  true  evening  co¬ 
setting  when  the  star  sets  exactly  \vith  the  sun.  And  there  is  the  kind  called  in¬ 
visible  evening  fore-setting  when  the  star,  beginning  its  heliacal  rising,  sets  be¬ 
fore  the  sun. 


266 


PTOLEMY 


5.  On  the  Co-risings,  Co-culminations,  and  Co-settings 
OF  THE  Fixed  Stars 

Now  with  matters  this  way,  the  times  of  the.  true  co-risings,  co-culminations, 
and  co-settings  considered  with  respect  to  the  sun’s  centre  can  be  gotten  geo¬ 
metrically  by  us  from  their  position  according  to  the  star  catalogue.  Because  the 
points  on  the  ecliptic  with  which  each  of  the  fixed  stars  culminates,  rises,  and 
sets,  can  be  shown  geometrically  by  the  following  theorems. 

For  first,  with  a  view  to  the  co-culminations>  let  there  be  the  circle  ABCD 
through  both  sets  of  poles,  the  equator’s  and  the 
ecliptic’s;  and  let  there  be  the  semicircle  A  EC  of 
the  equator  about  the  pole  F,  and  the  semicircle 
BED  of  the  ecliptic  about  the  pole  G.  Let  the  seg¬ 
ment  GHKL  of  a  great  circle  be  drawn  through  the 
poles  of  the  ecliptic.  And  let  the  fixed  star  in  ques¬ 
tion  be  thought  at  the  point  H  on  it.  For  their,  posL 
tions  with  respect  to  the  circles  so  drawn  are  avail¬ 
able  from  our  observation  and  record.  And  let  the 
segment  FZ/'MA  of  the  great  circle  through  the  poles 
of  the  equator  and  through  the  star  at  H  be  drawn. 

Now,  it  is  evident  that  the  star  at  H  culminates 
with  the  points  M  and  N  of  the  equator  and  eclip¬ 
tic  ;  and  that  these  points  and  the  arc  HN  are  given  will  be  clear  from  these  con¬ 
siderations.  For,  by  things  demonstrated  in  the  first  part  of  the  Composition, 
since  the  arcs  GL  and  NF  of  great  circles  are  drawn  through  to  the  arcs  AG  and 
AN  of  two  great  circles, 

chord  2  arc  GA  :  chord  2  arc  AF  comp,  chord  2  arc  GL  :  chord 
2  arc  LHy  chord  2  arc  NH  :  chord  2  arc  FN. 

But  each  of  the  arcs  AF,  FA,  and  GK  is  supposed  a  quadrant,  and  from  the 
star’s  record  are  given  the  arc  KH  in  latitude,  the  arc  KB  in  longitude,  and  arcs 
FG  and  KL  from  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  already  demonstrated.  Therefore 
it  is  clear  that  the  desired  arcs  GA,  AF,  GL,  Li/,  and  AFare  given,  and  the  re¬ 
maining  arc  NH  is  hence  given. 

Again,  since 

chord  2  arc  FG  :  chord  2  arc  GA  comp,  chord  2  arc  FH  : 
chord  2  arc  AA,  chord  2  arc  AL  :  chord  2  qxq>  LA 
and  the  desired  arcs  FG,  GAy  FHy  and  HN  are  given  by  the  preceding  steps,  and 
the  arc  LA  from  the  arc  KB  by  means  of  the  co-risings  of  the  equator  and  eclip¬ 
tic  in  the  right  sphere,  therefore  the  remaining  arc  AL  is  given. 

The  points  of  the  equator  and  ecliptic  co-rising  and  co-setting  with  the  fixed 
stars  are  easily  gotten  from  the  co-culminations  in  this  way. 

For  let  there  be  the  meridian  circle  ABCD,  the  semicircle  of  the  equator  AEC 
about  pole  F,  and  the  semicircle  of  the  horizon  BED,  And  let  the  star  rise  at 
the  point  G  of  the  horizon.  Through  the  points  F  and  G  let  the  quadrant 
FGH  of  a  great  circle  be  drawn. 

Now,  since  again  the  arcs  FH  and  EB  have  been  drawn  through  to  the  arcs 
of  two  great  circles  AF  and  AF,  therefore 

chord  2  arc  FB  :  chord  2  arc  BA 
comp,  chord  2  arc  FG  :  chord  2 


267 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 


arc  GH,  chord  2  arc  HE  :  chord  2  arc  AE. 
But  each  of  the  desired  arcs  FA^  FH,  and  EA  em¬ 
braces  a  quadrant,  and  the  arc  FB  is  given  from 
the  elevation  of  the  poles,  and  the  equator^s 
point  H  and  the  arc  HG  by  means  of  the  co-cul¬ 
minations.  And,  therefore,  the  remaining  arc  HE 
is  given. 

It  is  easily  understood  that  in  the  case  of  the 
co-settings — if  we  take  an  arc  equal  to  arc  HE 
west  of  Hy  such  as  HK — the  star  will  set  with 
the  point  K  of  the  equator  because  the  setting  at 
that  time  takes  place  on  the  arc  equal  to  BGj  and 
an  angle  west  of  the  meridian  is  intercepted  equal  to  that  contained,  according  to 
this  figure,  to  the  east  by  the  arcs  AF  and  FH. 

From  the  things  demonstrated  for  the  co-risings  and  co-settings  of  the  equator 
and  ecliptic  for  each  latitude,  the  part  of  the  ecliptic  rising  with  the  point  E  of 
the  equator  and  with  the  star  will  be  given;  and  the  part  setting  with  point  K 
and  the  star  also.  It  is  clear  that,  at  the  times  the  sun  is  truly  at  those  points  of 
the  ecliptic,  the  risings,  culminations,  and  settings  of  the  fixed  stars  considered 
with  respect  to  its  centre,  and  called  the  true  co-centerings,  will  be  accom¬ 
plished. 

6,  On  the  Heliacal  Risings  and  Settings  of  the  Fixed  Stars 

Now,  in  the  case  of  the  heliacal  risings  and  settings  we  no  longer  find  the  geo¬ 
metrical  method  worked  out  from  their  positions  alone  sufficient  (since,  for 
example,  vdth  whatever  point  of  the  ecliptic  the  star  is  sho^vn  to  rise  by  these 
means,  it  is  still  impossible  similarly  to  find  out  at  what  distance  of  the  sun  from 
the  horizon  beneath  the  earth  it  will  first  appear  or  be  hidden).  For  this  distance 
of  arc  cannot  be  equal  for  all  the  stars  nor  for  the  same  every^vhere,  but  differs 
according  to  the  magnitudes  of  the  stars,  their  latitudinal  elongations  from  the 
sun,  and  the  change  in  the  inclinations  of  the  ecliptic. 

If  we  suppose  ABCD  to  be  the  meridian  circle,  AEFC  the  semicircle  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  BED  the  semicircle  of  the  horizon  about  pole  G,  then  it  is  clear 
that  (when  the  stars  are  rising  at  point  E  of  the  ecliptic)  if  the  greater  begins  to 
.  appear  when  the  sun,  for  instance,  is  below  the  earth  a  distance  of  arc  EF, 
then  the  smaller  (if  it  has  an  equal  latitudinal  elongation  from  the  sun)  will 
‘  first  appear  when  the  sun  is  distant  by  a  greater  arc  EF  and  makes  thinner 
rays.  Again,  in  the  case  of  stars  of  equal  magni¬ 
tude,  if  the  star  nearer  the  point  E  in  latitude  ap¬ 
pears  first  at  a  distance  EF^  then  the  one  farther 
away  will  appear  at  a  less  distance,  because,  with 
I  the  sun  the  same  distance  below  the  earth,  there 
I  are  more  rays  near  the  ecliptic  and  the  sun  than 
remote  from  them.  And,  in  the  case  of  stars  of 
equal  magnitude  and  rising  at  the  same  latitudi- 
nal  elongation,  the  more  the  ecliptic  is  inclined 
I  to  the  horizon  and  makes  a  less  angle  DEF,  at 
so  much  greater  a  distance  EF  will  the  star  first 
appear. 


268 


PTOLEMY 


For  if  we  add  on,  as  in  the  following  figure, 
the  semicircle  HFK  through  the  poles  of  the 
horizon  and  through  the  sun  at  F  (which  is,  of 
course,  at  right  angles  to  the  horizon)  then  the 
sun^s  distance  under  the  earth  for  the  same  stars 
is  always  equal  to  arc  FH.  For  the  rays  above 
the  earth  are  similar  for  equal  distances  consi¬ 
dered  in  this  way.  And,  with  arc  HF  remaining 
the  same  as  we  said,  arc  EF  will  be  less  when 
the  ecliptic  is  perpendicular  to  the  horizon,  and 
greater  when  it  is  inclined. 

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  take  observations 
for  each  of  the  stars  to  get  the  sun's  distance  be¬ 
neath  the  earth  along  the  ecliptic.  If,  now,  the  distance  along  the  circle  at 
right  angles  to  the  horizon  (as  arc  FH  in  the  above  figure)  does  not  remain 
the  same  in  all  places  for  the  same  stars  because  similar  rays  do  not  shine 
the  same  in  the  denser  air  of  the  northern  climate,  then  we  shall  need  observa¬ 
tions  for  not  only  one  climate,  but  also  for  each  of  the  rest.  But  if  the  arc  corre¬ 
sponding  to  FH  remains  everywhere  the  same  for  the  same  stars,  as  is  likely  (for 
the  stars'  rays  would  necessarily  suffer  in  the  same  way  from  the  difference  in 
the  air)  then  the  distances  observed  for  one  climate  will  suffice  for  examining  the 
rest  geometrically,  whether  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  changes  because  of 
difference  in  place  or  because  of  the  demonstrated  shift  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars  towards  its  eastern  parts. 

For  let  the  distance  EF  be  given  from  observation  in  some  latitude.  Since 
then  again  the  arcs  BH  and  FA  have  been  drawn  through  to  the  arcs  GB  and 
GF  of  two  great  circles,  therefore, 

chord  2  arc  AB  :  chord  2  arc  BG  comp,  chord  2  arc  AE  :  chord  2  arc  EF, 
chord  2  arc  FH  :  chord  2  arc  HG. 

But  of  the  desired  arcs,  BG  and  HG  are  each  a  quadrant.  And  since  point  E  is 
supposed  to  be  that  with  which  the  star  rises,  the  point  A  of  culmination  is  also 
given  from  the  Table  of  Ascensions,  so  that  arc  AE  \&  therefore  given  and  EF 
from  observation.  The  arc  AG  is  given  by  calculation  of  the  distance  of  the 
point  A  from  the  equator  which,  in  turn,  is  given  in  the  Table  of  Obliquity,  and 
from  the  distance  of  the  equator  from  the  zenith  along  the  same  meridian,  which 
is  equal  to  the  pole's  elevation.  And,  therefore,  the  remaining  arc  FH  will  be 
given. 

And  once  this  is  found  and  is  kept  the  same,  we  shall  get,  by  means  of  this, 
the  sizes  of  the  arc  EF  for  the  other  inclinations.  For  again 

chord  2  arc  GB  :  chord  2  arc  AB  comp,  chord  2  arc  GH  :  chord  2  arc  FH, 
chord  2  arc  FE  :  chord  2  arc  EA ; 

and  of  the  desired  arcs,  FH  is  now  assumed,  and  the  point  E  is  given  as  rising 
with  the  star  according  to  the  latitude  in  question  as  shown  before;  and  likewise 
the  arcs  EA  and  BA  are  given.  And,  therefore,  the  remaining  arc  EF  of  the 
ecliptic  is  given. 

We  can  understand  the  same  kind  of  method  for  the  disappearances  of  the 
stars  at  their  settings  only  with  the  position  of  the  ecliptic  drawn  on  the  other 
side  in  the  same  figure  according  to  the  inclination  so  that  BD  is  taken  as  the 
western  horizon. 


G 


269 


THE  ALMAGEST,  VIII 

Not  to  pass  this  subject  by  entirely,  we  think  we  have  treated  it  sufficiently 
to  show  the  methods  used  in  this  theory.  And  because  the  generality  induced 
from  such  predictions  is  so  fluctuating  not  only  from  the  great  difference  of  the 
places  and  inclinations  of  the  ecliptic  but  also  from  the  multitude  of  the  stars 
and  the  difficulty  in  observing  their  heliacal  risings,  since  the  observers  and  the 
atmosphere  for  the  places  observed  can  make  the  time  of  the  first  glimpse  unlike 
and  unsure  (as  I  know  from  trial  and  from  the  differences  in  the  observations) 
and  besides  these  things  because,  through  the  shift  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars,  the  co-risings,  co-culminations,  and  co-settings  cannot  remain  constant, 
even  for  one  latitude,  with  those  calculated  with  the  present  numbers  and 
proofs,  therefore  we  have  avoided  such  a  waste  of  time,  being  content  for  the 
present  with  the  approximations  which  can  be  gotten  each  time  from  the  cata¬ 
logue  or  from  the  arrangement  of  the  sphere.  For  we  see  that  the  signs  of  the 
condition  of  the  atmosphere  gotten  from  the  heliacal  risings  and  settings  almost 
never  keep  any  order  or  unchangeableness,  if  one  attributes  the  cause  of  the 
differences  to  the  weather  and  not  to  the  places  of  the  ecliptic ;  so  that  this  cause 
acts  only  in  a  very  general  way  and  is  not  established  by  the  beginnings  of  the 
heliacal  risings  and  settings  as  it  is  by  the  configurations  of  the  moon  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  sun  in  its  general  distances,  and  by  the  moon^s  inclinations  in  the 
particular  distances. 


BOOK  NINE 


1(1 


1.  Concerning  THE  Order  OF  THE  Spheres  OF  THE  Sun  ■  .  , 
AND  Moon  and  Five  Planets  .  , 

Now,  certainly  whatever  one  could  say  in  general  about  the  fixed  stars,  to  the 
extent  that  the  appearances  up  until  now  fall  under  our  apprehension,  would 
be  pretty  much  like  this.  But  since  this  Composition  still  lacks  a  treatment  of 
the  five  planets,  we  shall  give  an  exposition  of  them,  going  as  far  as  possible 
with  what  they  have  in  common  to  avoid  repetition,  and  then  adding  on  the 
plan  of  each  one  in  particular.  -»• 

First,  then,  concerning  the  order  of  their  spheres,  all  of  which  have  their 
positions  about  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  we  see  the  foremost  mathematicians 
agree  that  all  these  spheres  are  nearer  the  earth  than  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars, 
and  farther  from  the  earth  than  that  of  the  moon;  that  the  three — of  which 
Saturn^s  is  the  largest,  Jupiter’s  next  earthward,  and  Mars’  below  that — are  all 
farther  from  the  earth  than  the  others  and  that  of  the  sun.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  spheres  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  placed  by  the  earlier  mathematicians 
below  the  sun’s,  but  by  some  of  the  later  ones  above  the  sun’s  because  of  their 
never  having  seen  the  sun  eclipsed  by  them.  But  this  judgment  seems  to  us 
unsure  since  these  planets  could  be  below  the  sun  and  never  yet  have  been  in 
any  of  the  planes  through  the  sun  and  our  e3^e  but  in  another,  and  therefore  not 
have  appeared  in  a  line  with  it;  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  moon’s  conjunctive 
passages  there  are  for  the  most  part  no  eclipses. 

Since  there  is  no  other  way  of  getting  at  this  because  of  the  absence  of  any 
sensible  parallax  in  these  stars,  from  which  appearance  alone  linear  distances 
are  gotten,  the  order  of  the  earlier  mathematicians  seems  the  more  trustworthy, 
using  the  sun  as  a  natural  dividing  line  between  those  planets  which  can  be  any 
angular  distance  from  the  sun  and  those  which  cannot  but  which  always  move 
near  it.  Besides,  it  does  not  place  them  far  enough  at  their  perigees  to  produce  a 
sensible  parallax. 

2.  On  the  Aim  of  the  Planetary  Hypotheses 
So  much,  then,  for  the  orders  of  the  spheres.  Now,  since  our  problem  is  to 
demonstrate,  in  the  case  of  the  five  planets  as  in  the  case  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
all  their  apparent  irregularities  as  produced  by  means  of  regular  and  circular 
motions  (for  these  are  proper  to  the  nature  of  divine  things  which  are  strangers 
to  disparities  and  disorders)  the  successful  accomplishment  of  this  aim  as  truly 
belonging  to  mathematical  theory  in  philosophy  is  to  be  considered  a  great 
thing,  very  difficult  and  as  yet  unattained  in  a  reasonable  way  by  anyone.  For, 
since,  in  the  case  of  the  researches  about  the  periodic  movements  of  each  planet, 
whatever  slight  error  the  eye  makes  in  systematic  observations  produces  a  sen¬ 
sible  difference  more  quickly  when  the  examination  has  been  over  a  shorter  in¬ 
terval  than  when  over  a  greater  one,  the  time  for  which  we  have  observations  of 

270 


271 


THE  ALIMAGEST,  IX 

the  planets  recorded  (being  short  for  grasping  such  a  considerable  lay-out,  fur¬ 
nishes  an  unsure  prediction  over  long  periods.  In  the  case  of  research  about  the 
anomalies,  the  fact  that  there  are  two  anomalies  appearing  for  each  of  the 
planets,  and  that  they  are  unequal  in  magnitude  and  in  the  times  of  their  re¬ 
turns,  works  a  good  deal  of  confusion.  For  one  of  the  anomalies  is  seen  to  have 
relation  to  the  sun,  and  the  other  to  the  parts  of  the  zodiac,  but  both  are  mixed 
together  so  it  is  very  hard  to  determine  what  belongs  to  each^ ;  and  most  of  the 
old  observations  were  thro^vn  together  carelessly  and  grossly.  The  more  con¬ 
tinuous  of  them  contain  stations  and  apparitions,  and  the  apprehension  of  these 
properties  is  not  certain.  The  stations  cannot  indicate  the  exact  time,  since  the 
planet’s  local  motion  remains  imperceptible  for  many  days  before  and  after  its 
station;  and  the  apparitions  not  only  make  the  places  immediately  disappear 
along  with  the  stars  as  they  are  seen  for  the  first  or  last  time,  but  also  can  be 
utterly  misleading  as  to  the  times  because  of  the  differences  in  the  atmosphere 
and  in  the  eye  of  the  observer.  In  general,  the  observations  made  with  reference 
to  some  fixed  star  at  a  rather  great  angular  distance,  unless  because  of  these 
things  one  attends  to  them  msely  and  clear-sightedly,  furnish  a  magnitude  from 
their  measurements  hard  to  calculate  and  subject  to  guesswork.  And  this  is  so, 
not  only  because  the  lines  between  the  observed  stars  make  different  angles 
with  the  ecliptic  and  by  no  means  right  angles — whence  in  the  variety  of  the 
zodiac’s  inclinations  a  great  uncertainty  is  apt  to  follow  in  the  determination  of 
the  longitudinal  and  latitudinal  positions — but  also  because  the  same  angular 
distances  appear  to  the  eye  greater  near  the  horizon  and  smaller  near  the  cul¬ 
minations,  and  so  they  can  be  measured  as  sometimes  greater  and  sometimes 
smaller  than  the  real  angular  distance. 

^It  is  important  to  notice  that  all  the  five  planets,  just  fike  the  moon,  have  an  anomaly 
with  respect  to  the  sun  as  well  as  an  anomaly  with  respect  to  the  zodiac.  Since  Ptolemy  merely 
expounds  the  theory  as  a  deduction,  it  might  be  well  to  explain  the  appearances  from  which 
these  things  could  be  gotten.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Ptolemy  had  long  astronomical 
tables  of  data  which  had  been  kept  for  nearly,  a  thousand  years,  and  which  served  as  appear¬ 
ances  over  a  long  period  of  time. 

The  appearances  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  fairly  simple.  These  two  stars  move  on  the 
ecliptic,  more  or  less,  and  swing  back  and  forth  from  one  side  of  the  sun  to  the  other,  Mercury 
never  getting  more  than  some  25°  from  the  sun,  and  Venus  never  more  than  some  45°.  This 
makes  them  alternately  morning  and  evening  stars.  This  swinging  in  the  heliacal  anomaly 
and,  from  a  greatest  elongation  from  the  mean  sun  (say  eastern)  back  to  the  next  greatest 
eastern  elongation,  is  called  one  cycle  of  heliacal  anomaly.  Furthermore  the  time  from  a 
western  elongation  to  an  eastern  is  longer  than  from  the  eastern  to  the  next  western.  It  is  also 
observed  that,  for  different  positions  of  the  mean  sun  on  the  ecfiptic,  the  greatest  elongations 
are  smaller  or  larger,  but  always  the  same  for  the  same  position. 

It  is  further  observed  that,  if  one  considers  the  sum  of  the  greatest  eastern  and  greatest 
western  elongation  for  each  position  of  the  mean  sun,  this  sum  is  greatest  at  one  position,  and 
on  either  side  gets  smaller  and  smaller  until  it  is  least  at  the  position  exactly  opposite  on  the 
ecliptic.  This  variation  of  the  apparent  heliacal  anomaly  is  called  the  zodiacal  anomaly. 

The  appearances  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  are  more,  complicated.  These  planets  move 
generally  from  west  to  east  along  the  ecfiptic  more  or  less  at  different  speeds,  Mars  making  a 
complete  circuit  through  the  fixed  stars  in  about  2  years,  Jupiter  in  about  11,  and  Saturn  in 
about  30.  They  can  be.  at  any  angular  distance  from  the  sun,  unlike  Venus  and  Mercury 
which  are  constrained  to  remain  within  certain  bounds.  But  they  are  tied  to  the  sun  in  a 
different  way.  Whenever  the  mean  sun  is  nearly  opposite  any  one  of  these  three  planets,  the 
planet  stops  its  eastward  motion,  and  this  is  called  a  station.  And  then,  as  the  mean  sun  gets 
more  directly  opposite,  the  planet  moves  westward,  and  this  is  called  a  regression  or  retro- 
gradation.  As  the  mean  sun  moves  on,  the  planet  appears  to  stop  again,  and  then  move  east¬ 
ward  again.  As  the  mean  sun  moves  toward  the  planet,  the  planet  moves  faster  and  faster 


272  PTOLEMY 

And  so  I  consider  Hipparchus  to  have  been  most  zealous  after  the  truth,  both 
because  of  all  these  things  and  especially  because  of  his  having  left  us  more  ex¬ 
amples  of  accurate  observations  than  he  ever  got  from  his  predecessors.  He 
sought  out  the  hypotheses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  demonstrated  as  far  as 
possible  and  by  every  available  means  that  they  were  accomplished  through 
uniform  circular  movements,  but  he  did  not  attempt  to  give  the  principle  of  the 
hypotheses  of  the  five  planets,  as  far  as  we  can  tell  from  those  memoirs  of  his 
which  have  come  down  to  us,  but  only  arranged  the  observations  in  a  more  use¬ 
ful  way  and  showed  the  appearances  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  hypotheses  of 
the  mathematicians  of  that  time.  For  not  only  did  he  think  it  necessary  as  it 
seemed  to  declare  that,  because  of  the  double  anomaly  of  each  planet,  the  re¬ 
gressions  of  each  are  unequal  and  of  such  and  such  a  magnitude,  while  the  other 
mathematicians  gave  their  geometrical  demonstrations  on  one  and  the  same 
anomaly  and  regression,  but  he  also  thought  that  these  movements  could  not 
be  effected  either  by  eccentric  circles,  or  by  circles  concentric  with  the  ecliptic 
but  bearing  epicycles,  or  even  by  both  together,  although  the  zodiacal  anomaly 
was  of  one  magnitude  and  the  anomaly  with  respect  to  the  sun  of  another.  For 
these  are  the  means  used  by  nearly  all  those  who  have  wished  to  demonstrate 
uniform  circular  movement  by  the  so-called  perpetual  table,  but  in  a  false  and 
inconsequential  way,  some  getting  nowhere  at  all,  some  following  the  problem 
to  a  limited  extent.  But  Hipparchus  reasoned  that  no  one  who  has  progressed 
through  the  whole  of  mathematics  to  such  a  point  of  accuracy  and  zeal  for 
truth  would  be  content  to  stop  at  this  like  the  rest;  but  that  anyone  who  was 
to  persuade  himself  and  those  in  touch  with  him  would  have  to  demonstrate 
the  magnitude  and  periods  of  each  of  the  anomalies  by  clear  and  consistent  ap¬ 
pearances;  and,  putting  both  together,  he  would  have  to  find  out  the  position 
and  order  of  the  circles  by  which  these  anomalies  are  produced  and  the  mode  of 
their  movement  and  finally  show  about  all  the  appearances  to  be  consistent  with 
the  peculiar  property  of  this  hypothesis  of  the  circles.  I  think  this  is  difficult, 
and  it  seemed  so  to  him.  We  have  said  all  this  not  through  ostentation,  but  in 
order  that,  if  we  are  forced  by  the  problem  itself  either  (1)  to  use  something  con¬ 
trary  to  the  general  argument,  as  when,  for  example,  for  ease  we  make  our 
demonstrations  of  the  circles  described  by  the  movement  in  the  planetary 
spheres  as  if  they  were  simple  and  in  the  same  plane  with  the  ecliptic;  or  if  we 
are  forced  (2)  to  presuppose  something  without  immediate  foundation  in  the 
appearances,  an  apprehension  gotten  from  continuous  trial  and  adjustment; 
or  (3)  to  suppose  not  everywhere  the  same  mode  of  movement  or  inclination  of 
the  circles — in  order  that,  I  say,  we  may  then  reasonably  agree  that  (1)  using 
something  of  the  sort  that  no  appreciable  difference  is  to  result  from  it  will  not 
falsify  the  subject  in  hand;  (2)  that  things  supposed  without  proof,  once  they 
are  conceived  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  consistent  with  appearances,  cannot  be 

eastward  until  the  mean  sun  has  overtaken  it;  then  it  moves  more  and  more  slowly  eastward 
until  it  again  appears  to  stop.  The  time  from  a  station  to  a  corresponding  station  is  one  cycle 
of  heliacal  anomaly.  Furthermore,  the  time  from  a  station  through  the  eastward  motion  of 
the  planet  to  the  next  station  is  much  longer  than  that  from  a  station  through  the  westward 
or  regressive  motion  of  the  planet  to  the  next  station. 

Again  these  speeds  vary  for  different  positions  of  the  mean  sun  on  the  echptic.  And  this 
variation  is  called  the  zodiacal  anomaly. 

All  the  planets  wander  slightly  from  one  side  of  the  ecliptic  to  the  other.  The  theory  of 
this  latitudinal  anomaly  is  explained  in  Book  XIII. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX  273 

found  without  some  plan  and  knowledge  even  if  the  way  of  getting  hold  of  them 
is  hard  to  explain  (after  all,  generally  speaking,  the  cause  of  first  principles  is 
either  nothing  or  hard  to  interpret  in  its  nature) ;  and  (3)  that,  since  the  appear¬ 
ances  relative  to  the  stars  are  also  found  to  be  dissimilar,  one  should  not  reason¬ 
ably  think  it  strange  or  absurd  to  vary  the  mode  of  the  hypotheses  of  the  circles, 
especially  when,  along  with  saving  the  regular  circular  movement  absolutely 
everywhere,  each  of  the  appearances  is  demonstrated  in  its  more  lawful  and 
general  character. 

And  so  we  have  used  for  the  demonstrations  of  each  planet  only  those  obser¬ 
vations  which  cannot  be  disputed,  that  is  those  taken  at  contact  or  great  prox¬ 
imity  with  the  stars  or  even  with  the  moon,  and  above  all  those  taken  with  the 
astrolabe  where  the  eye  is  lined  up  with  the  diametrically  opposite  sights  in  the 
circles,  sees  on  every  side  equal  angular  distances  by  means  of  similar  arcs,  and 
can  accurately  apprehend  the  passages  relative  to  the  middle  of  each  star  in 
longitude  and  latitude  by  moving  to  and  fro  to  the  observed  stars  the  astro- 
labels  ecliptic  circle  and  the  diametrically  opposite  sights  in  the  circles  through 
its  poles. 

3.  On  the  Periodic  Returns  of  the  Five  Planets 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  explained  in  advance,  we  shall  first  set  out 
the  least  periodic  joint  returns  (that  is  very  nearly  joint)  of  each  of  the  five 
planets  as  calculated  by  Hipparchus,  with  a  correction  of  our  own  gotten  from 
the  comparison  of  the  positions  made  after  the  demonstrations  of  the  anomalies, 
as  we  shall  show  in  that  place.  We  have  put  them  first  in  order  to  have  set  out  at 
hand,  for  the  calculations  of  the  anomalies,  the  particular  mean  movements  of 
each  one,  both  in  longitude  and  in  anomaly,  since  there  would  be  no  appreciable 
difference  even  if  one  should  use  the  mean  passages  in  their  more  approximate 
form.  In  general,  one  is  to  understand  by  movement  in  longitude  the  movement 
of  the  epicycle^s  centre  on  the  eccentric,  and  by  anomaly  the  movement  of  the 
star  on  the  epicycle. 

Now,  we  find  57  cycles  of  anomaly  of  Saturn  exactly  completed  in  59  solar 
years  of  our  kind  (that  is  from  one  tropic  or  equinoctial  point  back  to  the  same) 
plus  1+3^ +34  day  very  nearly,  and  in  2  revolutions  of  the  star  plus  {!  +  %+ 
34o)°  of  revolution;  for,  in  the  case  of  the  three  stars  continually  being  over¬ 
taken  by  the  sun,  the  number  of  revolutions  run  by  the  sun  in  the  time  of  return 
of  each  is  equal  to  the  number  of  longitudinal  revolutions  of  the  star  together 
with  the  number  of  its  returns  in  anomaly.^  And  we  find  65  cycles  of  anomaly  of 
Jupiter  exactly  completed  in  71  solar  years  of  the  same  kind  less  4+34+34+ 
3^5  days  very  nearly,  and  in  6  revolutions  of  the  star  less  (4+34+34)°  of  ^  revo¬ 
lution,  counting  from  a  tropic  point  back  to  the  same.  Likewise  we  find  37  cycles 
of  anomaly  of  Mars  in  79  of  our  solar  years  plus  3+3^^+34o  days  very  nearly, 

I  and  in  42  revolutions  of  the  star  plus  334°  of  a  revolution,  counting  from  a  tropic 

^This  fact  that,  for  the  planets  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn,  the  number  of  revolutions  of 
the  mean  sun  is  always  equal  to  the  number  of  longitudinal  revolutions  of  the  star  plus  the 
number  of  its  returns  of  anomaly,  is  of  great  importance  later  on  in  Book  X,  Chapter  6.  It 
also  becomes  important  in  the  hehocentric  theories.  For  while  it  remains  a  useful  accident  for 
Ptolemy,  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  primary  assumptions  of  Copernicus. 

The  fact,  again,  that  even  these  three  planets,  which  are  not  tied  to  the  sun  by  an  immedi¬ 
ate  appearance  as  Venus  and  Mercury,  yet  have  an  anomaly  which  is  referred  to  the  sun,  is 
a  sign  pointing  towards  a  heliocentric  hypothesis. 


PTOLEMY 


274 


point  I)a(;k  to  the  naino;  5  cycIcH  of  anomaly  of  Venus  in  8  of  our  solar  years  less 
+ Ko  ^  revolutions  of  the  star  less  2}4^  of  a  revolution,  equal 

in  nuinher  to  the  revolutions  of  the  sun;  and  145  cycles  of  anomaly  of  Mercury  in 
4(i  y(‘ars  of  the  sanu;  kind  plus  l  revolutions  of  the  star  i)lus  1° 

of  a  revolution,  afj;ain  (;qual  in  number  to  the  revolutions  of  the  sun. 

Ihit  if,  for  each  one,  we  r(Hlu(;e  the  time  of  return  into  days  in  accordance  with 
the  yearns  time  as  already  fj;iven  by  us,  and  the  number  of  cycles  of  anomaly  into 
the  .‘UiO®  of  a  circle,  th(*n  we  shall  hav(i,  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  21,5511^60  days 
and  20,520^^  of  anomaly;  in  the  case  of  .Jupiter,  25,927^%o  days  and  27,400°  of 
anomaly;  in  the  cast;  of  Mars,  28,857^'J^o  days  and  13,820°  of  anomaly;  in  the 
case  of  Venus,  2,0101x^60  days  and  1,800°  of  anomaly;  and  in  the  case  of  Mer¬ 
cury,  l(),802'‘^')fjo  52,200°  of  anomaly. 

Dividing,  then,  in  each  case,  the  number  of  d(;grees  of  anomaly  by  the  number 
of  days,  we  shall  have  the  daily  mean  movement  of  anomaly:  very  nearly  57^7^^ 
43*1*4  I  iv,|3v,j()vi  fjjj.  H^tiirn,  54*0‘‘2ii‘4()*''2()''  for  Jupiter,  27*41 1*40***  1 0i'’20''58''i 
for  Mars,  3(i *50 **25 '**53 *'^11 ''28''*  for  Venus,  and  3°()*24*‘()***50*''35''50''*  for  Mer¬ 


cury. 

'Fuking  a  twenty-fourth  of  (;ach  of  these,  we  shall  have  the  hourly  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  anom.aly:  2*22“40***10*M4''10''‘10''**  for  Saturn,  2*I5**22*“3()*\5()''5''*  for 
JupiU'r,  1  *0**14 ***10*''48''22''*25''**  for  Mars,  1*32**28***34*''42''58''*40''**  for  Venus, 
and  7‘4()‘*0***17*''28^50''*35''**  for  Mercury. 

Again,  multiplying  the  daily  mean  movements  of  each  by  thirty,  we  shall  have 
the  monthly  nu'an  movement  of  anomaly:  28°33*51**50***51*\5()''  for  Saturn,  27° 
4‘3I**23‘**13*''  for  Jupiter,  13°5()*5()*‘0**‘ 4()‘''20''  for  Mars,  18°20*42**5G***35*''44'' 
for  Vtuius,  and  0.3°  1 2 *3 **20 **‘4 7 *''55''  for  Mercury. 

And  likewisti  multiplying  the  d.aily  mean  movements  by  the  365  days  of  the 
Egyptian  y(;ar,  we  shall  have  the  yearly  juean  movement  of  anomaly:  347°32* 
()“48***5()*'38"2()''‘  for  Saturn,  329°25‘1**52***28*''10''  for  Jupiter,  168°28*30**17*** 
4 2 *''32'' 50''*  for  Mjuvs,  225°1  *32**28*‘*34*''30''15''*  for  Venus,  and  a  surplus  of  53° 
56‘42“32*‘*32‘^50''l()^*  for  Mercury. 

In  tlu;  same  way,  multiplying  also  each  of  the  yearly  movements  by  18,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  tables  of  the  sun  and  moon,  we  shall  have  the  mean  surplus  of 
anomaly  of  the  lOgyptian  18-year  |)criod:  135°36*  14**30***  1 1  *''30''  for  Saturn, 
160°30‘33**44*“27*''  for  Jupiter,  152°33‘5**18**‘45*^51''  for  Mars,  00°27*44**34*** 
23 *''4 6 ''30''*  for  \'enus,  and  25 1°0 *45* *45* **53 *''45''  for  Mercury. 

From  these  numbers  we  shall  get  the  mean  movements  in  longitude  so  that, 
without  reducing  the  number  of  revolutions  to  degrees,  we  may,  in  each  case, 
divide  th(;m  into  the  time  proposed.  It  is  clear  that  for  Venus  and  Mercury  the 
mean  movenuuits  in  longitude  will  be  the  same  as  those  already  set  out  for  the 
sun,  and  for  the  other  three  stars  they  will  bo,  for  each  number,  the  clitTerence 
between  the  mean  movenu'iit  of  anomaly  and  the  sun’s  mean  movement  in 
longitude.  And  in  (.his  way  we  sh.all  find  Hat.urn’s  daily  mean  movement  in  longi¬ 
tude  (,o  be  2*0‘*33***3I*"28\51''‘,  Jupiter’s  4*50**14***2G*''46''31''*,  and  Mars’  31* 
2G‘*3G***53*''51''33'’*;  Saturn’s  hourly  mean  movement  in  longitude  5' *1** *23 *''48'' 
42''*7"**3()''***,  Jupiter’s  12**28‘**G*'’G''5G''*17''*‘3()''***,  and  Mars’  1*18**3G***32*''14'' 
30''*;  Salurn’s  monthly  mean  movement  in  longitude  1°0*1G**45‘**44*''25'’30''‘, 
Jupiter’s  2°20*37*‘13***23*''15''3(F*,  and  Mars’  15°43‘1S‘*2G***55*''4G"30''*;  Saturn’s 
yearly  mean  movement  in  longitude  1 2°  13*23**56***30 *''30'' 15''*,  Jupiter’s  30°20' 
22**52***52*'38''35'’*,  and  Mars’  10riG*54**27*‘*38*''35''45''*;  and  Saturn’s  mean 


275 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 

movement  in  longitude  over  18  years  to  be  220®1H0‘‘57“‘9^^4'^30''‘,  Jupiter^s  a 
surplus  of  186'^G‘5H*51“‘53*''34'^30'^*,  and  Mars^  a  surplus  of  203®4‘20‘H7‘“34*'^ 
43'^30"^ 

Now  we  shall  again  arrange,  in  the  order  of  the  stars  for  the  ready  use  of  each, 
the  tables  of  these  mean  movements,  in  45  rows  and  in  lots  of  three  like  the 
others.  The  first  lots  will  contain  the  combinations  of  18-ycar  periods,  the  second 
the  yearly  and  hourly  combinations,  and  the  third  the  monthly  and  daily  ones. 
And  here  follow  the  tables: 


u 


18 

36 

54 

72 

90 

108 

126 

144 

162 

180 

198 

216 

234 

252 

270 

288 

306 

324 

342 

360 

378 

396 

414 

432 

450 

468 

486 

504 

522 

540 

558 

576 

594 

612 

630 

648 

666 

684 

702 

720 

738 

756 

774 


PTOLEMY 


4.  Tables  of  the  Mean  Movements  in  Longitude 
AND  IN  Anomaly  of  the  Five  Stars 
SATURN,  Anomaly  at  epoch,  34°2' 

Longitude  at  epochs  Goat  Apogee  at  epoch.  Scorpion  H^IO' 

Degrees  in  longitude  Degrees  of  anomaly 


0 

I 

ii 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

220 

1 

10 

57 

9 

4 

30 

135 

36 

14 

39 

11 

30 

0 

80 

2 

21 

54 

18 

9 

0 

271 

12 

29 

18 

23 

0 

0 

300 

3 

32 

51 

27 

13 

30 

46 

48 

43 

57 

34 

30 

0 

160 

4 

43 

48 

36 

18 

0 

182 

24 

58 

36 

46 

0 

0 

20 

5 

54 

45 

45 

22 

30 

318 

1 

13 

15 

57 

30 

0 

240 

7 

5 

42 

54 

27 

0 

93 

37 

27 

55 

9 

0 

0 

100 

8 

16 

40 

3 

31 

30 

229 

13 

42 

34 

20 

30 

0 

320 

9 

27 

37 

12 

36 

0 

4 

49 

57 

13 

32 

0 

0 

180 

10 

38 

34 

21 

40 

30 

140 

26 

11 

52 

43 

30 

0 

40 

11 

49 

31 

30 

45 

0 

276 

2 

26 

31 

55 

0 

0 

260 

13 

0 

28 

39 

49 

30 

51 

38 

41 

11 

6 

30 

0 

120 

14 

11 

25 

48 

54 

0 

187 

14 

55 

50 

18 

0 

0 

340 

15 

22 

22 

57 

58 

30 

322 

51 

10 

29 

29 

30 

0 

200 

16 

33 

20 

7 

3 

0 

98 

27 

25 

8 

41 

0 

0 

60 

17 

44 

17 

16 

7 

30 

234 

3 

39 

47 

52 

30 

0 

280 

18 

55 

14 

25 

12 

0 

9 

39 

54 

27 

4 

0 

0 

140 

20 

6 

11 

34 

16 

30 

145 

16 

9 

6 

15 

30 

0 

0 

21 

17 

8 

43 

21 

0 

280 

52 

23 

45 

27 

0 

0 

220 

22 

28 

5 

52 

25 

30 

56 

28 

38 

24 

38 

30 

0 

80 

23 

39 

3 

1 

30 

0 

192 

4 

53 

3 

50 

0 

0 

300 

24 

50 

0 

10 

34 

30 

327 

41 

7 

43 

1 

30 

0 

160 

26 

0 

57 

19 

39 

0 

103 

17 

22 

22 

13 

0 

0 

20 

27 

11 

54 

28 

43 

30 

238 

53 

37 

1 

24 

30 

0 

240 

28 

22 

51 

37 

48 

0 

14 

29 

51 

40 

36 

0 

0 

100 

29 

33 

48 

46 

52 

30 

150 

6 

6 

19 

47 

30 

0 

320 

30 

44 

45 

55 

57 

0 

285 

42 

20 

58 

59 

0 

0 

180 

31 

55 

43 

5 

1 

30 

61 

18 

35 

38 

10 

30 

0 

40 

33 

6 

40 

14 

6 

0 

196 

54 

50 

17 

22 

0 

0 

260 

34 

17 

37 

23 

10 

30 

332 

31 

4 

56 

33 

30 

0 

120 

35 

28 

34 

32 

15 

0 

108 

7 

19 

35 

45 

0 

0 

340 

36 

39 

31 

41 

19 

30 

243 

43 

34 

14 

56 

30 

0 

200 

37 

50 

28 

50 

24 

0 

19 

19 

48 

54 

8 

0 

0 

60 

39 

1 

25 

59 

28 

30 

154 

56 

3 

33 

19 

30 

0 

280 

40 

12 

23 

8 

33 

0 

290 

32 

18 

12 

31 

0 

0 

140 

41 

23 

20 

17 

37 

30 

66 

8 

32 

51 

42 

30 

0 

0 

42 

34 

17 

26 

42 

0 

201 

44 

47 

30 

54 

0 

0 

220 

43 

45 

14 

35 

46 

30 

337 

21 

2 

10 

5 

30 

0 

80 

44 

56 

11 

44 

51 

0 

112 

57 

16 

49 

17 

0 

0 

300 

46 

7 

8 

53 

55 

30 

248 

33 

31 

28 

28 

30 

0 

160 

47 

18 

6 

3 

0 

0 

24 

9 

46 

7 

40 

0 

0 

20 

48 

29 

3 

12 

4 

30 

159 

46 

0 

46 

51 

30 

0 

240 

49 

40 

0 

21 

9 

0 

295 

22 

15 

26 

3 

0 

0 

100 

50 

50 

57 

30 

13 

30 

0 

58 

30 

5 

14 

30 

0 

320 

52 

1 

54 

39 

18 

0 

206 

34 

44 

44 

26 

0 

0 

180 

53 

12 

51 

48 

22 

30 

342 

10 

59 

23 

37 

30 

0 

Sim 

Yeo 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

Hou 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
Saturn,  Continued 


277 


Saturn's  Degrees  in  longitude 


Saturn's  Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

12 

13 

23 

56 

30 

30 

15 

347 

32 

0 

48 

50 

38 

20 

24 

26 

47 

53 

1 

0 

30 

335 

4 

1 

37 

41 

16 

40 

36 

40 

11 

49 

31 

30 

45 

322 

36 

2 

26 

31 

55 

0 

48 

53 

35 

46 

2 

1 

0 

310 

8 

3 

15 

22 

33 

20 

61 

6 

59 

42 

32 

31 

15 

297 

40 

4 

4 

13 

11 

40 

73 

20 

23 

39 

3 

1 

30 

285 

12 

4 

53 

3 

50 

0 

85 

33 

47 

35 

33 

31 

45 

272 

44 

5 

41 

54 

28 

20 

97 

47 

11 

32 

4 

2 

0 

260 

16 

6 

30 

45 

6 

40 

no 

0 

35 

28 

34 

32 

15 

247 

48 

7 

19 

35 

45 

0 

122 

13 

59 

25 

5 

2 

30 

235 

20 

8 

8 

26 

23 

20 

134 

27 

23 

21 

35 

32 

45 

222 

52 

8 

57 

17 

1 

40 

146 

40 

47 

18 

6 

3 

0 

210 

24 

9 

46 

7 

40 

0 

158 

54 

11 

14 

36 

33 

15 

197 

56 

10 

34 

58 

18 

20 

171 

7 

35 

11 

7 

3 

30 

185 

28 

11 

23 

48 

56 

40 

183 

20 

59 

7 

37 

33 

45 

173 

0 

12 

12 

39 

35 

0 

195 

34 

23 

4 

8 

4 

0 

160 

32 

13 

1 

30 

13 

20 

207 

47 

47 

0 

38 

34 

15 

148 

4 

13 

50 

20 

51 

40 

220 

1 

10 

57 

9 

4 

30 

135 

36 

14 

39 

11 

30 

0 

Degrees  in  longitude  Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

0 

5 

1 

23 

48 

42 

0 

2 

22 

49 

19 

14 

19 

0 

0 

10 

2 

47 

37 

24 

0 

4 

45 

38 

38 

28 

38 

0 

0 

15 

4 

11 

26 

6 

0 

7 

8 

27 

57 

42 

57 

0 

0 

20 

5 

35 

14 

48 

0 

9 

31 

17 

16 

57 

17 

0 

0 

25 

6 

59 

3 

31 

0 

11 

54 

6 

36 

11 

36 

0 

0 

30 

8 

22 

52 

13 

0 

14 

16 

55 

55 

25 

55 

0 

0 

35 

9 

46 

40 

55 

0 

16 

39 

45 

14 

40 

14 

0 

0 

40 

11 

10 

29 

37 

0 

19 

2 

34 

33 

54 

33 

0 

0 

45 

12 

34 

18 

19 

0 

21 

25 

23 

53 

8 

52 

0 

0 

50 

13 

58 

7 

1 

0 

23 

48 

13 

12 

23 

12 

0 

0 

55 

15 

21 

55 

43 

0 

26 

11 

2 

31 

37 

31 

0 

1 

0 

16 

45 

44 

25 

0 

28 

33 

51 

50 

51 

50 

0 

1 

5 

18 

9 

33 

8 

0 

30 

56 

41 

10 

6 

9 

0 

1 

10 

19 

33 

21 

50 

0 

33 

19 

30 

29 

20 

28 

0 

1 

15 

20 

57 

10 

32 

0 

35 

42 

19 

48 

34 

47 

0 

1 

20 

22 

20 

59 

14 

0 

38 

5 

9 

7 

49 

7 

0 

1 

25 

23 

44 

47 

56 

0 

40 

27 

58 

27 

30 

26 

0 

1 

30 

25 

8 

36 

38 

0 

42 

50 

47 

46 

17 

45 

0 

1 

35 

26 

32 

25 

20 

0 

45 

13 

37 

5 

32 

4 

0 

1 

40 

27 

56 

14 

2 

0 

47 

36 

26 

24 

46 

23 

0 

1 

45 

29 

20 

2 

45 

0 

49 

59 

15 

44 

0 

42 

0 

1 

50 

30 

43 

51 

27 

0 

52 

22 

5 

3 

15 

2 

0 

1 

55 

32 

7 

40 

9 

0 

54 

44 

54 

22 

29 

21 

0 

2 

0 

33 

31 

28 

51 

0 

57 

7 

43 

41 

43 

40 

30 

60 

90 

120 

150 

180 

210 

240 

270 

300 

330 

360 

Days 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 


PTOLEMY 


Saturn,  Continued 


Degrees  in  longitude 


Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

1 

0 

16 

45 

44 

25 

30 

28 

33 

51 

50 

51 

50 

0 

2 

0 

33 

31 

28 

51 

0 

57 

7 

43 

41 

43 

40 

0 

3 

0 

50 

17 

13 

16 

30 

85 

41 

35 

32 

35 

30 

0 

4 

1 

7 

2 

57 

42 

0 

114 

15 

27 

23 

27 

20 

0 

5 

1 

23 

48 

42 

7 

30 

142 

49 

19 

14 

19 

10 

0 

6 

1 

40 

34 

26 

33 

0 

171 

23 

11 

5 

11 

0 

0 

7 

1 

57 

20 

10 

58 

30 

199 

57 

2 

56 

2 

50 

0 

8 

2 

14 

5 

55 

24 

0 

228 

30 

54 

46 

54 

40 

0 

9 

2 

30 

51 

39 

49 

30 

257 

4 

46 

37 

46 

30 

0 

10 

2 

47 

37 

24 

15 

0 

255 

38 

38 

28 

38 

20 

0 

11 

3 

4 

23 

8 

40 

30 

314 

12 

30 

19 

30 

10 

0 

12 

3 

21 

8 

53 

6 

0 

342 

46 

22 

10 

22 

0 

0 

o 

Degrees  in  longitude 

I  II  III  IV 

V 

VI 

o 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

I  II  III  IV 

V 

VI 

0 

2 

0 

33 

31 

28 

51 

0 

57 

7 

43 

41 

43 

40 

0 

4 

1 

7 

2 

57 

42 

1 

54 

15 

27 

23 

27 

20 

0 

6 

1 

40 

34 

26 

33 

2 

51 

23 

11 

5 

11 

0 

0 

8 

2 

14 

5 

55 

24 

3 

48 

30 

54 

46 

54 

40 

0 

10 

2 

47 

37 

24 

15 

4 

45 

38 

38 

28 

38 

20 

0 

12 

3 

21 

8 

53 

6 

5 

42 

46 

22 

10 

22 

0 

0 

14 

3 

54 

40 

21 

57 

6 

39 

54 

5 

52 

5 

40 

0 

16 

4 

28 

11 

50 

48 

7 

37 

1 

49 

33 

49 

20 

0 

18 

5 

1 

43 

19 

39 

8 

34 

9 

33 

15 

33 

0 

0 

20 

5 

35 

14 

48 

30 

9 

31 

17 

16 

57 

16 

40 

0 

22 

6 

8 

46 

17 

21 

10 

28 

25 

0 

39 

0 

20 

0 

24 

6 

42 

17 

46 

12 

11 

25 

32 

44 

20 

44 

0 

0 

26 

7 

15 

49 

15 

3 

12 

22 

40 

28 

2 

27 

40 

0 

28 

7 

49 

20 

43 

54 

13 

19 

48 

11 

44 

11 

20 

0 

30 

8 

22 

52 

12 

45 

14 

16 

55 

55 

25 

55 

0 

0 

32 

8 

56 

23 

41 

36 

15 

14 

3 

39 

7 

38 

40 

0 

34 

9 

29 

55 

10 

27 

16 

11 

11 

22 

49 

22 

20 

0 

36 

10 

3 

26 

39 

18 

17 

8 

19 

6 

31 

6 

0 

0 

38 

10 

36 

58 

8 

9 

18 

5 

26 

50 

12 

49 

40 

0 

40 

11 

10 

29 

37 

0 

19 

2 

34 

33 

54 

33 

20 

0 

42 

11 

44 

1 

5 

51 

19 

59 

42 

17 

36 

17 

0 

0 

44 

12 

17 

32 

34 

42 

20 

56 

50 

1 

18 

0 

40 

0 

46 

12 

51 

4 

3 

33 

21 

53 

57 

44 

59 

44 

20 

0 

48 

13 

24 

35 

32 

24 

22 

51 

5 

28 

41 

28 

0 

0 

50 

13 

58 

7 

1 

15 

23 

48 

13 

12 

23 

11 

40 

0 

52 

14 

31 

38 

30 

6 

24 

45 

20 

56 

4 

55 

20 

0 

54 

15 

5 

9 

58 

57 

25 

42 

28 

39 

46 

39 

0 

0 

56 

15 

38 

41 

27 

48 

26 

39 

36 

23 

28 

22 

40 

0 

58 

16 

12 

12 

56 

39 

27 

36 

44 

7 

10 

6 

20 

1 

0 

16 

45 

44 

25 

30 

28 

33 

51 

50 

51 

50 

0 

y-t/ea 

18 

36 

54 

72 

90 

108 

126 

144 

162 

180 

198 

216 

234 

252 

270 

288 

306 

324 

342 

360 

378 

396 

414 

432 

450 

468 

486 

504 

522 

540 

558 

576 

594 

612 

630 

648 

666 

684 

702 

720 

738 

756 

774 

792 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
JUPITER,  Anomaly  at  epoch,  146®4' 


279 


Longitude  at  epochs  Balance 
Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

186 

6 

51 

51 

53 

34 

30 

12 

13 

43 

43 

47 

9 

0 

198 

20 

35 

35 

40 

43 

30 

24 

27 

27 

27 

34 

18 

0 

210 

34 

19 

19 

27 

52 

30 

36 

41 

11 

11 

21 

27 

0 

222 

48 

3 

3 

15 

1 

30 

48 

54 

54 

55 

8 

36 

0 

235 

1 

46 

47 

2 

10 

30 

61 

8 

38 

38 

55 

45 

0 

247 

15 

30 

30 

49 

19 

30 

73 

22 

22 

22 

42 

54 

0 

259 

29 

14 

14 

36 

28 

30 

85 

36 

6 

6 

30 

3 

0 

271 

42 

57 

58 

23 

37 

30 

97 

49 

49 

50 

17 

12 

0 

283 

56 

41 

42 

10 

46 

30 

110 

3 

33 

34 

4 

21 

0 

296 

10 

25 

25 

57 

55 

30 

122 

17 

17 

17 

51 

30 

0 

308 

24 

9 

9 

45 

4 

30 

134 

31 

1 

1 

38 

39 

0 

320 

37 

52 

53 

32 

13 

30 

146 

44 

44 

45 

25 

48 

0 

332 

51 

36 

37 

19 

22 

30 

158 

58 

28 

29 

12 

57 

0 

345 

5 

20 

21 

6 

31 

30 

171 

12 

12 

13 

0 

6 

0 

357 

19 

4 

4 

53 

40 

30 

183 

25 

55 

56 

47 

15 

0 

9 

32 

47 

48 

40 

49 

30 

195 

39 

39 

40 

34 

24 

0 

21 

46 

31 

32 

27 

58 

30 

207 

53 

23 

24 

21 

33 

0 

34 

0 

15 

16 

15 

7 

30 

220 

7 

7 

8 

8 

42 

0 

46 

13 

59 

0 

2 

16 

30 

232 

20 

50 

51 

55 

51 

0 

58 

27 

42 

43 

49 

25 

30 

244 

34 

34 

35 

43 

0 

0 

0 

41 

26 

27 

36 

34 

30 

256 

48 

18 

19 

30 

9 

0 

82 

55 

10 

11 

23 

43 

30 

269 

2 

2 

3 

17 

18 

0 

95 

8 

53 

55 

10 

52 

30 

Apogee  at  epoch,  Virgin  2° 9' 
Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

169 

30 

33 

44 

27 

0 

0 

339 

1 

7 

28 

54 

0 

0 

148 

31 

41 

13 

21 

0 

0 

318 

2 

14 

57 

48 

0 

0 

127 

32 

48 

42 

15 

0 

0 

297 

3 

22 

26 

42 

0 

0 

106 

33 

56 

11 

9 

0 

0 

276 

4 

29 

55 

36 

0 

0 

85 

35 

3 

40 

3 

0 

0 

255 

5 

37 

24 

30 

0 

0 

64 

36 

11 

8 

57 

0 

0 

234 

6 

44 

53 

24 

0 

0 

43 

37 

18 

37 

51 

0 

0 

213 

7 

52 

22 

18 

0 

0 

22 

38 

26 

6 

45 

0 

0 

192 

8 

59 

51 

12 

0 

0 

1 

39 

33 

35 

39 

0 

0 

171 

10 

7 

20 

6 

0 

0 

340 

40 

41 

4 

33 

0 

0 

150 

11 

14 

49 

0 

0 

0 

319 

41 

48 

33 

27 

0 

0 

129 

12 

22 

17 

54 

0 

0 

298 

42 

56 

2 

21 

0 

0 

108 

13 

29 

46 

48 

0 

0 

277 

44 

3 

31 

15 

0 

0 

87 

14 

37 

15 

42 

0 

0 

256 

45 

11 

0 

9 

0 

0 

66 

15 

44 

44 

36 

0 

0 

235 

46 

18 

29 

3 

0 

0 

45 

16 

52 

13 

30 

0 

0 

214 

47 

25 

57 

57 

0 

0 

24 

17 

59 

42 

24 

0 

0 

193 

48 

33 

26 

51 

0 

0 

3 

19 

7 

11 

18 

0 

0 

172 

49 

40 

55 

45 

0 

0 

342 

20 

14 

40 

12 

0 

0 

151 

50 

48 

24 

39 

0 

0 

321 

21 

22 

9 

6 

0 

0 

130 

51 

55 

53 

33 

0 

0 

300 

22 

29 

38 

0 

0 

0 

109 

53 

3 

22 

27 

0 

0 

279 

23 

37 

6 

54 

0 

0 

88 

54 

10 

51 

21 

0 

0 

258 

24 

44 

35 

48 

0 

0 

67 

55 

18 

20 

15 

0 

0 

ing 

(ear 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

Jou 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 


PTOLEMY 


Jupiter,  Continued 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

IV 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

30 

20 

22 

52 

52 

58 

35 

329 

25 

1 

52 

28 

10 

0 

60 

40 

45 

45 

45 

57 

10 

298 

50 

3 

44 

56 

20 

0 

91 

1 

8 

38 

38 

55 

45 

268 

15 

5 

37 

24 

30 

0 

121 

21 

31 

31 

31 

54 

20 

237 

40 

7 

29 

52 

40 

0 

151 

41 

54 

24 

24 

52 

55 

207 

5 

9 

22 

20 

50 

0 

182 

2 

17 

17 

17 

51 

30 

176 

30 

11 

14 

49 

0 

0 

212 

22 

40 

10 

10 

50 

5 

145 

55 

13 

7 

17 

10 

0 

242 

43 

3 

3 

3 

48 

40 

115 

20 

14 

59 

45 

20 

0 

273 

3 

25 

55 

56 

47 

15 

84 

45 

16 

52 

13 

30 

0 

303 

23 

48 

48 

49 

45 

50 

54 

10 

18 

44 

41 

40 

0 

333 

44 

11 

41 

42 

44 

25 

23 

35 

20 

37 

9 

50 

0 

4 

4 

34 

34 

35 

43 

0 

353 

0 

22 

29 

38 

0 

0 

34 

24 

57 

27 

28 

41 

35 

322 

25 

24 

22 

6 

10 

0 

64 

45 

20 

20 

21 

40 

10 

291 

50 

26 

14 

34 

20 

0 

95 

5 

43 

13 

14 

38 

45 

261 

15 

28 

7 

2 

30 

0 

125 

26 

6 

6 

7 

37 

20 

230 

40 

29 

59 

30 

40 

0 

155 

46 

28 

59 

0 

35 

55 

200 

5 

31 

51 

58 

50 

0 

186 

6 

51 

51 

53 

34 

30 

169 

30 

33 

44 

27 

0 

0 

Degrees 

in  longitude 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

IV 

0 

0 

12 

28 

6 

6 

56 

0 

2 

15 

22 

36 

56 

5 

0 

0 

24 

56 

12 

13 

52 

0 

4 

30 

45 

13 

52 

10 

0 

0 

36 

24 

18 

20 

48 

0 

6 

46 

7 

50 

48 

15 

0 

0 

49 

52 

24 

27 

45 

0 

9 

1 

30 

27 

44 

20 

0 

1 

2 

20 

30 

34 

41 

0 

11 

16 

53 

4 

40 

25 

0 

1 

14 

48 

36 

41 

37 

0 

13 

32 

15 

41 

36 

30 

0 

1 

27 

16 

42 

48 

34 

0 

15 

47 

38 

18 

32 

35 

0 

1 

39 

44 

48 

55 

30 

0 

18 

3 

0 

55 

28 

40 

0 

1 

52 

12 

55 

2 

26 

0 

20 

18 

23 

32 

24 

45 

0 

2 

4 

41 

1 

9 

22 

0 

22 

33 

46 

9 

20 

50 

0 

2 

17 

9 

7 

16 

19 

0 

24 

49 

8 

46 

16 

55 

0 

2 

29 

37 

13 

23 

15 

0 

27 

4 

31 

23 

13 

0 

0 

2 

42 

5 

19 

30 

11 

0 

29 

19 

54 

0 

9 

5 

0 

2 

54 

33 

25 

37 

8 

0 

31 

35 

16 

37 

5 

10 

0 

3 

7 

1 

31 

44 

4 

0 

33 

50 

39 

14 

1 

15 

0 

3 

19 

29 

37 

51 

0 

0 

36 

6 

1 

50 

57 

20 

0 

3 

31 

57 

43 

57 

56 

0 

38 

21 

24 

27 

53 

25 

0 

3 

44 

25 

50 

4 

53 

0 

40 

36 

47 

4 

49 

30 

0 

3 

56 

53 

56 

11 

49 

0 

42 

52. 

9 

41 

45 

35 

0 

4 

9 

22 

2 

18 

45 

0 

45 

7 

32 

18 

41 

40 

0 

4 

21 

50 

8 

25 

42 

0 

47 

22 

54 

55 

37 

45 

0 

4 

34 

18 

14 

32 

38 

0 

49 

38 

17 

32 

33 

50 

0 

4 

46 

46 

20 

39 

34 

0 

51 

53 

40 

9 

29 

55 

0 

4 

59 

14 

26 

46 

31 

0 

54 

9 

2 

46 

26 

0 

210 

240 

270 

300 

330 

360 

Day^ 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
Jupiter,  Continued 


281 


Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

ir 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

2 

29 

37 

13 

23 

15 

30 

4 

59 

14 

26 

46 

31 

0 

7 

28 

51 

40 

9 

46 

30 

9 

58 

28 

53 

33 

2 

0 

12 

28 

6 

6 

56 

17 

30 

14 

57 

43 

20 

19 

33 

0 

17 

27 

20 

33 

42 

48 

30 

19 

56 

57 

47 

6 

4 

0 

22 

26 

35 

0 

29 

19 

30 

24 

56 

12 

13 

52 

35 

0 

27 

25 

49 

27 

15 

50 

30 

29 

55 

26 

40 

39 

6 

0 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

27 

4 

31 

23 

13 

0 

0 

54 

9 

2 

46 

26 

0 

0 

81 

13 

34 

9 

39 

0 

0 

108 

18 

5 

32 

52 

0 

0 

135 

22 

36 

56 

5 

0 

0 

162 

27 

8 

19 

18 

0 

0 

189 

31 

39 

42 

31 

0 

0 

216 

36 

11 

5 

44 

0 

0 

243 

40 

42 

28 

57 

0 

0 

270 

45 

13 

52 

10 

0 

0 

297 

49 

45 

15 

23 

0 

0 

324 

54 

16 

38 

36 

0 

0 

Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

4 

59 

14 

26 

46 

31 

0 

9 

58 

28 

53 

33 

2 

0 

14 

57 

43 

20 

19 

33 

0 

19 

56 

57 

47 

6 

4 

0 

24 

56 

12 

13 

52 

35 

0 

29 

55 

26 

40 

39 

6 

0 

34 

54 

41 

7 

25 

37 

0 

39 

53 

55 

34 

12 

8 

0 

44 

53 

10 

0 

58 

39 

0 

49 

52 

24 

27 

45 

10 

0 

54 

51 

38 

54 

31 

41 

0 

59 

50 

53 

21 

18 

12 

1 

4 

50 

7 

48 

4 

43 

1 

9 

49 

22 

14 

51 

14 

1 

14 

48 

36 

41 

37 

45 

1 

19 

47 

51 

8 

24 

16 

1 

24 

47 

5 

35 

10 

47 

1 

29 

46 

20 

1 

57 

18 

1 

34 

45 

34 

28 

43 

49 

1 

39 

44 

48 

55 

30 

20 

1 

44 

44 

3 

22 

16 

51 

1 

49 

43 

17 

49 

3 

22 

1 

54 

42 

32 

15 

49 

53 

1 

59 

41 

46 

42 

36 

24 

2 

4 

41 

1 

9 

22 

55 

2 

9 

40 

15 

36 

9 

26 

2 

14 

39 

30 

2 

55 

57 

2 

19 

38 

44 

29 

42 

28 

2 

24 

37 

58 

56 

28 

59 

2 

29 

37 

13 

23 

15 

30 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


0 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

54 

9 

2 

46 

26 

0 

1 

48 

18 

5 

32 

52 

0 

2 

42 

27 

8 

19 

18 

0 

3 

36 

36 

11 

5 

44 

0 

4 

30 

45 

13 

52 

10 

0 

5 

24 

54 

16 

38 

36 

0 

6 

19 

3 

19 

25 

2 

0 

7 

13 

12 

22 

11 

28 

0 

8 

7 

21 

24 

57 

54 

0 

9 

1 

30 

27 

44 

20 

0 

9 

55 

39 

30 

30 

46 

0 

10 

49 

48 

33 

17 

12 

0 

11 

43 

57 

36 

3 

38 

0 

12 

38 

6 

38 

50 

4 

0 

13 

32 

15 

41 

36 

30 

0 

14 

26 

24 

44 

22 

56 

0 

15 

20 

33 

47 

9 

22 

0 

16 

14 

42 

49 

55 

48 

0 

17 

8 

51 

52 

42 

14 

0 

18 

3 

0 

55 

28 

40 

0 

18 

57 

9 

58 

15 

6 

0 

19 

51 

19 

1 

1 

32 

0 

20 

45 

28 

3 

47 

58 

0 

21 

39 

37 

6 

34 

24 

0 

22 

33 

46 

9 

20 

50 

0 

23 

27 

55 

12 

7 

16 

0 

24 

22 

4 

14 

53 

42 

0 

25 

16 

13 

17 

40 

8 

0 

26 

10 

22 

20 

26 

34 

0 

27 

4 

31 

23 

13 

0 

0 

18 

36 

54 

72 

90 

108 

126 

144 

162 

180 

198 

216 

234 

252 

270 

288 

306 

324 

342 

360 

378 

396 

414 

432 

450 

468 

486 

504 

522 

540 

558 

576 

594 

612 

630 

648 

666 

684 

702 

720 

738 

756 


PTOLEMY 


MARS,  Anomaly  at  epoch,  327°13' 


Longitude  at  epochs  Ram  3°32' 
Degrees  in  longitude 


Apogee  at  epochs  Crab  16°4(y 
Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

203 

4 

20 

17 

34 

43 

30 

152 

33 

5 

18 

45 

51 

0 

46 

8 

40 

35 

9 

27 

0 

305 

6 

10 

37 

31 

42 

0 

249 

13 

0 

52 

44 

10 

30 

97 

39 

15 

56 

17 

33 

0 

92 

17 

21 

10 

18 

54 

0 

250 

12 

21 

15 

3 

24 

0 

295 

21 

41 

27 

53 

37 

30 

42 

45 

26 

33 

49 

15 

0 

138 

26 

1 

45 

28 

21 

0 

195 

18 

31 

52 

35 

6 

0 

341 

30 

22 

3 

3 

4 

30 

347 

51 

37 

11 

20 

57 

0 

184 

34 

42 

20 

37 

48 

0 

140 

24 

42 

30 

6 

48 

0 

27 

39 

2 

38 

12 

31 

30 

292 

57 

47 

48 

52 

39 

0 

230 

43 

22 

55 

47 

15 

0 

85 

30 

53 

7 

38 

30 

0 

73 

47 

43 

13 

21 

58 

30 

238 

3 

58 

26 

24 

21 

0 

276 

52 

3 

30 

56 

42 

0 

30 

37 

3 

45 

10 

12 

0 

119 

56 

23 

48 

31 

25 

30 

183 

10 

9 

3 

56 

3 

0 

323 

0 

44 

6 

6 

9 

0 

335 

43 

14 

22 

41 

54 

0 

166 

5 

4 

23 

40 

52 

30 

128 

16 

19 

41 

27 

45 

0 

9 

9 

24 

41 

15 

36 

0 

280 

49 

25 

0 

13 

36 

0 

212 

13 

44 

58 

50 

19 

30 

73 

22 

30 

18 

59 

27 

0 

55 

18 

5 

16 

25 

3 

0 

225 

55 

35 

37 

45 

18 

0 

258 

22 

25 

33 

59 

46 

30 

18 

28 

40 

56 

31 

9 

0 

101 

26 

45 

51 

34 

30 

0 

171 

1 

46 

15 

17 

0 

0 

304 

31 

6 

9 

9 

13 

30 

323 

34 

51 

34 

2 

51 

0 

147 

35 

26 

26 

43 

57 

0 

116 

7 

56 

52 

48 

42 

0 

350 

39 

46 

44 

18 

40 

30 

268 

41 

2 

11 

34 

33 

0 

193 

44 

7 

1 

53 

24 

0 

61 

14 

7 

30 

20 

24 

0 

36 

48 

27 

19 

28 

7 

30 

213 

47 

12 

49 

6 

15 

0 

239 

52 

47 

37 

2 

51 

0 

6 

20 

18 

7 

52 

6 

0 

82 

57 

7 

54 

37 

34 

30 

158 

53 

23 

26 

37 

57 

0 

286 

1 

28 

12 

12 

18 

0 

311 

26 

28 

45 

23 

48 

0 

129 

5 

48 

29 

47 

1 

30 

103 

59 

34 

4 

9 

39 

0 

332 

10 

8 

47 

21 

45 

0 

256 

32 

39 

22 

55 

30 

0 

175 

14 

29 

4 

56 

28 

30 

49 

5 

44 

41 

41 

21 

0 

18 

18 

49 

22 

31 

12 

0 

201 

38 

50 

0 

27 

12 

0 

221 

23 

9 

40 

5 

55 

30 

354 

11 

55 

19 

13 

3 

0 

64 

27 

29 

57 

40 

39 

0 

146 

45 

0 

37 

58 

54 

0 

267 

31 

50 

15 

15 

22 

30 

299 

18 

5 

56 

44 

45 

0 

110 

36 

10 

32 

50 

6 

0 

91 

51 

11 

15 

30 

36 

0 

313 

40 

30 

50 

24 

49 

30 

244 

24 

16 

34 

16 

27 

0 

156 

44 

51 

7 

59 

33 

0 

36 

57 

21 

53 

2 

18 

0 

359 

49 

11 

25 

34 

16 

30 

189 

30 

27 

11 

48 

9 

0 

202 

53 

31 

43 

9 

0 

0 

342 

3 

32 

30 

34 

0 

0 

45 

57 

52 

0 

43 

43 

30 

134 

36 

37 

49 

19 

51 

0 

249 

2 

12 

18 

18 

27 

0 

287 

9 

43 

8 

5 

42 

0 

92 

6 

32 

35 

53 

10 

30 

79 

42 

48 

26 

51 

33 

0 

295 

10 

52 

53 

27 

54 

0 

232 

15 

53 

45 

37 

24 

0 

138 

15 

13 

11 

2 

37 

30 

24 

48 

59 

4 

23 

15 

0 

Sin{ 

yea 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
Mars,  Continued 


283 


Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

191 

16 

54 

27 

38 

35 

45 

22 

33 

48 

55 

17 

11 

30 

213 

50 

43 

22 

55 

47 

15 

45 

7 

37 

50 

34 

23 

0 

236 

24 

32 

18 

12 

58 

45 

67 

41 

26 

45 

51 

34 

30 

258 

58 

21 

13 

30 

10 

15 

90 

15 

15 

41 

8 

46 

0 

281 

32 

10 

8 

47 

21 

45 

112 

49 

4 

36 

25 

57 

30 

304 

5 

59 

4 

4 

33 

15 

135 

22 

53 

31 

49 

9 

0 

326 

39 

47 

59 

21 

44 

45 

157 

56 

42 

27 

0 

20 

30 

349 

13 

36 

54 

38 

56 

15 

180 

30 

31 

22 

17 

32 

0 

11 

47 

25 

49 

56 

7 

45 

203 

4 

20 

17 

34 

43 

30 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

168 

28 

30 

17 

42 

32 

50 

336 

57 

0 

35 

25 

5 

40 

145 

25 

30 

53 

7 

38 

30 

313 

54 

1 

10 

50 

11 

20 

122 

22 

31 

28 

32 

44 

10 

290 

51 

1 

46 

15 

17 

0 

99 

19 

32 

3 

57 

49 

50 

267 

48 

2 

21 

40 

22 

40 

76 

16 

32 

39 

22 

55 

30 

244 

45 

2 

57 

5 

28 

20 

53 

13 

33 

14 

48 

1 

10 

221 

42 

3 

32 

30 

34 

0 

30 

10 

33 

50 

13 

6 

50 

198 

39 

4 

7 

55 

39 

40 

7 

7 

34 

25 

38 

12 

30 

175 

36 

4 

43 

20 

45 

20 

344 

4 

35  r 

1 

3 

18 

10 

152 

33 

5 

18 

45 

51 

0 

o 

Degrees  in  longitude 

I  II  III  IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

II  III  IV 

V 

VI 

0 

1 

18 

36 

32 

14- 

39 

0 

1 

9 

14 

10 

48 

22 

0 

2 

37 

13 

4 

29 

18 

0 

2 

18 

28 

21 

36 

44 

0 

3 

55 

49 

36 

43 

6 

0 

3 

27 

42 

32 

25 

7 

0 

5 

14 

26 

8 

58 

35 

0 

4 

36 

56 

43 

13 

29 

0 

6 

33 

2 

41 

13 

14 

0 

5 

46 

10 

54 

1 

52 

0 

7 

51 

39 

13 

27 

53 

0 

6 

55 

25 

4 

50 

14 

0 

9 

10 

15 

45 

42 

32 

0 

8 

4 

39 

15 

38 

36 

0 

10 

28 

52 

17 

57 

11 

0 

9 

13 

53 

26 

26 

59 

0 

11 

47 

28 

50 

11 

49 

0 

10 

23 

7 

37 

15 

21 

0 

13 

6 

5 

22 

26 

28 

0 

11 

32 

21 

48 

3 

44 

0 

14 

24 

41 

54 

41 

7 

0 

12 

41 

35 

58 

52 

6 

0 

15 

43 

18 

26 

55 

46 

0 

13 

50 

50 

9 

40 

29 

0 

17 

1 

54 

59 

10 

25 

0 

15 

0 

4 

20 

28 

51 

0 

18 

20 

31 

31 

25 

4 

0 

16 

9 

18 

31 

17 

13 

0 

19 

39 

8 

3 

39 

43 

0 

17 

18 

32 

42 

5 

36 

0 

20 

57 

44 

35 

54 

22 

0 

18 

27 

46 

52 

53 

58 

0 

22 

16 

21 

8 

9 

0 

0 

19 

37 

1 

3 

42 

21 

0 

23 

34 

57 

40 

23 

39 

0 

20 

46 

15 

14 

30 

43 

0 

24 

53 

34 

12 

38 

18 

0 

21 

55 

29 

25 

19 

5 

0 

26 

12 

10 

44 

52 

57 

0 

23 

4 

43 

36 

7 

28 

0 

27 

30 

47 

17 

7 

36 

0 

24 

13 

57 

46 

55 

50 

0 

28 

49 

23 

49 

22 

15 

0 

25 

23 

11 

57 

44 

13 

0 

30 

8 

0 

21 

36 

54 

0 

26 

32 

26 

8 

32 

35 

0 

31 

26 

36 

53 

51 

33 

0 

27 

41 

40 

19 

20 

58 

30 

60 

90 

120 

150 

180 

210 

240 

270 

300 

330 

360 

Days 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 


PTOLEMY 


Mars,  Continued 


Degrees  in  longitude 


Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

15 

43 

18 

26 

55 

46 

30 

13 

50 

50 

9 

40 

29 

0 

31 

26 

36 

53 

51 

33 

0 

27 

41 

40 

19 

20 

58 

0 

47 

9 

55 

20 

47 

19 

30 

41 

32 

30 

29 

1 

27 

0 

62 

53 

13 

47 

43 

6 

0 

55 

23 

20 

38 

41 

56 

0 

78 

36 

32 

14 

38 

52 

30 

69 

14 

10 

48 

22 

25 

0 

94 

19 

50 

41 

34 

39 

0 

83 

5 

0 

58 

2 

54 

0 

no 

3 

9 

8 

30 

25 

30 

96 

55 

51 

7 

43 

23 

0 

125 

46 

27 

35 

26 

12 

0 

110 

46 

41 

17 

23 

52 

0 

141 

29 

46 

2 

21 

58 

30 

124 

37 

31 

27 

4 

21 

0 

157 

13 

4 

29 

17 

45 

0 

138 

28 

21 

36 

44 

50 

0 

172 

56 

22 

56 

13 

31 

30 

152 

19 

11 

46 

25 

19 

0 

188 

39 

41 

23 

9 

18 

0 

166 

10 

1 

56 

5 

48 

0 

Degrees 

in  longitude 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

o 

I 

II 

111 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

31 

26 

36 

53 

51 

33 

0 

27 

41 

40 

19 

20 

58 

1 

2 

53 

13 

47 

43 

6 

0 

55 

23 

20 

38 

41 

56 

1 

34 

19 

50 

41 

34 

39 

1 

23 

5 

0 

58 

2 

54 

2 

5 

46 

27 

35 

26 

12 

1 

50 

46 

41 

17 

23 

52 

2 

37 

13 

4 

29 

17 

45 

2 

18 

28 

21 

36 

44 

50 

3 

8 

39 

41 

23 

9 

18 

2 

46 

10 

1 

56 

5 

48 

3 

40 

6 

18 

17 

0 

51 

3 

13 

51 

42 

15 

26 

46 

4 

11 

32 

55 

10 

52 

24 

3 

41 

33 

22 

34 

47 

44 

4 

42 

59 

32 

4 

43 

57 

4 

9 

15 

2 

54 

8 

42 

5 

14 

26 

8 

58 

35 

30 

4 

36 

56 

43 

13 

29 

40 

5 

45 

52 

45 

52 

27 

3 

5 

4 

38 

23 

32 

50 

38 

6 

17 

19 

22 

46 

18 

36 

5 

32 

20 

3 

52 

11 

36 

6 

48 

45 

59 

40 

10 

9 

6 

0 

1 

44 

11 

32 

34 

7 

20 

12 

36 

34 

1 

42 

6 

27 

43 

24 

30 

53 

32 

7 

51 

39 

13 

27 

53 

15 

6 

55 

25 

4 

50 

14 

30 

8 

23 

5 

50 

21 

44 

48 

7 

23 

6 

45 

9 

35 

28 

8 

54 

32 

27 

15 

36 

21 

7 

50 

48 

25 

28 

56 

26 

9 

25 

59 

4 

9 

27 

54 

8 

18 

30 

5 

48 

17 

24 

9 

57 

25 

41 

3 

19 

27 

8 

46 

11 

46 

7 

38 

22 

10 

28 

52 

17 

57 

11 

0 

9 

13 

53 

26 

26 

59 

20 

11 

0 

18 

54 

51 

2 

33 

9 

41 

35 

6 

46 

20 

18 

11 

31 

45 

31 

44 

54 

6 

10 

9 

16 

47 

5 

41 

16 

12 

3 

12 

8 

38 

45 

39 

10 

36 

58 

27 

25 

2 

14 

12 

34 

38 

45 

32 

37 

12 

11 

4 

40 

7 

44 

23 

12 

13 

6 

5 

22 

26 

28 

45 

11 

32 

21 

48 

3 

44 

10 

13 

37 

31 

59 

20 

20 

18 

12 

0 

3 

28 

23 

5 

8 

14 

8 

58 

36 

14 

11 

51 

12 

27 

45 

8 

42 

26 

6 

14 

40 

25 

13 

8 

3 

24 

12 

55 

26 

49 

1 

47 

4 

15 

11 

51 

50 

1 

54 

57 

13 

23 

8 

29 

21 

8 

2 

15 

43 

18 

26 

55 

46 

30 

13 

50 

50 

9 

40 

29 

0 

j-2/ea 

18 

36 

54 

72 

90 

108 

126 

144 

162 

180 

198 

216 

234 

252 

270 

288 

306 

324 

342 

360 

378 

396 

414 

432 

450 

468 

486 

504 

522 

540 

558 

576 

594 

612 

630 

648 

666 

684 

702 

720 

738 

756 

774 

792 

810 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX  285 

VENUS,  Anomaly  at  epoch,  71°7' 


Longitude  at  epochs  Fishes  45° 
Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

355 

37 

25 

36 

20 

34 

30 

351 

14 

51 

12 

41 

9 

0 

346 

52 

16 

49 

1 

43 

30 

342 

29 

42 

25 

22 

18 

0 

338 

7 

8 

1 

42 

52 

30 

333 

44 

33 

38 

3 

27 

0 

329 

21 

59 

14 

24 

1 

30 

324 

59 

24 

50 

44 

36 

0 

320 

36 

50 

27 

5 

10 

30 

316 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

0 

311 

51 

41 

39 

46 

19 

30 

307 

29 

7 

16 

6 

54 

0 

303 

6 

32 

52 

27 

28 

30 

298 

43 

58 

28 

48 

3 

0 

294 

21 

24 

5 

8 

37 

30 

289 

58 

49 

41 

29 

12 

0 

285 

36 

15 

17 

49 

46 

30 

281 

13 

40 

54 

10 

21 

0 

276 

51 

6 

30 

30 

55 

30 

272 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

0 

268 

5 

57 

43 

12 

4 

30 

263 

43 

23 

19 

32 

39 

0 

259 

20 

48 

55 

53 

13 

30 

254 

58 

14 

32 

13 

48 

0 

250 

35 

40 

8 

34 

22 

30 

246 

13 

5 

44 

54 

57 

0 

241 

50 

31 

21 

15 

31 

30 

237 

27 

56 

57 

36 

6 

0 

233 

5 

22 

33 

56 

40 

30 

228 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

0 

224 

20 

13 

46 

37 

49 

30 

219 

57 

39 

22 

58 

24 

0 

215 

35 

4 

59 

18 

58 

30 

211 

12 

30 

35 

39 

33 

0 

206 

49 

56 

12 

0 

7 

30 

202 

27 

21 

48 

20 

42 

0 

198 

4 

47 

24 

41 

16 

30 

193 

42 

13 

1 

1 

51 

0 

189 

19 

38 

37 

22 

25 

30 

184 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

0 

180 

34 

29 

50 

3 

34 

30 

176 

11 

55 

26 

24 

9 

0 

171 

49 

21 

2 

44 

43 

30 

167 

26 

46 

39 

5 

18 

0 

163 

4 

12 

15 

25 

52 

30 

Apogee  at  epoch j  Bull  16°  10' 
Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

90 

27 

44 

34 

23 

46 

30 

180 

55 

29 

8 

47 

33 

0 

271 

23 

13 

43 

11 

19 

30 

1 

50 

58 

17 

35 

6 

0 

92 

18 

42 

51 

58 

52 

30 

182 

46 

27 

26 

22 

39 

0 

273 

14 

12 

0 

46 

25 

30 

3 

41 

56 

35 

10 

12 

0 

94 

9 

41 

9 

33 

58 

30 

184 

37 

25 

43 

57 

45 

0 

275 

5 

10 

18 

21 

31 

30 

5 

32 

54 

52 

45 

18 

0 

96 

0 

39 

27 

9 

4 

30 

186 

28 

24 

1 

32 

51 

0 

276 

56 

8 

35 

56 

37 

30 

7 

23 

53 

10 

20 

24 

0 

97 

51 

37 

44 

44 

10 

30 

188 

19 

22 

19 

7 

57 

0 

278 

47 

6 

53 

31 

43 

30 

9 

14 

51 

27 

55 

30 

0 

99 

42 

36 

2 

19 

16 

30 

190 

10 

20 

36 

43 

3 

0 

280 

38 

5 

11 

6 

49 

30 

11 

5 

49 

45 

30 

36 

0 

101 

33 

34 

19 

54 

22 

30 

192 

1 

18 

54 

18 

9 

0 

282 

29 

3 

28 

41 

55 

30 

12 

56 

48 

3 

5 

42 

0 

103 

24 

32 

37 

29 

28 

30 

193 

52 

17 

11 

53 

15 

0 

284 

20 

1 

46 

17 

1 

30 

14 

47 

46 

20 

40 

48 

0 

105 

15 

30 

55 

4 

34 

30 

195 

43 

15 

29 

28 

21 

0 

286 

11 

0 

3 

52 

7 

30 

16 

38 

44 

38 

15 

54 

0 

107 

6 

29 

12 

39 

40 

30 

197 

34 

13 

47 

3 

27 

0 

288 

1 

58 

21 

27 

13 

30 

18 

29 

42 

55 

51 

0 

0 

108 

57 

27 

30 

14 

46 

30 

199 

25 

12 

4 

38 

33 

0 

289 

52 

56 

39 

2 

19 

30 

20 

20 

41 

13 

26 

6 

0 

no 

48 

25 

47 

49 

52 

30 

)ini 

jea\ 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

lou 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 


PTOLEMY 


Venus,  Continued 


Degrees  in  longitude 


Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

359 

45 

24 

45 

21 

8 

35 

225 

1 

32 

28 

34 

39 

15 

359 

30 

49 

30 

42 

17 

10 

90 

3 

4 

57 

9 

18 

30 

359 

16 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

315 

4 

37 

25 

43 

57 

45 

359 

1 

39 

1 

24 

34 

20 

180 

6 

9 

54 

18 

37 

0 

358 

47 

3 

46 

45 

42 

55 

45 

7 

42 

22 

53 

16 

15 

358 

32 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

270 

9 

14 

51 

27 

55 

30 

358 

17 

53 

17 

28 

0 

5 

135 

10 

47 

20 

2 

34 

45 

358 

3 

18 

2 

49 

8 

40 

0 

12 

19 

48 

37 

14 

0 

357 

48 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

225 

13 

52 

17 

11 

53 

15 

357 

34 

7 

33 

31 

25 

50 

90 

15 

24 

45 

46 

32 

30 

357 

19 

32 

18 

52 

34 

25 

315 

16 

57 

14 

21 

11 

45 

357 

4 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

180 

18 

29 

42 

55 

51 

0 

356 

50 

21 

49 

34 

51 

35 

45 

20 

2 

11 

30 

30 

15 

356 

35 

46 

34 

56 

0 

10 

270 

21 

34 

40 

5 

9 

30 

356 

21 

11 

20 

17 

8 

45 

135 

23 

7 

8 

39 

48 

45 

356 

6 

36 

5 

38 

17 

20 

0 

24 

39 

37 

14 

28 

0 

355 

52 

0 

50 

59 

25 

55 

225 

26 

12 

5 

49 

7 

15 

355 

37 

25 

36 

20 

34 

30 

90 

27 

44 

34 

23 

46 

30 

o 

Degrees  in  longitude 

I  II  HI  IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

II  III  IV 

V 

VI 

0 

2 

27 

50 

43 

3 

1 

0 

1 

32 

28 

34 

42 

58 

0 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

0 

3 

4 

57 

9 

25 

57 

0 

7 

23 

32 

9 

9 

3 

0 

4 

37 

25 

44 

8 

56 

0 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

0 

6 

9 

54 

18 

51 

54 

0 

12 

19 

13 

35 

15 

6 

0 

7 

42 

22 

53 

34 

53 

0 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

0 

9 

14 

51 

28 

17 

52 

0 

17 

14 

55 

1 

21 

9 

0 

10 

47 

20 

3 

0 

50 

0 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

0 

12 

19 

48 

37 

43 

49 

0 

22 

10 

36 

26 

26 

11 

0 

13 

52 

17 

12 

26 

48 

0 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

0 

15 

24 

45 

47 

9 

46 

0 

27 

6 

17 

53 

33 

14 

0 

16 

57 

14 

21 

52 

45 

0 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

0 

18 

29 

42 

56 

35 

44 

0 

32 

1 

59 

19 

39 

16 

0 

20 

2 

11 

31 

18 

42 

0 

34 

29 

50 

2 

42 

18 

0 

21 

34 

40 

6 

1 

41 

0 

36 

57 

40 

45 

45 

19 

0 

23 

7 

8 

40 

44 

40 

0 

39 

25 

31 

28 

48 

20 

0 

24 

39 

37 

15 

27 

38 

0 

41 

53 

22 

11 

51 

21 

0 

26 

12 

5 

50 

10 

37 

0 

44 

21 

12 

54 

54 

23 

0 

27 

44 

34 

24 

53 

36 

0 

46 

49 

3 

37 

57 

24 

0 

29 

17 

2 

59 

36 

34 

0 

49 

16 

54 

21 

0 

25 

0 

30 

49 

31 

34 

19 

33 

0 

51 

44 

45 

4 

3 

27 

0 

32 

22 

0 

9 

2 

32 

0 

54 

12 

35 

47 

6 

28 

0 

33 

54 

28 

43 

45 

30 

0 

56 

40 

26 

30 

9 

29 

0 

35 

26 

57 

18 

28 

29 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

0 

36 

59 

25 

53 

11 

28 

30 

60 

90 

120 

150 

180 

210 

240 

270 

300 

330 

360 

Days 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
Venus,  Continued 


287 


Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

0 

88 

42 

25 

49 

48 

46 

30 

118 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2 

0 

147 

50 

43 

3 

1 

17 

30 

177 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

0 

206 

59 

0 

16 

13 

48 

30 

236 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

0 

266 

7 

17 

29 

26 

19 

30 

295 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

0 

325 

15 

34 

42 

38 

50 

30 

354 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

0 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

18 

29 

42 

56 

35 

44 

0 

36 

59 

25 

53 

11 

28 

0 

55 

29 

8 

49 

47 

12 

0 

73 

58 

51 

46 

22 

56 

0 

92 

28 

34 

42 

58 

40 

0 

no 

58 

17 

39 

34 

24 

0 

129 

28 

0 

36 

10 

8 

0 

147 

57 

43 

32 

45 

52 

0 

166 

27 

26 

29 

21 

36 

0 

184 

57 

9 

25 

57 

20 

0 

203 

26 

52 

22 

33. 

4 

0 

221 

56 

35 

19 

8 

48 

0 

Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

1 

58 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2 

2 

57 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

3 

56 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

5 

54 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

6 

53 

58 

0 

32 

27 

37 

7 

53 

6 

17 

45 

40 

8 

8 

52 

14 

34 

58 

52 

39 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

10 

10 

50 

31 

9 

25 

17 

41 

11 

49 

39 

26 

38 

30 

12 

12 

48 

47 

43 

51 

42 

43 

13 

47 

56 

1 

4 

55 

14 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

45 

15 

46 

12 

35 

31 

20 

16 

16 

45 

20 

52 

44 

32 

47 

17 

44 

29 

9 

57 

45 

18 

18 

43 

37 

27 

10 

57 

49 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

20 

20 

41 

54 

1 

37 

22 

51 

21 

41 

2 

18 

50 

35 

22 

22 

40 

1 

36 

3 

47 

53 

23 

39 

18 

53 

17 

0 

24 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

55 

25 

37 

35 

27 

43 

25 

26 

26 

36 

43 

44 

56 

37 

57 

27 

35 

52 

2 

9 

50 

28. 

28 

35 

0 

19 

23 

2 

59 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

36 

59 

25 

53 

11 

28 

1 

13 

58 

51 

46 

22 

56 

1 

50 

58 

17 

39 

34 

24 

2 

27 

57 

43 

32 

45 

52 

3 

4 

57 

9 

25 

57 

20 

3 

41 

56 

35 

19 

8 

48 

4 

18 

56 

1 

12 

20 

16 

4 

55 

55 

27 

5 

31 

44 

5 

32 

54 

52 

58 

43 

12 

6 

9 

54 

18 

51 

54 

40 

6 

46 

53 

44 

45 

6 

8 

7 

23 

53 

10 

38 

17 

36 

8 

0 

52 

36 

31 

29 

4 

8 

37 

52 

2 

24 

40 

32 

9 

14 

51 

28 

17 

52 

0 

9 

51 

50 

54 

11 

3 

28 

10 

28 

50 

20 

4 

14 

56 

11 

5 

49 

45 

57 

26 

24 

11 

42 

49 

11 

50 

37 

52 

12 

19 

48 

37 

43 

49 

20 

12 

56 

48 

3 

37 

0 

48 

13 

33 

47 

29 

30 

12 

16 

14 

10 

46 

55 

23 

23 

44 

14 

47 

46 

21 

16 

35 

12 

15 

24 

45 

47 

9 

46 

40 

16 

1 

45 

13 

2 

58 

8 

16 

38 

44 

38 

56 

9 

36 

17 

15 

44 

4 

49 

21 

4 

17 

52 

43 

30 

42 

32 

32 

18 

29 

42 

56 

35 

44 

0 

18 

36 

54 

72 

90 

108 

126 

144 

162 

180 

198 

216 

234 

252 

270 

288 

306 

324 

342 

360 

378 

396 

414 

432 

450 

468 

486 

504 

522 

540 

558 

576 

594 

612 

630 

648 

666 

684 

702 

720 

738 

756 

774 

792 

810 


PTOLEMY 


MERCURY,  Anomaly  at  epoch,  21®55' 


Longitude  at  epoch,  Fishes  0°4^ 
Degrees  in  longitude 


Apogee  at  epoch,  Balance  1^10 
Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

355 

37 

25 

36 

20 

34 

30 

251 

0 

45 

45 

53 

45 

0 

351 

14 

51 

12 

41 

9 

0 

142 

1 

31 

31 

47 

30 

0 

346 

52 

16 

49 

1 

43 

30 

33 

2 

17 

17 

41 

15 

0 

342 

29 

42 

25 

22 

18 

0 

284 

3 

3 

3 

35 

0 

0 

338 

7 

8 

1 

42 

52 

30 

175 

3 

48 

49 

28 

45 

0 

333 

44 

33 

38 

3 

27 

0 

66 

4 

34 

35 

22 

30 

0 

329 

21 

59 

14 

24 

1 

30 

317 

5 

20 

21 

16 

15 

0 

324 

59 

24 

50 

44 

36 

0 

208 

6 

6 

7 

10 

0 

0 

320 

36 

50 

27 

5 

10 

30 

99 

6 

51 

53 

3 

45 

0 

316 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

0 

350 

7 

37 

38 

57 

30 

0 

311 

51 

41 

39 

46 

19 

30 

241 

8 

23 

24 

51 

15 

0 

307 

29 

7 

16 

6 

54 

0 

132 

9 

9 

10 

45 

0 

0 

303 

6 

32 

52 

27 

28 

30 

23 

9 

54 

56 

38 

45 

0 

298 

43 

58 

28 

48 

3 

0 

274 

10 

40 

42 

32 

30 

0 

294 

21 

24 

5 

8 

37 

30 

165 

11 

26 

28 

26 

15 

0 

289 

58 

49 

41 

29 

12 

0 

56 

12 

12 

14 

20 

0 

0 

285 

36 

15 

17 

49 

46 

30 

307 

12 

58 

0 

13 

45 

0 

281 

13 

40 

54 

10 

21 

0 

198 

13 

43 

46 

7 

30 

0 

276 

51 

6 

30 

30 

55 

30 

89 

14 

29 

32 

1 

15 

0 

272 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

0 

340 

15 

15 

17 

55 

0 

0 

268 

5 

57 

43 

12 

4 

30 

231 

16 

1 

3 

48 

45 

0 

263 

43 

23 

19 

32 

39 

0 

122 

16 

46 

49 

42 

30 

0 

259 

20 

48 

55 

53 

13 

30 

13 

17 

32 

35 

36 

15 

0 

254 

58 

14 

32 

13 

48 

0 

264 

18 

18 

21 

30 

0 

0 

250 

35 

40 

8 

34 

22 

30 

155 

19 

4 

7 

23 

45 

0 

246 

13 

5 

44 

54 

57 

0 

46 

19 

49 

53 

17 

30 

0 

241 

50 

31 

21 

15 

31 

30 

297 

20 

35 

39 

11 

15 

0 

237 

27 

56 

57 

36 

6 

0 

188 

21 

21 

25 

5 

0 

0 

233 

5 

22 

33 

56 

40 

30 

79 

22 

7 

10 

58 

45 

0 

228 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

0 

330 

22 

52 

56 

52 

30 

0 

224 

20 

13 

46 

37 

49 

30 

221 

23 

38 

42 

46 

15 

0 

219 

57 

39 

22 

58 

24 

0 

112 

24 

24 

28 

40 

0 

0 

215 

35 

4 

59 

18 

58 

30 

3 

25 

10 

14 

33 

45 

0 

211 

12 

30 

35 

39 

33 

0 

254 

25 

56 

0 

27 

30 

0 

206 

49 

56 

12 

0 

7 

30 

145 

26 

41 

46 

21 

15 

0 

202 

27 

21 

48 

20 

42 

0 

36 

27 

27 

32 

15 

0 

0 

198 

4 

47 

24 

41 

16 

30 

287 

28 

13 

18 

8 

45 

0 

193 

42 

13 

1 

1 

51 

0 

178 

28 

59 

4 

2 

30 

0 

189 

19 

38 

37 

22 

25 

30 

69 

29 

44 

49 

56 

15 

0 

184 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

0 

320 

30 

30 

35 

50 

0 

0 

180 

34 

29 

50 

3 

34 

30 

211 

31 

16 

21 

43 

45 

0 

176 

11 

55 

26 

24 

9 

0 

102 

32 

2 

7 

37 

30 

0 

171 

49 

21 

2 

44 

43 

30 

353 

32 

47 

53 

31 

15 

0 

167 

26 

46 

39 

5 

18 

0 

244 

33 

33 

39 

25 

0 

0 

163 

4 

12 

15 

25 

52 

30 

135 

34 

19 

25 

18 

45 

0 

Sini 

yea'i 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

Hou 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 
Mercury,  Continue 


289 


Degrees  in  longitude 


Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

359 

45 

24 

45 

21 

8 

35 

53 

56 

42 

32 

32 

59 

10 

359 

30 

49 

30 

42 

17 

10 

107 

53 

25 

5 

5 

58 

20 

359 

16 

14 

16 

3 

25 

45 

161 

50 

7 

37 

38 

57 

30 

359 

1 

39 

1 

24 

34 

20 

215 

46 

50 

10 

11 

56 

40 

358 

47 

3 

46 

45 

42 

55 

269 

43 

32 

42 

44 

55 

50 

358 

32 

28 

32 

6 

51 

30 

323 

40 

15 

15 

17 

55 

0 

358 

17 

53 

17 

28 

0 

5 

17 

36 

57 

47 

50 

54 

10 

358 

3 

18 

2 

49 

8 

40 

71 

33 

40 

20 

23 

53 

20 

357 

48 

42 

48 

10 

17 

15 

125 

30 

22 

52 

56 

52 

30 

357 

34 

7 

33 

31 

25 

50 

179 

27 

5 

25 

29 

51 

40 

357 

19 

32 

18 

52 

34 

25 

233 

23 

47 

58 

2 

50 

50 

357 

4 

57 

4 

13 

43 

0 

287 

20 

30 

30 

35 

50 

0 

356 

50 

21 

49 

34 

51 

35 

341 

17 

13 

3 

8 

49 

10 

356 

35 

46 

34 

56 

0 

10 

35 

13 

55 

35 

41 

48 

20 

356 

21 

11 

20 

17 

8 

45 

89 

10 

38 

8 

14 

47 

30 

356 

6 

36 

5 

38 

17 

20 

143 

7 

20 

40 

47 

46 

40 

355 

52 

0 

50 

59 

25 

55 

197 

4 

3 

13 

20 

45 

50 

355 

37 

25 

36  ^ 

20 

34 

30 

251 

0 

45 

45 

53 

45 

0 

Degrees 

in  longitude 

Degrees  of  anomaly 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

2 

27 

50 

43 

3 

1 

0 

7 

46 

0 

17 

28 

59 

0 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

0 

15 

32 

0 

34 

57 

59 

0 

6 

23 

32 

9 

9 

3 

0 

23 

18 

0 

52 

26 

58 

0 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

0 

31 

4 

1 

9 

55 

58 

0 

12 

19 

13 

35 

15 

6 

0 

38 

50 

1 

27 

24 

57 

0 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

0 

46 

36 

1 

44 

53 

57 

0 

17 

14 

55 

1 

21 

9 

0 

54 

22 

2 

2 

22 

57 

0 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

1 

2 

8 

2 

19 

51 

56 

0 

22 

10 

36 

27 

27 

11 

1 

9 

54 

2 

37 

20 

56 

0 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

1 

17 

40 

2 

54 

49 

55 

0 

27 

6 

17 

53 

33 

14 

1 

25 

26 

3 

12 

18 

55 

0 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

1 

33 

12 

3 

29 

47 

55 

0 

32 

1 

59 

19 

39 

16 

1 

40 

58 

3 

47 

16 

54 

0 

34 

29 

50 

2 

42 

18 

1 

48 

44 

4 

4 

45 

54 

0 

36 

57 

40 

45 

45 

19 

1 

56 

30 

4 

22 

14 

53 

0 

39 

25 

31 

28 

48 

20 

2 

4 

16 

4 

39 

43 

53 

0 

41 

53 

22 

11 

51 

21 

2 

12 

2 

4 

57 

12 

52 

0 

44 

21 

12 

54 

54 

23 

2 

19 

48 

5 

14 

41 

52 

0 

46 

49 

3 

37 

57 

24 

2 

27 

34 

5 

32 

10 

52 

0 

49 

16 

54 

21 

0 

25 

2 

35 

20 

5 

49 

39 

51 

0 

51 

44 

45 

4 

3 

27 

2 

43 

6 

6 

7 

8 

51 

0 

54 

12 

35 

47 

6 

28 

2 

50 

52 

6 

24 

37 

50 

0 

56 

40 

26 

30 

9 

29 

2 

58 

38 

6 

42 

6 

50 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

3 

6 

24 

6 

59 

35 

50 

30 

60 

90 

120 

150 

180 

210 

240 

270 

300 

330 

360 

Days 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 


PTOLEMY 


Mercury,  Continued 


Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

0 

88 

42 

25 

49 

48 

46 

30 

118 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2 

0 

147 

50 

43 

3 

1 

17 

30 

177 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

0 

206 

59 

0 

16 

13 

48 

30 

236 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

0 

266 

7 

17 

29 

26 

19 

30 

295 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

0 

325 

15 

34 

42 

38 

50 

30 

354 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

0 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

93 

12 

3 

29 

47 

55 

0 

186 

24 

6 

59 

35 

50 

0 

279 

36 

10 

29 

23 

45 

0 

12 

48 

13 

59 

11 

40 

0 

106 

0 

17 

28 

59 

35 

0 

199 

12 

20 

58 

47 

30 

0 

292 

24 

24 

28 

35 

25 

0 

25 

36 

27 

58 

23 

20 

0 

118 

48 

31 

28 

11 

15 

0 

212 

0 

34 

57 

59 

10 

0 

305 

12 

38 

27 

47 

5 

0 

38 

24 

41 

57 

35 

0 

0 

Degrees  in  longitude 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

0 

59 

8 

17 

13 

12 

31 

1 

58 

16 

34 

26 

25 

2. 

2 

57 

24 

51 

39 

37 

33 

3 

56 

33 

8 

52 

50 

4 

4 

55 

41 

26 

6 

2 

35 

5 

54 

49 

43 

19 

15 

6 

6 

53 

58 

0 

32 

27 

37 

7 

53 

6 

17 

45 

40 

8 

8 

52 

14 

34 

58 

52 

39 

9 

51 

22 

52 

12 

5 

10 

10 

50 

31 

9 

25 

17 

41 

11 

49 

39 

26 

38 

30 

12 

12 

48 

47 

43 

51 

42 

43 

13 

47 

56 

1 

4 

55 

14 

14 

47 

4 

18 

18 

7 

45 

15 

46 

12 

35 

31 

20 

16 

16 

45 

20 

52 

44 

32 

47 

17 

44 

29 

9 

57 

45 

18 

18 

43 

37 

27 

10 

57 

49 

19 

42 

45 

44 

24 

10 

20 

20 

41 

54 

1 

37 

22 

51 

21 

41 

2 

18 

50 

35 

22 

22 

40 

10 

36 

3 

47 

53 

23 

39 

18 

53 

17 

0 

24 

24 

38 

27 

10 

30 

12 

55 

25 

37 

35 

27 

43 

25 

26 

26 

36 

43 

44 

56 

37 

57 

27 

35 

52 

2 

9 

50 

28 

28 

35 

0 

19 

23 

2 

59 

29 

34 

8 

36 

36 

15 

30 

Degrees  of  anomaly 


o 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

3 

6 

24 

6 

59 

35 

50 

6 

12 

48 

13 

59 

11 

40 

9 

19 

12 

20 

58 

47 

30 

12 

25 

36 

27 

58 

23 

20 

15 

32 

0 

34 

57 

59 

10 

18 

38 

24 

41 

57 

35 

0 

21 

44 

48 

48 

57 

10 

50 

24 

51 

12 

55 

56 

46 

f40 

27 

57 

37 

2 

56 

22 

30 

31 

4 

1 

9 

55 

58 

20 

34 

10 

25 

16 

55 

34 

10 

37 

16 

49 

23 

55 

10 

0 

40 

23 

13 

30 

54 

45 

50 

43 

29 

37 

37 

54 

21 

40 

46 

36 

1 

44 

53 

57 

^30 

49 

42 

25 

51 

53 

33 

20 

52 

48 

49  • 

58 

53 

9 

10 

55 

55 

14 

5 

52 

45 

0 

59 

1 

38 

12 

52 

20 

50 

62 

8 

2 

19 

51 

56 

40 

65 

14 

26 

26 

51 

32 

30 

68 

20 

50 

33 

51 

8 

20 

71 

27 

14 

40 

50 

44 

10 

74 

33 

38 

47 

50 

20 

0 

77 

40 

2 

54 

49 

55 

50 

80 

46 

27 

1 

49 

31 

40 

83 

52 

51 

8 

49 

7 

30 

86 

59 

15 

15 

48 

43 

20 

90 

5 

39 

22 

48 

19 

10 

93 

12 

3 

29 

47 

55 

0 

291 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 

5.  Preliminaries  of  the  Hypotheses  of  the  Five  Planets 

Now,  the  relation  of  the  anomalies  to  the  longitudinal  passage  of  the  five 
planets  follows  the  exposition  of  these  mean  movements,  and  we  have  attempted 
a  general  outline  of  it  in  the  following  way. 

For,  as  we  said,  the  very  simple  movements  together  sufficient  for  the  problem 
in  hand  are  two:  oiie  effected  by  circles  eccentric  to  the  ecliptic,  and  the  other 
by  circles  concentric  with  the  ecliptic  but  bearing  epicycles.  And  likewise  also 
the  apparent  anomalies  for  each  star  considered  singly  are  two:  one  observed 
with  respect  to  the  parts  of  the  zodiac  and  the  other  with  respect  to  the  con¬ 
figurations  of  the  sun.  In  the  case  of  this  latter  anomaly,  we  find,  from  different 
configurations  observed  in  contiguity  and  in  the  same  parts  of  the  zodiac,  that, 
for  the  five  planets,  the  time  from  the  greatest  movement  to  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  is  always  longer  than  from  the  mean  to  the  least.  And  such  a  property 
((Fv/jLiTTcofia)  cannot  follow  from  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity,  but  its  contrary 
follows,  because  the  greatest  passage  is  always  effected  at  the  perigee,  and  in 
both  hypotheses  the  arc  from  the  perigee  to  the  point  of  mean  passage  is  less 
than  that  from  this  point  to  the  apogee.  But  it  can  occur  in  the  hypothesis  of  epi¬ 
cycles  when  the  greatest  passage  is  not  effected  at  the  perigee  as  in  the  case  of 
the  moon,  but  at  the  apogee^that  is,  when  the  star,  starting  from  the  apogee, 
moves  not  westward  as  the  moon,  but  eastward  in  the  opposite  direction.  And 
so  we  suppose  this  anomaly  to  be  produced  by  epicycles. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  anomaly  observed  with  respect  to  the  parts  of  the  zodi¬ 
ac,  we  find,  by  means  of  the  arcs  of  the  zodiac  taken  at  the  same  phases  or  con¬ 
figurations,  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  time  from  the  least  movement  to  the 
mean  is  always  greater  than  the  time  from  the  mean  movement  to  the  greatest. 
But  this  property  can  follow  from  either  hypothesis,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the 
composition  of  the  sun  [iii,  3]  we  showed  how  they  were  alike  in  this.  But  since 
it  is  more  proper  to  the  eccentric  hypothesis,  we  suppose  this  anomaly  is  effected 
according  to  it,  and  also  because  the  other  anomaly  is  peculiar  to  the  epicyclic 
hypothesis. 

But  immediately  on  applying  the  particular  positions  observed  to  the  courses 
constructed  from  the  combination  of  both  hypotheses  and  continually  examin¬ 
ing  them  together,  we  find  things  cannot  proceed  so  simply:  (1)  The  planes  in 
which  we  describe  the  eccentric  circles  are  not  immobile,  so  that  the  straight  line 
through  both  their  centres  and  the  ecliptic^s  centre,  along  which  the  apogees  and 
perigees  are  sighted,  always  remains  at  the  same  angular  distances  from  the 
tropic  and  equinoctial  points.  (2)  The  epicycles  do  not  have  their  centres  borne 
on  the  eccentric  circles  whose  centres  are  those  with  respect  to  which  the  epicy¬ 
cles’  centres  revolve  in  a  regular  eastward  motion  and  cut  off  equal  angles  in 
equal  times.  But  (1)  the  eccentrics’  apogees  make  a  slight  regular  shift  east¬ 
ward  from  the  tropic  points  around  the  ecliptic’s  centre  and  nearly  as  much  for 
each  planet  as  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  found  to  make — that  is,  one  degree 
in  a  hundred  years,  as  far  as  one  can  detect  from  present  data.  And  (2)  the  epi¬ 
cycles’  centres  are  borne  on  circles  equal  to  the  eccentrics  effecting  the  anomaly, 
but  described  about  other  centres.  And  these  other  centres,  in  the  case  of  all 
except  Mercury,  bisect  the  straight  lines  between  the  centres  of  the  eccentrics 
effecting  the  anomaly  and  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic.^  But  in  the  case  of  Mercury 

^These  three  points — the  centre  of  the  equant,  the  centre  of  the  deferent,  and  the  centre 
of  the  ecliptic — with  the  deferent’s  centre  midway  between  the  other  two,  by  means  of  the 


292  PTOLEMY 

alone,  this  other  centre  is  the  same  distance  from  the  centre  revolving  it  [centre 
of  equant]  as  this  centre  revolving  it  is  in  turn  from  the  centre  effecting  the  a- 
nomaly  on  the  side  of  the  apogee,  and  as  this  last  centre  effecting  the  anomaly 
is  in  turn  from  the  centre  placed  at  the  eye.  For,  in  the  case  of  that  star  alone  as 
also  vith  the  moon,  we  find  the  eccentric  circle  revolved  by  the  aforesaid  centre, 
contrari^^'ise  to  the  epicycle,  back  westward  one  revolution  in  a  yearns  time, 
since  it  appears  to  be  twice  perigee  in  one  revolution,  just  as  the  moon  is  also 
tvice  so  in  one  month^s  time. 

6.  Ox\  THE  Mode  and  DIFFEKE^’CE  OF  THESE  HYPOTHESES 

The  mode  of  the  hypotheses  just  derived  would  be  more  easy  to  understand 
in  this  way: 

In  the  case  of  the  hypothesis  of  all  the  planets  except  Mercury,  first  let  there 
be  conceived  the  eccentric  circle  ABC  about  the  centre  D,  and  the  diameter 
ADC  through  D  and  the  centre  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic.  And  on  this  diameter  let  E  be  made  the 
centre  of  the  ecliptic,  the  point  A  the  apogee, 
and  C  the  perigee.  And  let  DE  be  bisected  at 
F;  and  with  F  as  centre  and  DA  as  radius,  let 
circle  GHK  be  drawn,  equal  of  course  to  cir¬ 
cle  ABC,  And  with  H  as  centre  let  the  epi¬ 
cycle  LM  be  drawn,  and  let  the  straight  line 
JjHMD  be  joined. 

Then  first  we  suppose  the  plane  of  the  ec¬ 
centric  circles  to  be  inclined  to  that  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  again  the  plane  of  the  epicycle 
to  that  of  the  eccentric,  because  of  the  lati¬ 
tudinal  passage  of  the  stars  to  be  demon¬ 
strated  by  us  hereafter.  But  to  make  things 
easy  as  far  as  the  longitudinal  passages  are 
concerned,  we  suppose  that  they  are  all  con¬ 
ceived  in  the  one  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  since 
there  will  be  no  appreciable  difference  in  longitude  resulting  from  such  inclina¬ 
tions  as  \nll  be  found  for  each  of  the  stars. 

Then  we  say  that  the  whole  plane  revolves  eastward  in  the  direction  of  the 
signs  about  centre  £,  moving  the  apogees  and  perigees  one  degree  in  a  hundred 
years;  that  the  epicycle's  diameter  LHM  in  turn  is  revolved  regularly  by  centre 
D  eastward  in  the  direction  of  the  signs  at  the  rate  of  the  star's  longitudinal  re¬ 
turn;  and  that  at  the  same  time  it  revolves  the  points  of  the  epicycle  L  and  it/, 
its  centre  H  always  borne  on  the  eccentric  GHK^  and  the  star  itself.  And  the 
star  in  turn  moves  on  the  epicycle  LM,  regularly  with  respect  to  the  diameter 
always  pointing  to  centre  D,  and  makes  its  returns  at  the  rate  of  the  mean  cycle 

Copemican  transformation,  cor&e  to  represent  the  two  foci  and  the  centre  of  the  Keplerian 
ellipse  with  exactly  the  same  ratios  preser\^ed. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  this  broadening  of  the  principle  of  celestial  mechanics  to  allow  an 
epicycle’s  centre  to  move  regularly  about  a  point  other  than  the  centre  of  its  deferent  was  for 
Copernicus  the  major  scandal  of  the  Ptolemaic  system  and  one  which  his  own  allowed  him  to 
remove  only  at  the  expense  of  the  appearances,  as  Kepler  well  saw. 

All  this  is  explained  in  more  detail  in  the  first  note  of  Book  XII  and  in  Appendix  B  to  this 
work. 


A 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX  293 

of  the  anomaly  with  respect  to  the  sun,  mo\’ing  eastward  in  the  order  of  the  signs 
at  the  apogee  L. 

And  we  could  visualize  the  characteristic  property  of  the  hypothesis  of  Mer¬ 
cury  in  this  way. 

For  let  there  be  the  eccentric  circle  of  anomaly  ABC  about  centre  Z),  and  the 

diameter  ADEC  through  Z),  the  eclip¬ 
tic’s  centre  F,  and  the  apogee  A.  And  let 
DF  be  taken  on  AC  in  the  direction  of 
the  apogee  A  and  equal  to  DE. 

Then,  other  things  remaining  the  same 
(that  is,  the  whole  plane  shifting  the  apo¬ 
gee  eastward  about  as  a  centre  the 
same  amount  as  for  the  other  stars,  and 
the  epicycle  being  revolved  regularly 
eastward  about  D  as  centre  by  the 
straight  line  DB^  and  again  the  star  mov¬ 
ing  on  the  epicycle  in  the  same  way  as 
the  others),  here  the  centre  of  the  other 
eccentric,  equal  to  the  first  and  on  which 
the  epicycle’s  centre  will  always  lie,  vdll 
be  revolved  by  the  straight  line  FGH 
about  point  F  contrariwise  to  the  epicy¬ 
cle — that  is,  westward  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  signs — regularly  and  at 
the  same  speed  as  the  epicycle,  so  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  DB  and  FGiZ,  in 
one  year’s  time,  is  restored  once  with  respect  to  the  points  of  the  ecliptic,  and 
twice  with  respect  to  each  other.  And  this  centre  of  the  other  eccentric  will  al- 
w’ays  be  a  distance  from  the  point  F  equal  to  either  of  the  straight  lines  ED  or 
DF  (for  instance,  FG)  so  that  the  little  circle  described  by  its  movement  w^est- 
w’ard,  with  F  as  centre  and  FG  as  radius,  is  ahvays  bounded  by  the  centre  of  the 
first  eccentric  w’hich  remains  fixed;  and  the  moving  eccentric  is  described  in 
every  case  with  G  as  centre  and  with  radius  GH,  equal  to  Z)A,  as  for  instance 
here  HKy  and  the  epicycle  ahvays  has  its  centre  on  it,  as  here  at  point  K, 

We  can  follow  the  suppositions  even  more  precisely  from  the  demonstrations 
w'e  are  to  give  of  the  magnitudes  for  each  planet.  In  these  demonstrations  the 
motives  for  formulating  the  hypotheses  will  somehow^  show-  up  in  clearer  outline. 

Yet  one  must  premise  that,  since  the  longitudinal  cycles  do  not  make  their  re¬ 
turns  with  the  points  of  the  zodiac  and  with  the  apogees  or  perigees  of  the  eccen¬ 
tric  circles,  because  of  their  shift,  therefore  the  longitudinal  movements  set  out 
by  us  in  the  foregoing  manner  do  not  contain  returns  considered  with  respect 
to  the  apogees  of  the  eccentrics  but  returns  that  are  relative  to  the  tropic  and 
equinoctial  points  in  accordance  with  our  year. 

Then  it  must  be  shown  first  that,  also  according  to  these  hypotheses,  w^hen- 
ever  the  mean  longitudinal  position  of  the  star  is  equidistant  from  the  apogees 
and  perigees  in  either  direction,  the  difference  of  zodiacal  anomaly  is  equal  for 
either  distance,  and  also  the  greatest  elongation  on  the  epicycle  on  the  corre¬ 
sponding  side  of  the  mean  position. 

For  about  centre  E  and  diameter  AECj  let  there  be  the  eccentric  circle  ABC 
on  which  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  borne.  On  this  diameter  let  F  be  taken  as  the 
ecliptic’s  centre,  and  G  as  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  making  the  anomaty — that 


294 


PTOLEMY 


is,  the  centre  around  which  we  say  the  epicycle’s  mean  passage  is  regularly 
effected.  And  let  the  straight  lines  BGH  and  DGK  be  drawm  through,  both  the 
same  angular  distance  from  the  apogee  A,  so  that  angles  AGB  and  AGD  are 
equal.  And  let  epicycles  be  described 
about  points  B  and  Z>,  and  let  straight 
lines  BF  and  BD  be  joined,  and  from  F 
the  eye-point  let  the  straight  lines  FL 
and  FM  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  epicy¬ 
cles  on  the  corresponding  sides. 

I  say  that  angle  FBG  of  the  difference 
of  zodiacal  anomaly  is  equal  to  angle 
GDF;  and  that  angle  BFLy  the  greatest 
elongation  on  the  epicycle,  is  likewise 
equal  to  angle  DFM.  For  in  this  way  the 
magnitudes  of  the  elongations  resulting 
from  the  combination  of  the  eccentric 
and  of  the  greatest  elongations  from  the 
mean  position  will  also  be  equal. 

Then  let  the  straight  lines  BL  and  DM 
be  drawn  from  B  and  D  perpendicular 
to  FL  and  FM,  and  straight  lines  EN  and  EX  from  E  perpendicular  to  BH  and 
DK.  Since 

angle  =  angle  NGE^ 

and  the  angles  at  N  and  X  are  right,  and  EG  is  common  to  the  equiangular  tri¬ 
angles,  therefore 

NG=XG, 

EN^EX. 

Therefore  BH  and  DK  are  chords  equidistant  from  the  centre  E;  therefore  they 
are  equal  and  their  halves  also.  And  so,  by  subtraction, 

BG=DG.  ^ 

But  GF  is  common,  and 

angle  angle  DGF, 

and  are  within  equal  sides;  therefore  also 

base  BF  =  base  jDF, 

and 

angle  GBF  =  angle  DGF. 

And  also,  as  radii  of  the  epicycles, 

BL=DM, 

and  the  angles  at  L  and  M  are  right;  therefore  also 

angle  BFL = angle  DFM.  ,  i 

Which  things  it  w^as  required  to  prove. 

Then  again,  for  the  hypothesis  of  Mercury,  let  there  be  the  diameter  ABC 
through  the  circles’  centres  and  apogee ;  and  let  A  be  supposed  the  centre  of  the 
ecliptic;  B  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  effecting  the  anomaly,  and  C  the  point 
about  which  moves  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle.  And  again 
let  the  straight  lines  BD  and  BE  of  the  epicycle’s  regular  eastw^ard  motion  be 
drawn  through  on  either  side,  and  the  straight  lines  CF  and  CG  of  the  eccentric’s 
westward  revolution  at  the  same  rate,  so  that  of  course  the  angles  at  C  and  B  are 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX  295 

equal,  and  BD  parallel  to  CF, 
and  BE  to  CG.  And  let  the 
centres  of  the  eccentrics  be 
taken  on  CF  and  CG,  and  let 
them  be  H  and  K.  And  let  the 
eccentrics  described  about 
these  centres,  eccentrics  bear¬ 
ing  the  epicycles,  pass  through 
the  points  D  and  E,  Again, 
with  equal  epicycles  described 
about  points  D  and  E,  let  the 
straight  lines  AD  and  AE  be 
joined,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  AL  and  AM  be  drawn 
tangent  to  the  corresponding 
sides  of  the  epicycles. 

Then  it  must  be  proved  that  the  angle  of  zodiacal  anomaly  ADB  is  equal  to 
angle  AEB;  and  that  the  angle  of  greatest  elongation  for  the  epicycle  DAL  is 
equal  to  angle  EAM. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  BH,  BK,  HD,  and  KE  be  joined;  and  let  CN  and 
CX  be  drawn  from  C  perpendicular  to  BD  and  BE;  and  DF  and  EG  from  D  and 
E  perpendicular  to  CF  and  CG;  and  DL  and  EM  perpendicular  to  AL  and  AM, 
Since  then 

angle  CBN  =  angle  CBX, 

and  the  angles  at  A"  and  X  are  right,  and  the  straight  line  CB  is  common,  there¬ 
fore 

CN  =  CX, 

that  is 

DF=EG, 

But  also 

i7D  =  KE,i 

and  the  angles  at  F  and  G  are  right.  And  so 

■4  angle  =  angle  EKG; 

and 

angle  CHB  =  angle  CKB, 

because  it  is  supposed 
I  HC^CK, 

^For,  as  below, 

and  as  radii  of  the  same  moving  eccentric 

,  H  HE  =  KD, 


And  by  hypothesis 
and,  since  by  hypothesis'* 

:  I--;  .  •  ) 

therefore  -  ,  - 

and  by  addition  -  i 

angle  DBZ  =  angle  EBZ, 
Hence,  by  congruent  triangles  DKB  and  EHB, 

HD  =  KE. 


angle  DBC  =  angle  EBC; 

arc  HZ  =  arc  ZK, 
angle  HBC  =  angle  KBC, 


296 

CB  is  common,  and 


PTOLEMY 


angle  =  angle  KCB, 

And  so  also,  by  subtraction, 

angle  =  angle  BKEy 

and 

base  BD  —  base  BE, 

But  again  BA  is  also  common,  and 

angle  DBA  =  angle  EBA, 

And  so 

base  AD  =  base  AD, 

and 

angle  ADD  =  angle  AEB 
And  in  the  same  way,  since 

DL  =  Dilf, 

and  the  angles  at  L  and  M  are  right,  therefore  also 

angle  DAL  =  angle  EAM. 

Which  things  it  was  required  to  prove. ^ 

7.  Demonstration  of  Mercury^s  Apogee  and  of  its  Shift 

With  this  theory  established,  we  first  took  this  way  of  finding  the  wherea¬ 
bouts  on  the  ecliptic  of  Mercury apogee.  For  we  examined  the  observations  of 
the  greatest  elongations  in  which  the  morning  positions  of  the  star  were  equal 
to  the  evening  ones  in  their  angular  distance  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun. 
When  these  had  been  found,  it  followed  from  what  we  have  shown  that  the 
point  midway  between  the  two  positions  included  the  eccentric- s  apogee. 

Then  we  took  some  observations  for  this  purpose,  few  because  such  combina¬ 
tions  are  seldom  met  with,  but  capable  of  showing  up  the  subject  in  hand.  Here 
are  the  more  recent  of  them. 

For  in  the  year  16  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Phamenoth  16-17  in  the  eve¬ 
ning,  we  observed  Mercury,  by  the  manipulation  of  the  astrolabe,  at  its  greatest 
elongation  from  the  sun^s  mean  position.  And  then,  being  sighted  with  the 
bright  star  of  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  it  appeared  to  be  1°  within  the  Fishes. 
But  at  that  time  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  (9+3^+/4)°  within  the  Water 
Bearer.  Therefore  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was 
21M^ 

And  in  the  year  18  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Epiphi  18-19  at  dawn,  Mercurj’' 
was  at  its  greatest  elongation,  appeared  very  slight  and  dim,  was  sighted  with 
the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  and  appeared  to  be  (18+3^+J4)° 
within  the  Bull.  But  at  that  time  the  mean  sun  was  10°  within  the  Twins.  And 
therefore  at  that  time  the  greatest  morning  elongation  from  the  mean  position 
was  equally  213^°.  And  so,  since  in  one  observation  the  star’s  mean  position  was 
(9+3^+/4)°  within  the  Water  Bearer,  and  in  the  other  10°  within  the  Twins, 
and  since  the  point  on  the  ecliptic  midway  between  them  is  (10— *3^)°  within 

Tn  other  words,  Ptolemy  has  proved  that  if  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  equidistant  on  either 
side  from  the  apogee,  then  the  angles  are  equal.  It  cannot  be  proved  in  the  case  of  the  hy¬ 
potheses  of  Mercury  that  the  converse  is  true,  since  as  we  shall  see  later  Mercury  has  two 
perigees  and,  therefore,  there  are  other  points  of  symmetry.  Ptolemy,  however,  will  use  the 
converse  as  true  for  his  observations.  This  is  possible  because  he  knows  about  where  the 
apogee  of  the  eccentric  lies  and,  within  a  limited  range  on  either  side  of  that  approximate 
point,  the  converse  is  true. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX  297 

the  Ram,  the  diameter  through  the  apogee  would  be  in  that  position  at  that 
time. 

Again,  in  the  year  1  of  Antonine,  Egyptian  wise  Epiphi  20-21  in  the  evening, 
with  the  astrolabe  we  observed  Mercury  at  its  greatest  elongation  from  the 
sun^s  mean  position.  Being  sighted  at  that  time  with  the  star  of  the  Lion^s  heart 
[Regulus],  it  appeared  to  be  7°  within  the  Crab.  But  at  that  time  the  mean  sun 
was  103^°  within  the  Twins.  Therefore  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the 
mean  position  was  26}^^, 

And  likewise  also  in  the  year  4  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Phamenoth  18-19 
at  dawn,  Mercury  was  again  at  its  greatest  elongation,  was  sighted  with  the 
star  called  Antares,  and  appeared  to  be  133^°  within  the  Goat,  while  the  mean 
sun  was  10°  within  the  Water  Bearer.  And  therefore  at  that  time  the  greatest 
morning  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  likewise  263/^°.  And  so,  since 
at  one  of  the  observations  the  mean  position  of  the  star  was  103^°  within  the 
Twins,  and  at  the  other  10°  within  the  Water  Bearer,  therefore  the  point  of  the 
ecliptic  midway  between  them  is  1034°  within  the  Balance,  and  at  that  time 
the  diameter  through  the  apogee  would  be  in  that  position. 

From  these  observations,  then,  we  find  the  apogee  falling  very  nearly  10° 
within  the  Ram  or  the  Balance;  and  from  the  old  observations  of  the  greatest 
elongations,  about  6°  within  the  same  signs,  just  as  one  would  calculate  it  to  be. 

For  in  the  year  23  according  to  Dionysius,  Hydron  29  in  the  morning.  Mer¬ 
cury  was  three  moon^s  to  the  north  of  the  brightest  star  in  the  Goat^s  tail.  But 
this  fixed  star  was  then,  according  to  our  starting  points  (that  is,  the  tropic  and 
equinoctial  points),  2234°  within  the  Goat,  the  same  evidently  as  Mercury.  And 
it  is  evident  the  mean  sun  was  1834°  within  the  Water  Bearer;  for  that  time  was 
the  year  486  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Choiak  17-18  at  davm.  Therefore, 
the  greatest  morning  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  (25+34+/4)°- 

We  did  not  find  a  greatest  evening  elongation  exactly  equal  to  this  one  in  any 
of  the  observations  that  have  come  down  to  us,  but  from  two  of  them  we  cal¬ 
culated  one  very  nearly  equal  in  the  following  manner. 

For  in  the  same  year  23  according  to  Dionysius,  Tauron  4  in  the  evening, 
Mercury  was  three  moons  beyond  the  straight  line  through  the  horns  of  the 
Bull,  and  seemed  to  be  passing  more  than  three  moons  south  of  the  common 
star.^  And  so  again,  according  to  our  starting  points,  it  was  23^4°  within  the 
Bull.  And  that  was  again  the  year  486  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Phamenoth 
30-Pharmouthi  1  in  the  evening,  when  the  mean  sun  was  2934°  within  the  Ram. 
Therefore,  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  2434°* 

In  the  year  28  according  to  Dionysius,  Didymon  7  in  the  evening.  Mercury 
was  in  a  straight  line  with  the  heads  of  the  Twins,  and  was  to  the  south  of  the 
southern  one  by  a  third  part  of  a  moon  less  than  double  the  distance  between 
the  heads.  And  so  again  at  that  time  Mercury  was,  according  to  our  starting 
points,  2934°  within  the  Twins.  And  that  was  the  year  491  of  Nabonassar, 
Egyptianwise  Pharmouthi  5-6  in  the  evening,  at  which  time  the  mean  sun  was 
(2+34+34)°  ^vithin  the  Twins.  And  therefore  the  elongation  itself  was  2634°- 
Since,  when  the  mean  position  was  2934°  within  the  Ram,  the  greatest  elonga¬ 
tion  was  2434°,  and,  when  the  mean  position  was  (2+34+  34)°  within  the  Twins, 
the  elongation  was  2634°;  and  since  the  greatest  morning  elongation  whose  cor- 

‘The  star  described  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Stars  as  “the  star  at  the  tip  of  the  northern 
horn,  the  same  as  the  star  in  the  Charioteer’s  right  foot.” 


298  PTOLEMY 

respondent  we  sought  was  (25+H+3^)‘",  we  extracted  from  the  difference  of 
the  two  observations  just  reported,  where  the  mean  position  would  have  to  be 
in  order  for  the  greatest  evening  elongation  to  be  (25+}4+W-  For  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  two  mean  positions  comes  to  333^°,  and  between  the  great¬ 
est  elongations  to  23^°,  so  that  very  nearly  24°  corresponds  to  the  difference 
between  (25+3^+ and  243^°.  If  we  add  these  24°  to  the  29^°  within  the 
Ram,  we  shall  have  the  mean  position  where  the  greatest  evening  elongation  will 
be  equal  to  the  greatest  morning  elongation  of  (25+J^+3^)°,  and  that  will  be 
233^°  within  the  Bull.  And  the  point  midway  between  183^°  within  the  Water 
Bearer  and  23J^°  within  the  Bull  is  about  (5+J^+J^)°  within  the  Ram. 

Again,  in  the  year  24  according  to  Dionysius,  Leonton  28  in  the  evening. 
Mercury  was  west  of  Spica,  according  to  Hipparchus’  calculations,  by  little 
more  than  3°.  And  so  it  was  then  193^°  within  the  Virgin  according  to  our  start¬ 
ing  points.  And  that  was  the  year  486  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Payni  30  in 
the  evening,  at  which  time  the  mean  sun  was  (27+J^+3^)°  within  the  Lion. 
Therefore,  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  21^°, 
whose  exact  morning  correspondent  we  again  calculate  by  means  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  observations. 

For  in  the  year  75  according  to  the  Chaldeans,  Dius  14  in  the  morning.  Mer¬ 
cury  was  half  a  cubit  on  the  upper  side  of  the  southern  Balance.  And  so  it  was 
then,  according  to  our  starting  points,  143^°  within  the  Balance.  And  that  was 
the  year  512  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  9-10,  at  dawm,  at  which  time 
the  mean  sun  was  5J^°  within  the  Scorpion.  Therefore,  the  greatest  morning 
elongation  was  21°. 

In  the  year  67  according  to  the  Chaldeans,  Apellaius  5  in  the  morning.  Mer¬ 
cury  was  half  a  cubit  on  the  upper  side  of  the  northern  forehead  of  the  Scorpion. 
And  so  at  that  time,  in  our  terms,  it  was  23^°  within  the  Scorpion.  And  that  was 
the  year  504  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  27-28  at  dawn,  at  w^hich  time 
the  mean  sun  was  (24 +3^ +3^)°  wdthin  the  Scorpion.  Therefore  the  elongation 
itself  was  223^°.  Then  again — since  in  these  two  observations  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  mean  positions  comes  to  19^°,  and  between  the  greatest  elongations 
to  13^°,  and  since  for  this  reason  9°  corresponds  to  the  %°  by  which  the  21^°  of 
the  elongation  required  exceed  the  21°  of  the  smaller  elongation — if  we  add 
these  9°  to  the  5J^°  within  the  Scorpion,  we  shall  have  the  mean  position  at 
which  the  greatest  morning  elongation  is  equal  to  the  21^°  of  the  evening  elon¬ 
gation.  And  this  mean  position  is  143^°  within  the  Scorpion.  And  again,  the 
point  midway  between  (27+3^+3^)°  within  the  Lion  and  143^^°  within  the 
Scorpion  is  very  nearly  6°  within  the  Balance. 

From  these  appearances,  then,  and  from  the  agreement  of  the  appearances 
particular  to  the  other  stars,  we  find  it  consistent  for  the  diameters  through  the 
perigees  and  apogees  of  the  five  planets  to  make  a  shift  about  the  ecliptic’s  cen¬ 
tre  eastward  in  the  order  of  the  signs,  and  for  that  shift  to  be  at  the  same  rate 
as  that  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  For,  as  we  showed  [vii,  2],  it  shifts  very 
nearly  1°  in  a  hundred  years,  and  so  the  time  from  the  old  observations,  where 
Mercury’s  apogee  was  about  6°,  to  our  own  observations,  where  it  has  come  to 
be  about  10°,  is  found  to  embrace  nearly  400  years. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 


299 


8.  That  Mercury  also  Becomes  Twice  Perigee  in  One  Revolution 

Following  on  this,  we  examined  the  magnitudes  of  the  greatest  elongations 
produced  when  the  sun^s  mean  position  was  at  the  apogee  itself,  and  again  when 
it  was  diametrically  opposite.  And  here  one  can  very  well  understand  the  use¬ 
fulness  of  this  kind  of  sighting  [Le.,  with  the  astrolabe],  since,  even  if  some  ob¬ 
served  stars  do  not  appear  near  each  other  because  of  their  predetermined  posi¬ 
tions  (and  this  happens  for  the  most  part  in  the  case  of  Mercury  because  most 
of  the  fixed  stars  can  rarely  appear  at  a  distance  from  the  sun  equal  to  Mer¬ 
cury  ^s),  yet  by  sighting  with  the  far  distant  stars  it  is  possible  to  get  accurately 
their  longitudinal  and  latitudinal  positions. 

Now  in  the  year  19  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Athyr  14-15,  the  morning 
Mercury  was  at  its  greatest  elongation,  and,  sighted  with  the  star  of  the  Lion^s 
heart,  it  appeared  to  be  20}^^  within  the  Virgin,  while  the  mean  sun  was  about 
9}4°  within  the  Balance.  And  so  the  greatest  elongation  came  to  19J4o°* 

And  in  the  same  year,  Pachon  19  in  the  evening,  it  was  at  a  greatest  elonga¬ 
tion,  and,  sighted  with  the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  appeared  to 
be  within  the  Bull,  while  the  mean  sun  was  11^°  within  the  Ram.  And  so 
the  greatest  elongation  in  this  case  came  to  2334°>  a,nd  from  that  it  was  clear 
the  eccentric^s  apogee  was  in  the  Balance  and  not  in  the  Ram. 

Now,  these  things  being  given,  let  the  straight  line  ABC  be  the  diameter 
through  the  apogee;  and  let  the  point  B  be  supposed  the  ecliptic’s  centre  where 
the  eye  is;  A  the  point  10°  within  the  Balance;  and  C  the  point  10°  within  the 
Ram.  Let  equal  epicycles  be  described  about  A  and  C,  one  with  point  D  on  it, 
the  other  with  point  B;  and  let  the  straight  lines  BD  and  B£J  be  produced  from 
B  tangent  to  them;  and  let  the  perpendiculars  AD  and  CB  be  drawn  from  the 
centres  to  the  points  of  contact. 

Since,  then,  the  greatest  morning  elongation  in  the  Balance  was  observed  to 
be  193^0°  from  the  mean  position, 

angle  ABB  =  19°3' 

=  38°6'  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ABB, 
arc  AD  =  38°6', 

and 

chord  AB  =  39^9' 

where 

hypt.  AB  =  120^, 

Again,  since  the  greatest  evening  elongation  in  the  Ram  was  ob¬ 
served  to  be  23J4°  from  the  mean  position, 

angle  CDD  =  23°15' 

=  46°30'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  cii'cle  about  right  triangle  CBB, 

arc  CD  =  46°30' 

chord  CD  =  47^22' 

hypt.  CR  =  120p. 

And  because  as  radii  of  the  epicycles  i; 

AD  =  CD, 


and 

where 


300 

therefore 


PTOLEMY 


and,  by  addition, 
where 


SC  =  99^' 
i4BC=219P9' 


CS  =  39p9' 


and 

AS  =  120P. 

And  so,  if  the  straight  line  ABC  be  bisected  at  F,  then  as  half  of  ABC 

AF=  109^34', 

and 

SF  =10^25'. 

Then  it  is  clear  that  either  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  or  the 
centre  around  which  the  centre  of  that  eccentric  circle  is  revolved.  For  in  this 
way  only  could  the  epicycle’s  centre  be  equidistant  from  F  for  either  of  the  dia¬ 
metrically  opposite  positions,  as  was  proved.  But  since,  if  F  were  itself  the  centre 
of  that  eccentric  on  which  the  epicycle’s  centre  always  lies,  that  eccentric  would 
be  fixed,  and  of  all  the  positions  that  in  the  Ram  would  alone  be  perigee  because 
BC  is  the  least  of  all  the  straight  lines  from  B  to  the  circle  described  about  F; 
and  since  the  position  in  the  Ram  is  not  to  be  the  nearest  the  earth,  but  positions 
in  the  Twins  and  the  Water  Bearer  are  even  nearer  the  earth  than  it  and  very 
nearly  equal  to  each  other,  therefore  it  is  clear  that  the  centre  of  this  eccen¬ 
tric  is  carried  about  point  F  in  the  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  epicycle’s 
revolution  —  that  is,  westward  contrary  to  the  order  of  the  signs  —  once  in 
one  cycle.  For  in  this  way  the  epicycle’s  centre  will  be  twice  perigee  in  that 
cycle. 

It  is  immediately  understandable  from  the  observations  just  set  out  [ix,7], 
that  the  epicycle  is  nearer  the  earth  in  the  Twins  and  the  Water  Bearer  than  in 
the  Ram.  For  in  the  observation  of  the  year  16  of  Hadrian,  Phamenoth  16,  the 
greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  213^°;  and  in  the  ob¬ 
servation  of  the  year  4  of  Antonine,  Phamenoth  18,  the  greatest  morning  elonga¬ 
tion  from  the  mean  position  w'as  263^°,  while  the  mean  sun  for  both  observations 
was  about  10°  within  the  Water  Bearer.  And  again,  in  the  observation  of  the 
year  18  of  Hadrian,  Epiphi  19,  the  greatest  morning  elongation  from  the  mean 
position  ^vas  2134°;  fhe  observation  of  the  year  1  of  Antonine,  Epiphi  20, 

the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  %vas  2634°>  while  for 
both  observations  the  mean  sun  was  about  10°  within  the  Twins.  And  so  the 
contrary  greatest  elongations  in  the  Water  Bearer  and  in  the  Twins,  added  to¬ 
gether,  come  to  (47  4- 34+ 34)  while  both  the  greatest  elongations  in  the  Ram 
together  embrace  4634°j  because  the  evening  elongation  was  observed  to  be 
equal  to  the  morning  one  of  2334°- 


9.  On  the  Ratio  and  Magnitude  of  Mercury’s  Anomalies 

Now%  once  these  things  have  been  dealt  with,  it  remains  to  show^  around  what 
point  of  the  straight  line  AB  the  epicycle’s  yearly  return  in  regular  motion  east¬ 
ward  in  the  order  of  the  signs  takes  place;  and  how  far  from  F  is  the  centre  of 
the  eccentric  making  its  return  at  an  equal  speed  westw^ard.  We  have  also  used 
for  this  research  two  observations  of  greatest  elongations  both  morning  and 
evening,  with  the  mean  position  in  either  case  situated  a  quadrant’s  distance 


301 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 


from  the  apogee  on  the  same  side,  for  in  this  position  very  nearly  the  greatest 
difference  of  zodiacal  anomaly  is  produced. 

For  in  the  year  14  of  Hadrian,  Egyptian  wise  Mesore  18  in  the  evening,  as  we 
find  in  the  observations  taken  by  Theon,  “Mercury,^'  he  says,  ‘Svas  at  its  great¬ 
est  elongation  from  the  sun,  being  (3+H+J^)®  east  of  the  star  in  the  Lion^s 
heart  [Regulus].”  And  so,  according  to  our  starting  points,  it  was  very  nearly 
within  the  Lion,  while  the  mean  sun  at  that  time  was  about  103^^2°  within 
the  Crab.  And  so  the  greatest  elongation  was  26)4°- 
And  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Mesore  24  at  dawm,  observing 
its  greatest  elongation  with  the  astrolabe  and  sighting  it  with  the  bright  star  of 
the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  we  found  Mercury  to  be  20^2°  within  the  Twins,  while 
the  mean  sun  was  again  about  lOJ^®  within  the  Crab.  And  so  the  greatest  morn¬ 
ing  elongation  was  2034°* 

Now,  with  these  things  supposed,  again  let  there  be  the  diameter  AFBC 

through  the  points  10°  within  the  Bal¬ 
ance  and  the  Ram.  And  as  in  the  last  fig¬ 
ure,  let  A  be  supposed  the  point  where 
the  epicycle’s  centre  lies  when  it  is  10° 
within  the  Balance ;  C  the  point  where  it 
lies  when  it  is  10°  within  the  Ram;  B  the 
centre  of  the  ecliptic;  and  F  the  point 
about  which  the  eccentric’s  centre  makes 
its  westward  shift. 

First  let  it  be  required  to  find  how  far 
from  the  point  B  is  the  centre  about 
which  we  say  the  epicycle’s  regular  east¬ 
ward  movement  takes  place. 

Then  let  it  be  the  point  G,  and  let  a 
straight  line  be  drawn  through  G  at  right 
angles  to  AC,  so  that  it  will  be  a  quad¬ 
rant’s  distance  from  the  apogee  A;  and 
let  H  be  taken  on  it  as  the  centre  of  the  epicycle,  according  to  the  observations 
just  set  forth,  because  in  these  the  mean  position  was  a  quadrant’s  distance  from 
the  apogee,  the  mean  sun  being  about  10°  within  the  Crab.  And  with  the  epicy¬ 
cle  KL  described  about  H,  let  the  straight  lines  BK  and  BL  be  dravm  from  B 
tangent  to  it.  And  let  HK,  HL,  and  BH  be  joined.^ 

Now,  since  at  the  mean  position  just  taken,  the  greatest  morning  elongation 
is  supposed  2034°^  aiid  the  evening  2634°,  therefore 

angle  KJ5L  =  46°30'; 
and  therefore,  being  half  of  angle  KBL, 

angle  KBH  =  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BHK, 

arc  HA:  =  46°30', 


and 


chord  =  47^22' 


where 


hypt.  J5H=120p. 

^We  have  added  to  the  figure  a  broken  line  through  B  parallel  to  GH  to  represent  the  line 
to  the  mean  sun  which  moves  regularly,  of  course,  about  the  earth  or  the  centre  of  the  ecHptic. 


PTW-EMY 


3CC 


And  iberefore  where 


and  it  'was  shown  [p,  300j 


there 


epk,  rad. 

BF=l0^2o\ 


Aoin,  sinoe  the  difference  of  6*  between  these  freatest  ekngations  embraces 
twice  the  difference  of  xodiaral  anomaly^  and  since  this  difference  is  contained  by 
anffie  BHG  ^^for  w^  have  proved  that  before  [pL  295])^  tlierefore 

angle 

=6'  to  2  rt. 

And  so.  on  the  drcle  abont  right  triangle  BGHy 


and 

arc  B(r=6®, 

chord  fiG=6'lT' 

hypi,  BE  =  120. 

where 

And  where 

BE =99^ 

and  likewise 

BF= 10-25', 

there 

BG=5P12'. 

Therdore 

BG=-haliBF 

and 

BGHBF= 

where 

epic.  rad.  =309'. 

Again,  in  the  same  figure,  let  the  straight  line  FMX  be  drawn  throu^  F  at 
rirfit  angles  to  AC  on  the  ride  c^porite 


GH.  And  it  is  dear  the  centre  of  that 
eccentric  on  which  the  epicyde's  centre 
H  5es  will  be  on  this  straight  line 
FMX.  because  of  the  equal  poiod  of 
Jcmt  rettim  in  opporite  dnections  made 
bv  GH  and  FAT.  And  let 
fA=FA. 

so  that  F.V  like  FA  is  composed  of  the 
eccentric's  radius  and  of  the  straight 
line  between  the  eccmtiic'seentres  and 
the  pcant  F.  And  let  the  eccentric’s 
centre  be  taken  on  it  and  let  it  be  J/. 
And  let  FH  be  jcaned. 

Tben.  since  angle  MFG  is  right,  and 
rince  angle  HFG  hardly  differs  at  aQ 
frcsn  a  right  angle  so  that  XFH  does 


not  differ  appreciably  from  a  straight  line,  and  rince  it  has  been  shown  [p.  300] 
if 


epic,  rad.  =39^30", 


THE  ALJMLAGEI5T,  IX 


m 


then 


ud 

therefore,  by  addition. 


unci  tho  eceeni^ric'a  cadiui5  wtii  be  the  hiiif  oi  ^iFUi^  that  is 

SM  ^  li}^^22! 


ami,  by  aubtnictiurj, 

L.  btw.  c.  FM'^^iTf. 

But  it  'wm  ahowD  [p.  •5(J2| 

3G^^n2f, 

(JF--bn2! 


where  the  parts  are  the  aaoie..  ^ 

Therefore  we  have  provfjd  that,  to  the  the  eceenhrie'a  radius,  each 

of  the  atmii^t  lines  between  the  wnhres  is  5^12'^aad  the  epicyele^a  radius 
And  therefore,  tu  the  b0»^  o£  the  eccentric's  radius,  each  of  the  atiraight  lines  be¬ 
tween  the  centers  wUl  be  '5*',  and  the  epicycle'a  radius  22*^W^  Which  it  was  re¬ 
quired  to  prove. 

And  we  can  discover  in  the  following  way  that,  these  things  being  suppiised, 
the  greatest  elongations  at  the  perigees  are  consistent  with  the  observations;^ 

that  is,  that,  when  the  mean  position  is  lOf 
within  the  Water  Bearer  or  10®  within  the 
Twins  and  is  distant  from  the  apogee  the 
aide  of  the  inscribed  equilateral  triangle, 
then  the  angle  at  the  eye  subtending  the 
epicycle  is  very  nearly  (47+:^+)!^)®. 

For  let  there  be  the  ^iiameter  through  the 
apogee  ABCDMy.  and  let  pomt  A  on  it  be 
supposed  at  the  apc^ee;  B  the  point  about 
which  the  eccentric's  centre  moves  west- 
ward;*  C  the  point  about  which  the  epi¬ 
cycle's  centre  moves  eastward;  and  D  the 
centre  of  the  ecliptic.  /\nd  let  both  move¬ 
ments  be  taken  about  their  pro[wr  c'enbres, 
regtiiarly  and  equally,  in  opposite  ^iirec- 
tiuns  ft^nn  the  apogee  J.,  through  an  angu¬ 
lar  (Jistance  equal  to  the  side  of  the  in¬ 
scribed  equilateral  triangle.  i\jid  let  CF  be 
the  straight  line  revolving  the  epicycle,  and  BG  the  straight  line  revolving  the 

‘That  tbeve  p(/inU>  should  ba  the  f^ngeev  of  the  tnovi/j^  evoeiitihe  must  have  been  known  to 
Ptoierny  thr*miih  empineai  mathematic.'ai  methcAJs — that  is,  by  trying  points  very  imall  dis- 
tsDc-ee  away  ft^jtn  the  ipven  pKfint  on  either  :^ida  and  c'airniJating  the  dibtnncw.  For  inetanc’e, 
if  we  calculate  the  wiuare  of  the  distance  B/f  'i.e,,  the  distsUif^;  of  the  epicycle’s  centre  to  the 
earth)  ftrat  when  the  epicycle’s  center  is  118'^  fr*/m  the  secondly  when  it  is  120*'  fh/m 

^  the  apogee,  and  thif»Jly  when  it  is  U®*'  from  the  apog^A^,  we  get  the  following  values  re- 
ipectjvely:  3,101.49,  3,101.04,  and  3,101.^^.  Accoi^iing  to  Mr.  Ge^jrge  Comenetd^  who  has 
worked  on  this  problem,  it  is  evident  frvim  the  meUnais  of  the  differential  calculus  that  the 
^  pangee's  being  at  or  very  near  the  point  120*’  fr^jm  the  ap</gee  is  'impendent  on  the  particndar 
ratio  of  the  line  between  the  fAiotres  to  the  eccentnc’s  radius.  Theref^ire,  there  is  no  general 
gaometnc  proof. 


304  PTOLEMY 

eccentric^s  centre.  And  let  G  be  the  eccentric’s  centre,  and  F  the  epicycle’s. 
And  with  the  epicycle  described  about  F,  let  DH  and  DK  be  drawn  tangent  to 
it;  and  let  CG,  DF,  FH,  and  FK  be  joined.  And  let  DL  be  drawn  from 
D  perpendicular  to  CF. 

It  is  required  to  prove  that 

angle  i/DA:=  (47+3^+M)". 

Since,  then,  each  of  the  angles  ABG  and  ACL  subtends  a  side  of  the  inscribed 
equilateral  triangle  and  equals  120°,  so  that 

angle  CBG  =  angle  DCL  =  60°, 

and  since 

angle  BGC  =  angle  BCG 

because  it  is  supposed 

BC  =  BG, 

and  since  the  other  two  angles  together  are  120°,  and  each  of  them  60°,  the  tri¬ 
angle  BCG  is  equiangular  and  equilateral.  And  also 

angle  DCL  =  angle  BCG; 

therefore  G,  G,  and  F  are  points  on  the  same  straight  line. 

And  so 

ecc.  rad.  GF=60p 

where 

CG  =  CD  =  3^, 

CD  being  the  straight  line  between  the  centres.  And,  by  subtraction, 

GF  =  57p. 

Again,  since 

angle  DCL  =  Q0^ 

=  120°  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CDL, 

arc  Z)L=  120° 


and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle. 


arc  CL  =  60°. 

And  therefore 

chord  DL=  103p55', 

where 

chord  C'L=60p 

And  so 

hypt.  CD  =  120^. 

and,  by  subtraction. 

DL  =  2m', 

C'L  =  1P30', 

LF  =  55m' 

where 

DC=Z^ 

and  likewise 

.  CF=57^. 

And  since 

sq.  LF +sq.  DL  =  sq.  DF, 

therefore 

DF=55m' 

where  it  was  supposed 

FH  =  FK  =  22m', 

305 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 

that  being  the  epicycle^s  radius. 

And  therefore 

where 

hypt.  Z)F=  120p; 

and 

angle  FDH  =  angle  FDK  =  47®46'  to  2  rt. 
so  that,  addition, 

angle  HDK^^rW. 

Which  it  was  required  to  prove. 


10.  On  the  Correction  of  Mercury^s  Periodic  Movements 

Now,  the  establishing  of  Mercury’s  periodic  movements  and  its  epochs  fol¬ 
lows  next.  And  we  have  the  longitudinal  movements — that  is,  those  carrying 
the  epicycle  regularly  about  C — immediately  given  from  those  of  the  sun;  and 
the  movements  of  anomaly — that  is,  those  carrying  the  star  on  the  epicycle  a- 
bout  the  epicycle’s  centre — we  have  taken  from  two  sure  observations,  one  from 
those  recorded  by  us,  the  other  from  old  ones. 

For  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  which  was  the  year  886  of  Nabonassar,  Egyp- 
tian'VNTse  Epiphi  2-3,  we  observed  Mercury  with  the  astrolabe  when  it  had  not 
yet  come  to  its  greatest  evening  elongation,  and  being  sighted  with  the  star  in 
the  Lion’s  heart  [Regulus]  it  appeared  to  be  173^°  within  the  Twins.  At  that 
time  it  was  past  the  moon’s  centre  to  the  east  by  and  in  Alexandria  the 
time  was  43^  equatorial  hours  before  midnight  of  the  third,  since  on  the  astro¬ 
labe  the  point  12°  within  the  Virgin  w’as  culminating  and  the  sun  w^as  about  23° 
within  the  Bull.  But  the  sun’s  mean  position  at  that  hour,  according  to  the  hy¬ 
potheses  demonstrated  by  us,  was  22°34'  within  the  Bull.  The  moon’s  mean 
position  w^as  12°14'  within  the  Twins,  and  the  moon  w^as  281°20'  in  anomaly 
from  the  epicycle’s  apogee,  so  that  the  true  position  of  the  moon’s  centre  came 
to  17°10'  within  the  Twins,  and  its  apparent  position  16°20'  within  the  Tuvins. 
Therefore  Mercury,  since  it  was  13^°  beyond  the  moon’s  centre,  w^as  173^°  with¬ 
in  the  Twins. 

With  this  assumed,  let  ABODE  be 
the  diameter  through  the  apogee  and 
perigee.  And  let  A  be  supposed  its  point 
at  the  apogee;  B  the  point  about  w^hich 
the  eccentric’s  centre  moves  w^estw-ard; 
C  the  point  about  W'hich  the  epicycle’s 
centre  moves  eastw^ard;  and  D  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  ecliptic.  And  let  the  epicy¬ 
cle’s  centre  F  have  been  moved  through 
angle  ACF  about  point  C  by  the 
straight  line  OF;  and  let  the  eccentric’s 
centre  G  have  been  moved  about  B  by 
the  straight  line  BG  to  the  extent  of 
angle  ABGj  of  course  always  equal  to 
angle  ACF  because  of  the  equal  rate  of 
the  movements.  And,  with  the  epicycle 
HKL  described  about  F,  let  the  star  be 


306 


PTOLEMY 


supposed  at  L.  And  let  CG,  GF,  DF,  FL,  and  DL  be  joined;  and  let  GM  and  DN 
be  drawn  from  G  and  D  perpendicular  to  CFH  produced,  and  FX  from  F 
perpendicular  to  DL, 

And  it  is  required  to  find  the  epicycle's  arc  from  the  apogee  to  the  star  at  L. 

Since,  then,  the  mean  sun  at  that  time  was  22°34'  within  the  Bull,  and  the 
star's  perigee  very  nearly  10°  within  the  Ram  so  that  its  mean  longitudinal  posi¬ 
tion  was  42°34'  from  the  perigee,  therefore 

angle  CBG  =  42°34' 

=  85°8'  to  2  rt., 


and,  because  always 

RG  =  RG, 

angle  RGG  =  angle  BCG=  137°26'  to  2  rt. 
And  so,  on  the  circle  about  triangle  BCG, 

arc  GG  =  85°8' 


and 

And  therefore 

And  so 
where 


arc  137°26'. 

chord  GG==  81^10' 
chord  RC  =111^49'. 

GC  =  2nV 

BC=^3^. 


Again,  since 


angle  RGG=137°26'  to  2  rt. 


and 

angle  BCM  =  85°8'  to  2  rt., 
therefore  also,  by  subtraction, 

angle  GGM  =  52°18'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CGM, 

arc  GM  =  52°18' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  CM  =  127°42'. 

And  therefore 

chord  GM  =  52^53' 

where 

hypt.  CG=120p 

and 


\ 

\ 


GM  =  107^43'. 

^The  regular  epi cyclic  apogee  and  perigee,  for  the  planets  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter, 
and  Saturn,  are  determined  as  always  by  the  straight  line  through  the  equant’s  centre  and 
the  epicycle’s  centre.  The  regular  apogee  and  perigee  are  the  points  on  the  epicycle  from 
which  the  anomalistic  angle  is  regularly  measured  off.  They  coincide  with  the  apparent 
apogee  and  perigee  only  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee  or  perigee.  It 
should  be  recalled  here  that,  in  the  case  of  the  nioon  [V,  5],  the  equant’s  centre  and  the  earth 
coincide,  and  that  there  is  the  moon’s  mean  apogee  and  perigee,  determined  by  the  straight 
line  through  the  epicycle’s  centre  and  another  point  different  from  the  earth.  The  mean 
apogee  and  perigee  in  the  case  of  the  moon  are  the  points  from  which  the  anomalistic  angle 
is  measured  off. 


And  so  also 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 


307 


and  ’ 


GM-0P58' 
CM  =  1P58' 


where 

GC  =  2ni' 

and 

(?F  =  60P, 

GF  being  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle.  And  being  for  this 
reason  inappreciably  less  than  the  hypotenuse  GF, 

.  MF  =  60^, 

and,  by  subtraction, 

CF  =  58p2'. 

Likewise,  since 

angle  DON  =  S5°8'  to  2  rt.,  * 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CDN, 

arc  i)A  =  85°8', 


and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle. 


arc  CiV  =  94°52'. 

And  so 

chord  DN = 81^10' 

and 

chord  CiV=88p23' 

where 

hypt.  CD  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

DiV=2»2' 

and 

a 

II 

and,  by  subtraction, 

J\rF=55p49' 

where 

CD =3^ 

and,  as  was  shown. 

CF= 58^2'. 

And  for  this  reason 

hypt.  DF=.  55^51' 

where 

:  ; ;  rf:  . 

epic.  rad.  =  22p30'. 

And  therefore  < 

DN =4P22' 

where  -  l 

hypt.  jDF  =  120p. 

And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFN, 

arc  DiV  =  4°ll', 

so  that  also 


and,  by  addition, 


angle  DFN =4°11'  to  2  rt. 
angle  £DF=89°19'  to  2  rt.  [Eucl.  i,  32], 


308 

and,  also  by  addition, 


PTOLEMY 


angle  SDL  =  135®  to  2  rt. 

because  the  star  at  that  time  appeared  to  be  67®30'  from  the  apogee;  and,  by 
subtraction, 

angle  FDL  =  45°41'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFX^ 

arc  FX  =  45®41'; 

and 

chord  FX  =  46^35' 

where 

h3^pt.  DF=  120^. 

And  so  also 

SZ  =  21P41' 

where 

DS  =  55P51' 


and 

epic.  rad.  FL  =  22p30'. 

And  again 

SX  =  115P39' 

where 

hypt.  SL=120p. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  triangle  SLX, 

arc  FX=149®2' 


and 

And  it  was  proved  that 

and  likewise 

And  so,  b3"  addition. 


angle  FLX=149®2'  to  2  rt. 

angle  FDL  =  45®41'  to  2  rt. 

angle  HFK^A^V  to  2  rt. 

angle  HFL  =  198®54'  to  2  rt. 
=  99®27'. 


And  therefore  the  arc  HKL  of  the  epicycle,  which  is  Mercury^s  distance  from 
the  apogee  H  at  the  observation,  is  99®27'.  Which  it  was  required  to  prove. 

And  again,  in  the  year  21  according  to  Dionysius,  which  was  the  year  484  of 
Nabonassar,  Scorpion  22,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  18-19,  the  morning  Mercury  was 
the  distance  of  a  moon  east  of  the  straight  line  through  the  northern  and  middle 
stars  of  the  Scorpion^s  forehead,  and  was  2  moons  north  of  the  northern  star  of 
the  forehead.  But  the  middle  star  of  the  Scorpion^s  forehead  was  at  that  time, 
according  to  our  starting  points,  1^°  within  the  Scorpion  and  the  same  number 
of  degrees  south  of  the  ecliptic.  And  the  most  northern  star  was  23^®  within  the 
Scorpion  and  13^°  north  of  the  ecliptic.  Therefore  Mercury  was  very  nearly  3}^® 
within  the  Scorpion.  It  is  also  evident  that  it  had  not  yet  come  to  its  greatest 
morning  elongation,  because  4  days  later.  Scorpion  26,  it  is  recorded  that  it  was 
a  moon  and  a  half  east  of  the  same  straight  line.  For  the  elongation  was  greater, 
since  the  sun  had  moved  nearly  4®,  and  the  star  a  half  moon.  And  the  mean  sun, 
Thoth  19  at  dawn,  was  (20+3^+3^)®  within  the  Scorpion  according  to  our  ways 
of  counting,  and  the  starts  apogee  was  6°  within  the  Balance  because  the  400 
years  or  so  between  the  observations  made  the  apogee  shift  very  nearly  4°. 


309 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 


Now,  with  these  things  supposed, 
let  a  figure  similar  to  the  one  above 
be  again  constructed.  But  because 
of  the  dissimilarity  of  the  positions, 
let  the  angles  at  the  apogee  A  be 
drawn  acute,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  joining  the  star  be  drawn  to 
the  west  of  the  epicycle,  and  let 
the  perpendicular  FX  be  drawn 
above  the  epicycle’s  radius  FL, 
Since,  then,  the  mean  position  of 
the  star  was  44°50'  from  the  apo¬ 
gee, 

angle  ABG  =  44°50' 

=  89^40'  to  2  rt. 
And  so,  by  subtraction, 

angle  CBG  =  270^20'  to  2  rt., 
and 


And  therefore 
and 


angle  BCG  =  angle  BCC  =  44^50' 
to  2  rt. 

chord  CC  =  84^36' 


=  =  45^46' 

where,  in  the  circle  about  triangle  BCG, 

the  diameter  =120^. 

And  therefore 

CC  =  5P33' 

where 

BC  =  BG  =  SK 

Again,  since  it  is  supposed 

angle  ACB  =  89®40'  to  2  rt. 

and 


angle  BCG  =  44°50'  to  2  rt., 

and  by  addition 

angle  BCG=  134°30'  to  2  rt., 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CGM, 

arc  Gil/=  134^30' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  CM =45^30'. 

And  therefore 


and 

'  where 


chord  GM  =  110^40', 
chord  CM  =  46^24' 
hypt.  CG=120P. 


And  so 


GM  =  5p7' 


310 

and 


PTOLEMY 


where 

1 

CM  =  2n0', 

CG= SPSS' 

and  . 

•  ecc.  rad.  FG  =  60^. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

Fiif  =  59^47' 


and 

FMC  =  61°57'. 

Likewise,  since 

angle  DCA'  =  89°40'  to  2  rt. 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CDNy 

arc  i)A  =  89°40' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  GA  =  90°20'. 


And  therefore 

chord  DN  =  8im', 
chord  CN=85^& 

where 

hypt.  CZ)  =  120P. 

And  so  also 

DN  =  2^r, 

CN =2^8', 

and  by  addition 

FCN=U^7' 

where 

CD =80. 

And  therefore 

DN =8058' 

where 

FD  =  1200, 

And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFN, 


And  so  also 

arc  DN=8%8'. 

1 

angle  DFN=8°i8'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  subtraction. 

angle  ADF =85° 52'  to  2  rt. 

But  also  it  is  supposed 

angle  ADL^54°40'  to  2  rt. 

because,  according  to  the  observation,  the  star  was  27°20'  from  the  apogee. 
And  so,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FDL  =  31^12'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FDXy 

arcFX  =  3ri2', 


and 

chord  FZ=S2P16' 

where 

hypt.  DF  =  \20o. 

And  therefore 


THE  ALMAGEST,  IX 


311 


where 

or 


And 


FX=lin^' 

Z)i?  =  64P7' 

epic.  rad.  FL  =  22p30'. 


FX  =  92p 


where 


FL=120P. 


And  so  also,  on 
and  f 
And  it  was  also 


And 


the  circle  about  right  triangle  FLX, 
arc  100^8' 

angle  FLX  =  100°8'  to  2  rt. 
shown  that 

angle  FDL  =  3 1^12'  to  2  rt. 


angle  i^FX  =  3°48'  to  2  rt. 
and  so  also,  by  subtraction, 

angle  KFL  =  65°8'  to  2  rt. 

=  32'"34'. 

Therefore,  at  this  observation,  the  star  was  32°34'  from  K  the  epicycle's  peri¬ 
gee,  and  of  course  212°34'  from  the  apogee.  At  the  time  of  our  own  observation, 
it  was  shown  to  be  99®27'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee;  the  time  from  one  observa¬ 
tion  to  the  other  is  402  Egyptian  years,  283  days,  and  very  nearly  13J^  hours; 
and  that  time  embraces  1,268  of  the  star's  returns  in  anomaly,  since,  with  20 
Egyptian  years  making  very  nearly  63  cycles,  the  400  years  add  up  to  1,260 
cycles,  and  the  2  years  with  the  days  added  on  give  8  whole  cycles  more.  There¬ 
fore  it  is  clear  to  us  that,  in  402  Egyptian  years,  283  days,  and  13)^  hours.  Mer¬ 
cury  added  on,  over  and  above  the  1,268  returns  in  anomaly,  the  246°53'  by 
which  its  position  at  our  own  observation  exceeds  its  position  at  the  older  one. 
And  just  about  that  number  of  degrees  result  in  the  tables  set  out  by  us,  since  we 
made  the  correction  of  Mercury's  periodic  movements  from  these  very  observa¬ 
tions,  reducing  the  proposed  time  to  days  and  the  cycles  of  anomaly  plus  the 
surplus  to  degrees.  For  when  the  number  of  degrees  had  been  divided  over  the 
number  of  days,  we  got  Mercury's  daily  movement  of  anomaly  as  we  gave  it. 


11.  On  the  Epoch  of  its  Periodic  Movements 

In  order,  then,  as  with  the  sun  and  moon,  to  establish  the  epoch  for  the  five 
planets  at  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptian  wise  Thoth  1  at  noon,  we  took  the 
time  from  it  to  the  older  and  nearer  of  the  observations.  The  time  came  to  483 
Egyptian  years,  17  days,  and  very  nearly  18J^  hours.  And  a  surplus  of  190°39'  in 
mean  movement  of  anomaly  corresponds  to  this  amount  of  time.  If  we  subtract 
these  from  the  212°34'  representing  the  distance  from  the  apogee  at  the  ob¬ 
servation,  we  shall  have  the  epoch  in  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise 
Thoth  1  at  noon  (1)  21°55'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee  for  anomaly;  (2)  for  longi¬ 
tude  the  same  as  the  sun,  that  is  45'  within  the  Fishes;  (3)  and  the  apogee  of 
eccentricity  IJ^®  within  the  Balance,  since  the  number  of  years  in  hundreds 
comes  to  about  4+3^+M,  just  the  number  by  which  the  6°  within  the  Balance 
at  the  observation  exceeds  13^°. 


BOOK  TEN 


1.  Demonstration  of  Venus^  Apogee 

Therefore  we  have  ascertained  in  this  way  the  hypotheses  of  Mercury,  the 
magnitudes  of  its  anomalies,  and  further  the  quantity  of  its  periodic  movements 
and  of  their  epochs.  In  the  case  of  Venus,  we  again  sought,  from  equal  greatest 
elongations  on  corresponding  sides,  in  what  parts  of  the  ecliptic  the  apogee  and 
perigee  of  eccentricity  are.  For  this  purpose  we  did  not  have  any  old  observa¬ 
tions  exactly  corresponding,  but  we  have  made  just  such  an  addition  from  our 
own  observations. 

For  among  those  given  us  from  Theo  the  mathematician,  we  found  an  ob¬ 
servation  recorded  in  the  year  16  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Pharmouthi  21-22, 
in  which  he  says  the  evening  Venus  was  at  its  greatest  elongation  from  the  sun, 
being  west  of  the  middle  star  of  the  Pleiades  by  as  much  as  the  length  of  the 
Pleiades.  It  seemed  also  to  be  passing  by  a  little  to  the  north.  Now,  since  the 
middle  star  of  the  Pleiades  was  at  that  time,  by  our  starting  points,  3°  within 
the  Bull,  and  since  their  length  is  very  nearly  13^®,  it  is  evident  Venus  was  then 
'v^dthin  the  Bull.  And  so,  since  the  mean  sun  was  then  1434°  within  the 
Fishes,  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  position  was  4734°- 
And  in  the  year  14  of  Antonine,  Egyptianvdse  Thoth  11-12,  we  observed  the 
morning  Venus  at  its  greatest  elongation  from  the  sun;  and  it  was  north  of  the 
star  in  the  middle  of  the  Twdns'  knees,  and  east  of  it  by  half  a  full  moon.  At  that 
time  that  fixed  star,  by  our  starting  points,  was  1834°  within  the  Twins  so  that 
Venus  was  very  nearly  1834°  within  the  Twins,  while  the  mean  sun  was  (5+34+ 
34)°  within  the  Lion.  Therefore,  the  greatest  morning  elongation  was  also  4734°- 
Then,  since  the  mean  position  at  the  first  observation  was  1434°  within  the 
Fishes,  and  at  the  second  observation  (5+34+34)°  within  the  Lion,  and  since 
the  point  midway  between  them  falls  25°  within  the  Bull  and  25°  vdthin  the 
Scorpion,  the  diameter  through  the  apogee  and  perigee  would  be  at  these  points. 

Likewise,  among  the  observations  from  Theo,  we  found  that  in  the  year  12  of 
Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Athyr  21-22,  the  morning  Venus  was  at  its  greatest  e- 
longation  from  the  sun,  being  east  of  the  star  at  the  tip  of  Virgin^s  southern 
wing  by  the  length  of  the  Pleiades,  or  this  length  less  Venus^  own  magnitude. 
And  it  seemed  to  be  passing  north  of  the  star  by  one  moon.  Now,  since  this 
fixed  star  was  at  that  time,  according  to  us,  (28+34+34+K2)°  ^dthin  the 
Lion  so  that  Venus  was  very  nearly  34°  within  the  Virgin,  and  since  the  mean 
sun  was  (17+34+  34+  34o)°  within  the  Balance,  the  greatest  elongation  from 
the  mean  position  was  (47+34+34o)°- 
And  in  the  year  21  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Mechir  9-10  in  the  evening,  we 
ourselves  observed  Venus  at  its  greatest  elongation  from  the  sun.  It  was  very 
nearly  %  a  full  moon  west  of  the  northernmost  star  of  the  four  in  a  square,  fol¬ 
lowing  the  star  to  the  east  of,  and  in  a  line  vdth,  the  Water  Bearer^s  testicles; 
and  it  seemed  to  outshine  the  star.  And  so  since  this  fixed  star  was  then,  accord- 

312 


313 


THE  AL.MAGEST,  X 

ing  to  us,  20®  within  the  Water  Bearer,  and  therefore  Venus  was  about  19^® 
within  the  Water  Bearer,  and  since  the  mean  sun  was  23d^5®  within  the  Goat,  the 
greatest  evening  elongation  was  (47+3^+3'^o)°*  the  points  midway  be¬ 
tween  the  (17-h3^+M+Ho)°  within  the  Balance  of  the  first  observation  and 
the  23d^5®  within  the  Goat  of  the  second  are  again  very  nearly  25®  within  the 
Scorpion  and  within  the  Bull. 


2.  On  the  Magnitude  of  its  Epicycle 

In  this  way,  therefore,  we  took  the  apogee  and  perigee  of  eccentricity  for  our 
time  at  25®  within  the  Bull  and  within  the  Scorpion.  And  next  we  again  ex¬ 
amined  the  greatest  elongations  when  the  sun's  mean  position  was  about  25® 
within  the  Bull  and  about  25®  within  the  Scorpion. 

For,  among  the  observations  given  us  from  Theo,  w’e  find  that  in  the  year  13 
of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Epiphi  2-3,  the  morning  Venus  w’as  at  its  greatest 
elongation  from  the  sun,  being  1%®  w^est  of  the  straight  line  through  the  princi¬ 
pal  star  of  the  three  in  the  Ram's  head  and  through  the  star  of  the  hind-leg.  Its 
distance  from  the  principal  star  in  the  Ram's  head  w^as  very  nearly  double  that 
from  the  star  in  the  leg.  And  at  that  time,  according  to  us,  the  principal  star  of 
the  three  in  the  Ram's  head  w^as  6%®  wdthin  the  Ram  and  7^®  north  of  the 
ecliptic;  and  the  star  in  the  hind-leg  w’as  (14+/^+M)°  wdthin  the  Ram  and 
534°  south  of  the  ecliptic.  Therefore  Venus  ^vas  10%®  within  the  Ram  and  134° 
south  of  the  ecliptic.  And  so,  since  the  mean  sun  Avas  then  25%®  wdthin  the  Bull, 
the  greatest  elongation  from  the  mean  position  Avas  4434°* 

And  in  the  year  21  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwdse  Tybi  2-3  in  the  evening,  we  ob¬ 
served  Venus  at  its  greatest  elongation  from  the  sun;  and,  sighted  with  the  stars 
in  the  Goat's  horns,  it  appeared  to  be  (12-(-34+34)°  within  the  Goat,  w^hile  the 
mean  sun  Avas  2534°  within  the  Scorpion.  And  so  the  greatest  elongation  from 
the  mean  position  came  to  4734°-  It  is  clear  that  the  apogee  is  25®  AAithin  the 

Bull  and  the  perigee  25®  Avithin  the  Scorpion.  And 
it  is  evident  to  us  that  there  is  only  the  eccentric 
bearing  Venus'  epicycle,  because  noAAhere  on  the 
ecliptic  is  the  sum  of  both  the  greatest  elongations 
on  either  side  found  to  be  either  less  than  the  sum 
of  both  those  in  the  Bull  or  greater  than  the  sum 
of  both  those  in  the  Scorpion. 

Then,  with  these  things  assumed,  let  there  be 
the  eccentric  circle  ABC  on  AAhich  Venus'  epicycle 
is  alAA’ays  borne;  and  let  this  circle  be  about  dia¬ 
meter  AC  on  which  let  D  be  supposed  the  eccen¬ 
tric's  centre,  E  the  ecliptic's  centre,  and  A  the 
point  25®  within  the  Bull.  About  points  A  and 
C  let  equal  epicycles  be  described  AAith  points 
F  and  G  on  them.  And  let  the  tangents  EF  and 
EG  be  draAA’n  through,  and  AF  and  CG  joined. 

Since,  then,  angle  AEF,  at  the  ecliptic's  centre, 
subtends  the  gi-eatest  elongation  at  the  star's  apo¬ 
gee  AA’hich  is  assumed  to  be  44^4°,  therefore 
angle  A  EF  =  44®48' 

=  89®36'  to  2  rt. 


314 

PTOLEMY 

And  so, 

on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEF, 

arc  ^F=89°36', 

and 

chord  4F=84p33', 

:  ‘  -r^  -r 

where 

:t  niil  A  ^  ^ 

hypt.  4il  =  120P. 

Likewise,  since  angle  CEG  subtends  the  greatest  elongation  at  the  perigee  ' 
which  is  assumed  to  be  473^°,  therefore  ,  j 


angle  C£;(7=47°20' 

=  94°40'  to  2  ‘rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEGj 

arc  CG  =  94^40', 

and 

chord  C(? =88^13' 

where 

hypt.  Ci/  =  120p. 

And  therefore,  where 

rad.  epic.  CG  =  rad.  epic.  AF 
=  84^33' 

and 

A£  =  120P, 

there 


=  115^1'  ;  ■ 

and  clearly,  by  addition,  ' 

AC^235°1', 

and,  half  of  AC 

AD  =117^30', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

L  betw.  c.  DD  =  2p29'. 

And  so  also 

1.  betw.  c.  DE=l}4:^j 
epic.  rad.  AF  =  43p6' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  AD  =  60p. 

3.  On  the  Ratios  of  the  Star’s  Eccentricity 

Since  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  regular  movement  of  the  epicycle  is  effected 
about  point  D,  we  took  two  greatest  elongations  on  opposite  sides  at  a  time 
when  the  sun’s  mean  position  was  a  quadrant’s  distance  in  one  direction  or  the 
other  from  the  apogee.  One  of  them  we  made  in  the  year  18  of  Hadrian,  Egyp- 
tiamvise  Pharmouthi  2-3,  according  to  which  the  morning  Venus  was  at  its  great¬ 
est  elongation  from  the  sun;  and,  sighted  with  the  star  called  Antares,  it  was 
(ll+}<2+H~hM2°)  within  the  Goat,  while  the  mean  sun  was  then  253^°  vdthin 
the  Water  Bearer.  And  so  the  greatest. morning  elongation  was  (43+J^J“3d^2°)* 
The  other  one  we  made  in  the  year  3  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Pharmouthi 
4-5  in  the  evening,  according  to  which  Venus  was  at  its  greatest  elongation  from 
the  sun;  and,  sighted  with  the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran]  was  (13+ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


315 


within  the  Ram,  while  the  mean  sun  was  again  253^°  within  the  Water 
Bearer.  And  so,  therefore,  the  greatest  evening  elongation  from  the  mean  po¬ 
sition  was  483^°.  'Ai 

With  these  things  assumed,  let  there  be  the  diameter  ABC  through  the  apo¬ 
gee  and  perigee 
of  eccentricity; 
and  let  A  be  sup¬ 
posed  the  point 
25°  within  the 
Bull,  and  R  the 
ecliptic ^s  centre. 

Let  it  be  re¬ 
quired  to  find  the 
centre  around 
which  we  say  the 
epicycle^s  regu¬ 
lar  movement  is 
effected. 

Then  let  it  be 
the  point  Z),  and 
let  DE  be  drawn 
through  it  per¬ 
pendicular  to  A  C 
in  order  that  the 
•i  epicycle^s  mean 

position  may  be  a  quadrant^s  distance  from  the  apogee  as  in  the  observations. 
And  let  the  epicycle^s  centre  E  be  taken  on  DE  according  to  the  observations 
given.  With  epicycle  EG  described  about  R,  let  BF  and  BG  be  drawn  from  B 
tangent  to  it,  and  let  BF,  EF,  and  EG  be  joined.  Since,  then,  for  the  proposed 
mean  position,  the  greatest  morning  elongation  is  assumed  to  be  (43+3^+ 
3d^2)°>  the  evening  one  483^°,  therefore,  by  addition, 

■  .r/  angle  RR(?  =  Q1°55';  >  ^  d 
and  therefore,  angle  FBE  being  half  of  it,  -  'd  i 

angle  RRR  =  91°55' to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEF, 

arc  RF  =  91°55', 


and 


;lr.  ill 


chord  RF  =  86^16' 


where  n  , 

dr; 

And  therefore  where 

I  r 

there 


hypt,  BE=  120P. 
epic.  rad.  FF  =  43^10', 


I  tr  BE^m^Z', 

Again,  since  the  difference  between  these  greatest  elongations,  which  is  4°45', 
embraces  twice  the  difference  of  zodiacal  anomaly  for  that  time  which  is  con¬ 
tained  in  angle  BED,  therefore 


316 


PTOLEMY 


angle  5£;j[)  =  2°223^'  A 
=  4°45'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BDE, 

arc  4^45', 

and  ^ 
where 

And  therefore 
where 
and 


/ 


chord  5Z)  =  4p59' 
hypt.  BE  =  120^. 
5D  =  23^p 
5^7  =  60^3', 
epicycle^s  rad.  =  43^10'. 


But  the  straight  line  between  B  the  ^  ecliptic's  centre  and  the  centre  of  the  ec¬ 
centric  the  epicycle's  centre  is  always  on,  was  shown  to  be  134^;  and  so  it  is 
half  BD. 

If,  therefore,  we  bisect  BD  at  //,  we  shall  have  demonstrated  that 

■  1.  betw.  c.  =  betw.  c.  iyD  =  134^ 

and 

epic.  rad.  £77^  =  43^10' 

where 

AH  being  radius  of  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle. 


4.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Star's  Periodic  Movements 


Now,  the  mode  of  the  hypothesis  and  the  ratios  of  the  anomalies  were  gotten 
by  us  in  this  way.  But  again,  for  the  periodic  movements  of  the  star  and  its 
epochs,  we  took  two  sure  observations  from  among  our  own  and  from  among 
the  old  ones. 

With  the  astrolabe,  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Tybi  29-30,  we 
observed  the  morning  Venus  with  Spica,  after  its  greatest  elongation.  And  it  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  63^°  within  the  Scorpion.  At  that  time  it  was  between,  and  on  a 
straight  line  with,  the  northernmost  star  in  the  Scorpion's  forehead  and  the 
moon's  apparent  centre;  and  it  was  west  of  the  moon's  centre  by  one-and-a-half 
times  its  distance  east  of  the  northernmost  star  in  the  forehead.  But  this  fixed 
star  was  then,  by  our  starting  points,  6‘^20'  within  the  Scorpion  and  1°20'  north 
of  the  ecliptic.  And  the  time  was  4 +3^ +34  equatorial  hours  after  midnight, 
since,  with  the  sun  about  23°  within  the  Archer,  the  point  on  the  astrolabe  2° 
within  the  Virgin  was  culminating.  At  this  time  the  sun's  mean  position  was 
22°9'  within  the  Archer;  and  in  mean  longitude  the  moon  was  11°24'  within  the 
Scorpion,  in  anomaly  87°30'  from  the  apogee,  and  in  latitude  12°22'  from  the 
northern  limit.  Therefore,  the  moon's  centre  had  its  true  position  5°45'  within 
the  Scorpion,  and  5°  north  of  the  ecliptic;  and  in  Alexandria  it  appeared  to  be 
6°45'  within  the  Scorpion  in  longitude,  and  4°40'  north  of  the  ecliptic.  Therefore 
Venus,  for  these  reasons,  was  6°30'  within  the  Scorpion  and  2°40'  north  of  the 
ecliptic. 

With  these  things  assumed,  let  ABODE  be  the  diameter  through  the  apogee. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


317 


arc  HK,  the  distance  of  the  star  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee. 
Since,  then, 

angle  EBF  =  27^9' 

=  54°18'  to  2  rt., 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BCL, 

arc  CL -54^8' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  LL  =  125°42'. 

And  therefore 


And  let  A  be  supposed  the 
point  25°  within  the  Bull;  B 
the  point  about  which  the 
epicycle  moves  regularly;  C 
the  centre  of  the  eccentric 
on  which  the  epicycle^s  cen¬ 
tre  is  borne;  and  D  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  ecliptic.  Since  in 
the  observation  the  mean 
sun  was  22°9'  within  the 
Archer,  so  that  the  epicy¬ 
cle's  mean  position  was  27° 
9'  east  of  the  perigee  at  E, 
let  the  epicycle'^  centre  be 
supposed  at  F;  and,  with 
epicycle  GHK  described 
about  it,  let  DFG,  CFy  and 
BFH  be  joined.  Let  CL  and 
DM  be  dra^\m  from  C  and  D 
perpendicular  to  BF,  And, 
with  the  star  put  at  point 
« Ky  let  DK  and  FK  be  joined, 
and  FN  drawn  perpendicu¬ 
lar. 

It  is  required  to  find  the 


where 


And  so  also 


chord  CL  —  54p46', 
chord  LL  =106^47' 


hypt.  LC  =  120P. 

CL  =  0^34', 
J5L  =  1P7' 


w^here 


and 

And  since 


LC=1P15' 
ecc.  rad.  CL  =  60p. 
sq.  CF  — sq.  CL  =  sq.  FL, 

flngop. 


318 

Also 

and 

because 


And  so  also,  by  subtraction, 

:K 

and  \l) 

■  ,id  ' 

And  consequently  . .  -i  ^ . 


PTOLEMY 

LM  =  BL, 

DM=WL 

/ 

bgLcd. 

Filf=58P53' 


And  therefore 

)  I  f? 

where 


■j/j 


li 


-1  ^  \ 


DM  =  1p8'. 

\ 

hypt.  DF= 58^54'. 

/iM=2Pl8'  / 

!■  \  g 

,,  I>F=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFilf, 

ilv  Wci>M  =  2°12'.  t  ; 

And  so  also  .(\  j 

\  V  .  I  angle  5/^-0  =  2/12' to  2  rt.,  / 

and,  by  addition,  \  /  /  ^ 

angle -EZ)/^= 56^30' to^  rt.' 

And  also 

angle  EBK  =  18°30' 

because  by  just  so  much,  according  to  the  observations,  is  the  star  west  of  the 
perigee  at  E — that  is,  west  of  25°  within  the  Scorpion;  and  d 

angle  jE/Z)iiL=37°  to  2  rt.  n\  i' 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  FDK  =  to  2  rt.; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEN,  .  .  •  ^ 

arc  fA=93°30'. 


And  therefore 
where 
But 
where 

that  is,  where 
And  so  also 
where 


chord  FN  =  87m' 

FD  =  120^. 

FA  =  42^54' 
jDF  =  58^54', 

epic.  rad.  FA  =  43^10'  [p.  316]. 

\  “= 

FA  =  119^18' 

.  .  ( 

hypt.  FA  =  120p; 


»lul 


and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FKN, 

arcFA=167°38'. 


angle  Z)AF  =  167°38'  to  2  rt. 


And  therefore 


just  as  it  is  supposed 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


319 


and,  by  addition, 

And  it  was  also  proved 
that  is,  that 


angle  FDK  =  93^30'  to  2  rt.; 

angle  GFK—29V3'  to  2  rt. 
that 

angle  J5FZ)  =  2®12'  to  2  rt.. 


angle  GFH^2°\2'  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  ///^iiL=258°56'  to  2  rt. 


=  129^28'. 


Therefore,  Venus  at  the  stated  time  was  129^28'  west  of  the  epicycle^s  apogee 
H;  and,  by  subtraction  from  the  circle,  230°32'  east  of  it  according  to  the  move¬ 
ment  consequent  upon  the  hypothesis.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

Of  the  old  observation's,  we  took  one  which  Timocharis  records  thus:  In  the 
year  13  of  Philadelphus,  Egyptian  wise  Mesore  17-18  at  the  twelfth  hour,  Venus 
appeared  to  have  exactly  overtaken  the  star  opposite  Vindemiatrix.  And  this 
star,  according  to  us,  is  beyond  the  star  on  the  tip  of  the  Virgin^s  southern  wing, 
and,  in  the  year  1  of  Antonine,  was  834°  within  the  Virgin.  Since,  then,  the  year 
of  the  observation  is  the  year  406  of  Nabonassar,  and  since  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Antonine  is  the  year  884,  (so  as  to  add  on  very  nearly  a  43^2°  move¬ 
ment  of  the  fixed  stars  and  apogees  for  the  408  intervening  years)  it  is  evident 
that  Venus  was  4J4°  within  the  Virgin,  and  the  eccentric^s  perigee  (20+34+34 
+3^2)°  ^vithin  the  Scorpion.  And  at  this  time  Venus  had  passed  its  greatest 
morning  elongation.  For  4  days  after  this  observation,  Mesore  21-22,  from  what 

Timocharis  says,  Venus 
was,  by  our  starting  points, 
(8+^+34)°  within  the 
Virgin,  while  the  sun^s  mean 
position  at  the  first  obser- 
vsttion  was  17°3' within  the 
Balance,  and  at  the  second 
20°59'  within  the  Balance. 
And  so  the  elongation  of  the 
first  observation  comes  to 
42°53',  and  of  the  second 
to  42°9'. 

Then,  with  these  things 
given,  let  a  similar  figure  be 
again  set  out,  but  having 
the  epicycle  to  the  west  of 
the  perigee  because  of  the 
epicycle’s  mean  position’s 
being  17°3'  within  the 
Balance  and  the  eccen¬ 
tric’s  perigee’s  being 
20°55' within  the  Scor- 

A,  'v;i  -4  :  1  :;;r:pion. 


PTOLEMY 


320 

Since,  then,  for  this  reason 

angle  £?BF=33'’52' 

=  67°44'to2rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BCL, 

arc  C'L  =  67°44', 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

*  j.,.  f  arc£L=112‘’16'. 

And  therefore 


where 

And  so  also 


where 

and 

And  since 
in  length 


chord  CL  =  66p52', 
chord  BL  =  99^38' 

hypt.  BC  =  120’’. 

CL  =  0p42', 

BL  =  1P2' 


BC  =  1'>15' 
ecc.  rad.  CF = GO”, 
sq.  CF — sq.  CL=sq.  FL, 
FL=mK 

And,  for  the  same  reason  as  before, 
and 


And  so,  by  subtraction. 

And  consequently 
And  therefore 
where 


BL=LM 

DM=2CL. 


FM  =  58^58', 
DM  =  \^2A'. 

hypt.  DF=.  58^59'. 

DM  =  2^51' 


Z)F=  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FDM, 

,  ,  arcZ)M  =  2°44'. 

And  so  also 

,  angle  BFD  =  2°44'  to  2  rt. 

And 

angle  FZ)2i:= 76'’45' 

=  153'’30'  to  2  rt., 

which  is  the  star’s  distance  west  of  the  perigee.  And  so,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FDK  =  83°2'  to  2  rt.; 
and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFN, 

arc  FiV  =  83°2’. 


And  therefore 
where 
But 
where 

that  is,  where 


chord  FiV  =  79>'33' 
hypt,  DF  =  120'’. 
FAr=39'’7' 

L>F= 58059', 

epic.  rad.  FL:  =  43o10'  [p.  316]. 


And  so  also 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


321 


FA  =108^45' 

where 

hypt.  FA  =  120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FKNy 

arc  FA  =130°. 

And  therefore 

angle  DKF  — 130°  to  2  rt. 

just  as  it  is  supposed 

angle  FZ)A  =  83°2'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  AFA  =  213°2'  to  2  rt. 

And  it  was  also  proved  that 

angle  FFD  =  2°42'  to  2  rt., 

that  is,  that 

angle  (?FA  =  2°42'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  (7FA  =  215°46'  to  2  rt. 

=  107°53'. 

And  therefore  at  that  time  Venus  was,  by  subtraction  from  the  whole  circle, 
252°7'  east  of  the  epicycle’s  apogee  at  G.  Which  was  to  be  proved. 

Since,  then,  at  the  time  of  our  own  observation,  it  was  likewise  230°32'  from 
the  epicycle’s  apogee,  and  since  the  time  from  one  observation  to  the  other  em¬ 
braces  409  Egyptian  years  and  very  nearly  167  days,  and  255  complete  returns 
in  anomaly  (for  with  8  Egyptian  years  making  very  nearly  5  cycles,  408  years 
add  up  to  255  cycles,  and  the  year  left  over  taken  with  the  days  does  not  fill  out 
the  time  of  one  return),  it  is  evident  to  us  that,  in  409  Egyptian  years  and  167 
days,  Venus  added  on,  over  and  above  the  255  complete  returns  in  anomaly, 
338°25'  on  the  epicycle,  by  which  amount  its  position  at  our  observation  ex¬ 
ceeded  that  of  the  earlier  one.  Just  about  that  number  of  degrees  turn  up  in  the 
tables  of  mean  movement  established  by  us,  because  the  correction  of  them 
was  made  from  the  cyclic  surplus  we  have  just  found,  the  time  being  reduced  to 
days  and  the  returns  together  with  the  surplus  to  degrees.  For  when  the  number 
of  degrees  has  been  divided  over  the  number  of  da3^s,  there  results  the  daily 
mean  movement  in  anomaly  we  have  already  set  forth. 

5.  On  the  Epoch  of  its  Periodic  Movements 

Since  it  remains  now  to  establish  the  epochs  of  its  periodic  movements  at  the 
year  1  of  Nabonassar’s  reign,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  1  at  noon,  we  again  took  the 
time  from  this  date  to  the  older  of  the  observations.  And  it  comes  to  475  Egyp¬ 
tian  years  and  very  nearly 346+ 34  days.  According  to  the  columns  of  anom¬ 
aly,  the  surplus  of  mean  movement  corresponding  to  this  amount  of  time  is  very 
nearly  181°.  If  we  subtract  this  from  the  252°7'  at  the  observation,  we  shall  have 
the  epoch  at  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Thoth  1  at  noon;  71°7' 
from  the  epicycle’s  apogee  for  anomaly,  with  the  mean  position  in  longitude 
again  supposed  the  same  as  the  sun’s — that  is,  45'  within  the  Fishes.  It  is  evi¬ 
dent  that,  since  at  the  observation  the  apogee  is  about  20°55'  within  the  Bull, 
and  since  the  intervening  476  years  add  on  about  (4+34+/4)''j  at  the  proposed 
time  of  the  epoch  the  apogee  will  be  about  16°10'  within  the  Bull. 


322 


PTOLEMY 


6.  Preliminaries  to  the  Demonstrations  concerning  the  Other  Stars 

In  the  case  of  the  two  stars  Mercury  and  Venus,  we  have  used  such  methods 
as  these  for  getting  hold  of  the  hypotheses  and  demonstrating  the  anomalies.  In 
the  case  of  the  other  three — Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn — we  find  the  one  and  the 
same  hypothesis  as  that  apprehended  for  Venus;  that  is,  the  hypothesis  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  the  eccentric  circle  the  epicycle^s  centre  is  always  borne  on 
is  described  with  its  centre  at  the  point  bisecting  the  straight  line  between  the 
centres  of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the  circle  effecting  the  epicycle’s  uniform  revo¬ 
lution.  For  in  the  case  of  each  of  these  stars,  the  difference  in  general  found  at 
the  point  of  greatest  difference  of  zodiacal  anomaly  turns  out  to  be  very 
nearly  double  the  difference  of  the  eccentricity  calculated  from  the  magnitude 
of  the  epicycle’s  regressions  at  the  greatest  and  least  distances.^  And  we  find 
that  demonstrations,  by  means  of  which  we  establish  each  of  the  magnitudes 
of  the  anomalies  and  of  the  apogees,  cannot  be  worked  out  for  these  stars  in 
the  same  way  as  for  the  other  two,  because?  they  can  be  at  any  angular  distance 
from  the  sun  and  because  it  is  not  evident  from  the  observations — as  in  the 
case  of  the  greatest  elongations  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  when  the  star  is  at 
the  point  of  contact  of  the  straight  line  drawn  from  our  eye  tangent  to  the 
epicycle.  Since,  then,  this  method  does  not  work  here,  we  have  used  the  posi¬ 
tions  observed  when  diametrically  opposite  the  sun’s  mean  position,  and  from 
these  we  show  the  ratios  of  eccentricity  and  the  apogees,  since  only  in  the 
positions  so  considered  do  we  find  the  zodiacal  anomaly  set  off  by  itself.  For 
then  there  is  no  anomalistic  difference  with  respect  to  the  sun. 

For  let  ABC  be  the  star’s  eccentric  circle  on  which  the  epicycle’s  centre  is 
borne,  and  let  it  be  about  centre  D.  And 
let  AC  be  the  diameter  through  the  apo¬ 
gee;  and  point  E  on  it  the  ecliptic’s  centre; 
and  F  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  with  re¬ 
spect  to  which  the  mean  longitudinal  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  epicycle  is  considered.  With  the 
epicycle  GHKL  described  about  let  the 
straight  lines  FLBH  and  GBKEM  be 
joined. 

I  say,  first,  that  when  the  star  appears 
along  the  straight  line  EG  through  the 
epicycle’s  centre  B  the  sun’s  mean  posi¬ 
tion  will  always  be  in  the  same  straight 
line:  when  the  star  is  at  (?,  it  is  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  sun’s  mean  position  seen  at 

^The  eccentricity  of  the  planets  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  is  established  by  the  theory  of 
regressions  in  Book  XII,  where  the  angle  of  regression  is  computed  for  each  planet  at  each  of 
the  three  principal  distances:  mean,  greatest,  and  least.  The  angle  of  regression  obviously 
appears  larger  or  smaller  according  as  the  star  is  closer  or  farther  from  the  eye  of  the  observer. 
It  is  therefore  shown  in  Book  XII  that  the  assumption  that  the  deferent^s  centre  lies  half 
way  between  the  earth  and  the  equant^s  centre  saves  the  appearances  of  the  angles  of  re¬ 
gression. 

In  the  following  chapters  of  this  Book  and  of  Book  XI,  this  assumption  concerning  the 
position  of  the  deferent's  centre  is  made  without  more  ado,  and  this  sentence  is  the  lone  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  manner  of  its  justification.  For  the  demonstrations  that  follow  are  solely  con¬ 
cerned  with  finding  the  centres  of  the  equants.  ‘‘O  ' 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X  323 

(j,  and  when  it  is  at  Ky  it  will  be  diametrically  opposite  the  sun^s  mean  position 
seen  at  M. 

For  since  in  the  case  of  each  of  these  stars  the  mean  angular  distances  from 
the  apogee  both  in  longitude  and  in  anomaly,  when  added  together,  give  the 
mean  passage  of  the  sun  from  the  same  starting  point;  and  since  the  angle  at  B 
embracing  the  starts  regular  passage  on  its  epicycle  is  always  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  angle  at  centre  F  which  embraces  the  starts  regular  movement  in 
longitude  and  the  angle  at  E  which  embraces  its  apparent  movement;  therefore 
is  it  clear  that,  when  the  star  is  at  point  G,  it  will  fall  short  of  its  return  to  apogee 
H  by  angle  GBHy  the  angle  which  combined  with  angle  AFB  (that  is,  subtracted 
from  it)  gives  angle  AEG,  the  angle  contained  by  the  mean  solar  passage  and  the 
same  as  the  star's  apparent  passage.  And  it  is  clear  that,  when  the  star  is  at 
point  K,  again  it  will  have  moved  on  the  epicycle  through  angle  HBK  which, 
added  to  angle  AFB,  will  equal  the  sun's  mean  passage  from  apogee- A.  For  the 
sun's  mean  passage  embraces  the  semicircle  plus  the  difference  between  angle 
AFB  and  angle  KBL — that  is,  angle  OEM,  the  angle  vertical  to  the  angle  of  the 

star's  apparent  passage. 

For  this  reason,  in  the  case  of  these  con¬ 
figurations,  the  straight  line  drawn  from 
the  epicycle's  centre  B  to  the  star  and  that 
drawn  from  the  point  E  at  our  eye  to  the 
sun's  mean  position  fall  both  along  the  same 
straight  line.  And,  in  the  case  of  all  the 
other  distances,  they  are  directed  to  differ¬ 
ent  points,  but  are  always  parallel  to  each 
other.^ 

For  if,  at  any  position  on  the  figure  just 
given,  we  draw  a  straight  line  from  B 
to  the  star — for  example,  BN,  and  another 
from  E  to  the  sun's  mean  position,  for  in¬ 
stance  EX — then,  for  the  same  reasons  as 

^There  is  a  most  important  tacit  assumption  made  here.  In  order  for  this  theorem  to  apply, 
it  is  evident  that  we  must  assume  that  at  least  once  in  the  past  or  future  the  sun,  the  mean 
sun,  the  earth.  Mars  (for  example)  and  the  centre  of  Mars^  epicycle  have  been,  or  will  be,  in 
a,  straight  line.  Then,  given  the  fact  that  the  cycles  of  mean  longitude  plus  the  c^^cles  of 
anomaly  equal  the  cycles  of  the  mean  sun,  it  is  proved  here  that  those  four  points  will  always 
be  in  a  straight  Hne  whenever  three  of  them — Mars,  the  earth,  and  the  mean  sun — are  in  a 
straight  line. 

Now,  Ptolemy  probably  referred  to  just  this  assumption  and  the  one  discussed  in  the 
previous  note  when,  in  IX,  2  ,  he  said,  “or  if  we  are  forced  (2)  to  presuppose  something  with¬ 
out  immediate  foundation  in  the  appearances,  an  apprehension  gotten  from  continuous  trial 
and  adjustment.”  This  assumption  becomes  a  necessity  in  the  Copernican  system  where  the 
outer  planet’s  epicycle  becomes  the  circular  orbit  of  the  earth  about  the  mean  sun  and  the 
outer  planet's  eccentric  circle  becomes  the  circular  orbit  of  the  outer  planet's  mean  longi¬ 
tudinal  movement  about  the  mean  sun.  Since,  under  the  Copernican  hypothesis,  the  earth 
continually  passes  between  the  outer  planet  and  the  mean  s\m,  and  the  centre  of  the  outer 
planet’s  epicycle  has  under  this  hypothesis  become  the  mean  sun,  it  is  obvious  that  there 
will  be  a  time  when  the  earth,  the  planet,  and  the  mean  sun  will  be  in  a  straight  hne;  and 
that  will  be  precisely  when  the  planet  is  nearest  the  earth — that  is,  in  the  Ptolemaic  system 
at  the  apparent  perigee  of  its  epicycle.  Hence  the  above  assumption  of  Ptolemy  points  almost 
by  an  inner  necessity  to  a  hehocentric  theory.  In  Book  I  of  this  treatise  Ptolemy  asserts,  it 
must  be  remembered,  that  the  hehocentric  hypothesis  is  simpler. 


324 

just  given, 


PTOLEMY 


and 


angle  A^Y'  =  angle  AFH+qji^q  NBH 


angle  AFH  =  angle  AEG+smgle  GBH. 

By  the  subtraction  of  the  common  angle  AEG, 

angle  GEX  =  angle  GBN. 

Therefore,  straight  line  EX  is  parallel  to  BN. 

Smce,  then,  at  the  configurations  of  conjunctions  and  oppositions  considered 
in  relation  to  the  sun’s  mean  position,  we  find  the  star  to  be  seen  in  a  line  with 
the  epicycle’s  centre  as  if  it  had  no  movement  whatsoever  on  the  epicycle  but 
had  its  position  on  the  circle  ABC  and  were  revolved  regularly  by  the  straight 
line  FB  in  the  same  way  as  the  epicycle’s  centre,  therefore  it  is  clear  that  it 
will  be  possible  by  means  of  these  positions  to  demonstrate  the  ratios  of  ec¬ 
centricity  of  zodiacal  anomaly  in  themselves.  But  since  the  conjunctive  con¬ 
figurations  do  not  appear,  it  is  clear  that  it  remains  only  to  get  at  the  demon¬ 
strations  by  means  of  the  oppositions. 


7.  Demonstration  of  Mars’  Eccentricity  and  Apogee 

Just  as,  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  we  took  the  places  and  times  of  three  eclipses 
at  the  full  moon  and  demonstrated  geometrically  the  ratio  of  anomaly  and  the 
place  of  the  apogee,  so  here  in  the  same  way,  having  observed  as  accurately  as 
possible  with  the  astrolabe  the  places  of  three  acronychal  oppositions  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  sun’s  mean  position  for  each  of  the  three  stars,  and  having  calcu¬ 
lated  beforehand  to  a  fine  degree  of  angular  distance  the  time  and  place  of  the 
sun’s  mean  positions  at  the  observations,  we  show  from  these  things  the  ratio 
of  eccentricity  and  the  apogee. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  we  took  three  oppositions  of  Mars:  the  first  of 
which  we  observed  in  the  year  15  of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Tybi  26-27,  1  equa¬ 
torial  hour  after  midnight,  about  21°  within  the  Twins;  the  second  in  the  year  19 
of  Hadrian,  Egyptianwise  Pharmouthi  6-7,  3  hours  before  midnight,  about 
28°50'  within  the  Lion;  and  the  third  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise 
Epiphi  12-13,  2  equatorial  hours  before  midnight,  about  2°34'  within  the  Archer. 
Now,  the  time  of  the  interval  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second  embraces  4 
Egyptian  years,  69  days,  and  20  equatorial  hours;  and  from  the  second  to  the 
third,  likewise,  4  years,  96  days,  and  1  equatorial  hour.  From  the  first  interval  of 
time  there  adds  up  81°44'  in  longitudinal  movement,  over  and  above  complete 
circles;  and  from  the  second,  95°28'.  For  there  will  be  no  appreciable  difference 
even  if  we  calculate  the  mean  movements  for  this  amount  of  time  from  the  peri¬ 
odic  returns  set  out  in  the  rough.  And  it  is  clear  that,  for  the  first  interval,  the 
apparent  star  has  moved  67°50'  over  and  above  complete  circles,  and,  for  the 
second,  93°44'. 

Then  let  three  equal  circles  be  described  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  Let  ABC 
about  centre  D  be  the  one  bearing  the  epicycle’s  centre;  EFG  about  centre  H 
the  eccentric  of  regular  movement;  KLM  about  centre  N,  concentric  with  the 
ecliptic;  and  let  the  straight  line  KOPR  be  the  diameter  through  all  the  centres. 
Moreover,  let  A  be  supposed  the  point  where  the  epicycle’s  centre  was  at  the 
first  opposition,  B  where  it  was  at  the  second,  and  C  where  it  was  at  the  third. 
And  let  HAE,  HBF,  HGC,  NKA,  NLB,  and  NCM  be  joined,  so  that  arc  EF  of 
the  eccentric  is  the  81°44'  of  the  first  periodic  angular  distance,  and  arc  FG  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


325 


95°28'  of  the  second;  and  again  so  that  arc  KL  of  the  ecliptic  is  the  67®60'  of  the 
first  apparent  angular  distance,  and  arc  LM  the  93°44'  of  the  second. 

If,  then,  the  eccentric’s  arcs  EF  and  FG  were  subtended  by  the  ecliptic’s  arcs 
KL  and  LM,  we  should  need  nothing  more  for  the  demonstration  of  the  eccen¬ 
tricity.  But  since  they  subtend  arcs  AB  and  BC  of  the  middle  eccentric  which 
are  not  given,  and  since,  if  we  join  NSE,  NTF,  and  NGU,  again  arcs  ST  and  TU 
of  the  ecliptic  (clearly  not  given)  subtend  arcs  EF  and  FG  of  the  eccentric,  it 
will  be  necessary,  first,  that  the  differences  KS,  LT,  and  MU  be  given,  in  order 
for  the  ratio  of  eccentricity  to  be  accurately  demonstrated  from  the  correspond¬ 
ing  arcs  EF,  FG  and  ST,  TU,  But  since  it  is  not  possible  to  get  these  accurately 
prior  to  the  ratio  of  eccentricity  and  the  apogee — and  yet  since  they  will  be 
given  approximately,  even  if  not  accurately  given  before,  because  the  differences 
are  not  great — we  shall  first  make  our  calculation  as  if  the  arcs  ST,  TU  did  not 
differ  appreciably  from  arcs  KL,  LM, 

For  let  ABC  be  the  eccentric  circle  of  Mars’  regular  passage  [the  equant],  and 
let  A  be  supposed  the  point  of  the  first  opposition,  B  of  the  second,  and  C  of 
the  third.  Within  this  circle  let  D  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic  where 
our  eye  is;  and  let  all  the  straight  lines  be  joined  from  the  three  opposition 
points  to  the  eye — in  this  case  AD,  BD,  and  CD.  And  let  one  of  the  three 


326  PTOLEMY 

straight  lines  that  have  been  joined  be 
produced  to  the  opposite  arc  of  the  ec¬ 
centric,  as  here  CDE)  and  let  a  straight 
line  join  the  other  two  opposition 
points,  as  here  AB,  Then,  from  the  re¬ 
sulting  intersection  of  the  eccentric 
with  the  straight  line  produced  in  (say 
E)^  let  straight  lines  be  joined  to  the 
other  two  opposition  points,  as  here 
EA  and  EB;  and  from  the  same  point 
E  let  perpendiculars  be  drawn  to  the 
straight  lines  joining  the  aforesaid  two 
points  and  the  ecliptic^s  centre,  as  here 
EF  perpendicular  to  AD  and  EG  to  BD. 

Yet  again,  from  either  of  the  aforesaid 
two  points,  let  a  perpendicular  be 
drawn  to  the  straight  line  joining  the 
other  of  the  two  points  to  the  extra  point  produced  on  the  eccentric,  in  this 
instance  AH  from  A  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BE. 

Now,  no  matter  how  we  go  about  these  things  in  this  drawing,  we  shall  find 
the  same  ratios  borne  in  the  numbers;  and  the  rest  of  the  proof  from  the  arcs 
given  for  Mars  will  be  evident  in  this  way. 

For  since  the  eccentric^s  arc  BC  is  assumed  to  subtend  93°44'  on  the  ecliptic, 
therefore 

angle  £Z)C=93°44' 

=  187°28' to2rt., 

angle  BDC  being  at  the  ecliptic^s  centre;  and,  as  its  supplement, 

angle  £'Z)G  =  172^32'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEG^ 

arc  ^(?=  172^32', 

and 

chord  =  119^45' 

where 

hypt.  DE 

Likewise,  since 

arc  5(7=95^28', 
therefore,  being  an  angle  at  the  circumference, 

angle  5^JC  =  95°28' to  2  rt. 

And 

angle  jBZ)£  =  172^32' to  2  rt.; 
therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  E^G  =  92°  to  2  rt.  > 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEG^ 

arc^;G  =  92^ 

and 

chord  =  86^19' 

where 

hypt.  BE=  120^. 

And  therefore 


/ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 
HE' =166^29' 


327 


where  it  was  proved 

EG  =119^45' 

and 

Z)E=120P. 

Again,  since  the  whole  arc  ABC  of  the  eccentric  is  assumed  to  subtend  on  the 
ecliptic  161^34',  the  sum  of  both  intervals,  therefore 

angle  AZ)C=16r34', 
and,  by  subtraction,  ' 

angle  ADE  — 18°26' 

=  36^52'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEE, 

arc  EE  =  36°52', 

and 

chord  EE  =  37^57' 

where 

hypt.  Z)E=  120p. 

Likewise,  since 

arc  ABC  =  nr  12', 

ABC  being  an  arc  on  the  eccentric,  therefore 

angle  AEC=  177^2'  to  2  rt. 

And  we  saw 

angle  AEE  =  36°52'  to  2  rt. 

Therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  I)AE  =  145^56'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  A  EE, 

arc  EE=  145^56', 

and 

chord  EE  =  114^44' 

where 

hypt.  AE  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

AE  =  39^42' 

where  it  was  proved 

EE  =  37p57' 

and 

EE  =  120p. 

Again,  since 

arc  AH  =  81^44', 

AB  being  an  arc  on  the  eccentric,  therefore 

angle  AEH  =  81°44'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEH, 

arc  AH  =  Sr 44:' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  EE^  =  98°16'. 

And  therefore 

chord  AH  =  78^31', 
chord  EH  =  90^45' 


328 

where 


PTOLEMY 


And  so 

hypt.  AE=\2Q^. 

AH  =  25^^58', 

EH  =  S0'>2' 

where  it  was  proved 

AE=89H2' 

supposing 

jBZ)  =  120p. 

And  it  was  also  proved,  with  the  same  parts,  that 

whole  = 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

=  136^27' 


where 

AH  =  25m'.  , 

And 

sq.  =18,615^16' 

and  likewise 

sq.  A/f  =  G74Pl6', 

which  added  together  make 

sq.  =  19,289^32'; 


in  length,  therefore. 

AB  =  138m', 

AE=89H2', 

where 

DE  =120K 

And 

AB  =  78m' 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120p; 
for  AB  subtends  an  arc  of  81°44'.  And  therefore 


where 

DE=^Qim', 

AE=22^W 

4B  =  78»31' 

and 

ecc.  diam.  =  120'’. 

And  so  also,  AE  being  an  arc  on  the  eccentric, 

arc  AE  =  2r^V 


and,  by  addition. 

arc  EABC=  198°53', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

arc  C£?=161°7'. 

And 

chord  CDi?- 118P22' 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 

If,  then,  the  straight  line  CE  had  been  found  equal  to  the  eccentric's  diameter. 


329 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


L 


CD  = 


it  is  clear  that  the  eccentric^s  centre 
would  be  on  it,  and  the  ratio  of  eccen¬ 
tricity  would  be  immediately  apparent. 
But  since  it  has  not  come  out  equal, 
and  has  made  segment  EABC  greater 
than  a  semicircle,  it  is  evident  that  the 
eccentric^s  centre  will  fall  on  that  side. 
Then  let  it  be  supposed  the  point  K, 
and  let  the  diameter  LKDM  through 
both  centres  be  drawn  through  K  and 
D;  and  from  K  let  KNX  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  CE. 

Since,  then,  it  was  shown 
CE=  118^22', 

DE  =  67^50' 

where 

diam.  LM  =  120^, 
therefore  also,  by  subtraction. 


And  so,  since 
we  shall  find 
But  also 


rect.  £'Z),  DC =rect.  LD,  DM, 
rect.  LD,  DM  =  3,427^51'. 


rect.  LD,  DM +sq.  DLr  =  sq.  LK 

which  is  the  square  on  half  the  whole  diameter.  Therefore,  if  we  subtract  from 
the  3,600p  of  the  square  on  LK  the  3,427p51'  of  the  rectangle  LD^  DM,  then  we 
shall  have  left  the  172p9'  of  the  square  on  DK,  And  therefore  we  shall  have  in 
length 

1.  btw.  c.  Di^=13P7' 


where 


ecc.  rad.  LK  =  60p. 


Again,  since 

half  CE  or  CiV  =  59^11', 

and  it  was  proved 

DC  =  50^32' 

where 

diam.  LM  =  120^, 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

DA^  =  8p39' 

where  it  was  found 

DX  =  13p7'. 

And  so  also 

DN  =  7m' 

where 

hypt.  DX=  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DKN, 

arc  DiV  =  82°30. 


Therefore  also 


330 


PTOLEMY 


N. 


\ 


angle  Z)ZAr  =  82^30'  to  2  rt. 

=  4ri5'. 

And  since  it  is  at  the  eccentric  ^s  centre,  we  shall  have_ 

arcMX  =  4n5'. 

And  also,  by  addition, 

arc  CMZ  =  half  arc  CZJ^  =  80°34'. 

Therefore  also,  by  subtraction, 

arc  CAr  =  39n9' 

where  CM  is  the  arc  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  perigee.  And  it  is  evident 
that,  since  it  was  assumed  j 

arc5C  =  95°28',  / 

by  subtraction,  / 

arc5L  =  45°13' 

where  LB  is  the  arc  from  the  apogee  to  the  second  opposition;  and  that,  since 
it  was  assumed  i  __ 

arc  AJ5  =  8r44', 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arcAL  =  36°31' 

where  CL  is  the  arc  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  apogee. 

Now,  with  these  things  assumed,  let  us  find  out  in  the  following  way  what 
differences  they  yield  at  each  opopsition  for  the  required  arcs  of  the  ecliptic. 

From  the  figure  of  the  three  oppositions  given  above  [p.  325],  let  the  drawing 
of  the  first  opposition  alone  be  laid 
out.  And  after  AD  has  been  joined,  let 
DV  and  iVF  be  drawn  from  points  D 
and  N  perpendicular  to  AH  produced. 

Since,  then, 

arc  jBX  =  36^31', 

therefore 

angle  = 

and,  being  the  angle  vertical  to  it, 
angle  DHV  =  73^2'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DHVj 

arcDF  =  73°2', 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semi¬ 
circle, 

arc  /77=106°58'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DF  =  71^25' 
chord  HV  =  96^27' 


where 
And  so  also 

where 

and 


hypt.  DH  =  120p. 

i)F  =  3P54', 

HV  =  5m' 

ecc.  rad.  A/)  =  60p. 


And  since 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


331 


therefore,  in  length, 

sq.  AD — sq.  DV  =  sq.  AV, 

and  since 

^F  =  59'>52'; 

therefore,  by  addition. 

VY=HV, 

4  F =65^8' 

where,  since 

NY=2DV, 

J\rY=7H8'. 

And  consequently 

And  therefore 

hypt.  ^iV  =  65p36'. 

where 

ArF=14Pl6' 

/ 

AN  =120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ANY, 

arc  iV'F=  13°40'. 

And  so  also 

angle  NA  Y  =  13°40'  to  2  rt. 
Again,  since  it  was  shown 

A^y  =  7P48', 


where 

ffY= 10^32' 

therefore,  by  addition. 

ecc.  rad.  EH =60^, 

EHY=7m2' 

and  consequently 

And  therefore 

hypt.  EN =71^. 

where 

NY=13nO' 

EN  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ENY, 

arc  A'F=  12^36'. 


And  so  also 

But 

angle  NEY  =  V£^3Q'  to  2  rt. 

angle  =  13W  to  2  rt.; 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  ANE  =  V^'  to  2  rt. 

=  32'. 

Therefore  on  the  ecliptic 

arc/i:5  =  32'. 

Then  let  there  be  laid  out  the  similar  figure  containing  the  drawing  of  the 


332 


PTOLEMY 


second  opposition.  Since  it  is  assumed 
arc  FX  =  45°13', 

therefore 

angle  F//X  =  45°13', 
and,  being  the  angle  vertical  to  it, 
angle  Z)//F  =  90°26'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DHV, 

-arc  Z)F  =  90°26', 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semi¬ 
circle, 

arc  //F  =  89°34'. 

And  therefore 

chord  i)F  =  85PlO', 
chord  i7F  =  84^32' 

where 

hypt.  Z)i/=  120p. 

And  so  also 

i)F  =  4P39', 
i/F  =  4P38' 

where 


=  6^333^' 

ecc.  rad.  5Z)  =  60p. 

sq.  BD — sq.  DV  =  sq.  iBF, 

BF  =  59p49'; 

VY=HV, 

57=64^27' 

iVF=2Z)F, 

AF  =  9P18'. 

hypt.  BN  =  69^6'. 

A^F=17P9' 

where 

£A^=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BNY^ 

arc  AF=  16^26'. 

And  so  also 

angle  NBY=m^2&  to  2  rt. 
Again,  since  it  was  proved 

AF  =  9P18', 
i7F  =  9n6' 


and 

And  since 

therefore,  in  length, 
and,  because 
therefore,  by  addition, 
where,  since 

And  consequently,  also. 
And  therefore 


where 

therefore,  by  addition. 


ecc.  rad.  = 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 
F//F  =  69^16' 

hypt.  FAT  =  69^52'. 
NY=IQ^ 


333 


and  consequently 
And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  FA/^=  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FNY^ 

arc  NY  — 15°20'. 

And  so  also 

angle  NFY  =  15°20'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  NBY  =  16°26'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BNF  =  1°6'  to  2  rt. 

=  33'. 

Therefore  on  the  ecliptic 

arc  KSSy. 

Since,  then,  at  the  first  opposition  we  found  arc  KS  to  be  32',  it  is  clear  that 
the  first  interval  of  the  apparent  movement  considered  with  respect  to  the  ec¬ 
centric  will  be  greater  by  the  segments  of  both  arcs,  1®5',  and  will  contain  68°55'. 

Then  let  the  drawing  of  the  third  opposition  be  laid  out.  Since  then  it  is  sup¬ 
posed 

arc  (?P  =  39n9', 

therefore 

angle 

=  78°38'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  tri¬ 
angle  DHV, 

arc  Z)7  =  78°38', 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 
arc  P7=10r22'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DV  =  76^2', 
chord  /7F  =  92^50' 

where 

hypt.  DH=  120^. 

And  so  also 

2)7  =  4^9', 

227=5^4' 

where 

1.  btw.  c.  2)22  =  6P333^', 

and 

ecc.  rad.  C2)  =  60p. 

And  since 

sq.  CD— sq.  D7  =  sq.  C7, 

therefore 

C7  =  59P51'; 

and,  because 

227=77, 


334 

by  subtraction 


PTOLEMY 


Cy  =  54P47'  !K  ! 

where,  since 

NY  =  2DV, 

,  ,  ,  NY=Sn8\ 

And  consequently  also  » 

hypt.  CN  =  55^25', 

And  therefore  ^ ' 

,  17^59' 

where  ' 

CA  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CNY, 

^  arc  AF=17°14'. 

And  so  also  ‘ 

angle  NCY  =  17°14'  to  2  rt. 

Again,  since  it  was  shown 

NY  =  8n8\ 
iyy=iop8' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  GH  =  60^, 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

(?F  =  49p52', 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  GA  =  50P33'.  v  ‘ 

And  therefore 

NY  =  19H2'  > 

where 

(?A  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  GNY,  'j  y 

arc  AF=  18^54'. 

And  so  also  \ 

angle  NGY  =  18°54'  to  2  rt., 

and  it  was  proved 

angle  NCY=  17^14'  to  2  rt.  .  ^  ‘ 

Therefore,  by  subtraction,  *  . 

/  angleC'iVG=l°40'to2rt.  ’ 

=50'. 

Therefore  also  on  the  ecliptic 

arcMC/  =  50'. 

Since,  then,  at  the  second  opposition,  we  found  the  arc  LT  to  be  33',  it  is  clear 
that  the  second  interval  of  the  apparent  movement,  considered  with  respect  to 
the  eccentric,  will  be  less  by  the  segments  of  both  arcs,  1°23',  and  will  contain 
92°21'. 

With  these  arcs  of  the  ecliptic  calculated  for  the  two  intervals,  we  again  go 
through  the  theorem  for  demonstrating  the  apogee  and  the  ratio  of  eccentricity, 
and  find  (not  to  make  this  treatise  too  long  by  repition) 

1.  btw.  c,  jDA^  =  11^50' 

^DK  here  refers  to  the  fourth  figure  back.  It  is  the  distance  between  the  ecliptic^s  centre 
or  the  earth  and  the  equant^s  centre.  As  it  has  been  pointed  out  before,  the  deferent^s  centre 
is  assumed  to  be  midway  between  the  two,  an  assumption  established  and  justified  by  the 
theory  of  regressions  in  Book  XII. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


335 


where 


ecc.  rad.  =  60P; 

and,  on  the  eccentric, 

arc  CM  =  45^33', 

CM  being  the  arc  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  perigee.  And  again  from  this 

arc  j5L  =  38°59', 
arc  AL  =  42°45'. 

Like^vise  when  we  had  used  these  numbers  in  the  proofs  of  each  opposition,  we 
finally  found  the  accurate  magnitudes  of  each  of  the  required  arcs: 

arc  X5  =  28', 
arc  LT  =  28', 
arcMC/  =  30'. 

And  putting  together  the  differences  at  the  first  and  second  oppositions  and 
adding  the  resulting  56'  to  the  67°50'  of  the  first  interval  on  the  ecliptic,  we  had 
the  distance  of  68°46'  accurately  considered  with  respect  to  the  eccentric;  and 
putting  together  those  at  the  second  and  third  oppositions  and  subtracting  the 
resulting  1°8'  from  the  apparent  93°44'  of  the  second  interval  on  the  ecliptic, 
again  we  found  the  distance  of  92°36'  accurately  considered  with  respect  to  the 
eccentric.  Finally  from  these  results,  using  the  same  proof,  we  accurately  ascer¬ 
tained  the  ratio  of  eccentricity  and  the  apogee. 

And  we  found 


,  1.  btw.  c.  Z)A:m2i> 

where 

ecc.  rad.  A^L  =  60p; 

and  on  the  eccentric 

arc  CM  =  44®21' 

from  which,  in  turn,  it  results  that 

arc  5L  =  40'^11', 
arc  AL  =  41^33'. 

By  these  same  means  we  shall  also  show  that  the  observed  apparent  intervals 
of  the  three  oppositions  agree  with  these  last  magnitudes. 

For  let  there  be  set  out  the  drawing  of  the  first  opposition,  containing  only 
the  eccentric  circle  the  epicycle^s  cen¬ 
tre  is  always  borne  on  [the  deferent]. 

Since  then 

angle 

and,  being  the  angle  vertical  to  it, 
angle  DHV  =  83°6'  to  2  rt., 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DHVy 

arc  D7  =  83°6' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semi¬ 
circle, 

arc  MF  =  96°54'. 

And  therefore 

chord  Z)F  =  79^35', 
chord  HV  =  89^50' 

where 

hypt.  Z)Ar  =  120p. 

And  so  also 


E 


336 


PTOLEMY 


where 

Z)F  =  3'’58H', 

HV=Am' 

DH=6<^, 

and 

AD  =  m^. 

And  since 

sq.  AD — sq.  DV =sq.  AV, 

therefore,  in  length. 

AV  =  59^50'. 

Again,  since 

HV  =  VV 

and 

NY  =  2DV, 

we  shall  have,  by  addition, 

^F  =  64P20' 


where 

NY =7^57’. 

And  consequently  also 

hypt.  AiV=64P52'. 

And  so  also 

iVF= 14P44' 

where 

=  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ANY ^ 

arciVF=14°6', 


and  therefore 

angle  NA  Y  =  14°6'  to  2  rt. 

=  7°3'. 

But 

angle  =  41^33', 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction,  being  the  angle  of  apparent  passage, 

angle  = 

and  by  this  amount  is  the  star  west  of  the  apogee  at  the  first  opposition. 
Again  let  a  similar  drawing  of  the  second  opposition  be  set  out.  Since,  then, 
being  the  angle  of  the  epicycle^s  mean  passage 

angle  5iTi;  =  40°ll', 
and,  being  the  angle  vertical  to  it, 

angle  80^22'  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DHV, 

arc  Z)F  =  80^22' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle. 


And  therefore 

arc  i/F =99'’38'. 

chord  Z>F=77p26', 
chord  i7F  =  9lP41' 

where 


hypt.  Z)/f=120p. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


337 


And  also 


DF  =  3^52', 
/7F=4p35' 


where 

and 


hypt.  i?D  =  60p. 


And  since 

sq.  BD — sq.  Z)F  =  sq.  BV, 
therefore,  in  length, 

57  =  59^53'. 

And  in  the  same  way,  since 
i/F=7F 

and 

NY  =  2DV, 
therefore,  by  addition 

^F  =  64p28' 

where 


NY  =  7H4:\ 
hypt.  =  64^56'. 
ArF=14Pl9' 


And  consequently 
And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  BN  =  120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BNY, 

arc  A^F=  13^42'. 

And  so  also 

angle  NBY  =  13^^42'  to  2  rt. 

=  6^51'. 

And 

angle  BHE^^Q'^lV. 

Therefore,  by  subtraction,  being  the  angle  of  apparent  passage, 

angle  =  33^20'. 

By  this  distance  the  star  hence  appeared  east  of  the  apogee  at  the  second  opposi¬ 
tion.  It  had  already  been  proved  34^^30'  west  of  the  apogee  at  the  first  opposition; 
therefore  the  whole  interval  from  the  first  to  the  second  opposition  comes  to 
67®50',  in  agreement  with  the  amount  gotten  by  the  observations. 

Then  let  the  drawing  of  the  third  opposition  be  set  out  in  the  same  way.  Since 
in  this  case,  being  the  angle  of  the  epicycle^s  regular  passage, 

angle  CffF  =  44°21' 

=  88°42'  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DffF, 

arc  i>7  =  88^42' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

arc  /7F  =  9n8'. 


And  therefore 


chord  DF  =  83^53', 


338 


chord  HV  =  85^49' 


PTOLEMY 


where 

hypt.  Z)ff  =120p. 

And  so  also 

1)7  =  4^1134', 

/  HV  =  4:nr 

where 

AD  =  6p 

and 

ecc.  rad.  CD  =  60p. 
And  since 

sq.  CD— sq.  D7  =  sq.  C7, 
we  shall  have,  in  length, 

C7  =  59^51'. 

And  again,  since 

HV  =  VY 

and 

NY=^2DV, 

we  shall  have,  by  subtraction. 


E 


CF  =  55p34' 


where 

iVF  =  8p23'. 

And  consequently  we  shall  have 

hypt.  CiV  =  56n2'. 

And  therefore 

ArF=  17^55' 


where 


hypt.  CiV  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CNY^ 

arc  A^F=  17^0'. 


And  so  also 


angle  HCN  —  Vl^W  to  2  rt. 
=  8°35'. 


But 


angle  CDF  =  44^21'; 

and  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  CDF  =  52^56'. 

At  the  third  opposition,  therefore,  the  star  appeared  west  of  the  perigee  by  just 
that  much.  And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  the  resulting  93^^44'  from  the  second 
to  the  third  opposition  was  found  to  agree  with  the  amount  observed  in  the 
second  interval.  It  is  also  clear  that,  when  the  star,  sighted  along  the  straight 
line  CD,  was  according  to  observation  2'’34'  within  the  Archer  and  angle  CDF  at 
the  ecliptic’s  centre  was  proved  to  be  52'’56',  then  the  perigee  of  eccentricity  at 
point  F  was  25°30'  within  the  Goat,  and  the  apogee  diametrically  opposite 
25°30'  was  within  the  Crab. 

Also,  if  we  describe  the  epicycle  of  Mars  about  centre  C  and  produce  straight 
line  CD,  we  shall  have  the  epicycle’s  mean  passage  of  135°39'  from  the  eccen¬ 
tric’s  apogee  at  the  time  of  the  third  opposition;  for  it  was  proved 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X 


339 


angle  C^/^  =  44°21' 
which  is  the  remainder  of  the 
semicircle.  And  we  shall  have 
arcifM  =  171°25' 
which  is  the  starts  mean  pass¬ 
age  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee 
]  because  it  was  proved 
angle 

HCN  being  an  angle  at  the  epi- 
cycle^s  centre;  because 
arc /fL  =  8°35', 

KL  being  the  arc  from  the  star 
K  to  the  perigee  L;  and  be¬ 
cause,  therefore,  the  arc  from 
apogee  M  to  star  K  is  171°25' 
as  proposed. 

With  the  other  results  it  is 
now  clear  to  us  that,  at  the 
time  of  the  third  opposition — 
that  is,  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Epiphi  12-13,  2  equatorial 
hours  before  midnight — Mars  was  135°39'  in  mean  longitude  from  the  eccen- 
tric^s  apogee,  and  171°25'  in  anomaly  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee.  Which 
things  it  was  required  to  prove. 

8.  Demonstration  of  the  Magnitude  of  Mars’  Epicycle 

Since  the  next  thing  was  to  demonstrate  the  ratio  of  the  epicycle’s  magnitude, 
we  took  for  this  purpose  an  observation  which  we  made  very  nearly  3  days  after 
the  third  opposition  (that  is,  in  they  ear  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  month  15-16, 
3  equatorial  hours  before  midnight),  for  the  point  on  the  astrolabe  20°  within  the 
Balance  was  culminating  and  the  sun  was  then  according  to  its  mean  passage 
5°27'  within  the  Twins.  In  comparison  with  the  point  corresponding  to  Spica 
and  sighted  with  its  position,  Mars  appeared  to  be  1^°  within  the  Archer,  and 
at  the  same  time  appeared  to  be  equally  1%°  east  of  the  moon’s  centre.  The 
moon’s  mean  position  was  then  about  4°20'  within  the  Archer;  and  its  true  one 
was  29°20'  within  the  Scorpion,  since  in  anomaly  the  moon  was  92°  from  the 
epicycle’s  apogee.  And  the  apparent  moon  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  Archer 
so  that,  consequently.  Mars  was  then  consistently,  just  as  sighted,  1°36'  within 
the  Archer — and,  of  course,  53°54'  w^est  of  the  perigee.  From  the  time  of  the 
third  opposition  to  that  of  this  observation  there  is  contained  1°32'  in  longi¬ 
tude,  and  very  nearly  1°21'  in  anomaly.  And  if  we  add  these  to  the  positions 
already  demonstrated  for  the  third  opposition,  we  shall  have  Mars,  at  the  time 
of  this  observation,  in  longitude  137°11'  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee,  and  in 
anomaly  172°46'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

With  these  things  assumed,  about  centre  D  and  diameter  ADC  let  there  be 
the  eccentric  circle  ABC  bearing  the  epicycle’s  centre.  And  on  the  diam¬ 
eter  let  E  be  supposed  the  ecliptic’s  centre,  and  F  the  centre  of  the  greater 

'The  star  at  K  is,  of  course,  at  the  apparent  perigee.  L  and  M  are,  respectively,  the  regular 
perigee  and  regular  apogee,  but  in  planetary  theory  they  are  often  referred  to  simply  as  the 
perigee  and  apogee  of  the  planet^s  epicycle. 


340 


PTOLEMY 


eccentricity.  And 
with  epicycle  GHK 
described  about  B, 
let  FKBGy  EHB, 
and  DB  be  drawn 
through,  and  let  EL 
and  DM  be  drawn 
from  points  D  and 
E  perpendicular  to 
FB,  Let  the  star  be 
supposed  at  point 
N  on  the  epicycle; 
and,  with  EN  and 
BN  joined,  let  BX 
be  drawn  from  B 
perpendicular  to 
EN  produced. 

Since,  then,  the 
star  is  137°11'  from 
the  eccentric^s  apo¬ 
gee  so  that 
angle  BFC-=^2^W 

=  85^38'  to2rt., 


therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFM^ 

arc  Z)ikr  =  85^38' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 

’  arc  FAT  =  94^22'. 


And  therefore 

where 
And  so  also 


where 


chord  DAT  =  81^34', 
chord  FAf  =  88^1' 

hypt.  DF  =120^, 

Z)il/  =  4P5', 

FM  =  4p24' 

1.  btw.  c.  Z)F  =  6p 


and 

And  since 
therefore 

And  likewise,  since 
and 


ecc.  rad.  BD  =  &Q^, 
sq.  BD — sq.  DM  =  sq,  BM^ 
£Af  =  59^52'. 
FM=LM 
EL  =  2DMy 


THE  ALMAGEST,  X  341 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

5L  =  55^28', 


And  consequently 

EL=SnO'. 

hypt.  BE  =  56H'. 

And  therefore 

EL  =  17^28' 

where 

BE  =120^) 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEL^ 


And  so  also 

arc  EL  =  16°44'. 

angle  EBF=  16°44'  to  2  rt. 

Again,  since  it  is  supposed 

angle  C£X  =  53^54', 

=  107°48'  to2rt., 

the  angle  by  which  Mars  appeared  west  of  the  perigee  C,  and  since 

angle  BEC  =  102°22'  to  2  rt. 

(because 

angle  BEC  =  Siiig\e  angle  BFC, 

it  having  been  proved 


and  assumed 

angle  EBF  =  16°42'  to  2  rt. 

angle  BFC  ==85^38'  to  2  rt.), 
therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BEX  =  5°26'  to  2  rt. 
And,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEXy 

arc  ^X  =  5p26'. 


And  consequently 

chord  BX  =  dHV 

where 

hypt.  BE  =120^, 

And  therefore 

J5X  =  2P39' 

where  it  was  proved 

BE^5m' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  =  60^. 

Likewise,  since  the  point  N  was  172°46'  from  G  the  epicycle's  apogee,  and 
7°14'  from  K  the  perigee,  therefore 

angle  KBN  =  7°U' 

=  14°28'  to  2  rt. 


And 


angle  HBK  =  16®44'  to  2  rt. ; 


PTOLEMY 


342 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  HBN  =  to  2  rt. 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  BNX  =  7®42'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BNX, 

arc  ^Z  =  7°42', 

and 

chord  BX  =  8^3' 

where 

hypt.  BN  =  120P. 

And  therefore 

epic.  rad.  BN =39^30' 

where 

5X=2p39' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  =  60^. 

Therefore,  the  ratio  of  the  eccentric’s  radius  to  the  epicycle’s  radius  is  60^  to 
39^30'.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

9.  On  the  Correction  of  Mars’  Periodic  Movements 

For  the  correction  of  the  periodic  mean  movements  we  took  one  of  the  old  ob¬ 
servations  according  to  which  it  is  quite  clear  that  in  the  year  13  according  to 
Dionysius,  Aigon  25  in  the  morning.  Mars  seemed  to  occult  the  Scorpion’s 
northern  forehead.  Now,  the  date  of  this  observation  is  the  year  42  after  the 
death  of  Alexander  (that  is,  the  year  476  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Athyr 
20-21  in  the  morning)  at  which  times  we  find  the  sun,  in  its  mean  passage,  23®54' 
within  the  Goat.  According  to  us,  the  star  of  the  Scorpion’s  northern  forehead 
was  observed  to  be  63^®  within  the  Scorpion.  And  so,  again,  since  the  409  years 
from  the  observation  to  the  reign  of  Antonine  makes  very  nearly  a  4°5'  change  in 
the  fixed  stars  and  since  then,  at  the  time  of  the  observation,  this  fixed  star  must 
have  been  2}4°  within  the  Scorpion,  clearly  Mars  must  have  been  in  the  same 
position.  And  likewise,  since  for  us — that  is,  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of 
Antonine — Mars’  apogee  was  25^30'  within  the  Crab,  at  the  observation  it  must 
have  been  21°25'  within  the  Crab.  And  it  is  clear  that  the  apparent  star  was  then 
100^50'  from  the  apogee;  the  mean  sun  182'’29'  from  the  same  apogee,  and  of 
course  2°29'  from  the  perigee. 

With  these  things  assumed,  about  centre  D  and  diameter  ADC  let  ABC  be  the 
eccentric  circle  bearing  the  epicycle’s  centre.  On  the  diameter  let  E  be  supposed 
the  ecliptic’s  centre;  and  F  the  centre  of  the  greater  eccentricity  [of  the  equant]. 
With  the  epicycle  GH  described  about  centre  B^  let  FBG  and  DB  be  drawm 
through,  and  let  FK  be  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  DB.  Let 
the  star  be  supposed  at  point  H  on  the  epicycle;  and  with  BH  joined,  let  EL  be 
drawn  from  E  parallel  to  it.  Clearly,  from  what  we  have  already  proved,  the 
sun’s  mean  position  will  be  seen  along  EL.  And  with  EH  joined,  let  DM  and  BN 
be  drawn  from  D  and  B  perpendicular  to  it;  and  again  from  D  let  DX  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  BN,  so  that  the  figure  DMNX  turns  out  to  be  a  right  parallel¬ 
ogram. 


THE  AUMAGEST,  X 


343 


Since,  then,  being  the  angle  of  the  star’s  apparent  passage  from  the  apogee, 

angle  AEH  = 

and,  being  the  angle  of  the  sun’s  mean  passage, 

angle  GEL  =  2'^29', 

therefore 

angle  i^£'L  =  angle  jBH'£?  =  81®39' 

=  163^8'  to2rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BHN, 

arc  5Ar=:  163^18', 

and 

chord  BN  =  118^43' 

where 

hypt.  .B^  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

HA^  =  39p3' 

where 

epic.  rad.  BH  =  S9^S0' 

and 


Again,  since 


1.  btw.  c.  DE  =  6^, 

angle  A£7i/  =  100°50' 

=  201^40'  to  2  rt. 


and  consequently,  as  its  supplement, 

angle  DEM  ^158^20'  to  2  rt., 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEM ^ 

arc  DM  =158^20', 


344 

and 

where 

PTOLEMY 

chord  DM  =  1 17^52^ 

hypt.  D£=120p. 

And  therefore,  where 

DE  =  6p 


and  it  was  shown 

and  where 

BN =39^3', 

there 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  &S», 

DM  =  NX  =  5^5i' 

and,  by  subtraction. 

BX=33’>9'. 

And  therefore  also 

BX  =  mn8' 

where 

h^t.  BD  =  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BOX, 

arc  BX  =  67°4'. 


And  so  also 

and,  by  addition. 

angle  BDX  =  67°4'  to  2  rt., 

angle  Bi)3/  =  247®4'  to  2  rt. 
And,  because  it  was  shown 


therefore 

angle  =  158®20'  to  2  rt.. 

angle  EDM  =  21° W  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BDE  =  225°2^'  to  2  rt., 

and  as  its  supplement 

angle  BDA  =  134°36'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFKy 

arc  F/v  =  134^36' 

and,  by  subtraction  from  the  semicircle, 


And  therefore 

arc  Z)F  =  45®24'. 

chord  FK  =  110^42', 
chord  DK  =  46^18' 

where 

hypt.  FF=120p. 

And  therefore 

FF  =  5P32', 

DK  =  2n9' 

and,  by  subtraction. 

BK  =  57HV 

where 

Z)F  =  6P 

and 

ecc.  rad.  DB  =  60^, 

THE  ALMAGES  r,  X  345 

Aud  coii5txiueiitly  also 

hypt.  BFHo7^b7\ 

And  therefore 

FA’=1H2S' 

where 

AT=120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BKF, 

ai\‘ FA  =  10^53'. 

Vnd  so  also 

angle  DBF=  lO^oS'  to  2  rt. 

But  also 

angle  134^36'  to  2  rt.; 

and  therefore,  by  addition. 

vangle  AFF=  145^4'  to  2  rt. 

=  72"47. 

Therefore,  at  the  time  of  this  observation,  the  starts  mean  longitudinal  posi¬ 
tion — that  is,  the  epicycle  s  centre  B — was  72^47'  from  the  apogee,  and  con¬ 
sequently  4^12^  within  the  Balance.  Since  it  is  also  suppose<l  that 

angle  CFL  =  2"29' 

^which  togetlier  with  the  semicircle  of  2  right  angles,  ABC,  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  AFB,  the  angle  of  mean  longitude,  and  GBH,  the  angle  of  anomaly — that  is, 
the  star's  movement  on  the  epicvcle),  we  shall  have,  bv  subtraction, 

angle  GBH  =  109^42^ 

Therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  observation,  the  star  was  in  anomaly  that  ver>' 
109^42^  from  the  epicycle's  apogee.  Which  things  it  was  required  to  find. 

And  we  had  already  proves.!  that  the  star,  at  the  time  of  the  thiix!  opposition, 
was  in  anomaly  171^25'  from  the  epicycle's  apogee.  Therefore,  in  the  time  be- 
t)i\'een  the  observations  (embracing  410  Eg}’ptian  years  and  very  nearly  231^ 
days)  it  added  on,  over  and  above  the  192  complete  circles,  61%3'.  This  is  very 
nearly  the  surplus  we  find  in  the  tables  of  the  star  s  mean  movements  set  up  by 
us,  since  we  established  the  daily  movement  from  these  numbers,  dividing  the 
sum  of  the  circles  and  surplus  reduced  to  degrees  over  the  total  number  of  days 
in  the  time  between  the  two  observations. 

10.  Ox  THE  Epoch  of  its  Pehiodic  Movements 

Again,  since  the  time  from  the  year  1  of  Xabonassar,  Eg^-ptianwise  Thoth  1 
at  noon,  to  this  observation  is  475  Eg\’ptian  years  and  very  nearly  794-M+3<4 
days,  and  since  that  amount  of  time  embraces  1S0^40^  surplus  in  longitude  and 
142^29'  surplus  in  anomaly,  if  we  subtract  them  from  each  of  the  corresponding 
positions  at  the  observation — that  is,  from  the  4^12'  within  the  Balance  in  longi¬ 
tude  and  from  the  109'42'  in  anomaly — we  shall  have  the  epoch  of  the  pericKiic 
movements  of  Mars  in  the  year  1  of  Xabonassar,  Eg\’ptianwise  Thoth  1  at  noon: 
(1)  in  longitude,  3^32^  witliin  the  Ram;  (2)  in  anomaly,  327^13'  from  the  epi¬ 
cycle's  apogee.  And  consequently,  since  in  475  years  there  comes  to  be  a 
(iT-Hh  s^hift  in  apogees,  and  since  Mars'  apogee  at  the  observation  was 
about  21^25'  within  the  Crab,  it  will  evidently  be,  at  the  time  of  the  epoch, 
16^40^  within  the  Crab. 


BOOK  ELEVEN 


1.  Demonstration  of  Jupiter^s  Eccentricity 

Now  that  Mars^  periodic  movements,  anomalies,  and  epochs  have  been  shown, 
we  shall  next  work  out  Jupiter’s  also,  and  in  the  same  way,  taking  first  again, 
for  the  demonstration  of  the  apogee  and  eccentricity,  3  acronychal  oppositions 
relative  to  the  sun’s  mean  passage.  We  observed  the  first  of  these  by  the  astro¬ 
labe  in  the  year  17  of  Hadrian,  Egyptian  wise  Epiphi  1-2, 1  hour  before  midnight, 
about  23°11'  within  the  Scorpion.  The  second  in  the  year  21,  Phaophi  13-14, 
2  hours  before  midnight,  about  7°54'  within  the  Fishes.  And  the  third  in  the  year 
1  of  Antonine,  Athyr  20-21,  5  hours  after  midnight,  about  14°23'  within  the 
Ram.  Now,  of  the  two  intervals,  that  from  the  first  acronychal  opposition  to  the 
second  embraces  3  Egyptian  years,  106  days,  and  23  hours,  and  104°43'  of  the 
star’s  apparent  passage;  and  that  from  the  second  to  the  third,  1  Egyptian  year, 
37  days,  and  7  hours,  and  similarly  36°29'.  And  the  mean  longitudinal  passage 
comes  to  99°55'  for  the  time  of  the  first  interval,  and  33°26'  for  that  of  the 
second.  From  these  intervals,  in  consequence  of  the  methods  propounded  by  us 
in  the  case  of  Mars,  we  first  construct  the  proof  of  the  things  we  are  required  to 
find,  again  with  the  one  eccentric  circle,  in  this  way: 

Let  there  be  the  eccentric  circle  ABC;  and  let  A  be  supposed  the  point  where 
the  epicycle’s  centre  was  at  the  first  achronychal  opposition,  B  at  the  second, 
and  C  at  the  third.  Within  the  eccentric  ABC  let  D  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the 
ecliptic;  and  let  AD,  BD,  and  CD  be 
joined.  And,  with  CDE  produced,  let  AE, 

BE,  and  AB  be  joined.  Let  EF  and  EG  be 
drawn  from  E  perpendicular  to  AD  and 
BD;  and  AH  from  A  perpendicular  to  EB. 

Since,  then,  the  eccentric’s  arc  BC  is 
assumed  to  subtend  36°39'  of  the  ecliptic, 
angle  jBD(j==  angle  BDC 
=  36°29' 

=  72°58'  to  2  rt., 

angle  BDC  being  at  the  centre.  And  so  al¬ 
so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EDG, 
arc  EG  ^72%S', 

and 

chord  EG=7im' 

where 

hypt.  D£;=120P. 

Likewise,  since 

arc  RC  =  33°26', 
therefore,  being  an  angle  at  the  circumference, 

angle  REC  =  33°26'  to  2  rt., 

346 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


347 


and,  by  subtraction, 

angle 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEGy 

arc  A;G  =  39^32', 

and 

chord  EG =40^35' 

where 

hypt.  EE  =  120P. 

And  therefore 

EE  =  210^58' 

where  it  was  shown 

EG  =  71P21' 

and 

EE=120P. 

Again,  since  the  eccentric^s  whole  arc  ABC  is  assumed  to  subtend  on  the 
ecliptic  141°12',  the  sum  of  both  intervals;  therefore,  being  at  the  ecliptic’s 
centre, 

angle  AEG=14ri2' 

=  282^24'  to  2  rt. 


and,  being  adjacent  to  it, 

angle  AEE  =  77^36'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EEE, 

arc  EE  =  77°36', 

and 

chord  EE  =  75n2' 

where 

hypt.  DE  =  120P. 

Likewise,  since  the  eccentric’s  arc  ABC  adds  up  to  133°21',  therefore,  being 
an  angle  at  the  circumference, 

angle  AEC=  133°21'  to  2  rt. 

But 


angle  ADE  =  77°36'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  EAF— 149°3'. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  A  EE, 

arc  EE=149°3', 

and 

chord  EE  =115^39' 

where 

hypt.  4E=120P. 

And  therefore 

4E  =  78p2' 

where  it  was  shown 

EE  =  75^12' 

and  it  is  supposed 

EE=120p. 

Again,  since  the  eccentric’s  arc  AB  is  99^^55',  therefore,  being  at  the  cir¬ 
cumference, 


angle  A.EE  =  99^^55'. 


348  PTOLEMY 


And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEH, 


arc  A/r=99°55' 

and  as  supplement 

arc  EH  =  80°5’. 

And  therefore 

chord  AH =91^52', 
chord  EH=77H2' 

where 

hypt.  AE=\29^. 

And  so 

AH  =  b9H‘i' 

and  likewise 

EH  =  59n2' 

where  it  was  shown 

AE  =  78^2' 

and 

Z)i;=120p. 

It  had  already  been  shown 

=210^58'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction. 

=  160^46' 

where 

^iy  =  59''44'. 

And 

sq.  5/^  =  25,845^55' 

and  likewise 

sq.  A/r  =  3,568^4', 

which,  added  together,  make 

sq.  A5  =  29,413^59'; 

in  length,  therefore, 

,  ^  A5  =  171^30' 

where 

Z)5  =  120P, 

and  likewise 

A5  =  78p2'. 

And  also 

A5  =  91^52' 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120P; 
for  AB  subtends  an  arc  of  99°55'.  And  therefore 

Z)5  =  64^17', 

A5  =  41^47' 

where 

A5  =  91^52' 

and 

ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 
And  so  also,  AE  being  an  arc  on  the  eccentric, 

arc  A5  =  40°45', 

and,  by  addition, 

arc  5A5C=174°6'. 


And  therefore 


chord  5Z)C=  119^50^ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI  349 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 

Since,  then,  segment  EABC  is  less  than  a  semicircle,  and  therefore  the  ec- 
centric^s  centre  falls  outside  it,  let  it  be  supposed  the  point  K.  And  let  the  diam¬ 
eter  through  both  centres  be  dra^Mi 
through  it  and  Z),  and  let  KNX  be  drawm 
from  K  perpendicular  to  CE  and  pro¬ 
duced. 

Since,  then,  it  was  sho^ra 
=119^50', 

Z)£;  =  64^17' 

where 

diam.  LM  =  120^, 

therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have 
CD  =  55^33'. 

And  so,  since 

rect.  ED,  DC  =  red.  LD,  DM, 
we  shall  have 

rect.  LD,  DM  =  3,570^56' 

where 

diam.  LM  =  120^. 

But 

rect.  LD,  DM +sq.  DK  =  sq.  half  diam. 

=  sq.  KL 

Therefore,  if  we  subtract  the  rectangle  LD,  DM  or  3,570^56'  from  the  square 
on  half  the  diameter  or  3,600^,  we  shall  have  left  the  square  on  DK  as  29^4'. 
And  therefore  we  shall  have 

1.  betw.  c.  DK'=  5^23' 


where 

Again,  since 
where 
and  it  was  shown  also 

therefore  also,  by  subtraction, 
where 


ecc.  rad.  KL  =  ^0^, 

half  CE  or  CA^  =  59^55' 
diam.  LM  =  120^, 
Ci)  =  55P33', 

DN  =  ^^22' 

DK  =  5^23'. 

DN  =  97m' 


And  so  also 
where 

DK=  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DKN, 

arc  Z)iV'  =  108°24'. 

And  therefore 

angle  DKN  =  108°24'  to  2  rt. 

=  54°12'. 

And  since  it  is  at  the  eccentric^s  centre,  we  shall  have  also 

arc  ilfZ  =  54°12'. 


PTOLEMY 


350 

And  also,  by  addition, 

arc  CilfX  =  half  arc  CXE  =  87^3'. 

Therefore  also,  by  subtraction, 

arc  CM  =  32°51' 

where  CM  is  the  arc  from  the  perigee  to  the  third  opposition.  And  it  is  evident 
that,  since  it  was  assumed 

arc5C  =  33°26^ 

therefore  we  shall  have,  by  subtraction 

arc  BM  =  0^35' 

where  BM  is  the  arc  from  the  second  opposition  to  the  perigee;  and  that,  since 
it  was  assumed 

arc  AB  =  99°55', 

therefore  we  shall  have,  by  subtraction, 

arc  AL  =  79^30' 

where  AL  is  the  arc  from  the  apogee  to  the  first  opposition. 

If,  then,  the  epicycle’s  centre  were  borne  on  this  eccentric,  it  would  suffice  to 
use  these  quantities  as  precise.  But  since,  according  to  the  hypothesis,  it  moves 
on  another  circle— that  is,  on  one  dravm  with  a  centre  bisecting  DK  and  with 
radius  KL — it  will  again  be  necessary,  as  in  the  case  of  Mars,  to  calculate  first 
the  differences  resulting  for  the  apparent  distances,  and  to  show  of  what  size 
they  would  be,  considering  the  ratios  of  eccentricity  very  nearly  the  same  as  if 
the  epicycle’s  centre  were  borne,  not  on  another  eccentric,  but  on  the  first  also 
embracing  the  zodiacal  anomaly;  that  is,  on  the  one  drawn  about  centre  K, 
Then  let  the  circle  LM  about  centre  D  n 

be  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle’s 
centre.  And  let  the  circle  NX  about  centre 
F  and  equal  to  LM  be  the  circle  of  its  reg¬ 
ular  movement.  With  the  diameter  NLM 
through  the  centres  joined,  let  E  be  taken 
on  it  as  the  ecliptic’s  centre.  And  first  let 
the  epicycle’s  centre  be  supposed  at  point 
A  for  the  first  opposition.  Let  DA,  DA, 

FAXj  and  EX  be  joined;  and  let  DG  and 
EH  be  drawn  from  points  D  and  E  per¬ 
pendicular  to  AF  produced. 

Since,  then,  angle  NFX  of  the  regular 
longitudinal  movement  wns  shown  to  be 
79°30',  therefore,  being  the  angle  vertical 
to  it, 

angle  DFG  =  79°30' 

=  159°  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFGj 

arc  DG=159° 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  FG  =  21°. 

And  therefore 

chord  D(?=  117^59', 
chord  FG  =  21^52' 


where 


hypt.  DF=120p. 


And  so  also 

and  likewise 
where 

and 

And  since 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 

Z)(?=2p39' 

F(?  =  0p30' 

Di^  =  half  ^i^N2p42' 

ecc.  rad.  AZ)  =  60p. 
sq.  AD — sq.  Z)G  =  sq.  AGy 


therefore  we  shall  have  also 

And  likewise,  since 

=  59^56'. 

FG=GH 

EH  =  2DG, 

and 

therefore  also,  by  addition, 

where 

AH  =  60‘‘2Q' 

EH  =  5n8', 

and  therefore 

And  therefore 

hypt.  AE=8(y“iO'. 

EH  =  10^2^' 

where 

AE=12(F‘-, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEHy 

,  ,  ,  arc  EH  =10^1', 

And  so  also 

angle  EAH  =  10°!'  to  2  rt. 

Again,  since 

rad.  ecc.  FX  =  60p, 

FH  =  lP 

and,  by  addition,  clearly 

^rx=6ip 

where 

EH  =  5nS\ 


therefore  we  shall  have  also 


hypt.  EX  =  Qmi\ 
EH  =  10^23' 


And  so  also 
where 

£'X=120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHX, 

arc  EH  =  9%5\ 

And  therefore 

T)  ,  ,  angle  EXH  =  9'^55'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  shown  ® 

angle  EAH  =  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  AEX  =  0%'  to  2  rt. 

=  0°3', 


351 


which  is  the  difference  sought. 


352 


PTOLEMY 


But  the  star,  sighted  along  the  straight  line  AE,  appeared,  at  the  first 
opposition,  to  be  situated  23°11'  within  the  Scorpion.  It  is  hence  evident 
that,  if  the  epicycle’s  centre  were  not  borne  on  the  eccentric  LM  but  on 
NX^  it  would  be  at  point  X  on  it  and  the  star  would  appear  along  straight 
line  EXy  differing  by  3  sixtieths  and  being  situated  23°14'  within  the  Scor¬ 
pion. 

Again,  in  a  like  figure,  let  also  the  drawing  of  the  second  opposition  be  laid 
down  in  a  position  a  little  west  of  the 
perigee. 

Since  the  eccentric’s  arc  NX  was  shown 
to  be  35  sixtieths,  therefore 
angle  iVi^X  =  0°35' 

=  1°10'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DFG, 

arc  i)G=riO', 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  F(?=  178^50'. 

And  therefore 

chord  £)G=lPl3', 
chord  FG=  120^ 

where 

hypt.  DF  = 

And  so  also 

DG  =  0p2' 

and  likewise 

FG  =  2H2' 

where 

DF  =  2H2^ 

and 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  Q0^. 

And  likewise  also,  since  it  is  indistinguishable  from  the  hypotenuse  BD, 

BG  =  60^, 


And  again,  since 
and 


GH  =  FG, 


EH  =  2DG, 

we  shall  also  have,  by  subtraction, 

BH  =  o7nS' 

where 

EH  =  0H\ 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  BE  =  57HS\ 

And  so  also 

EH  =  m' 

where 


BE  =  120^  \ 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEH,  again 

arc  EH  =  0°S\ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI  353 

And  therefore 

angle  EBH  =  0°8'  to  2  rt. 

Likewise,  since  it  was  shown 

ra=:5P24' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  /^X  =  60p, 

therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  also  have 

i/X  =  54^36' 

where 

and  therefore 

hypt.  E'X  =  54^36'. 

And  therefore 

EH'=mO' 

where 

£;X=120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHX, 

arc  £'^  =  0n0'. 

And  so  also 

angle  EXH  —  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BEX  =  0°2'  to  2  rt. 

=  0°!'. 

And  now  it  is  evident,  therefore,  that, 
since,  at  the  second  opposition,  the  star 
as  it  appeared  along  EB  was  situated 
7^54'  within  the  Fishes,  if  in  turn  it  ap¬ 
peared  along  EX  it  would  be  only  7°53' 
within  the  Fishes. 

And  now  let  the  dravdng  of  the  third 
opposition  be  laid  out  in  a  position  east 
of  the  perigee.  Since  the  eccentric^s  arc 
NX  is  assumed  to  be  32®51',  therefore 
angle  XFX  =  32°51' 

=  65^42'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  tri¬ 
angle  DFGy 

arc  Z)G  =  65°42', 
and  as  its  supplement 

arc  FG=  114^18'. 

And  therefore 

chord  Z)G  =  65p6', 

chord  FG=100P49' 

where 

hypt.  i)F=  120p. 

And  so  also 

Z)G=1P28' 


and  likewise 


FG  =  2n& 


354 

where 


PTOLEMY 


Z)F  =  2p42' 
ecc.  rad.  CZ)  =  60p. 
sq.  CD — sq.  DG^sq.  CG, 
GG =59^59'. 
GH^FG 


and 

And  since 
we  shall  also  have 
And  likewise,  since 
and 

EH  =  2DG, 

we  shall  also  have,  by  subtraction, 

G^  =  57^43' 

where 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  0^;  =  57^47'. 

And  therefore 

EH  =  Q^5' 

where 

CE  =120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEH^ 

arc  £'Lr=5°48'. 

And  so  also 

angle  ECH  =  6°48'  to  2  rt. 

Likewise,  since 

F/7=4P32' 

where 

ecc,  rad.  FX  =  GQp, 

therefore  we  shall  also  have,  by  subtraction, 

HX  =  55m\ 

where 

and  therefore  also 
And  so  also 
where  . 

£'X=120P, 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHX, 

arc  EH  =  Q^2\ 

And  therefore 

angle  EXH  =  Q^2'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  GEX  =  0°14'  to  2  rt. 

=  0°7'. 

And  so,  since  at  the  third  opposition  the  star  sighted  along  EC  was  situated 
14°23'  within  the  Ram,  it  is  evident  that,  if  it  were  along  the  straight  line  EXy 


EH  =  2^m') 
hypt.  i/X  =  55^33'. 
EH  =  &m' 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


355 


it  would  be  situated  14°30'  within  the  Ram.  And  it  was  shown  that  at  the  first 
opposition  it  was  23°  14'  within  the  Scorpion,  and  at  the  second  7°53'  within  the 
Fishes.  Therefore,  if  the  star's  apparent  intervals  were  considered — not  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle's  centre,  but  with  respect  to  that  em¬ 
bracing  its  regular  movement — they  would  come  to  104°39'  from  the  first  op¬ 
position  to  the  second,  and  to  36°37'  from  the  second  to  the  third.  Following 
these  with  the  theorem  already  shown,  we  find  the  intervals  between  the  centres 
of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the  eccentric  embracing  the  epicycle's  regular  movement 
to  be  very  nearly  5^30'  where  the  eccentric's  diameter  is  120^.  Of  the  eccentric's 
arcs,  we  find  that  from  the  apogee  to  the  first  opposition  to  be  77°15',  that  from 
the  second  opposition  to  the  perigee  to  be  2°50',  and  that  from  the  perigee  to  the 
third  opposition  to  be  30°36'. 

That  these  quantities  have  been  here  taken  accurately  because  the  differences 
of  the  intervals  are  very  nearly  the  same  as  the  first  and  are  calculated  through 
them — all  this  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  star's  apparent  intervals  are 
found,  by  means  of  the  discovered  ratios,  to  be  the  same  as  the  observed  ones, 
as  will  be  clear  to  us  from  what  follows. 

For  again  let  the  drawing  of  the  first  opposition  be  set  out  having  only  the 


And  so  also 


DG=2P41' 

and  likewise 

FG=0p36' 

where 

J5F  =  2p45' 
and 

ecc.  rad.  AD  =  60p. 

And,  for  the  same  reasons  as  sho^vn  before, 

AG=59p56', 

and 

=  60^32' 


where 


EH  =  2DG=5^22'; 


356 

and  so  it  is  calculated 


PTOLEMY 


=  60^46'. 

And  therefore 

EH  =  iom' 

where 

AE=  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEH, 

arc  EH  =10°S\ 

And  therefore 

angle  EAH  =  10°8'  to  2  rt. 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  LEA  =  144°22'  to  2  rt. 

=  72°11'. 

Therefore,  by  just  so  many  degrees  was  the  star  distant  from  the  ecliptic^s 
apogee  at  the  first  opposition. 

Again,  let  the  drawing  of  the  second  opposition  be  set  out.  Since  it  is  assumed 
angle  5Fil/  =  2^50' 

=  5^40'  to2rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  tri¬ 
angle  DFG, 

arc  i)(?  =  5°40' 
and^  as  its  supplement, 

arc  FG=174°20'. 

And  therefore 

chord 

chord  /^G=  119^51' 

where 

hypt.  Z)/^=120P. 

And  so  also 

Z)G  =  0p8' 

and  likemse 

FGN2P45' 

where 

Z)F  =  2P45' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  bO^. 

And  for  the  same  reasons  also 

i?G=60p, 

and,  by  subtraction, 
where 

And  so  also  it  is  calculated 
And  therefore 
where 

BE  =^120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EBHy 


BH^binb' 
EH=om\ 
hypt.  BE=^b7nb\ 
EH  =  0^33' 


And  so  also 
and,  by  addition, 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 
arc  £J/f  =  0°32'. 

angle  EBH  =  0°32'  to  2  rt. 


357 


angle  B£^M  =  6®12'  to  2  rt. 

=  3^6'. 

Therefore  the  star  at  the  second  opposition  was  also  3°6'  west  of  the  perigee. 
But  it  was  also  shown  to  be  72°11'  east  of  the  apogee  at  the  first.  Therefore  the 
apparent  distance  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second  is  calculated  to  be 
the  104^43'  of  the  remainder  of  the  semicircle,  in  accord  with  the  distance 
gotten  from  the  observations. 

Then  also  let  the  drawing  of  the  third  opposition  be  set  out.  Since  it  was 
shown 

angle  il/FC  =  30^36' 

=  6^12'  to2rt., 
therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DFG 

arc  Z)G  =  6ri2', 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  FG=nS%S\ 

And  therefore 

chord  DG  =  Q1^Q\ 
chord  FG  =103^17' 

where 

hypt.  DF=  120p. 

And  so  also 

Z)G=1P24' 

and  likewise 

FG  =  2^22' 

where 

DF  =  2H5' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  CD  =  60^. 

And  for  the  same  reasons  also 

CG  =  59^59' 

and,  by  subtraction, 
where  it  is  calculated 
And  so  also 
And  therefore 
where 

CE  =120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEH^ 

arc  EH  =  b'^U\ 

And  so  also 


CH  =  bl^Zr 
EH  =  2HS\ 
hypt.  CE^dlHV. 
EH  =  5m' 


angle  ECH  =  5^3^  to  2  rt.. 


358 

and,  by  addition, 


PTOLEMY 


angle  M£'(7  =  66^46'  to  2  rt. 

=  33°23'. 

By  just  as  many  degrees  was  the  star  east  of  the  perigee,  therefore,  at  the 
third  opposition.  And  it  was  shown  to  be  3°6'  west  of  the  same  perigee  at  the 
second.  Consequently,  the  apparent  distance  from  the  second  to  the  tliird 
comes  to  the  same  result  of  36°29',  again  in  accord  with  things  observed. 

It  is  immediately  clear  that  since,  at  the  third  opposition,  the  star  was 
situated  by  observation  14°23'  within  the  Ram  (at  a  distance,  as  was  shown, 
of  33°23'  east  of  the  perigee),  the  perigee  of  the  eccentricity  at  that  time  was 
11°  within  the  Fishes,  and  the  apogee  exactly  opposite  11°  within  the  Virgin. 

If  we  draw  the  epicycle  GHK  about  centre  C,  we  shall  have  immediately  the 
mean  longitudinal  passage  from  the 
eccentric’s  apogee  L  of  210°36',  be¬ 
cause  we  have  sho^vn 

angle  ikfFC=30°36'; 
and  we  shall  have  the  epicycle’s  arc 
HKj  from  the  perigee  H  to  the  star 
at  A,  equal  to  2°47',  because  we 
have  shown 

angle  EOF  =  5°34'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°47'. 

Therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  third 
opposition— that  is,  in  the  year  1 
of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Athyr 
20-21,  5  hours  after  midnight — 

Jupiter  considered  with  respect  to 
its  mean  passages  was  in  longitude 
210°36'  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee 
(that  is,  it  was  situated  11°36'  within  the  Ram)  and  in  anomaly  182°47'  from 
Gj  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

2.  Demonstration  of  the  Size  of  Jupiter’s  Epicycle 

Again  in  what  follows  for  the  demonstration  of  the  epicycle’s  size  we  took 
the  observation  we  sighted  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Mesore 
26-27  before  the  rising  of  the  sun — that  is,  very  nearly  5  equatorial  hours 
after  midnight,  when  the  sun’s  mean  passage  was  16°11'  within  the  Crab  and 
the  second  degree  of  the  Ram  was  culminating  in  the  astrolabe.  At  that  time, 
Jupiter,  sighted  relative  to  the  bright  star  in  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  appeared 
to  be  15^°  within  the  Twins,  and  it  appeared  at  the  same  longitude  as  the 
centre  of  the  moon  which  was  more  to  the  south.  But  at  that  hour,  by  cal¬ 
culations  already  set  forth,  we  find  the  moon’s  mean  position  to  be  9°  within 
the  Twins,  and  in  anomaly  we  find  it  to  be  272°5'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee; 
and  therefore  its  true  passage  to  be  about  14°50'  within  the  Twins,  and  its  ap¬ 
parent  passage  in  Alexandria  to  be  about  15°45'.  Therefore  Jupiter  was  in 
this  way  situated  153^°  within  the  Twins. 

Again,  since  the  time  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  given  observation  is 
1  Egyptian  year  and  276  days,  and  since  that  amount  of  time  embraces  53°17' 
in  longitude  and  218°31'  in  anomaly  (for  there  will  be  no  sensible  difference 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


359 


even  if  this  amount  is  taken  more  or  less  roughly),  if  we  add  these  to  the 
demonstrated  positions  at  the  third  opposition  we  shall  have  at  the  time  of  the 
observation  very  nearly  263°53'  in  longitude  from  the  same  apogee  and  41°18' 
in  anomaly  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

Then,  with  these  things  supposed,  let  there  be  laid  out  again  the  drawing  of 
a  proof  similar  to  that  of  Mars,  hav¬ 
ing  the  epicycle’s  position  east  of  the 
eccentric’s  perigee  and  the  star’s  just 
after  the  epicycle’s  apogee  in  accord 
wdth  the  mean  passages  in  longitude 
and  anomaly  here  laid  out.  i 

Since,  then,  the  mean  passage  in 
longitude  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee 
is  263°53',  therefore 
angle  BFC  = 

=  167°46'  to2rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DFM, 

arc  DM  =  167^46' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  DM  =  12°14'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DM  =  119^19', 
chord  FM  =  12^47' 

where 

hypt.  DF=  120p. 

And  so  also 


and  likewise 

where 

and 


DM  =  2^44', 
FM  =  0p18' 
DD  =  2p45' 


And  since 


ecc.  rad.  DD  =  60p. 


sq.  DD — sq.  DM  =  sq.  DM, 

therefore 


And  hkewise,  since 
and 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 
where  it  is  calculated 
and  therefore 


DM  =  59^56'. 
FM  =  LM 
EL  =  2  DM, 
BL  =  5m8' 

EL  =  5^28\ 
hypt.  DD  =  59P52'. 


And  therefore 


DmiOP58' 


360 

where 


PTOLEMY 


BE  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEL, 

arc  £'L=  10°30'. 


And  so  also 

angle  EBF=  10°30'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  BFC=  167^46'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  BEC  =  178°16'  to  2  rt. 

Again  since  the  perigee  is  very  nearly  11°  vdthin  the  Fishes  and  the  star  ap¬ 
peared  along  EK  15°45'  within  the  Twins,  therefore 
angle  i^S(7  =  94°45' 


and,  by  subtraction. 

=  189°30'  to  2  rt., 

angle  BEK  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEN, 

arc  5A  =  11°14', 


and 

chord  11^44' 

where 

And  therefore 

hypt.  BE = 120'*. 

BN =5^50' 

where 

BE  =  59^52' 

and 

ecc.  rad. =60'’. 

And  likewise,  since 

arc  GK  =  U°18', 

therefore 

angle  GBK =U°18' 

=  82°36'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  GBH  =  angle  EBF 

=  10°30'  to2rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  HBK  =  72°6'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  shown  also 

angle  HEK=11°14'  to  2  rt., 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BKN  =  60°52'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BKN, 

arc  BN  =  m%2', 


and 

chord  5iV=60'’47' 

where 

hypt.  BK  =  120'’. 

And  therefore 
where 
and 

Which  it  was  required  to  find. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 
epic.  rad.  ^X'miPSO' 
BN  =  5^50' 
ecc.  rad.  =  60P. 


361 


3.  On  the  Correction  of  Jupiter’s  Periodic  Movements 

Next,  for  the  periodic  movements,  W'e  again  took  one  of  the  ancient  observa¬ 
tions  very  faithfully  recorded,  according  to  which  it  is  quite  clear  that  in  the 
year  45  of  Dionysius,  Parthenon  10,  Jupiter  at  sunrise  occulted  the  Southern 
Ass.  Now,  this  time  is  the  year  83  after  Alexander’s  death,  Egyptian  wise 
Epiphi  17-18  in  the  morning,  at  which  time  we  find  the  sun’s  mean  passage 
9°56'  vfithin  the  Virgin.  But  the  star  called  the  Southern  Ass  of  those  about 
the  nebula  of  the  Crab  was  at  the  time  of  our  observation  113^°  within  the 
Crab,  but  clearly  at  that  observation  7°33',  since  3°47'  correspond  to  the  378 
years  between  the  observations.  And  therefore  Jupiter  at  that  time  (since  it 
occulted  the  star)  was  7°33'  within  the  Crab.  Likewise  also,  since  the  apogee 
according  to  us  was  about  11°  within  the  Virgin,  at  the  observation  it  must 
have  been  7°13'  within  the  Virgin.  It  is  clear  that  the  apparent  star  w^as 
300°20'  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee  at  that  time,  and  the  mean  sun  w'as  2°43' 
from  the  same  apogee. 

Now,  with  these  things  supposed,  again  let  the  drawing  of  the  similar  proof 

for  Mars  be  laid  out,  only  here  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  passages  given  at  the 
observation,  having  the  epicycle’s 
position  at  B  before  the  apogee  A 
and  that  of  the  sun’s  mean  situa¬ 
tion  a,t  L  Si  little  after  the  same 
apogee.  And  therefore  it  also  has  the 
position  of  the  star  at  H  after  the 
epicycle’s  apogee  G.  Likewise  let 
FBG,  DB,  BH,  and  EH  still  be 
joined;  and  let  FK  be  dra^vn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  DB,  DM  and  BN  to 
EH,  and  here  DX  to  NB  produced 
to  make  the  rectangular  parallelo¬ 
gram  DMNX, 

Now^  since,  containing  as  it  does 
the  remainder  of  300°20'  from  the  one  circle  of  the  ecliptic, 

angle  AL/^  =  59°40' 
and 

angle  ALL  =  2°43', 

therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  LEH  or  angle  BHE  =  62°23' 

=  124°46' to2rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BHN, 

arc  LAr  =  124°46', 


362 

and 


PTOLEMY 


where 

chord  BiV=  106^20' 

And  therefore 

hypt.  BH  =  120p. 

BAr=10Pl2' 

where 

epic.  rad.  =  11^30'. 

Again,  since  it  is  assumed 

angle  DEM  =  59°40' 


and,  by  subtraction, 

=  119'’20'  to2rt. 

angle  MZ)iE7  =  60°40'  to  2  rt., 
therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEM, 

arc  J9M=119°20', 


and 

chord  DM  =  103^34'  i 

where 

And  therefore 

hypt.  DE=  120p. 

DM  =  2^23' 

and,  by  addition, 

DATX  =  12^35' 

where  -y.i 

1  .  ■  I'.' 

DE  =  2H5' 

and 

y 

n  ecc.  rad.  DD  =  60'’. 

And  so  also 

where 

BX =25^10' 

\ 

hypt.  BD  =  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BDXy 


And  therefore 

arc  BX  =  24°14'. 

angle  BDX  =  24^14'  to  2  rt., 

and,  as  its  complement, 

angle  BDM  =  155°46'  to  2  rt. 
and  likewise,  by  addition, 

angle  BDE  =  216°2Q'  to  2  rt. 
and  again,  as  its  supplement, 

angle  BDF=  143^34'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  FDK, 

arcFiC=143°34', 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  DK  =  36^26'. 


And  therefore  also 

chord  FX  =  113'>59', 
chord  DX=37‘>31' 

363 


where 

And  therefore 

and  likewise 

and,  by  subtraction, 

THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 

hypt.  DF=mK 

FK  =  2^Zr 

DK=0^b2' 

u\ 

where  '  ^ 

BK=^bm' 

-ft  , 

Di7’=2p45' 

and 

^  i 

And  therefore  also 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  Q0^. 

n  1  •  >  ' 

hypt.  BF=mn2'. 

And  so  also 

1  FK^mZ' 

where 

BF=m^] 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BFK, 


arcFiC  =  5°4'. 

And  therefore 

angle  FBD  =  5°4'  to  2  rt. 

and  by  addition,  embracing  the  regular  longitude, 

angle  148°38'  to  2  rt. 

=  74^19'. 

And  since  also  angle  GBH  combined  with  angle  BFC  and  the  semicircle 
(that  is,  less  angle  AFB  here)  gives 

^  angle  AEL  =  2°43', 

therefore  we  shall  also  have  angle  GBH,  which  contains  the  starts  passage 
from  the  epicycle’s  apogee,  equal  to  77°2'.  We  have  hence  shown  that,  at  the 
time  of  the  given  observation,  Jupiter  considered  according  to  its  mean  pas¬ 
sage  was  in  longitude  285°41'  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee  or  in  mean  position 
22°54'  within  the  Twins,  and  in  anomaly  77°2'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

But  we  had  also  proved  that,  at  the  time  of  the  third  opposition,  it  was 
182°47'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee.  Therefore,  in  the  time  between  the  two 
observations  (embracing  377  Egyptian  years  and  128  days  less  very  nearly  1 
hour)  it  added  on,  with  345  complete  circles,  105°45'  in  anomaly.  The  surplus 
of  degrees  in  anomaly  from  the  mean  movements  worked  out  by  us  comes  to 
very  nearly  this  amount,  because  we  established  the  daily  movement  from 
these,  dividing  the  total  number  of  degrees  from  the  circle  and  surplus  by  the 
total  number  of  days  of  that  time. 

4.  On  the  Epoch  of  Jupiter’s  Periodic  Movements 

Now  here  again,  since  the  time  from  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise 
Thoth  1  at  midday,  to  the  given  ancient  eclipse  is  506  Egyptian  years  and  very 
nearly  316^  days,  and  since  that  amount  of  time  embraces  surpluses  of 
258°13'  in  longitude  and  290°58'  in  anomaly,  therefore,  if  we  subtract  these 
from  the  proper  given  positions  at  the  observation,  we  shall  have,  at  the  time 
of  the  epoch  the  same  as  for  the  others,  Jupiter’s  mean  longitudinal  position 


364  PTOLEMY 

4°41'  within  the  Balance,  and  its  anomalistic  position  146®41'  from  the  epi- 
cycle^s  apogee.  Also  for  the  same  reasons  the  apogee  of  its  eccentricity  will  be 
2°9'  within  the  Virgin. 

5.  Demonstration  of  Saturn's  Eccentricity  and  Apogee 
And  now  that  it  was  left  at  this  place  to  demonstrate  the  anomalies  of  Saturn 
and  its  positions,  first  for  the  examination  of  its  apogee  and  eccentricity,  we 
again,  as  for  the  others,  took  the  acronychal  oppositions  relative  to  the  sun's 
mean  passage.  The  first  of  these  we  observed  with  the  astrolabe  in  the  year  11 
of  Hadrian,  Egyptiamvise,  Pachons  7-8  in  the  evening,  1°13'  within  the  Bal¬ 
ance;  and  the  second  in  the  year  17  of  Hadrian  likewise,  Egyptiamvise  Epiphi 
18;  and  we  calculated  the  time  and  place  of  the  true  opposition,  by  observa¬ 
tions  on  it,  to  be  4  hours  after  noon  of  the  18th,  9°40'  within  the  Archer.  Ob¬ 
serving  the  third  opposition  in  the  year  20  of  Hadrian  again,  Egyptiamvise 
Mesore  24,  we  likewise  calculated  the  time  of  the  true  opposition  to  have  been 
at  the  very  noon  of  the  24th,  and  its  place  to  have  been  14°14'  within  the  Goat. 

Now,  of  the  two  intervals,  the  one  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second 
embraces  6  Egyptian  years,  70  days,  and  22  hours,  and  68°27'  of  the  star's 
apparent  passage;  and  that  from  the  second  to  the  third,  3  Egyptian  years,  35 
days,  and  20  hours,  and  likewise  34°34'.  And  75°43'  of  mean  longitudinal 
passage  are  calculated  in  the  rougher  way^  for  the  first  interval,  and  37°52'  for 
the  second.  With  these  intervals  supposed,  we  again  show  what  is  required  by 
the  same  theorem  that  is  first  on  one  eccentric  in  this  way. 

For,  not  to  repeat,  let  there  be  laid  out  the  drawing  similar  to  those  of  the 
same  proof.  And  since  the  eccentric's  arc 
BC  is  assumed  to  subtend  34°34'  of  the 
ecliptic,  therefore,  being  at  the  ecliptic's 
centre 

angle  EDG  =  angle  BDC 
=  34°34' 

=  69°8'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  tri¬ 
angle  DEGj 

arc  E(?  =  69°8'; 

and 

chord  EG  =  68^5' 

where 

hypt.  DE  =  120^. 

Likewise,  since 

arc  BC  = 

therefore,  being  at  the  circumference, 

angle  BEC  =  37°52'  to  2  rt. 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  EBG  =  3ri&  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EBG, 

arc  E(?  =  3ri6', 

and 

chord  EG  =  32m' 

^That  is,  without  correction.  For  such  a  small  angular  distance  it  would  make  no  difference. 


where 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


365 


hypt.  BE  =  \20^, 

And  therefore 

BE^2b2HV 

where  it  was  shown 

EG  =  m^5' 

and 

DE=  120^. 

Again,  since  the  w^hole  arc  ABC  subtends  on  the  ecliptic  the  103®!'  all  told 
of  both  distances,  therefore,  being  at  the  ecliptic^s  centre, 

angle  ADC=  103®!'. 

And  for  this  reason  also,  as  adjacent  to  it, 
angle  ADE  =  76%9' 

=  153®58'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEF, 

arc  ^F  =  153®58' 

and 

chord  =  116^55' 


where 

hypt.  DE  =  120p. 

And  like^vise,  since  the  eccen trices  arc  ABC  totals  113®35',  therefore,  being  at 
the  circumference, 

angle  AEC  =  113®35'  to  2  rt. 

But 

angle  153®58'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FAE  =  92^27'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEF, 

arc  EF  =  92^27 \ 

and 

chord  iEJF  =  86^39' 

where 

hypt.  A£'=120p. 

And  therefore 

AJS  =  161^55' 

w^here  it  was  shown 

116^55' 

and 


DE=  129^. 

Again,  since  the  eccentric^s  arc  AB  is  75®43',  therefore  also,  being  at  the 
circumference, 

angle  A£J15  =  75®43'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEHj 

arc  A/f  =  75®43' 

and  as  its  supplement 

arc  £;i7  =  104®17'. 


And  therefore 


chord  =  73^39', 
chord  £7/7  =  94^45' 


366 

where 


PTOLEMY 


And  so  also 


hypt.  AE=\2Q^. 
Aff =99^43' 


and  likewise 
where  it  was  shown 
and 

And  it  has  been  shown 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

where 


^i?=127»51' 
A®  =161^55' 

B^=252p41'; 
B/f  =  124P50' 


And 


Ai7  =  99‘>43'. 
sq.  BH=  15,583^22' 


and  likewise 


sq.  AH  =  9,877p3', 


which,  added  together,  make 

sq.  A£  =  25,460^25'. 


Therefore,  in  length, 
where 

and  likewise 
But  also 
where 


AB  =  159^34' 
Z)B=120P 
AB  =161^55'. 
AB =73^39'  ,f 


ecc.  diam.  =  120^, 
for  AB  subtends  an  arc  of  75°43'.  And  therefore 

BB =55^23' 


and 

where 

and 

And  so  also 
and,  by  addition, 
and  clearly,  by  subtraction. 
And  for  this  reason  also 


AB=74P43' 

AB  =  73^39' 
ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 
ecc.  arc  AB=77°1' 
arc  BABC'  =  190°36', 
arc  CE=  i69°24'. 
chord  CBBmi9P28' 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI  367 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 

Then  let  the  eccentric^s  centre  be  taken  within  the  segment  BAC  since  it  is 
greater  than  a  semicircle,  and  let  it  be  K. 

Through  it  and  B  let  the  eccentric ^s  diam¬ 
eter  through  both  centres  LKDM  be 
drawn.  And  let  KNX  be  drawn  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  CE  and  produced. 

Since,  then,  it  was  shown 
-  CF=  119^28' 

and 

DE  =  55^23' 

where 

diam.  LM=120p, 

therefoice  we  shall  also  have,  by  subtrac¬ 
tion, 

CjD  =  64p5'. 

And  so,  since 

rect.  ED^  DC  =  red.  LDy  DMy 
we  shall  also  have 

rect.  LD,  Dilf  =  3,549^9' 

where 

diam.  Lilf  =  120^. 

But  also 

rect.  LD,  DM+sq.  DK  —  sq.  half  diam. 

=  sq.  LK. 

If,  therefore,  we  subtract  3,549^9'  from  the  square  on  half  the  diameter  or 
3,600p,  we  shall  have  left  the  square  on  DK  as  50^51'.  And  therefore  we  shall 
have,  in  length, 

.X"  I.  betw.  c.  DK=.7p8' 

where 

ecc.  diam.  =  120^. 

/  Again,  since 

half  Ci;  or  =  59^44' 

where 

diam.  LM  =  120^ 

and  it  was  shown  also 

=  55^23', 

therefore  we  shall  also  have,  by  subtraction, 

Z)Ar  =  4p2T 

where 


DK  =  7^S\ 
DN=73nV 


And  so  also 
where 

hypt.  DX  =  120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DKN, 

arc  DN  =  75^0'. 


368 

And  therefore 


PTOLEMY 


angle  DKN  =  75^10'  to  2  rt. 

=  37°35'. 

And  since  it  is  at  the  eccentric’s  centre,  we  shall  also  have 

arc  lfX  =  37°35'. 

And 

arc  CX  =  half  arc  CX£  =  84^42'. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  CL  =  57°43' 

where  CL  is  the  arc  from  the  apogee  to  the  third  opposition.  But  also  it  is 
assumed 

arc  BC  =  37°52'; 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

arc  BL=19°51' 

where  BL  is  the  arc  from  the  apogee  to  the  second  opposition.  And  likewise, 
since  it  is  assumed 

arc  =  75^43', 

therefore  we  shall  also  have 

arc  AL  =  55°52' 

where  AL  is  the  arc  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  apogee. 

Now,  since  again  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  not  borne  on  this  eccentric,  but  on 
the  eccentric  drawn  with  a  centre  bisecting  DK  and  with  radius  KL^  we  cal¬ 
culated  accordingly,  as  for  the  others,  the  resulting  differences  of  the  apparent 
distances  on  the  ecliptic,  considering  the  ratios  very  nearly  the  same  if  one 
should  change  the  epicycle’s  passage  to  the  eccentric  effecting  the  zodiacal 
anomaly. 

For  let  the  drawing  of  the  first  opposition  for  the  similar  proof  be  laid  out  in 
a  position  west  of  the  apogee  L.  Since, 
then,  angle  NFX  of  the  regular  longi¬ 
tudinal  passage,  (that  is,  angle  DFG)  w^as 
showm  to  be  55°52'  or  111°42'  to  2  right 
angles’  360°,  therefore,  on  the  circle  about 
right  triangle  DFGj 

arc  DG=111°42' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  F(7  =  68°16'. 

And  therefore 

chord  Z)(?  =  99^20', 
chord  FG  =  67^20' 

where 

hypt.  Z)F=120P. 

And  so  also 

DG  =  2^57' 

and  likewise 

FG  =  2p 

where 

1.  betw.  c.  Z)F  =  3p34' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  AZ)  =  60p. 


And  since 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


369 


we  shall  have 
And  likewise,  since 
and 

therefore,  by  addition, 
where 

And  for  this  reason  also 
And  so  also 


sq.  AD -sq,  DG  =  sq.  AG, 
AG  =  59^56'. 

FG  =  GH 
EH  =  2DG, 

A// =  61^56' 

J5J//  =  5P54'. 
hypt.  Ai^  =  62^13'. 


where 


hypt.  AJ5J=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEH, 

arc  EH 


And  therefore 

angle  EAH=^  10%!'  to  2  rt. 

Again,  since 

ecc.  rad.  FX  =  ()0^, 
F/f=4p 


and,  by  addition,  clearly 
where 

therefore  we  shall  also  have 
And  therefore 
where 


HZ  =  64P 
£'//  =  5P54'; 
hypt.  =  64^16'. 

Eli  =  11^2' 


hypt.  -^X  =  120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHX, 

arc  EH  =  ]0^33', 


And  so  also 

angle  £:Xi/  =  10°33'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  also  shown 

angle  ^A//  =  10°51'  to  2  rt.; 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  A^X  =  0°18'  to  2  rt. 

=  0°9' 

which  is  the  difference  sought. 

But  at  the  first  opposition  the  star  appeared  along  straight  line  AE,  situated 
1®13'  within  the  Balance.  Now,  it  is  clear  that,  if  the  epicycle^s  centre  were  not 
borne  on  the  epicycle  AL  but  on  NX,  it  would  be  at  point  X  on  it,  and  the  star 


370 


PTOLEMY 


would  appear  along  straight  line  EX,  9  sixtieths  west  of  the  position  at  A,  and 
it  would  be  situated  1°4'  ^\dthin  the  Balance. 

Again,  for  the  same  proof,  let  the  dramng  of  the  second  opposition  be  laid  out 
east  of  the  apogee. 

Since  the  eccentric’s  arc  NX  was  shown 
to  be  19®51',  therefore  angle  NFX  and 
angle  DFG,  vertical  to  it,  would  each 
equal  19°51',  or  39°42'  to  2  right  angles’ 

360°.  And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DFG, 

arc  Z)G  =  39°42' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arcF(?=140°18'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DG  =  40^45', 
chord  =112^52' 

where 

hypt.  DF=120p. 

And  so  also 

DG=1P13' 

and  likewise 

FG=3p21' 

where 


Z)F  =  3p34' 
ecc.  rad.  5Z>  =  60p. 
sq.  £Z)-sq.  DG  =  sq.  BG, 
5(?= 59^59'. 
FG=GH 


and 

And  since 
therefore 

And  likewise,  since 
and 

EH  =  2DG, 

therefore,  by  addition,  we  shall  have 

=  63^20' 

where 

and  therefore  also 
And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  BE  =  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEH, 

arc  £:Z7  =  4°24'. 

And  so  also 

angle  EBH  =  4!'2^'  to  2  rt. 


£^^  =  2^26'; 
hypt.  =  63^23'. 

£'^  =  4^36' 


Likewise,  since 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


371 


F/7  =  6P42' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  FX  =  60p, 
therefore  we  shall  have,  by  addition, 

/7X  =  66P42' 

where  it  was  supposed 

EH  =  2m\ 

and  therefore 

hypt.  EX  =  66p45'. 

And  so  also 
where 

hypt.  EX  =120^) 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHXy 

arc  EH  =  ^°12', 

And  therefore 

angle  EXH  =  ^n2'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  had  already  been  shown  also 

angle  £'5^7=4^24'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BEX  =  12'  to  2  rt. 

=  0°6'. 

Now,  it  is  clear  here  that,  since  at  the  second  opposition  the  star  appearing 
along  EB  was  situated  9°40'  within  the  Archer,  if  in  turn  it  appeared  along  EX 
it  would  be  situated  9°46'  within  the  Archer.  But  it  was  shown  that,  at  the  first 
opposition,  it  was  situated  likewise  1°4'  within  the  Balance.  Hence  it  is  evident 
that  the  apparent  distance  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second  would  amount 
to  68°42'  on  the  ecliptic  if  it  were  considered  with  respect  to  the  eccentric  NX, 
And  likewise  let  the  drawing  of  the  third  opposition  be  laid  out  according  to 
the  same  general  figure  as  that  of  the 
second. 

Since  arc  NX  was  shown  to  be  57°43', 
therefore  angle  NFX  or  angle  DFG  is 
57^43',  or  115°26'  to  2  right  angles^  360°. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  tri¬ 
angle  DFGy 

arc  Z)(?=115°26' 
and  as  its  supplement 

arc  £G  =  64°34'. 

And  therefore 

chord  Z)G=  101^27', 
chord  F(j  =  64p6' 

where 

hypt.  Z)£  =  120P. 

And  so  also 

DG=Zn' 


and  likewise 


F(?=1P54' 


372 

PTOLEMY 

where 

DF  =  3i>34' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  0^  =  60”. 

And  again,  since 

sq.  CD -sq.  DG—sq.  CG, 

we  shall  also  have 

CG  =  59^56'. 

And  likewise,  since 

FG=GH 

and 

EH  =  2DG, 

therefore,  by  addition,  we  shall  have 


where 

Ciy  =  61P50' 

EH  =  6^2', 

and  therefore 

hypt.  CE  =  Q2^8'. 

And  therefore 

EH=nm' 

where 

hypt.  CE  =  120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEHj 


And  so  also 

arc  EH=.n°9'. 

angle  ECH  =  to  2  rt. 

Likewise,  since 

F^=3'>48' 

where 

ecc.  rad.  FX  =  60^, 
therefore,  by  addition,  we  shall  have 

HX  =  63H8' 


where 

EH  =  6^2', 

and  therefore 

hypt.  EX =64^5'. 

And  therefore 

EH=nn8' 

where 

hypt.  EX  =  120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EHXy 


And  so  also 

Site  EH  =10°49'. 

angle  EXH=  10°49'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  shown 

angle  ECH  =  ir9'  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  C EX  =  0^20'  to  2  rt. 
=  0^10'. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI  373 

And  so,  since,  at  the  third  opposition,  the  star  appearing  along  EC  was  situ¬ 
ated  14°14'  within  the  Goat,  it  is  evident  that,  if  it  were  on  straight  line  EX,  it 
would  be  14°24'  within  the  Goat,  and  in  turn  the  apparent  distance  from  the 
second  opposition  to  the  third,  considered  relative  to  the  eccentric  NX,  would 
be  34°38'. 

Working  with  these  distances  in  the  same  theorem,  we  find  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  centres  of  the  ecliptic  and  of  the  eccentric  embracing  the  epicycle’s 
regular  movement  (or  the  distance  equal  to  EF)  to  be  very  nearly  6^50'  where 
the  eccentric’s  diameter  is  120^.  And,  of  the  same  eccentric’s  arcs,  we  find  that 
from  the  first  opposition  to  the  apogee  is  57°5';  that  from  the  apogee  to  the 
second  opposition  is  18°38';  and  that  from  the  apogee  to  the  third  opposition 
is  56°30'. 

Here  again  these  quantities  have  been  accurately  taken  because  the  differ¬ 
ences  of  the  ecliptic’s  arcs  amount  to  very  nearly  the  same  as  the  former  ones, 
by  using  these  arcs,  and  because  the  star’s  apparent  distances  are  found  to  be  in 
accord  with  those  observed,  as  will  be  clear  to  us  from  similar  proofs. 

For  let  the  figure  of  the  first  opposition  be  laid  out  for  only  the  eccentricity 
bearing  the  epicycle’s  centre. 

Since,  then,  angle  AFL,  subtending  as 
it  does  57°5'  of  the  eccentric,  is  57°5',  and 
it  and  the  vertical  angle  DFG  are  each 
114°10'  to  2  right  angles’  360°,  therefore, 
on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFG, 
arc  i)G  =  114°10', 
and  as  its  supplement 

arc  FG  =  65°50'. 

And  therefore 

chord  i)G  =  100P44', 
chord  FG  =  65^13' 

where 

hypt.  i)F=120P. 

And  so  also 


Z)G  =  2P52' 


and  likewise 


where 


FG=1P51' 


and 


1.  betw.  c.  DF  =  3p25' 
ecc.  rad.  Ai)  =  60p. 
sq.  AZ)-sq.  DG  =  sq.  AG, 
AG  =  59^56'. 


And  again,  since 
we  shall  also  have 
And  likewise,  since 
and 

EH  =  2DG, 

therefore,  by  addition,  we  shall  have 

AH  =  61^47' 


FG  =  GH 


374 

where 


PTOLEMY 


EH  =  5H4\ 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  AE  =  ^2^y, 

And  therefore 

^H=11P5' 

where 

hypt.  AE=\2Q^\ 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AEHy 

arc  EH  = 


And  so  also  j 

angle  =  10°36'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  supposed 

angle  AFL=  114^10'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  =  103°34'  to  2  rt. 

=  5r47'. 

By  just  so  many  degrees,  therefore,  the  star  was  west  of  the  apogee  at  the  first 
opposition. 

Again,  let  the  drawing  of  the  second  opposition  be  laid  out  in  a  similar  man¬ 
ner.  Since  angle  BFL  was  shown  to  be  18°38',  and  it  and  the  vertical  angle 
DFG  each  37^16'  to  2  right  angles^  360^ 
on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFGj 
arc  D(7  =  37°16' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  F(?=142°44'. 

And  therefore 

chord  D(7  =  38^20', 
chord  FG=  113^43' 

where 

hypt.  Z)F  =  120p. 

And  so  also 

Z)(?=1P5' 

and  likewise 

F(?  =  3P14' 

where 

Z)F  =  3p25' 


and 

And  since 

therefore  we  shall  have 
And  likewise,  since 


ecc.  rad.  BD  =  G0^. 
sq.  BD -sq.  DG  =  sq,  BG, 
BG  =  59^59'. 

FG  =  GH 


and 


EH  =  2DGy 

therefore  we  shall  have,  by  addition, 

BH  =  6dm' 


where 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


375 


and  therefore  also 
And  therefore 


EH  =^2m'y 
hypt.  BE’ =  63^15'. 
EB  =  4p7' 


where 

hypt.  BE  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEHy 

arc  EH  =  d%6\ 

And  so  also 

angle  EBF  =  3°56'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  supposed 

angle  BFL  =  37°16'  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  BEL  =  33°20'  to  2  rt. 
=  16°40'. 


Therefore  at  the  second  opposition  the  star  appeared  16°40'  east  of  the 
apogee.  But  it  was  shown,  at  the  first  opposition,  to  be  51®47'  west  of  the  same 
apogee.  Hence  the  apparent  distance  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second 
comes  to  a  total  of  68°27'  in  accord  with  the  number  obtained  from  the  ob¬ 
servations. 

Then  let  the  drawing  of  the  third  opposition  be  laid  out  also.  Since  angle  CFL 
was  shown  to  be  56°30',  and  it  and  the 
vertical  angle  DFG  each  113°  to  2  right 
angles'  360°,  therefore,  on  the  circle  about 
right  triangle  DFG, 

arc  Z)G=113° 
and  as  its  supplement 

arc  FG  =  67°, 

And  therefore 

chord  DG  — 100^4', 
chord  EG  =  66^14' 

where 

hypt.  DF  =  120^, 

And  so  also 

EG  =  2^51' 

and  likewise 

EG  =  1^53' 

where 

EE  =  3^25' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  GE  =  60p. 

And  since  again 


sq,  GE-sq.  EG  =  sq.  GG, 


we  shall  also  have 


GG  =  59^56'. 


376 

And  likewise,  since 


PTOLEMY 


FG^GH 

and 

EH  =  2DG, 

therefore  we  shall  also  have,  by  addition, 

=  61^49' 

where 

EH  = 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  CE^62^5'. 

And  therefore 

EH=nno' 

where 

hypt.  (7£  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEH, 

arc  EH  =  10^32'. 

And  so  also 

angle  ECH  =  10°32'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  is  supposed 

angle  Ci^A  =  113°  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  CEL  =  102°28'  to  2  rt. 

=  51°14'. 

Therefore  by  just  so  many  degrees,  at  the  third  opposition,  did  the  star 
appear  east  of  the  apogee.  But  it  was  also  shown  to  be  16°40'  east  of  the  apogee 
at  the  second  opposition.  And  so  the  apparent  distance  from  the  second  op¬ 
position  to  the  third  is  the  difference  of  34°34',  again  in  accord  with  the  number 
obtained  from  the  observations. 

It  is  immediately  evident  also  that,  since  the  star  was  51°  14'  east  of  the 
apogee,  as  was  shown,  and  14°14'  within  the  Goat,  the  apogee  of  its  eccen¬ 
tricity  at  that  time  was  23°  within  the  Scorpion,  and  its  perigee  just  opposite 
23°  within  the  Bull. 

Likewise,  if  we  draw  epicycle  GH  about  centre  C,  then  we  shall  have  the 
epicycle’s  mean  longitudinal  passage 
from  the  eccentric’s  apogee  as  the  56° 

30'  just  proved;  and  the  epicycle’s  arc 
HK  as  5°16',  because  it  has  been  shown 
angle  £;CF=10°32'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  the  supplementary  arc  GH  from 
the  epicycle’s  apogee  to  the  star  is  left 
to  be  174°44'.  Therefore,  at  the  time  of 
the  third  opposition — that  is,  in  the 
year  20  of  Hadrian,  Egyptian  wise  Me- 
sore  24  at  midday — Saturn  considered 
with  respect  to  its  mean  passages  was 
56°30'  in  longitude  from  the  eccentric’s 
apogee  or  19°30'  within  the  Goat,  and 
174°44'  in  anomaly  from  the  epicycle’s 
apogee.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


377 


6.  Demonstration  of  t?ie  Size  of  Saturn’s  Epicycle 


And  then  again  for  showing  the  epicycle’s  size  we  took  an  observation  we 
made  in  the  year  2  of  Antonine,  Egyptianwise  Mechir  6-7,  4  equatorial  hours 
before  midnight,  when  the  last  degree  of  the  Ram  was  culminating  in  the 
astrolabe,  with  the  mean  sun  28°41'  within  the  Archer.  At  that  time  Saturn, 
sighted  relative  to  the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades  [Aldebaran],  appeared  to  be 
9/dL5°  within  the  Water  Bearer  and  was  very  nearly  east  of  the  moon’s 
centre.  For  it  was  just  that  far  from  its  northern  horn.  But  at  that  hour  the 
moon,  according  to  its  mean  passage,  was  8®55'  within  the  Water  Bearer,  and 
in  anomaly  was  174°15'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee.  Therefore  its  true  passage 
must  have  been  9°40'  wdthin  the  Water  Bearer,  and  its  apparent  passage  in 
Alexandria  8®34'.  Consequently,  since  it  was  very  nearly  3^®  east  of  its  centre 
Saturn  must  have  been  9^5°  within  the  Water  Bearer.  And  it  was  76®4'  from 
the  eccentric’s  same  apogee  because  in  that  amount  of  time  it  did  not  change 
appreciably. 

Since  the  time  from  the  third  opposition  to  this  observation  is  2  Egyptian 
years,  167  days,  and  8  hours,  and  since  again  Saturn,  in  that  amount  of  time, 
moves  approximately  in  longitude  30®3'  and  in  anomaly  134®24',  it  follows  that 
if  we  add  these  to  the  position  given  at  the  third  opposition  we  shall  have, 
for  the  time  of  the  given  observation,  in  longitude  86®33'  from  the  eccentric’s 
apogee  and  in  anomaly  309®8'  from  the  epicycle’s  apogee. 

Now,  with  these  things  supposed,  let  the  drawing  of  the  similar  proof  be 

laid  out,  having  the  epicycle’s  posi¬ 
tion  to  the  east  of  the  eccentric’s 
apogee,  and  the  star’s  position  be¬ 
fore  the  epicycle’s  apogee  according 
to  the  passages  supposed. 

Since,  then,  it  is  supposed 
angle  AFB  or 
angle  Z)FM  =  86®33' 

=  173®6'  to2rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  DFM, 

arc  DM  =  173®6' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  FAT  =  6®54'. 

And  therefore 

chord  DM  =  119^47', 
chord  FAT  =  7p13' 

where 


And  so  also 


hypt.  Z>F=120p. 


and  likewise 


Z)ilf=3p25' 
FAf  =  0Pl2' 


where 


1.  betw.  c.  DF  =  3^25' 


378 

and 


PTOLEMY 


ecc.  rad.  BD  =  ^Qp. 
sq.  BD-sq.  DM  =  sq.  BM, 
=  59^54'. 

FM  =  LM, 


i;L-6P50', 
hypt.  ^£7  =  60^29'. 
£7L  =  13P33' 


And  since 
we  shall  also  have 
And  likewise,  since 
and 

EL  =  2DM, 

therefore  also  we  shall  have,  by  addition, 

BL  =  &m' 

where 

and  therefore  also 
And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  BjS7  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEL, 

arc  £^L  =  12°58'. 

And  so  also 

angle  EBF  to  2  rt. 

And  it  is  also  supposed 

angle  AF5  =  173®6'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore^,  by  subtraction, 

angle  Aj55  =  160°8'  to  2  rt. 

But  also,  as  the  angle  containing  the  starts  apparent  distance  from  the  apogee, 

angle  Ai;K  =  76°4' 

=  152°8'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore  we  shall  have,  by  subtraction, 

angle  KEB  =  8°0'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BEN^ 

arc  BN  =  8°, 

and  ‘ 

where 

And  therefore 
where 
and 

ecc.  rad.  =  60p. 

Again,  since  the  star  was  309°8'  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee  G,  therefore,  by 
subtraction, 


chord  BA  =  8p22' 
hypt.  BE  =120^. 
jBAr  =  4Pl3' 

5£’  =  60P29' 


And  therefore 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 
arc  GA:  =  50°52'. 


379 


angle  GBK  =  b^%2' 

=  10r44'  to2rt. 

But 

angle  =  angle  GBH  =12%^'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  to  2  rt. 

where  it  was  shown 

angle  KEB  =  8°  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have 

angle  =  80^46'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BKN, 

arc  HAr  =  80°46' 

and 

chord  5Ar  =  77^45' 

where 

hypt.  BK  =  120p. 

And  therefore  we  shall  have 

epic.  rad.  BK=.^}/2^ 

where  it  was  shown 

SAT  =  4^13' 


and 

ecc.  rad.  =  60P. 

We  have  concluded  that  Saturn^s  apogee  at  these  dates  near  the  beginning 
of  Antonine^s  reign  was  23®  within  the  Scorpion.  Where  the  radius  of  the 
eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle  is  60^,  there  the  line  between  the  centres  of  the 
ecliptic  and  of  the  eccentric  effecting  the  regular  movement  comes  to  6^50', 
and  the  epicycle^s  radius  to  6^30'.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

7.  On  the  Correction  of  Saturn^s  Periodic  Movements 

Now  that  it  is  left  to  show  the  correction  of  the  periodic  movements,  we 
took  for  this  again  one  of  the  faithfully  recorded  ancient  observations,  accord¬ 
ing  to  which  it  is  clear  that  in  the  year  82  of  the  Chaldeans,  Xanthicus  5,  in 
the  evening,  Saturn  was  2  digits  below  the  Virgin^s  southern  shoulder.  This 
date  is  the  year  519  of  Nabonassar,  Egyptianwise  Tybi  14  in  the  evening,  at 
which  time  we  find  the  mean  sun  6®10'  within  the  Fishes.  But  the  fixed  star 
of  the  Virgin^s  northern  shoulder  at  the  time  of  our  observation  was  133^® 
within  the  Virgin.  At  the  time  of  the  given  observation,  since  very  nearly 
3^®  of  the  fixed  star’s  movement  correspond  to  the  intervening  366  years,  it 
was  clearly  93^®  within  the  Virgin;  and  also  Saturn,  since  it  was  south  of  the 
fixed  star  by  2  digits.  Likewise,  since  its  apogee  v/as  shown  in  our  time  to  be 
nearly  23®  within  the  Scorpion,  at  that  time  it  must  have  been  193^®  within 
the  Scorpion.  By  means  of  these  things  it  is  concluded  that  at  the  given  time 
the  apparent  star  was  290®10'  along  the  ecliptic  from  the  apogee  at  that  time, 
and  the  mean  sun  was  106®50'  from  the  same  apogee. 

With  these  things  supposed,  again  let  there  be  set  out  the  drawing  for  a 


380 


PTOLEMY 


angle  HEL  or  angle  BHE  =  353°20'  to  2  rt. 
because  BH  is  parallel  to  EL^  And  by  subtraction 

angle  BHN  =  6°40'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BHN, 

arc  BN  =  6%0', 


similar  proof,  having  the  epi- 
cycle^s  position  west  of  the  ec- 
centric^s  apogee  and  the  sun^s 
west  of  the  perigee  and  parallel 
to  it  the  line  from  the  epicycle^s 
centre  to  the  star. 

Now,  since  Saturn  appeared 
west  of  the  apogee  by  the  69°50' 
failing  one  complete  circle,  there¬ 
fore,  being  at  the  ecliptic^s  centre, 
angle  AEH  =  69°50' 

=  139^40'  to2rt. 

But  also  the  angle  AEL  of  the 
solar  distance  is  assumed  to  be 
106°50'  or  213°40'  to  2  right 
angles’  360°.  And  therefore,  by 
addition, 


and 

where 

And  therefore 
where 

Likevdse,  since 
and 


chord  BN  =  6^58' 
hypt.  BH  =120^. 
BN-=0m' 
epic.  rad.  BH 

angle  AEH  =139^40'  to  2  rt. 


angle  -BDilf  =  40°20'  to  2  rt. 
therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DEM, 

arc  Dikr=139°40', 


and 

where 

And  therefore 

where 

and 

and,  by  addition, 


chord  12^39' 

hypt.  2)E'=120p. 
DM  =  XN  =  3n2' 

1.  betw.  c.  DE  =  3^25' 
ecc.  rad.  5Z)  =  60p; 

BN  X  =  3^35' 
hypt.  BD  =  90^, 


where 


And  therefore 

THE  ALMAGEST,  XI  381 

where 

BX  =  7nO' 

5Z)==120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BDX, 

arc  5X  =  6°52'. 

And  so  also 

angle  BZ)Z  =  6°52'  to  2  rt., 

and  as  its  complement 

angle  BDM  =  173°8'  to  2  rt., 

and  likewise  by  addition 

angle  BDE  =  to  2  rt., 

and  as  its  supplement 

angle  BDA  =  146°32'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  DFK, 

arcFi^=146°32' 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  =  33^28'. 


And  therefore 

where 

chord  fa:  =  114P55', 
chord  Z)F:  =  34p33' 

And  therefore 

hypt.  DF  =  120p. 

and  likewise 

FiC =3P17' 

where 

DK =0^59' 

and 

1.  betw.  c.  F)F  =  3p25' 

and,  by  subtraction, 

ecc.  rad.  BD  =  Q0^; 

BK=mn' 

where 

and  therefore 

FK^znr, 

And  so  also 

hypt.  BF=5m'. 

where 

FK  =  mO' 

hypt.  5F=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BFKj 

arc  F7v=  6^22'. 


And  therefore 

But 

angle  FBK  =  6°22'  to  2  rt. 

angle  ADB  =  146^32'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition,  we  shall  have 

angle  =  152°54'  to  2  rt. 

=  76°27', 

the  angle  which  embraces  the  regular  longitudinal  passage. 

Therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  given  observation,  Saturn,  according  to  its 
mean  longitudinal  passage,  was  283°33'  from  the  apogee,  or  situated  2°o3' 


382  PTOLEMY 

within  the  Virgin.  Since,  moreover,  the  sun^s  mean  passage  is  supposed 
50',  if  we  add  to  this  the  360°  of  one  circle  and  from  the  resulting  466°50' 
subtract  the  283°33'  in  longitude,  we  shall  have,  for  that  same  time,  the 
183°17'  of  anomaly  from  the  epicycle's  apogee. 

At  the  time  of  the  given  observation,  which  was  in  the  year  519  of  Nabonas- 
sar,  Tybi  14  in  the  evening,  Saturn  was  shown  to  be  183°17'  from  the  epi¬ 
cycle's  apogee,  and  at  the  time  of  the  third  opposition,  which  was  in  the  year 
883  of  Nabonassar,  Mesore  24  at  midday,  it  was  174°44';  therefore  it  is  evident 
that  in  the  time  between  the  two  observations,  which  embraces  364  Egyptian 
years  and  219^  days,  Saturn  has  moved  351°27'  above  351  complete  circles 
of  anomaly.  And  again  the  surplus  from  the  mean  movements  worked  out  by 
us  comes  to  very  nearly  this  much.  For  the  daily  mean  movement  was  es¬ 
tablished  by  dividing  the  total  number  of  degrees  resulting  from  the  number 
of  circles  and  the  surplus  by  the  total  number  of  days  of  the  time. 

8.  On  the  Epoch  of  Saturn's  Periodic  Movements 

But  since  also  the  time  from  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar,  Thoth  1,  at  midday 
to  the  given  ancient  observation  is  518  Egyptian  years  and  13334  days,  and 
since  this  amount  of  time  embraces  surpluses  of  216°9'  in  longitude  and  149°  15' 
in  anomaly,  if  we  subtract  these  from  the  given  positions  at  the  observations, 
we  shall  have,  again  for  this  time  of  the  epoch,  Saturn's  mean  longitudinal 
position  26°44'  within  the  Goat,  its  anomalistic  position  34°2'  from  the  epi¬ 
cycle's  apogee,  and  therefore  the  apogee  of  its  eccentricity  about  14°10'  within 
the  Scorpion.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

9.  How  THE  True  Passages  are  Gotten  Geometrically  from 
the  Periodic  Movements 

By  means  of  the  same  things  it  will  be  clear  to  us  that  conversely,  if  the  peri¬ 
odic  arcs  of  the  eccentric  embracing  the  regular  movement  and  of  the  epicycle 
are  given,  then  also  the  stars'  apparent  passages  are  easily  obtained  by  geome- 
try. 

For  if,  in  the  simple  drawing  of  the  eccentric  and  epicycle,  we  join  FBH  and 
EBGy  then,  given  the  mean  longi¬ 
tudinal  passage  (that  is,  angle  AFB) 
angle  AEB,  and  angle  EBF  or  angle 
GBH  are  also  given  according  to 
both  hypotheses,  from  things  al¬ 
ready  shown.  Furthermore,  the  ratio 
of  the  straight  line  BE  to  the  epicy¬ 
cle's  radius  is  given. 

Let  the  star  be  supposed,  for  in¬ 
stance,  at  point  K  on  the  epicycle, 
and  EK  and  BK  be  joined.  And  let 
arc  HK  be  given.  Now,  if  we  no  lon¬ 
ger  (as  in  the  converse  proof)  draw 
a  straight  line  from  the  epicycle's 
centre  B  perpendicular  to  EK  but 
rather  from  the  star  at  K  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  EB  (as  here  KL)  then  the 


A 


383 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 

whole  angle  GBK  is  given,  and  therefore  also  the  ratio  of  KL  and  LB  to  BK  and 
EB;  and,  accordingly,  the  ratio  of  the  whole  EBL  to  LK,  And  so  also,  given  the 
angle  LEK^  we  get  the  angle  AEK  containing  the  star’s  apparent  distance  from 
the  apogee. 

10.  Treatment  of  the  Construction  of  Tables  for  the  Anomalies 

Yet  in  order  that  we  may  not  always  calculate  the  apparent  passages  geo¬ 
metrically  (although  this  way  alone  accurately  obtains  what  is  required,  but  is 
too  difficult  for  ease  in  researches),  we  have  constructed  tables  as  convenient 
and  as  nearly  accurate  as  possible,  for  each  of  the  five  stars,  and  containing  their 
particular  anomalies  combined  in  such  a  way  that,  when  the  periodic  movements 
from  the  proper  apogees  are  given,  we  may  readily  calculate  from  them  the  ap¬ 
parent  passages  for  any  time. 

Each  of  these  tables  we  have  arranged  again  in  45  rows,  for  symmetry’s  sake, 
and  in  8  columns.  Of  these  columns,  the  first  two  contain  the  numbers  of  the 
mean  passages,  as  in  the  case  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  with  the  180°  from  the 
apogee  arranged  downwards  in  the  first  and  the  remaining  180°  of  the  semicircle 
arranged  upwards  in  the  second,  so  that  the  number  180  has  been  put  in  the  last 
row  in  both,  and  their  increase  for  the  first  15  rows  downwards  is  by  intervals  of 
6°  and  for  the  remaining  30  under  them  by  intervals  of  3°.  For  the  differences  of 
the  sections  of  anomaly  with  respect  to  each  other  are  less  appreciable  at  the 
apogees,  but  they  change  more  rapidly  at  the  perigees. 

Of  the  next  two  columns,  the  third  contains  the  addition-subtractions  result¬ 
ing  for  the  corresponding  number  of  mean  longitudinal  passage  through  the 
greatest  eccentricity,  yet  taken  simply  as  if  the  epicycle’s  centre  were  borne  on 
the  eccentric  embracing  the  regular  movement.  The  fourth  column  contains  the 
differences  of  the  addition-subtractions  resulting  from  the  fact  that  the  epicy¬ 
cle’s  centre  is  not  borne  on  that  circle  but  on  another.  And  the  way  in  which 
each  of  these  two  is  obtained  geometrically,  at  the  same  time  and  separately,  can 
be  readily  understood  through  the  many  theorems  already  propounded  by  us. 
It  w^as  fitting  that  at  this  point  in  this  treatise  such  an  analysis  of  the  zodiacal 
anomaly  be  displayed  and  therefore  set  forth  in  two  columns;  but,  for  actual  use, 
one  column  combined  from  the  addition-subtraction  of  them  both  would  suffice. 

Of  the  next  three  columns,  each  contains  the  addition-subtractions  due  to  the 
epicycle,  again  taken  simply,  with  the  apogees  and  perigees  considered  relative 
to  the  distance  from  our  eye.  For  the  method  of  this  kind  of  proof  can  be  easily 
understood  by  us  with  the  help  of  theorems  already  set  out.  The  middle  one  of 
these  three  columns,  or  the  sixth  from  the  first,  contains  the  addition-subtrac¬ 
tions  calculated  according  to  the  ratios  of  the  mean  distances.  But  the  fifth  con¬ 
tains,  for  the  same  sections,  the  differences  of  the  addition-subtractions  at  the 
greatest  distance  mth  respect  to  those  at  the  mean;  and  the  seventh  contains 
the  differences  of  the  addition-subtractions  at  the  least  distance  with  respect  to 
those  at  the  mean. 

For  we  have  shown  that,  where  the  epicycle’s  radius  is  6^30'  in  the  case  of 
Saturn  (for  it  would  be  wnll  finally  to  begin  from  the  top  down),  11p30'  for  Jupi¬ 
ter,  39^30'  for  Mars,  43^10'  for  Venus,  and  22^30'  for  Mercury,  there  the  mean 
distance  of  all  is  60^ — that  is,  the  distance  considered  with  respect  to  the  radius 
of  the  eccentric  bearing  the  epicycle;  and  the  greatest  distance  with  respect  to 
the  ecliptic’s  centre  is  for  Saturn  63^25',  for  Jupiter  62^45',  for  Mars  66p,  for 


384  PTOLEMY 

Venus  61^15',  and  for  Mercury  69p;  and  likewise  the  least  distance  is  for  Saturn 
56^35',  for  Jupiter  57^15',  for  Mars  54^,  for  Venus  58^45',  and  for  Mercury 
55P34'. 

We  have  arranged  the  eighth  and  last  column  for  obtaining  the  corresponding 
parts  of  the  difference,  set  out  when  the  stars'  epicycles  are  neither  at  the  mean, 
greatest,  or  least  distances,  but  in  the  passages  between.  We  have  arranged  the 
calculation  of  this  correction  for  each  distance  between,  only  with  respect  to  the 
greatest  addition-subtractions  at  the  tangents  from  our  eye  to  the  epicycle, 
since  there  is  no  appreciable  deviation  in  the  proportion  of  the  differences  for  the 
other  sections  of  the  epicycle  relative  to  those  for  the  greatest  addition-sub¬ 
tractions. 

To  make  what  is  here  said  still  clearer,  and  to  have  the  method  of  proportions 
stand  out  in  evidence,  let  there  be  laid  out  the 
straight  line  ABCD  through  the  centres  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic  and  of  the  eccentric  embracing  the  regular  move¬ 
ment  of  the  epicycle.  Let  C  be  supposed  the  ecliptic's 
centre,  and  B  the  centre  of  the  epicycle's  regular 
movement.  With  BEF  produced,  let  the  epicycle  FG 
be  drawn  about  centre  E;  and  let  straight  line  CG  be 
drawn  from  C  tangent  to  it,  letting  CE  and  the  per¬ 
pendicular  EG  be  joined.  For  an  example,  let  the  epi¬ 
cycle's  centre  for  each  of  the  five  stars  be  supposed 
30°  in  regular  movement  from  the  apogee  of  eccen¬ 
tricity. 

Now  (not  to  draw  out  the  calculations  by  proving 
the  same  things  again)  it  was  shown  by  many  theo¬ 
rems  preceding  this,  both  for  the  hypothesis  of  Mer¬ 
cury  and  the  rest,  that,  when  angle  ABE  is  given,  the  ratio  of  CE  to  the  epicy¬ 
cle's  radius  or  GE  is  also  given;  and,  when  angle  ABE  is  assumed  to  be  30°,  by 
calculations  for  each  case,  the  ratio  becomes  63^2'  to  6^30'  for  Saturn,  62^26'  to 
11^30'  for  Jupiter,  65^24'  to  39^30'  for  Mars,  61^26'  to  43^10'  for  Venus,  and 
66^35'  to  22^30'  for  Mercury.  Therefore  we  shall  have  angle  ECG  which  contains 
the  greatest  addition-subtraction  due  to  the  epicycle  at  that  time:  5°553^'  for 
Saturn,  10°363^'  for  Jupiter,  37°9'  for  Mars,  44°563^'  for  Venus,  and  19°45'  for 
Mercury. 

According  to  the  ratios  just  expounded,  the  greatest  addition-subtractions  at 
the  mean  distances,  become  6°13',  11°3',  41°10',  46°,  and  22°2',  in  the  order  of 
the  stars  just  given,  to  avoid  repetition.  At  the  greatest  distances  they  become 
5°53',  10°34',  36°45',  44°48',  and  19°2';  and  at  least  distances  they  become  6°36', 
11°35',  47°!',  47°17',  and  23°53'.  Those  at  the  greatest  distances  hence  differ 
from  those  at  the  mean  by  0°20',  0°29',  4°25',  1°12',  and  3°;  and  those  at  the 
least  differ  from  them  by  0°23',  0°32',  5°51',  1°17',  and  1°51'. 

Now,  the  addition-subtractions  of  the  distances  sought  are  less  than  those  of 
the  mean  distances  and  differ  from  them  by  0°173/^',  0°263^',  4°1',  1°33^',  and 
2°17'.  These  are,  for  Saturn,  52  and  30'  sixtieths  of  the  given  whole  differences 
between  those  at  the  mean  distances  and  those  at  the  greatest;  for  Jupiter,  54 
and  50'  sixtieths;  for  Mars,  54  and  34';  for  Venus  52  and  55';  and  for  Mercury, 
45  and  40'.  And  therefore  in  the  eighth  column  in  each  table  we  have  placed  just 
that  number  of  sixtieths  in  the  row  containing  the  number  30  of  periodic  longi- 


385 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 

tude.  And  in  the  case  of  distances  having  addition-subtractions  greater  than 
those  at  the  mean  distances,  we  likewise  analysed  their  differences  into  sixtieths 
again,  but  relative  to  whole  differences  with  those  at  the  least  distances  and  no 
longer  with  those  at  the  greatest.  In  the  same  way  we  calculated,  for  the  other 
positions  at  intervals  of  6°  mean  longitude,  the  resulting  sixtieths  of  the  whole 
differences,  and  we  put  them  beside  the  proper  numbers.  For,  as  we  said,  the 
proportion  of  the  differences  is  sensibly  the  same,  even  if  the  passages  of  the, 
stars  are  not  at  the  epicycle^s  greatest  addition-subtractions,  but  at  other  parts  of 
it.  And  here  is  the  exposition  presented  in  the  following  five  tables  [pp.  386-390]. 

12.  On  Calculating  the  Longitudes  of  the  Five  Planets 

Now,  whenever  we  wish  to  know  the  apparent  passages  of  each  of  the  stars, 
from  their  periodic  movements  in  longitude  and  anomaly,  by  means  of  the 
foregoing  tables,  we  shall  make  the  calculation,  one  and  the  same  for  the  five 
stars,  in  this  way:  * 

Calculating,  from  the  tables  of  mean  movement,  the  regular  positions  of 
longitude  and  anomaly  above  whole  circles  produced  in  the  time  required,  we 
first  carry  the  degrees  from  the  eccentric's  apogee  at  that  time  to  the  mean 
longitudinal  passage,  to  the  table  of  anomaly  proper  to  the  star.  If  the  longi¬ 
tudinal  number  set  out  is  in  the  first  column,  we  subtract  from  the  degrees  of 
longitude  the  quantities  in  the  third  column  of  the  truly  determined  longitude 
corresponding  to  the  number,  along  with  the  addition-subtraction  of  sixtieths 
in  the  fourth  column;  and  we  add  them  to  the  degrees  of  anomaly.  But  if  the 
longitudinal  number  is  in  the  second  column,  we  add  them  to  the  longitudinal 
and  subtract  them  from  the  anomalistic,  so  that  we  may  have  both  passages 
truly  determined. 

Then  we  carry  the  number  of  degrees  from  the  anomaly's  apogee,  analysed 
out,  again  to  the  first  two  tables,  and  we  record  the  corresponding  addition- 
subtraction  of  the  mean  distance  in  the  sixth  column.  Likewise  carrying  the 
original  number  of  regular  longitude,  brought  over,  to  the  same  numbers,  if 
it  is  in  the  first  rows  more  apogee  than  that  of  the  mean  distance  (which  be¬ 
comes  clear  from  the  sixtieths  in  the  eighth  column),  then,  whatever  number 
of  sixtieths  in  the  eighth  column  correspond  to  it,  we  take  just  that  many  of 
the  difference,  corresponding  to  the  recorded  mean  addition-subtraction,  in 
the  fifth  column  of  the  greatest  distance,  and  we  subtract  the  result  from  what 
we  recorded.  But  if  the  number  of  the  aforesaid  longitude  is  in  the  lower  rows 
more  perigee  than  that  at  the  mean  distance,  then  likewise,  whatever  number 
of  sixtieths  correspond  to  it  in  the  eighth  column,  we  take  just  that  many  of 
the  difference,  corresponding  to  the  recorded  mean  addition-subtraction,  in 
the  seventh  column  of  the  least  distance,  and  we  add  the  results  to  what  we 
recorded. 

The  total  number  of  degrees  of  the  addition-subtraction  so  determined  we 
add  to  the  degrees  of  longitude,  truly  determined,  if  the  truly  determined 
anomalistic  number  is  in  the  first  column;  and  we  subtract  them  from  the 
longitudinal  degrees,  if  it  is  in  the  second  column.  And  counting  the  resulting 
Iiumber  of  degrees  from  the  star's  apogee  at  that  time,  we  come  to  its  ap¬ 
parent  passage. 


2 

ion 

ers 

354 

348 

342 

336 

360 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


0 

30 

0 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

0 

30 

0 

0 

0 

0 

30 

45 

ion 

32 

51 

8 

45 

21 

58 

31 

11 

47 

24 

0 

37 

13 

50 

26 

3 

39 

37 

34 

32 

29 

49 

6 

24 

42 

21 

0 

0 

0 


PTOLEMY 

11.  Tables  fob  the  Anomalies 


SATURN,  Apogee,  14°10'  within  the  Scorpion 


s 

4 

Differences 

S 

6 

Addition- 

7 

Longitudinal 

of 

Differences 

Subtraction 

Differences 

Addition- 

Addition- 

of 

of 

of 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Anomaly 

Addition 

0 

37 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

36 

0 

2 

1 

13 

0 

4 

0 

4 

1 

11 

0 

4 

1 

49 

0 

6 

0 

5 

1 

45 

0 

7 

2 

23 

0 

8 

0 

7 

2 

18 

0 

9 

2 

57 

0 

9 

0 

8 

2 

50 

0 

11 

3 

29 

0 

10 

0 

10 

3 

20 

0 

13 

3 

59 

0 

11 

0 

11 

3 

49 

0 

15 

4 

28 

0 

11 

0 

12 

4 

17 

0 

17 

4 

55 

0 

10 

0 

14 

4 

42 

0 

19 

5 

20 

0 

9 

0 

15 

5 

4 

0 

20 

5 

42 

0 

8 

0 

17 

5 

25 

0 

20 

6 

0 

0 

7 

0 

18 

5 

42 

0 

21 

6 

14 

0 

5 

0 

18 

5 

55 

0 

21 

6 

24 

0 

3 

0 

19 

6 

5 

0 

22 

6 

30 

0 

1 

0 

19 

6 

12 

0 

22 

6 

31 

0  0 
Addition 

0 

20 

6 

12 

0 

23 

6 

32 

0 

2 

0 

20 

6  13 

0 

23 

6 

31 

0 

3 

0 

20 

6 

12 

0 

24 

6 

30 

0 

4 

0 

21 

6 

12 

0 

24 

6 

27 

0 

5 

0 

21 

6 

9 

0 

24 

6 

23 

0 

6 

0 

20 

6 

5 

0 

25 

6 

19 

0 

7 

0 

20 

6 

0 

0 

25 

6 

14 

0 

8 

0 

20 

5 

55 

0 

24 

6 

7 

0 

9 

0 

19 

5 

48 

0 

24 

5 

59 

0 

10 

0 

19 

5 

40 

0 

23 

5 

50 

0 

10 

0 

19 

5 

31 

0 

23 

5 

39 

0 

11 

0 

18 

5 

21 

0 

22 

5 

27 

0 

11 

0 

18 

5 

10 

0 

22 

5 

14 

0 

12 

0 

17 

4 

58 

0 

21 

5 

0 

0 

12 

0 

17 

4 

45 

0 

20 

4 

45 

0 

12 

0 

16 

4 

31 

0 

19 

4 

29 

0 

12 

0 

15 

4 

16 

0 

18 

4 

12 

0 

12 

0 

14 

4 

0 

0 

17 

3 

54 

0 

12 

0 

14 

3 

43 

0 

15 

3 

35 

0 

11 

0 

12 

3 

25 

0 

14 

3 

16 

0 

11 

0 

11 

3 

7 

0 

13 

2 

56 

0 

10 

0 

10 

2 

48 

0 

12 

2 

36 

0 

9 

0 

9 

2 

29 

0 

11 

2 

15 

0 

8 

0 

7 

2 

9 

0 

10 

1 

53 

0 

7 

0 

6 

1 

48 

0 

8 

1 

31 

0 

6 

0 

5 

1 

27 

0 

7 

1 

9 

0 

5 

0 

5 

1 

6 

0 

5 

0 

47 

0 

3 

0 

4 

0 

45 

0 

4 

0 

24 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

23 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ion 

ers 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


ion 

0 

58 

56 

54 

50 

43 

35 

27 

19 

8 

58 

45 

35 

23 

40 

8 

n 

52 

9 

26 

43 

G 

49 

37 

26 

15 

4 

52 

41 

30 

19 

7 

28 

49 

42 

31 

58 

22 

47 

11 

40 

13 

40 

4 

32 

0 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 


11.  Tables  for  the  Anomalies 
JUPJTER,  Apogee,  2''9'  within  the  Virgin 


3 

4 

Differences 

5 

6 

Addition- 

7 

Longitudinal 

of 

Differences 

Subtraction 

Differences 

Addition- 

Addition- 

of 

of 

of 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Anomaly 

Addition 

0 

30 

0 

1 

0 

2 

0 

58 

0 

2 

1 

0 

0 

2 

0 

5 

1 

56 

0 

5 

1 

30 

0 

3 

0 

7 

2 

52 

0 

7 

1 

58 

0 

4 

0 

9 

3 

48  ; 

0 

9 

2 

26 

0 

5 

0 

11 

4 

42 

0 

11 

2 

52 

0 

6 

0 

13 

5 

34 

0 

13 

3 

17 

0 

7 

0 

15 

6 

25 

0 

15 

3 

40 

0 

7 

0 

17 

7 

12 

0 

18 

4 

1 

0 

7 

0 

19 

7 

57 

0 

*20 

4 

20 

0 

6 

0 

21 

8 

37 

0 

22 

4 

37 

0 

5 

0 

23 

9 

14 

0 

24 

4 

51 

0 

4 

0 

24 

9 

46 

0 

26 

5 

2 

0 

3 

0 

25 

10 

13 

0 

28 

5 

9 

0 

2 

0 

26 

10 

35 

0 

30 

5 

14 

0 

1 

0 

26 

10 

51 

0 

31 

5 

15 

0  0 
Subtraction 

0 

27 

10 

57 

0 

31 

5 

16 

0 

1 

0 

27 

11 

0 

0 

32 

5 

15 

0 

1 

0 

27 

11 

2 

0 

32 

5 

14 

0 

2 

0 

28 

11 

3 

0 

32 

5 

12 

0 

2 

0 

28 

11 

1 

0 

33 

5 

9 

0 

3 

0 

29 

10 

59 

0 

33 

5 

5 

0 

4 

0 

29 

10 

53 

0 

33 

5 

0 

0 

5 

0 

30 

10 

45 

0 

34 

4 

54 

0 

5 

0 

30 

10 

35 

0 

34 

4 

47 

0 

6 

0 

30 

10 

24 

0 

34 

4 

39 

0 

6 

0 

29 

10 

10 

0 

33 

4 

10 

0 

7 

0 

29 

9 

54 

0 

33 

4 

20 

0 

7 

0 

28 

9 

36 

0 

32 

4 

9 

0 

8 

0 

28 

9 

16 

0 

32 

3 

58 

0 

8 

0 

27 

8 

54 

0 

31 

3 

46 

0 

8 

0 

26 

8 

30 

0 

30 

3 

33 

0 

8 

0 

25 

8 

4 

0 

28 

3 

20 

0 

7 

0 

23 

7 

36 

0 

26 

3 

6 

0 

7 

0 

22 

7 

6 

0 

25 

2 

51 

0 

6 

0 

21 

6 

34 

0 

23 

2 

36 

0 

6 

0 

19 

6 

0 

0 

21 

2 

20 

0 

5 

0 

17 

5 

24 

0 

19 

2 

4 

0 

5 

0 

15 

4 

47 

0 

17 

1 

47  , 

0 

4 

0 

13 

4 

9 

0 

15 

1 

30 

0 

3 

0 

11 

3 

29 

0 

13 

1 

13 

0 

2 

0 

9 

2 

49 

0 

10 

0 

55 

0 

2 

0 

7 

2 

7 

0 

8 

0 

37 

0 

1 

0 

5 

1 

25 

0 

5 

0 

18 

0 

1 

0 

3 

0 

43 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ion 

\ers 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

*^0 


53 

59 

51 

36 

34 

11 

28 

17 

38 

8 

26 

20 

47 

33 

5 

34 

3 

n 

5 

13 

1 

49 

44 

38 

33 

27 

35 

42 

31 

20 

9 

58 

35 

12 

26 

39 

50 

1 

47 

32 

44 

55 

49 

43 

52 

0 


PTOLEMY 


11.  Tables  for  the  Anomalies 
MARS,  Apogee,  16°40'  within  the  Crab 


3 

4 

Differences 

5 

6 

Addition- 

7 

Longitudinal 

of 

Differences 

Subtraction 

Differences 

Addition- 

Addition- 

of 

of 

of 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Anomaly 

Addition 

1 

0 

0 

5 

0 

8 

2 

24 

0 

9 

2 

0 

0 

10 

0 

16 

4 

46 

0 

18 

2 

58 

0 

15 

0 

24 

7 

8 

0 

28 

3 

56 

0 

20 

0 

33 

9 

30 

0 

37 

4 

52 

0 

24 

0 

42 

11 

51 

0 

46 

5 

46 

0 

27 

0 

51 

14 

11 

0 

56 

6 

39 

0 

28 

1 

0 

16 

29 

1 

6 

7 

28 

0 

29 

1 

9 

18 

46 

1 

16 

8 

14 

0 

28 

1 

18 

21 

0 

1 

28 

8 

57 

0 

27 

1 

27 

23 

13 

1 

40 

9  36 

0 

24 

1 

37 

25 

22 

1 

53 

10 

9 

0 

20 

1 

49 

27 

29 

2 

6 

10 

38 

0 

15 

2 

1 

29 

32 

2 

19 

11 

2 

0 

10 

2 

14 

31 

30 

2 

33 

11 

19 

0 

4 

2 

28 

33 

22 

2 

45 

11 

25 

0  0 
Subtraction 

2 

35 

34 

15 

2 

57 

11 

29 

0 

4 

2 

42 

35 

6 

3 

6 

11 

32 

0 

8 

2 

49 

35 

56 

3 

15 

11 

32 

0 

12 

2 

56 

36 

43 

3 

25 

11 

31 

0 

16 

3 

4 

37 

27 

3 

36 

11 

28 

0 

19 

3 

13 

38 

9 

3 

47 

11 

22 

0 

22 

3 

22 

38 

48 

3 

58 

11 

14 

0 

25 

3 

32 

39 

24 

4 

9 

11 

5 

0 

28 

3 

43 

39 

56 

4 

21 

10 

53 

0 

31 

3 

54 

40 

23 

4 

35 

10 

39 

0 

33 

4 

4 

40 

44 

4 

50 

10 

23 

0 

35 

4 

14 

40 

59 

5 

5 

10 

4 

0 

37 

4 

24 

41 

7 

5 

21 

9 

42 

0 

39 

4 

35 

41 

9 

5 

37 

9 

21 

0 

40 

4 

45 

41 

2 

5 

55 

8 

55 

0 

41 

4 

56 

40 

45 

6 

14 

8 

27 

0 

41 

5 

7 

40 

16 

6 

34 

7 

59 

0 

41 

5 

18 

39 

37 

6 

53 

7 

27 

0 

41 

5 

28 

38 

40 

7 

12 

6 

54 

0 

38 

5 

34 

37 

25 

7 

30 

6 

19 

0 

36 

5 

38 

35 

52 

7 

45 

5 

41 

0 

33 

5 

38 

33 

53 

7 

58 

5 

3 

0 

30 

5 

34 

31 

30 

8 

3 

4 

22 

0 

27 

5 

18 

28 

35 

7 

58 

3 

41 

0 

23 

4 

52 

25 

3 

7 

47 

2 

58 

0 

19 

4 

18 

21 

0 

7 

6 

2 

14 

0 

15 

3 

32 

16 

25 

5 

59 

1 

30 

0 

10 

2 

27 

11 

19 

4 

26 

0 

45 

0 

5 

1 

16 

5 

45 

2 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ion 

ers 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


10 

55 

40 

0 

55 

35 

50 

5 

5 

40 

15 

25 

35 

20 

40 

n 

31 

42 

39 

35 

32 

28 

25 

21 

18 

14 

0 

44 

18 

50 

11 

32 

42 

51 

37 

23 

46 

8 

18 

26 

28 

26 

1 

36 

58 

0 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XI 
11.  Tables  for  the  Anomalies 


VENUS,  Apogee,  16°10'  within  the  Bull 


s 

4 

Differences 

5 

1  6 

Addition- 

7 

Longitudinal 

of 

Differences 

Subtraction 

Differences 

Addition- 

Addition- 

of 

of 

of 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Anomaly 

Addition 

0 

14 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

31 

0 

2 

0 

28 

0 

1 

0 

3 

5 

1 

0 

4 

0 

42 

0 

1 

0 

5 

7 

31 

0 

6 

0 

56 

0 

2 

0 

7 

10 

1 

0 

8 

1 

9 

0 

2 

0 

9 

12 

30 

0 

10 

1 

21 

0 

2 

0 

11 

14 

58 

0 

12 

1 

32 

0 

3 

0 

13 

17 

25 

0 

14 

1 

43 

0. 

3 

0 

15 

19 

51 

0 

16 

1 

53 

0 

3 

0 

18 

22 

15 

0 

18 

2 

1 

0 

2 

0 

20 

24 

38 

0 

20 

2 

8 

0 

2 

0 

22 

26 

37 

0 

23 

2 

14 

0 

2 

0 

24 

29 

14 

0 

25 

2 

18 

0 

1 

0 

27 

31 

27 

0 

28 

2 

21 

0 

1 

0 

29 

33 

38 

0 

30 

2 

23 

0  1 
Subtraction 

0 

31 

35 

44 

0 

33 

2 

23 

0 

0 

0 

33 

36 

40 

0 

36 

2 

23 

0 

1 

0 

35 

37 

43 

0 

38 

2 

22 

0 

1 

0 

38 

38 

40 

0 

40 

2 

21 

0 

1 

0 

40 

39 

35 

0 

43 

2 

20 

0 

1 

0 

42 

40 

29 

0 

45 

2 

18 

0 

1 

0 

45 

41 

20 

0 

47 

2 

16 

0 

1 

0 

47 

42 

9 

0 

50 

2 

13 

0 

2 

0 

49 

42 

54 

0 

52 

2 

10 

0 

2 

0 

52 

43 

35 

0 

55 

2 

6 

0 

2 

0 

54 

44 

12 

0 

58 

2 

2 

0 

2 

0 

57 

44 

45 

1 

1 

1 

58 

0 

2 

1 

0 

45 

14 

1 

4 

1 

51 

0 

2 

1 

3 

45 

36 

1 

8 

1 

49 

0 

3 

1 

6 

45 

51 

1 

11 

1 

44 

0 

3 

1 

10 

45 

55 

1 

14 

1 

39 

0 

3 

1 

14 

45 

57 

1 

18 

1 

33 

0 

3 

1 

19 

45 

45 

1 

22 

1 

27 

0 

2 

1 

24 

45 

20 

1 

27 

1 

21 

0 

2 

1 

29 

44 

40 

1 

32 

1 

14 

0 

2 

1 

33 

43 

39 

1 

38 

1 

7 

0 

2 

1 

37 

42 

18 

1 

43 

1 

0 

0 

2 

1 

39 

40 

28 

1 

58 

0 

53 

0 

2 

1 

41 

38 

7 

1 

51 

0 

46 

0 

1 

1 

42 

35 

7 

1 

52 

0 

39 

0 

1 

1 

38 

31 

24 

1 

50 

0 

32 

0 

1 

1 

31 

26 

46 

1 

43 

0 

24 

0 

1 

1 

19 

21 

15 

1 

27 

0 

16 

0 

1 

0 

58 

14 

47 

1 

5 

0 

8 

0 

1 

0 

31 

7 

38 

0 

35 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

on 

ers 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


40 

40 

40 

40 

0 

40 

0 

20 

20 

n 

14 

0 

44 

28 

31 

34 

0 

26 

52 

18 

23 

28 

44 

0 

44 

23 

39 

50 

46 

41 

3 

26 

48 

11 

34 

57 

36 

15 

26 

37 

48 

0 

44 

28 


PTOLEMY 

11.  Tables  FOR  THE  Anomalies 


MERCURY,  Apogee,  1®10'  within  the  Balance 


8 

4 

Differences 

S 

6 

Addiiion- 

7 

Longitudinal 

of 

Differences 

Subtraciion 

Differences 

Addition’- 

Addition- 

of 

of 

of 

Subtraction 

Subtraction 

Sublraciion 

Anomaly 

Addition 

0 

18 

0 

1 

0 

10 

1 

38 

0 

5 

0 

34 

0 

2 

0 

20 

3 

16 

0 

11 

0 

51 

0 

4 

0 

22 

4 

53 

0 

17 

1 

7 

0 

5 

0 

39 

6 

29 

0 

23 

1 

22 

0 

5 

0 

49 

8 

4 

0 

28 

1 

37 

0 

4 

0 

59 

9 

,  36 

0 

34 

1 

51 

0 

4 

1 

8 

11 

6 

0 

40 

2 

4 

0 

3 

1 

18 

12 

33 

0 

45 

2 

15 

0 

1 

1 

28 

13 

58 

0 

50 

2 

25 

0  0 
Addition 

1 

39 

15 

18 

0 

56 

2 

34 

0 

2 

1 

49 

16 

33 

1 

4 

2 

41 

0 

4 

1 

59 

17 

43 

1 

11 

2 

46 

0 

6 

2 

9 

18 

47 

1 

17 

2 

50 

0 

7 

2 

19 

19 

44 

1 

23 

2 

52 

0 

9 

2 

29 

20 

33 

1 

29 

2 

52 

0 

10 

2 

34 

20 

54 

1 

32 

2 

52 

0 

10 

2 

39 

21 

14 

1 

35 

2 

51 

0 

11 

2 

44 

21 

29 

1 

38 

2 

50 

0 

10 

2 

48 

21 

42 

1 

41 

2 

48 

0 

10 

2 

53 

21 

52 

1 

44 

2 

46 

0 

10 

2 

58 

21 

59 

1 

46 

2 

44 

0 

9 

3 

2 

22 

2 

1 

49 

2 

41 

0 

9 

3 

4 

22 

1 

1 

52 

2 

37 

0 

9 

3 

6 

21 

56 

1 

55 

2 

33 

0 

8 

3 

8 

21 

47 

1 

57 

2 

28 

0 

7 

3 

9 

21 

33 

1 

59 

2 

23 

0 

7 

3 

10 

21 

15 

2 

0 

2 

18 

0 

6 

3 

12 

20 

53 

2 

0 

2 

12 

0 

6 

3 

12 

20 

25 

2 

1 

2 

6 

0 

5 

3 

9 

19 

50 

2 

1 

2 

0 

0 

4 

3 

6 

19 

10 

2 

0 

1 

53 

0 

4 

3 

2 

18 

24 

2 

0 

1 

46 

0 

3 

2 

57 

17 

32 

1 

58 

1 

38 

0 

3 

2 

51 

16 

35 

1 

53 

1 

30 

0 

2 

2 

42 

15 

31 

1 

47 

1 

22 

0 

2 

2 

32 

14 

20 

1 

41 

1 

13 

0 

2 

2 

21 

13 

3 

1 

34 

1 

5 

0 

1 

2 

9 

11 

41 

1 

26 

0 

56 

0 

1 

1 

55 

10 

13 

1 

17 

0 

46 

0 

1 

1 

38 

8 

40 

1 

7 

0 

38 

0 

0 

1 

19 

7 

1 

0 

56 

0 

28 

0 

0 

1 

1 

5 

19 

0 

43 

0 

19 

0 

0 

0 

42 

3 

35 

0 

28 

0 

9 

0 

0 

0 

21 

1 

48 

0 

14 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

BOOK  TWELVE 


1.  On  the  Preliminaries  to  the  Regressions 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  demonstrated,  it  would  follow  that  the 
greatest  and  least  regressions  for  each  of  the  five  planets  be  examined  and  that, 
from  the  given  hypotheses,  their  sizes  be  shown  as  much  in  accord  as  possible 
with  those  gotten  from  observations. 

For  the  understanding  of  this,  the  other  mathematicians  and  Apollonius  of 
Perga  first  demonstrate,  as  in  the  case  of  the  one  anomaly  relative  to  the  sun, 
that  if  it  is  taken  care  of  according  to  the  epicyclic  hypothesis  (with  the  epi¬ 
cycle  making  its  longitudinal  passage  eastward  about  the  circle  concentric 
with  the  ecliptic  and  with  the  star  on  the  epicycle  making  its  anomalistic 
passage  about  its  centre  eastward  from  the  apogee),  and  if  a  straight  line  is 
drawn  from  our  eye  cutting  the  epicycle  in  such  a  way  that  the  half  of  its 
segment  intercepted  within  the  epicycle  has  to  the  straight  line  from  our  eye 
to  its  intersection  at  the  epicycle's  perigee  the  ratio  which  the  speed  of  the 
epicycle  has  to  the  speed  of  the  star,  then  the  point  produced  by  the  straight 
line  so  drawn  on  the  epicycle's  perigeal  arc  divides  the  progressions  and  re¬ 
gressions  so  that  the  star  at  the  point  itself  makes  the  appearance  of  a  station. 

If  the  anomaly  relative  to  the  sun  is  taken  care  of  by  the  hypothesis  of  ec¬ 
centricity  (this  can  be  done  only  in  the  case  of  the  three  stars  capable  of  any 
elongation  from  the  sun),  with  the  eccentric's  centre  carried  eastward  about 
the  ecliptic's  centre  at  a  speed  equal  to  the  sun's  and  with  the  star  moving  on 
the  eccentric  about  its  centre  westward  at  a  speed  equal  to  the  anomalistic 
passage,  and  if  a  straight  line  is  drawn  to  the  eccentric  circle  through  the 
ecliptic's  centre  (that  is,  through  our  eye),  in  such  a  way  that  one-half  of  the 
whole  line  has  to  the  lesser  of  the  segments  produced  by  our  eye  the  ratio 
which  the  eccentric's  speed  has  to  the  star's  speed,  then  the  star  at  the  point 
at  which  the  straight  line  cuts  the  eccentric's  perigeal  arc  will  make  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  stations. 

Editorial  Note.  This  second  theory  for  the  three  planets  capable  of  any  elongation  from 
the  sun  is  not  mentioned  anywhere  else  in  the  Almagest.  It  is  of  greater  importance 
than  it  might  at  first  seem.  For  it  is  almost  equivalent  to  the  conversion  theorem  by 
which  one  passes  from  the  Ptolemaic  theory  to  the  Copernican  theory  of  the  outer 
planets.  The  ratio  of  the  radius  of  the  circle  the  eccentric's  centre  moves  on  to  the 
eccentric^s  radius  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  epicycle’s  radius  to  the  radius  of  the  deferent 
in  the  epicyclic  theory.  This  is  apparent  from  the  theorem  which  follows  in  the  text. 

Since  this  equivalence  is  so  important  we  shall  proceed  to  give  its  proof,  and  then 
show  the  immediate  resemblance  to  the  conversion  theorem.  We  shall  ignore  the  anomaly 
of  the  equant  and  deferent  in  this. 

Let  us  consider  the  epicyclic  theory  first.  Suppose  the  planet  first  at  A,  and  then  at  C. 
Then  angle  AEB  is  the  angle  of  longitude,  and  angle  DEC  the  angle  of  anomaly.  And 
angle  A  EC  is  the  angle  of  apparent  distance  between  the  two  positions  of  the  planet. 

391 


PTOLEMY 


392 


Now 


angle  AEC  =  angle  AEB  =  angle  EEC 
angle  AEB  =  angle  CBD  —  angle  BCE 

since 

angle  CBD  =  angle  BCE  +  angle  BEC, 

Let  us  next  consider  the  eccentric  hypothesis.  Let 
K'E'y  the  radius  of  the  circle  on  which  the  eccentric^s 
centre  moves,  be  equal  to  the  epicycle’s  radius ;  and 
let  A^K'y  the  eccentric’s  radius,  be  equal  to  the  de¬ 
ferent’s  radius.  Let  the  planet  be  first  at  A'  and 

then  at  C'.  Now, 


according  to  the 
hypothesis,  angle 
A'E'D'  is  equal  to 
the  angle  of  the 
mean  sun’s  mo¬ 
tion,  angle  C'B'D'  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  anomaly, 
and  angle  A^E'C'  is  the  angle  of  apparent  distance. 

angle  A'E'C  =  angle 
A'E’D’  —  angle  B'C'E'. 

And,  since  angle  of  mean  sun’s  movement  minus  the 
angle  of  anomaly  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  longitude, 
therefore 

angle  of  longitude  =  angle  A'E'D'  —  angle 
C^E^B'  —  angle  B'C'E\ 


Hence 


angle  A'E'C'  =  angle  A'E'D'  —  angle  C'E'B' 

=  angle  of  longitude  +  angle  C'B'D'  —  angle  C'E'B'. 
But  because  triangle  E'B'C'  is  congruent  with  triangle  in  the  epicyclic  hypothesis, 

therefore  angle  C'E'B'  =  angle  BCE, 

and  angle  A'E'C  =  angle  AEC, 

because  angle  AEB  represents  the  angle  of  longitude  in  the  epicyclic  hypothesis.  Hence 
the  angle  of  apparent  distance  is  the  same  in  both  hypotheses. 

The  step  from  this  last  hypothesis  to  the  Coper nican  is  fairly  immediate.  The  centre 
of  the  planet’s  eccentric  moves  eastward  about  the  earth  at  the  rate  of  the  mean  sun. 
Suppose,  then,  that  the  earth  moves  about  the  centre  of  the  planet’s  eccentric  at  the 

same  rate:  nothing  will  be  changed  in  the  appearances.  And  then  the  centre  of  the 

planet’s  eccentric  would  be  the  mean  sun.  Then  suppose  the  planet  to  move  about  the 
eccentric’s  centre  at  the  rate  of  the  longitudinal  movement.  We  can  now  demonstrate 
the  equivalence  of  these  last  two  hypotheses. 

Thus  suppose  the  earth  first  at  E  and  the  planet  first  at 
A;  then  the  earth  at  D  moving  about  K  at  the  rate  of  the 
mean  sun  and  the  planet  at  C  moving  about  K  at  the 
mean  longitudinal  rate  of  the  planet.  Thus  angle  EKD  is 
the  movement  of  the  mean  sun,  angle  AKC  the  longi¬ 
tudinal  movement  of  the  planet,  and  angle  ARC  the  ap¬ 
parent  distance  between  the  two  positions  of  the  planet. 

angle  EKD  —  angle  XKC  =  angle  AKC. 

But  since  angle  EKD  is  the  mean  sun’s  movement  and 
angle  AKC  the  longitudinal  movement,  and  since  the 
sun’s  mean  movement  minus  the  anomalistic  movement 
is  equal  to  the  longitudinal,  therefore  angle  XKC  is  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII  393 

angle  of  anomaly.  Hence  angle  CKD  equals  C'B'E^  of  the  hypothesis  of  the  stationary 
earth,  since  in  both  cases  these  angles  are  2  right  angles  minus  the  anomalistic  angle. 
Hence  the  two  triangles  CKD  and  C'B'E'  are  congruent  and 
angle  CDK  =  angle  C'E'B'. 

angle  ARC  =  angle  AKC  +  angle  DCK 

=  angle  AKC  +  angle  CKX  —  angle  CDK 
And,  since  angle  AKC  is  the  angle  of  longitude  and  angle  CKX  that  of  anomaly,  there- 

angle  ARC  =  angle  A^E'C' 

of  the  former  hypothesis.  And  so  in  both  hypotheses  the  apparent  distances  are  the 
same,  and  they  are  equivalent  for  saving  the  appearances. 

The  equant  and  deferent  of  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis  is  taken  care  of  in  the  Copernican 
by  making  the  planet^s  orbit  eccentric  to  the  mean  sun  and  putting  the  planet  on  a  small 
epicycle.  The  proportions  are  given  without  explanation  by  Copernicus  in  Book  V  of 
The  Revolutions  of  the  Celestial  Spheres.  Their  equivalence  will  be  explained  in  Appendix 
B  to  this  book. 

The  passage  from  the  Ptolemaic  to  Copernican  hypothesis  for  Venus  and  Mercury  is 
immediately  evident.  Hence  it  is  not  too  daring  to  say  that  this  hypothesis  of  eccentricity 
for  the  other  planets  indicates  how  the  Greeks  handled  their  heliocentric  theories,  no 
different  from  the  manner  of  Copernicus.  It  is  not  a  vague  statement  Ptolemy  is  making 
when  he  says  in  Book  I  of  this  treatise  that  the  heliocentric  theory  is  simpler  for  saving 
astronomical  appearances.  R,  C.  T. 

Nevertheless  we  also  shall  set  out  briefly  and  more  carefully  the  required 
point,  using  a  common  proof  combined  from  both  hypotheses  for  showing  the 
accord  and  similarity  in  their  ratios. 

Let  there  be  the  epicycle  ABCD  about  centre  Ej  and  let  AEC  be  its  diameter 
dra^vn  to  Fj  the  ecliptic’s  centre  or  our  eye.  With  arcs 
CG  and  CH  cut  off  equal  on  either  side  of  the  perigee  C, 
let  FGB  and  FHD  be  dra’wn  from  F  through  points  G 
and  H.  And  let  DG  and  BH  be  joined,  cutting  each  other 
at  point  K  which  will  clearly  fall  on  the  diameter  AC. 
We  say  first  that 

AF  :  CF  : :  AK  :  CK. 

For  let  AD  and  DC  be  joined.  And  through  C  parallel 
to  AD  let  LCM  be  drawn,  clearly  at  right  angles  to  DC, 
since  angle  ADC  is  also  right.  Now  since 
angle  CDG  =  angle  CDH, 

therefore 


And  therefore 


But 


and 


CL  =  CM. 

AD:  CL::  AD  :  CM. 
AD  :  CM  ::AF:  CF, 
AD  :  CL  ::AK:  CK. 


And  therefore 

AF  :CF::  AK  :  CK. 

Therefore,  if  we  conceive  the  epicycle  ABCD  as  the  eccentric  in  the  hypo¬ 
thesis  of  eccentricity,  the  point  K  will  be  the  ecliptic’s  centre  and  the  diameter 
AC  will  be  divided  by  it  in  the  same  ratio  of  the  epicychc  hypothesis,  since 
we  showed  that,  for  the  epicycle,  whatever  ratio  the  greatest  distance  AF  has 


394 


PTOLEMY 


to  the  least  distance  CF,  that  ratio,  for  the  eccentric,  the  greatest  distance  AK 
has  to  the  least  distance  CK. 

And  we  say  that  also 

DF  :  FH  : :  BK  :  HK. 

For  in  a  similar  drawing  let  there  be  joined  the  straight  line  BND  clearly  at 
right  angles  to  diameter  AC;  and  from  H  let  HX  be 
drawn  parallel  to  it. 

Since,  then, 

BN=DN, 

therefore 

BN  :HX::DN  :  HX, 


DN:HX::DF  :  FH, 


But 
and 

BN  :HX  ::BK:  HK. 

And  therefore 

DF:FH::BK:  HK. 

And  componendo 

DF+FH  :FH::BH  :  HK, 

and  dividendo,  with  the  perpendiculars  EO  and  EP 
drawn, 

FO:FH::  HP:  HK. 

And  further,  separando, 

HO  :FH::KP:  HK. 

If  therefore,  in  the  epicyclic  hypothesis,  DF  has  been  so  drawn  that 
HO  :  FH  :  :  epicycle^s  speed  :  star’s  speed, 
then,  in  the  hypothesis  of  eccentricity,  KP  will  have  to  HK  the  same  ratio. 

And  the  reason  for  not  having  used  here,  for  the  stations,  the  separated  ratio 
(that  is,  the  ratio  of  KP  to  HK)  but  the  unseparated  ratio  (that  is,  the  ratio  of 
HP  to  HK)  is  that  the  epicycle’s  speed  has  to  the  star’s  speed  the  ratio  which 
the  longitudinal  passage  alone  has  to  the  anomalistic ;  but  the  eccentric’s  speed 
has  to  the  star’s  the  ratio  which  the  sun’s  mean  passage  (that  is,  the  star’s  longi¬ 
tudinal  and  anomalistic  passages  combined)  has  to  the  anomalistic.  And  so,  for 
example,  in  the  case  of  Mars,  the  ratio  of  the  epicycle’s  speed  to  the  star’s  speed 
is  very  nearly  42  to  37.  For  we  demonstrated  the  ratio  of  the  longitudinal  pas¬ 
sage  to  the  anomalistic  to  be  very  nearly  that.  And,  therefore,  HO  to  FH  is  in 

that  ratio.  But  the  eccentric’s  speed  to 
the  star’s  speed  is  that  of  the  sum  79  to 
37  (that  is,  of  the  combined  HP  to  HK) 
since  the  separated  ratio  of  KP  to  HK 
was  the  same  as  the  ratio  oi  HO  to  FH 
that  is,  as  the  ratio  of  42  to  37. 

Let  us  consider  the  things  up  to  this 
point  as  preliminary  theorems.  It  is  left 
to  show  that,  when  the  straight  lines 
taken  in  either  hypothesis  are  divided  in 
this  ratio,  then  the  points  G  and  H  will 
embrace  the  appearances  of  stations,  and 
the  arc  GCH  is  necessarily  regressive  and 
the  rest  progressive.  And  Apollonius  first 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII  395 

takes  this  little  lemma  that,  if,  in  the  triangle  ABC  having  BC  greater  than  AC, 
CD  is  cut  off  not  less  than  AC,  then 

CD  :  jBZ)>angle  :ABC  angle  BCA, 

And  he  proves  it  in  this  way.  For,  he  says,  let  the  parallelogram  ADCE  be 
completed,  and  let  AB  and  CE  produced  meet  at  point  F,  Since  AE  is  not  less 
than  AC,  the  circle  drawn  about  centre  A  and  with  radius  AE  will  pass  either 
through  C  or  beyond  C.  Then  let  the  circle  GEC  be  drawn  through  C. 

And  since  ,  . 

trgl.  A£^F>sect.  AEGy 

and 


therefore 


But 

and 

therefore 


trgl.  AEC  <sect.  AEC, 

trgl.  AEF  :  trgl.  A£;C>sect.  AEG  :  sect.  AEC, 
sect.  AEG  :  sect.  AEC  : :  angle  EAF  :  angle  EACj 

trgl.  AEF  :  trgl.  AEC  :  :  base  EF  :  base  CE; 
EF  :  C.£/>  angle  EAF  :  angle  EAC. 


But 

and 


Therefore 


CD 


EF  :  CE  : :  CD  :  BD, 

angle  £^AF  =  angle  ABCy 
angle  .^AC  =  angle  ACB, 

:  Bi)>angle  ABC  :  angle  ACB, 

And  it  is  evident  that  the  ratio  will  be  much 
greater  if  CD  or  AE  is  not  supposed  equal  to  AC, 
but  greater. 

Now,  with  this  first  understood,  let  there  be  the 
epicycle  ABCD  about  centre  E  and  diameter  A^C. 
And  let  the  diameter  be  extended  to  point  F  our  eye 
in  such  a  way  that 

CE  :  CF>epicycle’s  speed  :  starts  speed. 
Therefore  it  is  possible  to  draw  through  straight  line 
FGB  in  such  a  way  that 

half  BG  :  FG  :  :  epicycle’s  speed  :  star’s  speed. ^ 

If,  because  of  things  already  proved,  we  take  arc  AD 
equal  to  arc  AB  and  join  DHGy  then  point  H  in  the 
hypothesis  of  eccentricity  will  be  conceived  as  our 
eye  and 

half  DG  :  HG  :  :  eccentric’s  speed  :  star’s  speed. 
Then  we  say  that  the  star  at  point  C,  in  either  hy¬ 
pothesis,  will  effect  the  appearance  of  a  station;  and, 
whatever  arc  we  take  on  either  side  of  C,  we  shall  find 
the  arc  taken  towards  the  apogee  progressive  and 
that  towards  the  perigee  regressive. 

For  first  let  there  be  cut  off  an  arc  at  random  KG 

^For  BG  takes  on  every  magnitude  between  CA  and  nothing,  and  FG  increases  from  FC 
to  the  length  of  the  tangent  from  F  to  the  epicycle.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  half  BG  to  FG  can 
be  any  ratio  less  than  CE  to  CF.  This  can  be  proved  on  Euclidean  principles  similar  to,  and 
yet  different  from,  those  of  Dedekind. 


396 


PTOLEMY 


towards  the  apogee.  And  let  FKL  and  KHM  be  drawn  through;  and  let  BK 
and  DKj  and  also  EK  and  EG,  be  joined.  Since,  then,  in  triangle  BKF, 

BG>BK, 


therefore 


And  so  also 


BG  :  FG>angle  GFK  :  angle  GBK, 


But 


half  BG  ;  FG>angle  GFK  :  2  angle  GBK, 
>angle  GFK  :  angle  GEK, 


half  BG  :  FG  : :  epicycle's  speed  :  star's  speed; 

therefore 

angle  GFK  :  angle  (?jE7A<  epicycle's  speed  :  star's  speed. 

Therefore  the  angle,  having  to  angle  GEK  the  same  ratio  as  the  epicycle's  speed 
to  the  star's  speed,  is  greater  than  angle  GFK,  Then  let  it  be  angle  GFN, 
Since,  then,  while  the  star  moves  through  the  epicycle's  arc  KG,  the  epicycle's 
centre  has  made  a  passage  in  the  contrary  direction  equal  to  the  distance  from 
FG  to  FN,  it  is  evident  that  in  the  same  time  the  epicycle's  arc  KG  has  carried 
the  star  westward  through  an  angle  at  our  eye  GFK  less  than  that  through 
which  the  epicycle  has  moved  it  eastward — that  is,  angle  GFN,  And  so  the  star 
has  progressed  through  angle  KFN, 

Likewise  also,  if  we  reason  it  out  with  the  eccentric  circle,  since 
BG  :  FOangle  GFK  :  angle  GBK, 

therefore  componendo 

BF  :  F(?>angle  BKL  :  angle  GBK, 

But 


BFiFG  :  :  DH  :  GH, 

and 

angle  J5AL  =  angle  DKM,^ 
angle  GBK  =  angle  GDK, 


Therefore 

DH  :  Gi?  >angle  DKM  :  angle  GDK. 
And  so  also  componendo 

DG  :  GFr>angle  GHK  :  angle  GDK; 
and  therefore  dividendo 

half  DG  :  G/f  >angle  GHK  :  2  angle  GDK, 
>angle  GHK  :  angle  GEK, 


But 


half  DG  :  GH  :  :  eccentric's  speed  :  star's  speed; 


therefore 

angle  GHK  :  angle  GFif< eccentric's  speed  :  star's  speed. 

Therefore  the  angle,  having  to  angle  GEK  the  same  ratio  as  the  eccentric's  speed 
to  the  star's  speed,  is  greater  than  angle  GHK,  Then  again  let  it  be  angle  GHN. 

Since,  then,  in  the  same  time,  the  star  itself  describing  arc  GK  has  traveled 
westward  angle  GEK,  and  is  carried  eastward  by  the  eccentric's  movement 
through  angle  GHN  which  is  greater  than  angle  GHK,  it  is  evident  that  the 
star  will  thus  appear  to  progress  through  KHN. 


Tor  arc  LB  is  equal  to  arc  DM,  since,  in  the  eccentric  theory,  the  star  moves  on  the  ec¬ 
centric  according  to  the  anomalistic  speed — that  is,  as  the  star  moves  on  the  epicycle  in  the 
epicyclic  theory. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


397 


It  can  be  seen  at  once  that  by  the  same  means  the  contrary  will  also  be 
shown,  if  in  the  same  drawing  we  suppose 

half  KL  :  FK  :  :  epicycle^s  speed  :  star’s  speed, 
so  that 

half  KM  :  HK  :  :  eccentric’s  speed  :  star’s  speed, 
if  we  conceive  arc  GK  as  having  been  cut  off  in  the 
direction  of  the  perigee  from  straight  line  FL.  For, 
with  LG  joined  and  producing  triangle  LFG  in  which 
FK  is  cut  off  greater  than  FGy 

KL  :  FA"<angle  GFK  :  angle  GLK. 

And  so  also 

half  KL  :  FA<angle  GFK  :  2  angle  GLK 
<angle  GFK  :  angle  GEK, 
conversely  to  what  was  shown  before.  By  the  same 
means  the  contrary  can  be  concluded  that 

angle  GEK  :  angle  GFA<  star’s  speed  : 
epicycle’s  speed, 

and 

angle  GEK  :  angle  star’s  speed  : 

eccentric’s  speed. 

And  so,  since  an  angle  greater  than  angle  GEK  would 
have  the  same  ratio,  therefore  the  regressive  shift 
would  turn  out  greater  than  the  progressive. 

For  those  distances  where  CE  does  not  have  to  OF 
a  ratio  greater  than  the  ratio  of  the  epicycle’s  speed  to  the  star’s  speed,  it  is 
evident  that  it  will  not  be  possible  to  draw  another  line  through  in  the  same 
ratio,  nor  will  the  star  appear  to  pause  or  to  regress.  For  since,  in  triangle 
EKF,  the  straight  line  CE  is  not  cut  off  less  than  EKj  therefore 
angle  CFK  :  angle  CEK<CE  :  CF, 

But 

CE  :  CF>epicycle’s  speed  :  star’s  speed; 
therefore 

angle  CFK  :  angle  CA A  <  epicycle’s 
speed  :  star’s  speed. 

And  so,  since  we  have  shown  the  star  to 
progress  wherever  this  happens,  we  shall 
find  no  arc  of  the  epicycle  and  eccentric 
for  which  it  will  appear  to  regress. 

2.  Demonstration  of  Saturn’s 
Regressions 

With  these  things  so,  we  shall  finally 
set  out  the  calculation  of  the  regressions 
for  each  of  the  stars  in  accordance  mth 
the  hypotheses  already  demonstrated,  be¬ 
ginning  with  Saturn  in  this  way. 

Let  the  circle  bearing  the  epicycle’s 
centre  be  the  circle  AB  about  diameter 
ACB,  on  which  let  the  ecliptic’s  centre 


398  PTOLEMY 

or  our  eye  be  supposed.  And  with  the  epicycle  DEFG  drawn  about  centre  A, 
let  the  straight  line  CFE  be  dra^vn  through  in  such  a  way  that,  if  AH  is  drawn 
perpendicular  to  it,  then 

half  EF  or  FH  :  CF  :  :  epicycle^s  speed  :  starts  speed. 

And  first  let  the  epicycle  be  supposed  in  the  position  of  the  mean  distance  so 
that  the  periodic  movements  of  longitude  and  anomaly  are  very  nearly  the 
same  as  those  considered  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic’s  centre. 

Now  since,  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  we  showed 

epic.  rad.  AZ)  =  63^p 

where  the  mean  distance  AC  equals  60^, 
so  that,  by  addition, 

CZ)  =  66^30', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

CG  =  53^30', 

and 

rect.  CD,  CG =3,557p45', 

and 

rect.  CD,  GG  =  rect.  CE,  CF, 
therefore  we  shall  also  have 

rect.  CE,  CF  =  3,557^45'. 

Again,  since,  according  to  the  mean  passages, 

star’s  speed  or  GF  =  28^25'  46" 

where 

epicycle’s  speed  or  FH  =  1^, 

so  that,  by  addition, 

G£^  =  30p25'46" 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF  =  865p5'32", 

therefore,  if  we  apply  [divide]  3,557^45'  to  [by]  865p5'32",  take  the  square 
root  2p1'40"  of  the  4p6'45"  resulting  from  the  application,  and  multiply  it 
by  the  number  of  FH  and  the  number  28p25'46"  of  CF,  then  we  shall  have 

FH  =  2nA0" 

and 

CF  =  57p38'55" 

where 

rect.  CE,  CF  =  3,557H5\ 

Then,  since  with  AF  joined, 

FH  =  2nA0'' 

where 

AF  =  mO', 
but 

FH  =  37m'9" 

where 

AF=120p, 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AFH, 

arcF^  =  36°21'15", 


angle  FAZ7  =  36°21'15"  to  2  rt. 
m8°10'38". 


and 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


399 


Again,  since  by  addition 

CFi/ =  59p40'35^ 

where 

hypt.  C(?A=60P, 

and 

(7F^=119p21'10" 

where 

hypt.  CGA  =  120p, 

therefore  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ACH, 
angle  CA//=  168°5'39"  to  2  rt. 

=  84°2'50". 

And  therefore  we  shall  also  have,  by  subtraction,  from  a  right  angle, 

angle  ACi7  =  5‘^57'10", 
and,  by  subtraction  of  angle  FAH, 

angle  FAG  =  65^52' 12". 

Since,  then,  at  the  first  station,  the  star  appears  along  CF  and,  at  the  acron- 
ychal  opposition,  along  CG,  it  is  clear  that,  if  the  epicycle^s  centre  were  not 
moving  eastward,  the  65°52'12"  of  arc  FG  would  embrace  the  5®57'10"  of 
angle  ACF  in  regression.  But  since,  according  to  the  given  ratio  of  the  epi- 
cyclers  speed  to  the  starts  speed,  very  nearly  2°19'  of  longitude  corresponds  to 
the  required  65^^52' 12"  of  anomaly,  from  one  of  the  stations  to  the  opposition 
we  shall  thus  have  by  subtraction  3‘^38'10"  and  the  69  days  in  which  the  star 
moves  very  nearly  2°  19'  of  periodic  longitude;  and  we  shall  have  the  whole 
regression  of  7°16'20"  and  138  days. 

And  next  we  shall  examine  with  the  same  means  the  quantities  about  the 
greatest  distance;  that  is,  when  the  acronychal  opposition  midway  the  stations 
puts  the  epicycle's  centre  at  the  eccentric's  apogee  and  when  each  of  the  stations 
is  clearly  at  a  distance  somewhere  near  the  2'^19'  demonstrated  for  the  mean 
distance,  from  the  opposition  or  the  apogee  of  the  longitude  truly  determined.^ 
At  this  position  the  straight  line  AC  of  the  distance  for  that  time  is  taken  as  in¬ 
distinguishable  from  the  greatest,  because  of  theorems  already  given  by  us;  and 
an  addition-subtraction  of  very  nearly  0°6'30"  is  taken  as  corresponding  to  1° 
of  longitude.  And  so  the  longitude  truly  determined  to  the  anomaly  truly  de¬ 
termined — that  is,  the  epicycle's  apparent  speed  at  that  time  to  the  star's  ap¬ 
parent  speed^  is  in  the  ratio  of  0'^53'30"  to  28°32'16". 

Now,  with  the  same  drawing  set  out,  since,  being  no  different  from  the  great¬ 
est  distance, 

AC  =  63^25' 

^To  find  the  longitude  truly  determined — that  is,  the  change  of  the  epicycle^s  centre  for  a 
particular  part  of  the  ecHptic — Ptolemy  here  uses  the  same  method  as  for  the  moon  in  Book 
VI,  Chap.  4.  Going  to  the  Tables  of  Anomaly  in  Book  XI,  we  find  that  for  the  first  6°  in  mean 
longitude  there  is,  in  the  third  column,  an  addition-subtraction  of  0°37'  due  to  the  epicycle's  cen¬ 
tre  being  moved  regularly  with  respect  to  an  equant  not  concentric  with  the  ecUptic.  This  addi¬ 
tion-subtraction  is  taken  as  if  the  equant  and  deferent  were  the  same.  But  in  the  fourth 
column  we  find  an  addition  of  0°2'  due  to  their  not  being  the  same.  Hence  there  is  a  difference 
of  0°39'  for  6°  of  the  mean  longitude,  or  a  difference  of  for  each  1°  of  mean  longitude. 

Therefore,  while  the  epicycle's  centre  makes  a  mean  movement  of  1®,  at  this  part  of  the 
echptic  it  makes  an  apparent  movement  of  only  0°53H'. 

*The  anomaly  truly  determined  or  star's  apparent  speed  on  the  epicycle  is  the  star's  speed 
taken  over  a  certain  distance  relative  to  the  epicycle's  apparent  apogee  and  perigee  rather 
than  its  regular  apogee  and  perigee.  In  planetary  theory,  the  apparent  apogee  is  that  defined 


400  PTOLEMY 

where 

ecc.  rad.  AD  =  6^30'; 
and  since  for  that  reason,  by  addition, 

CD  =  69^55' 
and,  by  subtraction, 

CC  =  56^55' 

and 

rect.  CD,  CD  =  rect.  CD,  CG 
=  3,979p25'25"; 

and  since 

star's  speed  or  CF  =  28^32' 16" 
where  it  is  supposed 

epicycle's  speed  or  DD  =  0*^53 '30" 
and,  by  addition, 

CD  =  30P19'16" 

and 

rect.  CD,  CD  =  865p17'50" 

therefore,  if  again  we  apply  [divide]  3,979p25'25"  to  [by]  865p17'50",  and  if  we 
multiply  the  square  root  2p8'40"  of  the  4p35'56"  resulting  from  the  application 
by  the  0p53'30"  of  straight  line  FH  and  the  28p32'16"  of  CD  each  separately, 
then  we  shall  have 

DD=1P54'44", 

^C  =  63P25', 

CD  =  61P11'52", 


and,  by  addition, 
where 

And  therefore 


CD  =  63P6'36" 

AD  =  6p30'. 
DD  =  35P18'9" 


with  respect  to  the  ecliptic’s  centre  or  the  earth;  the  regular  apogee  is  that  defined  with 
respect  to  the  equant’s  centre. 

If,  now,  we  wish  to  get  the  star’s  speed  from 
a  station  preceding  the  perigee  to  an  acronychal 
opposition  at  the  greatest  distance,  consider  the 
figure  where  E  is  the  echptic’s  centre,  D  the 
equant’s  centre,  and  F  the  apogee  of  eccentricity. 
Furthermore,  A  is  the  epicycle’s  regular  perigee 
and  B  its  apparent  perigee.  Now  consider  the 
star  moving  on  the  epicycle  toward  A  from  the 
side  opposite  D,  while  the  epicycle’s  centre  C 
moves  toward  F.  But  as  C  moves  towards  D, 
the  apparent  apogee  B  moves  towards  the  regular 
apogee  A,  Hence  the  star  moves  faster  toward  B 
than  it  does  toward  A.  But  its  regular  anomalis¬ 
tic  movement  is  with  respect  to  A,  and  therefore 
we  add  the  difference  of  angle  ACB  to  the  regular 
anomalistic  movement  for  the  period  of  longitudi¬ 
nal  movement  from  C  to  D,  or,  as  we  found  above 
for  Saturn,  an  average  of  0°6H'  for  each  1®  of 
mean  longitude  and  for  each  0°53H'  of  longi¬ 
tude  truly  determined. 

About  the  least  distance,  the  difference  of  ap¬ 
parent  anomaly  is  subtractive  for  the  same 
reasons. 


401 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


where 


and 

where 


hypt.  i4F=I20P; 
=  119^25'!  r 


hypt.  4(7=120p. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AFHj 

arc  ra  =  34°m^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ACH^ 

arc  C^  =  168°43'38". 


And  therefore 


and 


angle  FAH=S4:m'4:"  to  2  rt. 
=  17°6'32"; 


angle  CAH  =  168°43'38"  to  2  rt. 

=  84°21'49". 

And  so,  by  subtraction,  we  Avould  have 

angle  AOT  =  5°38'11" 

as  the  angle  from  one  of  the  stations  to  the  opposition,  if  the  epicycle  did  not 
lag  behind  the  regression;  and,  by  subtraction,  we  would  have 

angle  FA(7  =  67°15'17" 

as  the  apparent  passage  on  the  epicycle  for  that  distance.  Since  to  these  angles, 
according  to  the  ratios  of  the  speeds  at  the  apogee,  there  corresponds  2®6'6"  of 
truly  determined  longitude,  we  shall  have,  by  subtraction,  half  of  the  whole  re¬ 
gression  as  3®32'5"  and  70}^  days  in  which  the  star  very  nearly  moves  the  peri¬ 
odic  2°21'25"  corresponding  to  the  2°6'6"  of  truly  determined  longitude  re¬ 
quired;  and  we  shall  have  the  whole  regression  as  7°4'10"  and  140%  days. 
Again,  through  similar  means  and  with  the  same  dramng,  we  shall  examine 

the  quantities  about  the  least  distance, 
when  the  acronychal  opposition  midway 
the  stations  is  at  the  eccentric's  perigee 
and  each  of  the  stations  is  somewhere  near 
the  given  longitudinal  distance  from  the 
opposition  or  perigee.  And  AC,  the  dis¬ 
tance  at  that  time,  is  taken  in  this  position 
as  not  differing  from  the  least  distance, 
and  the  addition-subtraction  correspond¬ 
ing  to  1°  of  longitude  is  taken  as  very  near¬ 
ly  0°7'20".  And  so  here  the  epicycle's  ap¬ 
parent  speed  to  the  star's  apparent  speed 
is  in  the  ratio  of  1°7'20"  to  28°18'26",  and 
therefore 

CF  =  28P18'26" 

where 

ra  =  lP7'20", 
and  by  addition 

C^  =  30P33'6^ 


and 


rect.  CE,  CF  =  864H9'50". 


402 


PTOLEMY 


Now  since  also,  not  differing  from  the  least  distance, 

,  AC  =  56^35' 

where 

epic.  rad.  AD  =  6^30'; 

and  therefore  by  addition 

and  by  subtraction  ^ 

CC-50P5' 

and 

rect.  CD,  CiP  =  rect.  CD,  CG 
=  3,159p25'25", 

therefore,  if  in  the  same  way  we  apply  [divide]  3,159p25'25"  to  [by]  864p49'58" 
and,  taking  the  square  root  1p54'42"  of  the  3p39'12"  resulting  from  the  applica¬ 
tion,  multiply  by  the  1p7'20"  of  the  straight  line  FH  and  the  28p18'26"  of  CD, 
each  separately,  then  we  shall  have 

DD  =  2p8'43", 

CD  =  54p6'22", 


CD  =  56P15'5" 


and  by  addition 
where 

epic.  rad.  AD  =  6^30' 
and,  as  the  distance  at  that  time,  - 

AC  =  56^35'. 


And  therefore 


DD-39P36'18" 


where 

and 


hypt.  J?D=120p; 

CD  =  119P17'46" 

where 

hypt.  AC=120p. 

And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADD, 

arc  DD  =  38°32'34"; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  AC//, 

,  j  ,  arc  C//  =  167°34'54". 

And  so  also 

angle  DAD  =  38°32'34"  to  2  rt. 

=  19°16'17"; 

and  ' 

angle  CAD  =  167°34'54"  to  2  rt. 

=  83°47'27". 

And  therefore,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have 

angle  ACD  =  6n2'33" 

as  the  angle  of  regression,  due  to  the  starts  speed,  from  one  of  the  stations  to 
the  opposition;  and,  by  subtraction,  we  shall  have  , 

angle  DAG  =  64°31'10"  / 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  passage  on  the  epicycle  at  the  same  distance. 
Since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratio  of  the  speeds  at  the  perigee,  there  cor¬ 
responds  the  2°33'28"  of  the  longitude  truly  determined,  we  shall  have  half 
the  whole  regression  of  3'^39'5"  and  68  days  in  which  the  star  very  nearly 
makes  a  mean  movement  of  2'^16'45"  corresponding  to  the  given  2°33'28"  of 
the  longitude  truly  determined;  and  we  shall  have  the  whole  regression  of 
7°18'10"  and  136  days. 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII  403 

3.  Demonstration  of  Jupiter’s  Regressions 
In  the  case  of  Jupiter,  according  to  the  calculations  for  the  mean  distance, 

FH  :CF  10p5I'29", 

and 

CE  :CF  ::  12p51'29"  :  10p5H29", 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF=  139p37'39"; 
and  again 

AC  :AD 

and 

CDiCG::  71^30'  :  48^30', 

and 

rect.  CD,  C(?  =  3,467^45'. 

And  the  square  root  4p59'1"  of  the  24^ 
50'9"  resulting  from  the  application,  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF, 
makes 

F//  =  4P59'1", 
j  CF  =  54p6'44", 

and  by  addition 

Ci7  =  59P5'45", 

relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and  AF, 

And  therefore  < 

F^  =  52p0'10" 

where 
and 
where 
And 

And  accordingly  also 


r-ov 

And,  by  subtraction. 


hypt.  AF=  120^; 

C/7  =  118P11'30" 

hypt.  AC  =  12QP, 

arc  =  51^21 '41", 
arc  Ci/ =  160^4'55". 

angle  FAi/N25®40'50", 
angle  CA/7  =  80°2'28". 


angle  FCA=9°57'32" 
as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star’s  speed;  and 

angle  FA(?  =  54°21'38" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  given  ratio, 
there  corresponds  5°1'24"  of  longitudinal  passage,  half  of  the  regression  is  4®56'8" 
and  very  nearly  603^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  is  9°52'16"  and  121  days. 

But  the  distance  at  an  interval  of  5°  from  the  apogee  and  perigee  is  hardly 
less  than  the  greatest  and  hardly  greater  than  the  least. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  greatest  distance,  the  addition- 
subtraction  of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  0°5'6".  And  therefore 
FH  :CF  ::  0p54'50"  :  10p56'39", 


and 


CEiCF  ::  12p46'19"  :  10p56'39", 


404 

and 


PTOLEMY 


And  again 

and 

and 


rect.  CE,  CF  =  139p46'42". 
AC:  AD::  62^45' :  11^30', 
CD  :CG::  74^15' :  51^15', 


rect.  CD,  CG  =  3,805p18'45". 

And  the  square  root  5p13'4"  of  the  27p13'26"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

FH  =  4:m'&', 

CF  =  57p6'19", 

and,  by  addition, 

C/f  =  6lP52'25", 
relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and  AF. 

And  therefore  also 


where 

and 

where 


Fir=49p45'23" 
hypt.  AF=120p; 
CJ?  =  118P19'27" 


hypt.  AC  =  120p. 

arc  =48°59'34", 
arc  C^f=160°49'36". 


And  consequently 

angle  FAif  =  24°29'47", 
angle  CAIf  =  80°24'48". 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA=9°35'12" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star's  speed ;  and 

angle  FAG  =  55%5'1" 

as  the  angle  of  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  apogeal 
ratios,  there  corresponds  4®40'35"  of  longitude  truly  determined  and  5°6'35'' 
of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  is  4'^54'37"  and  very  nearly  61 
days,  and  the  whole  regression  is  9°49'14"  and  123  days. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  least  distance,  the  addition-subtrac¬ 
tion  of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  And  therefore 

j  FH:CF  ::  1p5'40"  :  10p45'49", 

and 

^  CE  :  CF  : :  12p57'9"  :  10p45'49", 

and 


And  again 
and 


rect.  CF,  CF  =  139p24'56". 
AC  :  AF  : :  57^15'  :  11^30', 


CD  :CG::  68^45' :  45^45', 

and  , 

rect.  CF,  CC  =  3,145p18'45". 

And  the  square  root  4p45'0"  of  the  22p33'39"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

FF  =  5P11'55", 

CF=51p7'38'^, 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


405 


and,  by  addition, 

C^  =  56P19'33", 
relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  and  AF. 

And  therefore  also 

F//  =  54P14'47" 

where 

hypt.  A7^=120p; 

and 

(7iy  =  118P3'46" 

where 

hypt.  AC=120P. 

And 

arc  F/7  =  53M5'4", 
arc  CH=\m^22A0\ 

And  consequently  also 

angle  FA/f  =  26°52'32", 
angle  =  79°41'20^. 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =  10®18'40^ 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  FAG  =  52°48'48" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratios  at 
the  perigee,  there  corresponds  5°21'20"  of  longitude  truly  determined  and 
4°54'20"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  comes  to  4°57'20"  and  very 
nearly  59  days;  and  the  whole  regression  comes  to  9°54'40"  and  118  days. 

4.  Demonstration  op  Mars'  Regressions 

Again,  in  the  case  of  Mars,  according  to  the  calculations  for  the  mean  distance 

FH  :CF  ::  R  :  0p52'51", 

and 

CE  :  CF  : :  2p52'51"  :  0p52'51", 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF  =  2p32'15". 

And  again 

AC  :  A(?  :  :  60^  :  39^30', 

and 

CD  :CG::  99^30'  :  20p30', 

and 

rect.  CD,  CC  =  2,039^45'. 

And  the  square  root  28p21'8"  of  the  803^ 
50'50"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and 
CF,  makes 

F/7  =  28p21'8", 

CF  =  24P58'25'', 
and,  by  addition, 

CAf  =  53Pl9'33", 

relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and 
AF. 


406 

PTOLEMY 

And  therefore  also 

FH  =  86p8'0" 

where 

hypt.  AF=\2(F-, 

and 

where 

hypt.  .AC=120p. 

And 

arc  Fi7  =  91°44'34'', 
arc  Ci7  =  125°26T0". 

And  consequently  also 

angle  jP^fl'=45°52'17", 
angle  C^H  =  62°43'5". 

And,  by  subtraction. 

angle  FCA  =27°16'55" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  16°50'48" 

as  the  angle  of  the  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  given  ratio, 
there  corresponds  19°7'33"  of  longitudinal  passage,  half  of  the  regression  is 
8°9'22"  and  very  nearly  363^^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  is  16°18'44"  and 
73  days. 

But  the  distance,  at  the  interval  of  the  stations  from  the  apogee  and  perigee, 
is  less  than  the  greatest  and  greater  than  the  least  by  very  nearly  20  sixtieths. 

And  according  to  the  calculations  near  the  greatest  distance,  the  addition- 
subtraction  of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  0°10H'  in  proportion  to  1°.  And 

■f  Vi  PT’P‘f  rirp 

:  CF  :  :  0p49'40"  :  1P3'11", 

and 


I 

and 

And  again 
and 


CEiCF::  2p42'31"  :  1p3'11", 
rect.  CF,  CF  =  2p51'8". 

AC  :AG::  65^40' :  39^30', 


\ 

i 


CD  :CG  : :  105^10' :  26^10', 

and  j 

rect.  CD,  C(?  =  2,751p51'40". 

And  the  square  root  31p3'41"  of  the  964p48'47"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

F//  =  25P42'43", 

CF  =  32p42'34",  j 

and,  by  addition, 

Ci7  =  58p25'17", 
relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and  AF. 

And  therefore  also 


F^  =  78p6'44" 


where 


hypt.  AF=120P; 


and 

where 

And 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 

C/f=106P45'36" 

hypt.  AC=120p. 

arc  ra  =  8ri3'8", 
arc  OT=125°39'46". 

angle  FA/f =40°36'34", 
angle  CAH^Q2^W53". 


407 


And  consequently  i 
And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FC A  =27^10'7" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  FAG  =  22°13'19" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  apogee’s 
ratios,  there  corresponds  17°13'21"  of  longitude  truly  determined  and  20°58'21" 
of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  comes  to  9°56'46"  and  very  nearly  40 
days;  and  the  whole  regression  comes  to  19®53'32"  and  80  days. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  least  distance,  the  addition-subtrac¬ 
tion  of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  0°12%'. 

And  therefore 

and  ^ 


and 

/ 

And  again 

and 

and 


FH  :CF::  1P12'40"  :  0^40'!  1", 
CE:CF::  3p5'31"  :  0^40'! I'’, 
rect.  CE,  CF=2H'U". 

AC  :  AG  : :  64^20'  :  39^30', 

I 

CD  :CG::  93p50'  :  14p50', 


rect.  CD,  CC=1,391p51'40".  ‘  .C  X  ) 

And  the  square  root  25p55'38"  of  the  672p12'  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  ratio  oi  FH  and  CF,  makes 

FD=3lP24'3'', 

CF  =  17P21'51", 

and  by  addition 

CD=48P45'54",  , 

relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and  AF. 

And  therefore  ‘ 


fD=95P23'42" 

where 

hypt.  A^’  =  120p; 

and 

CH=  107p42'7" 

where 

hypt.  AC=  120p. 

And 

arc  FD  =  105°18'10" 
arc  CD  =  127‘’40'22" 

408 

And  consequently 


PTOLEMY 


angle  FAi7  =  52°39'5" 
angle  CAi7  =  63°50'11^. 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA=26°9'49" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star’s  speed;  and 

angle  FA(?=iril'6" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratios 
at  the  perigee,  there  corresponds  20®33'42"  of  longitude  truly  determined 
and  16°52'52"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  comes  to  5°36'7" 
and  very  nearly  3234  days;  and  the  whole  regression  comes  to  11°12'14"  and 
6434  days. 

5.  Demonstration  of  Venus’  Regressions 

Again,  in  the  case  of  Venus,  according  to  calculations  near  the  mean  distance, 
FH:CF 

and 

CE:CF::  2p37'31"  :.0p37'31", 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF  = 

And  again 

AC  :  AG  :  43n0', 

and 

CD  :CG::  lOSnO' :  16^50', 

and 

rect.  CD,  CG  =  1,736p38'20". 

And  the  square  root  32p31'29"  of  the 
105p50'6"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and 
CFy  makes 

2^D  =  32p31'29", 

CF  =  20p20'11", 
and,  by  addition, 

CD  =  52P51'40", 

relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and 
AF, 

And  therefore  also 


FD  =  90p24'58^ 


where 

h3T)t.  AF  =120’^', 

and 

CH=  105p43'20'' 

where 

hypt.  AC  =  120”. 

And 

arc  FH  =  97°i7'0'', 
arc  Ci/  =  123°31'49''. 

And  consequently  also 


angle  FA/7  =  48®53'30", 
angle  CAD  =  6r45'54^. 


And,  by  subtraction, 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


409 


angle  FCA=28°I4'6" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  12°52'24" 

as  the  angle  of  the  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  given  mean  ratio, 
there  corresponds  20°35'19"  of  the  longitudinal  passage,  half  of  the  regression 
comes  to  7°38'47"  and  very  nearly  20+3^+J^  days;  and  the  whole  regression 
comes  to  15°17'34"  and  41 days. 

And  the  distance  at  the  interval  of  the  stations  from  the  apogee  and  perigee 
is  less  than  the  greatest  and  greater  than  the  least,  by  very  nearly  5  sixtieths 
of  the  mean  distance. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  greatest  distance,  the  addition- 
subtraction  of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  0°23^'.  And  therefore 
FH  :CF  ::  0p57'40"  :  0p39'51", 

CE  :  CF  :  :  2p35'11"  :  0p39'51", 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF  =  IH3'^". 

And  again 

AC:  AG:  :  61^10'  :  43^10', 

and 


and 


CD  :CG::  104^20' ;  18^0', 


rect.  CD,  0(7=1,878^0'. 


And  the  square  root  33p3'53"  of  the  1,093p16'23"  resulting  from  the  applica¬ 
tion,  multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

Fi7  =  3lP46'44", 

=  21P57'38", 

and,  by  addition. 


C^  =  53p44'22", 
relative  to  the  given  quantities  of  AC  and  AF, 
And  therefore  also 


i^’77  =  88P20'34'' 


where 


and 


hypt.  AF  =  120p; 


where 

And 


C/7  =  105p25'44" 
hypt.  AC  =  120p, 


arc  F^  =  94°48'54", 
arc  C/^  =  122°56'27". 

And  consequently 

angle  /^Ai/  =  47°24'27", 
angle  CAH  =  Qr28AV. 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =28°31'46'' 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star’s  speed ;  and  ^ 

angle  FAC  =  14°3'47" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratios  at 
the  apogee,  there  corresponds  20®19'3"  of  longitude  truly  determined  and  21°9' 


410 


PTOLEMY 


3"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  comes  to  8°12'43"  and  very  nearly 
21^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  comes  to  16°25'26"  and  43  days. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  least  distance,  the  addition-subtraction 
of  true  determination  is  found  to  be  0°23^'. 

And  therefore 

FH  :CF::  1^2'20"  :  0^35'!  1", 

and 

CE  :CF  ::  2^29' 51"  :  0^35'!  1", 

and 


And  again 

and 

and 


rect.  CE,  CF=  1p33'44". 
AC:  AD::  58^50' :  43^10', 
CD:CG::  102^0'  :  15^40', 


rect.  CD,  (70  =  1,598^0'. 


And  the  square  root  3lP58'58"of  the  1,022p54'7" resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

FH  =  33m'S5", 

CF  =18H5'1Q", 

and,  by  addition. 


CH  =  51^58' 52", 

relative  to  the  supposed  quantities  of  AC  and  AF. 


And  therefore  also 
where 
and 
where 
And 


FH  =  92^22'2" 
hypt.  AF  =  120p; 
C//  =  106p1'23" 
hypt.  AC=120p. 


arc/^i/  =  100°39'34", 
arc  CJT  =  124^8'22". 

And  consequently 

angle  i^AJT  =  50°19'47", 
angle  CA//  =  62°4'11". 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =  27°55'49" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star's  speed ;  and 

angle  FAC=11°44'24" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratios  at 
the  perigee,  there  corresponds  20°53'30"  of  longitude  truly  determined  and 
20°4'30"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  consequently  comes  to 
7°2'19"  and  very  nearly  20^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  comes  to  14°4'38" 
and  40%  days. 


THE  ALIMAGEST,  XII 


411 


6.  Demonstration  of  Mercury’s  Regressions 

And  again,  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  according  to  the  calculations  near  the 

mean  distance, 

FH  :CF:  :  H  :  S^Q'S", 

and 

CE  :CF  ::  S^Q'S"  :  3p9'8", 

and 

rect.  CE,  CF=mn^'27\ 

And  again 

AC  :AG::  60^  :  22>^p, 

and 

CD  :CG::  82^30' :  37^30', 

and 

rect.  CD,  CG  =  3,093^45'. 

And  the  square  root  13^487"  of  the  190^ 
29'31^  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  give  ratio  of  FH  and  CF, 
makes 

=13^487", 

CF  =  43p30'24", 
and,  by  addition, 

C77  =  57P18'31", 
relative  to  the  supposed  quantities  of  AC  and  AF. 

And  therefore  also 

FH  =  73m'37" 

where 

hypt.  AF=  120p; 

and 

(7i7=114P37'2" 

where 

hypt.  AC  =  120p. 

And 

arc  Fi7  =  75W28", 
arc  Ci7  =  145°32'52". 

And  consequently 

angle  FAH  =  37°5QA4", 
angle  C AH  =  72^W2&\ 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =  17°13'34" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  star’s  speed;  and 

angle  FAG  =  34°56'12" 

as  the  angle  of  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  given  ratio,  there  corre¬ 
sponds  11°4'59"  of  longitudinal  passage,  half  of  the  regression  is  left  to  be 
6°8'35"  and  very  nearly  1134  days;  and  the  whole  regression  is  left  to  be  12°17' 
10"  and  2234  days. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  greatest  distance,  that  is,  when  the 
longitude  truly  determined  is  about  11°  from  the  apogee  (to  which  there  corre- 


412 


PTOLEMY 


spends  very  nearly  113^°  of  regular  longitude),  the  addition-subtraction  of  true 
determination  is  found  to  be  very  nearly  0°2^'  in  proportion  to  1®.  And  there¬ 
fore 


and 

and 


FH  :CF  ::  0p57'40"  :  3^1 1^28^, 
CE  :CF  ::  5p6'48"  :  3p11'28", 


And  again 

and 

and 


rect.  CE,  CF= 

AC:  AG::  68^36' :  22^30', 


CD  :CG  :  :  91^6'  :  46^6', 


rect.  CD,  CG  =  4,199p42'36". 

And  the  square  root  16p2'35"  of  the  257p22'44"  resulting  from  the  application, 
multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF,  makes 

F/7  =  15p25'9", 

CF  =  51P11'43", 

and,  by  addition, 


ra  =  66p36'52", 

relative  to  the  supposed  quantities  of  AC  and  AF, 
And  therefore  also 


Fi?  =  82Pl4'8" 

where 

hypt.  AF  =12Q^; 

and 


C£r  =  116P31'36'" 


where 

And 


hypt.  AC  =  120p. 


arc  FJ^  =  86°31'4^, 
arcC/7=152^27'56". 

And  consequently 

angle  FA/f  =  43n5'32^, 
angle  CAH  =  76°13'58". 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =  13°46'2" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  FAC  =  32°52'26" 

as  the  angle  of  apparent  anomaly.  And  since  to  this,  according  to  the  ratios 
at  the  apogee,  there  corresponds  9®48'51"  of  longitude  truly  determined,  and 
10°16'51"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  is  left  to  be  3°57'11" 
and  very  nearly  103^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  to  be  7°54'22"  and  21  days. 

According  to  the  calculations  near  the  least  distances,  which  are  at  the 
intervals  of  120°  in  periodic  longitude  from  the  apogee,  the  addition-sub¬ 
traction  of  true  determination  for  the  rate  11°  either  side  of  the  perigees  is 
found  to  be  very  nearly  0°13^'.  And  therefore 

FH  :CF  :  :  in'30"  :  3^7^38", 


and 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


413 


and 


CE  :CF::  dnO'SS"  : 


rect.  CE,  CF=  lQnV25'\ 

And  again,  very  nearly, 

AC  :  AG::  55^42'  :  22^30', 

and 


CD  :  CG  :  :  78^12'  :  33^12', 

and 


rect.  CD,  C(?  =  2,596p14'24'^. 

And  the  square  root  12p39'48"  of  the  160p21'29"  resulting  from  the  applica¬ 
tion,  multiplied  by  the  given  ratio  of  FH  and  CF  separately,  makes 

Fi/  =  I2P58'47", 

FC  =  S9m'V, 


and  by  addition 

Ci7  =  52p34'51", 

relative  to  the  supposed  quantities  of  AC  and  AF, 
And  therefore  also 


FH  =  mm'Sl" 


where 

and 

where 

And 


hypt.  AF=120P; 

Cif=113Pl6'48" 

hypt.  AC=120P. 

arc  F^  =  70°27'44", 
arc  Ci^  =  14r28'14". 


And  consequently 

angle  FAiy=35°13'52", 
angle  CA^  =  70°447". 

And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FCA  =  19°15'53" 

as  the  angle  of  regression  due  to  the  starts  speed;  and 

angle  FAG  =  35°30'15" 

as  the  angle  of  the  apparent  anomaly.  Since  to  this,  according  to  the  given 
ratios,  there  corresponds  11°39'30"  of  longitude  truly  determined,  and  11° 
21 '30"  of  periodic  longitude,  half  of  the  regression  is  left  to  be  7°36'23"  and 
very  nearly  llj^  days;  and  the  whole  regression  to  be  15°12'46"  and  23  days. 

The  quantities  which  have  been  shown  are  in  each  case  very  nearly  in  ac¬ 
cord  with  those  taken  from  the  appearances. 

And  we  got  the  rates  of  longitudinal  passage  about  the  greatest  and  least 
distances  in  this  way:  for  example,  in  the  case  of  those  about  the  greatest 
distance  of  Mars  we  showed  the  epicycle's  apparent  arc  from  one  of  the  sta¬ 
tions  to  the  opposition  (that  is,  the  arc  considered  with  respect  to  the  eclip¬ 
tic's  centre)  to  be  22°13'19".  The  approximately  21°10'  of  periodic  longitude 
corresponding  to  these  in  the  ratio  of  1^  to  1p3'H",  although  they  are  not 
exact  because  the  speeds  given  at  the  stations  do  not  remain  unchanged 
throughout  the  whole  regressions,  yet  do  not  differ  enough  to  make  the  cor- 


414  PTOLEMY 

responding  addition-subtraction  differ  appreciably  from  very  nearly  3°45'. 
And  we  subtracted  these  from  the  22®13'19"  of  the  epicycle,  since  at  the  great¬ 
est  distances  the  apparent  passages  on  the  epicycle  are  greater  than  the  peri¬ 
odic,  and  we  found  the  corresponding  periodic  passage  of  anomaly  from  one 
of  the  stations  to  the  opposition  to  be  18°28'19".  Since,  by  the.  ratio  of  the 
mean  movements,  20°58'21"  of  periodic  longitude  correspond  to  them,  we 
used  these  as  exact  instead  of  the  21°10'.  Subtracting  from  them  the  3^45'  of 
addition-subtraction  which  remained  almost  the  same  here  (for  at  the  greatest 
distances  the  apparent  passages  in  longitude  are  less  than  the  periodic)  we 
found  the  apparent  passage  in  longitude  for  the  given  interval  to  be  17°13'21". 

7.  Construction  of  a  Table  for  the  Stations. 

And  again,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  easily  to  see  at  what  sections  of 
the  epicycle  each  of  the  stars  makes  the  appearance  of  stations  for  the  dis¬ 
tances  between  the  mean  distance  and  the  greatest  and  least  distances,  we 
arrange  this  table  of  31  rows  and  12  columns.  The  first  two  columns  contain 
the  numbers  of  periodic  longitude  at  intervals  of  6®  according  to  the  develop¬ 
ments  of  the  other  tables.  And  the  ten  columns  following  contain,  for  each 
of  the  five  stars,  the  intervals  of  anomaly  truly  determined  from  the  epicycles' 
apparent  apogees — the  first  one  in  each  case  containing  those  of  the  first 
stations  and  the  second  those  of  The  second.  We  took  the  quantities  of  these 
from  what  was  demonstrated  above  for  the  mean,  least,  and  greatest  dis¬ 
tances,  and  from  those  differences  in  the  distances  between  which  we  have 
already  explained  for  the  comparison  by  sixtieths  in  the  eighth  column  of  the 
Tables  of  Anomalies,  Book  XI,  chap.  11.  The  epicycles^  distances,  relative 
to  which  the  difference  of  the  stations  is  most  especially  considered,  are  there 
demonstrated  for  each  passage  of  periodic  longitude  with  the  quantity  of 
greatest  anomalistic  difference. 

Since  the  regressions  shown  about  the  apogees  and  perigees  do  not  contain 
the  stations  resulting  when  the  epicycles^  centres  are  at  the  apogees  and  peri¬ 
gees  but  only  when  they  are  a  certain  distance  away,  for  each  star  we  first  of 
all  got  from  these  quantities  the  quantities  corresponding  to  the  apogees  and 
perigees  in  this  way. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter — since  the  epicycles^  distances  at 
the  apogees  and  perigees  differ  hardly  at  all  from  those  at  the  given  intervals 
from  them — we  placed,  in  the  proper  rows,  the  anomalistic  numbers  from  the 
epicycles^  apparent  apogees,  obtained  in  these  cases;  that  is,  those  of  the 
apogees  in  the  rows  containing  the  number  360,  and  those  of  the  perigees  in 
the  rows  containing  the  number  180.  In  the  case  of  Saturn  the  distance  from 
the  epicycle^s  perigee,  at  the  apogee  of  eccentricity,  was  shown  to  be  very 
nearly  67°15',  and  at  the  perigee  64°31';  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  the  distance 
at  the  apogee  55°55',  and  at  the  perigee  52°49'.  For  convenience  we  arranged 
the  numbers  from  the  epicycles'  apogees  corresponding  to  these  in  the  sub¬ 
sequent  four  columns  along  the  proper  rows:  along  the  row  containing  the 
apogee's  number  of  360°,  in  the  third  column,  the  112°45'  of  Saturn's  first 
station;  in  the  fourth,,  the  247°15'  of  its  second  station;  likewise,  in  the  fifth, 
the  124°5'  of  Jupiter's  first  station;  and,  in  the  sixth,  the  235°55'  of  its  second 
station.  And  along  the  row  containing  the  perigee's  number  of  180°,  according 
to  the  same  order,  115°29'  and  244°31';  and  likewise  127°11'  and  232°49'. 


415 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 

In  the  case  of  Mars,  we  showed  that,  whenever  the  epicycle^s  centre  is  20°58' 
of  periodic  movement  from  the  eccentric^s  apogee,  the  star  makes  its  stations  at 
a  distance  of  22°13'  from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee.  But  the  passage  at  the 
mean  distance  contains  16°51',  so  that  there  is  a  difference  of  5°22'.  And  where 
the  mean  distance  is  60^,  the  greatest  is  66^,  and  the  difference  relative  to  the 
mean  is  6^.  But  at  the  given  angular  distance  from  the  apogee,  it  is  65^40',  and 
the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  5^40'.  Now,  multiplying  the  6^  by  the  5°22'j 
and  applying  [dividing]  the  result  to  [by]  the  5^40',  we  found  the  distance  at  the 
apogee  over  the  mean  distance  to  be  very  nearly  5®41'.  And  so  the  angular  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee  comes  to  22°32',  and  the  angular  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  first  station  from  the  apogee  comes  to  157°28'  which  we  place  in  the 
seventh  column  in  the  row  of  360°;  and  of  the  second  station  to  202°32'  which  we 
place  in  the  eighth  column  in  the  same  row. 

Likewise,  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  16°53'  in  mean  movement  from  the 
perigee,  the  star  makes  its  stations  at  a  distance  of  11°11'  from  the  epicycle’s 
apparent  perigee,  so  that  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  distance  comes  to 
5°40'.  But  of  the  linear  distances,  the  least  is  54^  according  to  the  difference  of 
fip  relative  to  the  mean,  and  that  of  the  given  angular  distance  from  the  eccen¬ 
tric’s  perigee  54^20';  and  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  5^40'.  Therefore  we 
shall  have  the  whole  difference  at  the  perigee  to  be  6°,  and  the  passage  from  the 
epicycle’s  apparent  perigee  10°5T;  and  the  passage  of  the  first  station  from  the 
apogee  169°9',  and  of  the  second,  190°51',  which  we  place  in  the  180°  row  in  the 
proper  columns. 

In  the  case  of  Venus,  we  showed  that,  when  the  epicycle’s  centre  is  21°9'  in 
periodic  longitude  from  the  apogee,  the  star  makes  its  stations  14°4'  from  the 
epicycle’s  apparent  perigee.  But  the  passage  at  the  mean  distance  contains  12° 
52',  so  that  there  is  a  difference  of  1°12'.  Where  the  mean  distance  is  60p,  the 
greatest  is  61^15'  and  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  1^15'.  But  at  the  given 
angular  distance  from  the  apogee,  the  distance  is  61^10'  and  the  difference  rela¬ 
tive  to  the  mean  1^10'.  And  again,  multiplying  ^15'  by  1°12'  and  applying  [di¬ 
viding]  the  result  to  [by]  1^10',  we  found  the  difference  at  the  apogee  over  the 
mean  distance  to  be  1°17'.  And  so  the  angular  distance  from  the  epicycle’s  ap¬ 
parent  perigee  comes  to  14°9',  and  the  angular  distance  of  the  first  station  from 
the  apogee  comes  to  165°5T  which  we  place  in  the  ninth  column  in  the  row  of 
360°;  and  of  the  second  station  to  194°9',  which  we  place  in  the  tenth  column 
along  the  same  row. 

And  likewise,  when  the  epicycle  is  very  nearly  20°  according  to  regular  longi¬ 
tudinal  passage  from  the  eccentric’s  perigee,  the  star  makes  its  stations  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  11°44'  from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee,  so  that  the  difference  rela¬ 
tive  to  the  mean  distance  comes  to  1°8'.  Of  the  linear  distances,  the  least  is 
58^45'  where  the  mean  is  60^,  and  the  difference  between  them  1^15';  but  that  of 
the  given  angular  distance  from  the  eccentric’s  perigee  58^50',  and  its  difference 
relative  to  the  mean  1^10'.  And  nultiplying  the  Plo'  by  the  1°8'  and  applying 
[dividing]  the  result  to  [by]  1^10',  we  found  the  difference  at  the  apogee  over  the 
mean  distance  to  be  1^13'.  Therefore  we  found  the  passage  from  the  epicycle’s 
apparent  perigee  to  be  11°39',  and  the  passage  of  the  first  station  from  the  apo¬ 
gee  to  be  168°21',  and  of  the  second  station  191°39',  which  we  place  in  the  same 
columns  by  the  number  180°. 

In  the  case  of  Mercury,  we  demonstrated  that,  when  the  epicycle  is  10°17'  in 


416  PTOLEMY 

periodic  longitude  from  the  eccentric’s  apogee,  the  star  makes  its  stations  32°52' 
from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee.  But  the  passage  at  the  mean  distance  con¬ 
tains  34®56',  so  that  there  is  a  difference  of  2°4'.  Where  the  mean  distance  is  60^, 
the  greatest  is  69^  and  the  difference  between  them  9^;  but  at  the  given  angular 
distance  from  the  apogee,  it  is  68^36'  and  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean 
8^36'.  And  in  the  same  way  as  before,  multiplying  the  9^  b}^  2°4'  and  applying 
[dividing]  the  result  to  [by]  8^36',  we  found  the  difference  at  the  apogee  over  the 
mean  distance  to  be  very  nearly  2p10'.  And  so  the  angular  distance  from  the  epi¬ 
cycle’s  apparent  perigee  comes  to  32°46',  and  the  angular  distance  of  the  first 
station  from  the  apogee  comes  to  147°14'  which  we  place  in  the  eleventh  column 
beside  the  number  of  360®;  and,  of  the  second  station,  to  212°46',  which  we  place 
in  the  twelfth  column  along  the  same  row. 

And  likewise,  when  the  epicycle  is  11®22'  in  periodic  movement  from  the  peri¬ 
gee,  then  the  star  makes  its  stations  35®30'  from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee 
so  that  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  distance  is  0®34'.  Of  the  linear  dis¬ 
tances,  the  least  is  55^34'  where  the  mean  is  60^,  and  their  difference  is  4^26';  but 
at  the  given  angular  distance  from  the  eccentric’s  perigee  is  very  nearly  55p42', 
and  the  difference  relative  to  the  mean  4^18'.  Again  multiplying  the  4^26'  by 
0®34'  and  applying  [dividing]  the  result  to  [by]  the  4^18',  we  found  the  difference 
at  the  perigee  relative  to  the  mean  to  be  0^35'.  Therefore  we  found  the  passage 
from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  perigee  to  be  35°31',  and  the  perigee  of  the  first 
station  from  the  apogee  to  be  144°29',  and,  of  the  second,  215®3T,  which  we 
place  in  the  same  columns;  yet  not  beside  the  number  180®  in  longitude  but  be¬ 
side  120®  and  240®,  since  the  perigees  of  Mercury’s  eccentricity  have  been  dem¬ 
onstrated  to  be  at  those  places. 

Now  with  these  things  first  set  forth,  the  differences  of  the  intervening  pass¬ 
ages  are  established  according  to  the  same  methods. 

For,  as  an  example,  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  corresponding  positions  of  the 
apparent  anomaly  for  the  first  stations  when  the  mean  longitudinal  passage  is 
30®  from  the  apogee.  In  this  position,  where  the  mean  distance  is  in  every  case 
60p,  the  epicycle’s  distance  is  established,  by  means  already  formulated,  to  be 
63^2'  for  Saturn,  62p26'  for  Jupiter,  65^24'  for  Mars,  61^6'  for  Venus,  and  66^35' 
for  Mercury.  And  so,  relative  to  the  mean,  the  differences  in  each  case  are  (in 
the  same  order,  to  avoid  repetition)  3^2',  2^26',  5^24',  1^6',  and  6^35'.  But  the 
differences  between  the  mean  and  apogeal  distances  (for  in  every  case  the  given 
numbers  of  the  distances  are  greater  than  the  mean)  are  3^25',  2^45',  6^0',  1^15', 
and  9^0'.  Now,  since  the  whole  differences  of  the  degrees  of  apparent  anomaly  at 
the  apogees,  relative  to  the  mean  distances,  come  to  1®23',  1®33',  5®41',  1®17', 
and  2®10',  in  the  same  order,  therefore,  multiplying  each  of  them  by  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  distance  at  that  time  and  the  mean,  proper  to  each  star  (for 
example,  1®23'  by  3^2'),  and  applying  [dividing]  the  result  to  [by]  the  difference 
of  the  greatest  distance  (for  instance  3^25'),  we  shall  have,  for  each  case  at  the 
given  longitudinal  passage,  the  excess  of  the  degrees  of  anomaly  over  those  for 
the  mean  distance:  1®14',  1®22',  5®7',  1®8',  and  1®35'.  But,  for  the  mean  distances, 
the  intervals  from  the  epicycle’s  apparent  apogee  are  114®8',  135®38',  163®9', 
167®8',  and  145®4';  and  the  intervals  for  the  greatest  distances  are  less  than 
these  in  all  cases  except  Mercury  where  it  is  more.  And  so,  for  the  other  cases, 
subtracting  the  differences  found  for  the  given  distances  from  intervals  at  the 
mean  distances,  but  adding  them  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  we  shall  have,  corre- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII  417 

spending  to  30®  of  periodic  longitude  in  the  columns  of  the  first  stations,  the  de¬ 
grees  of  apparent  anomaly  from  the  epicycle^s  apogee:  112®54'  for  Saturn,  124® 
16'  for  Jupiter,  158®2'  for  Mars,  166®  for  Venus,  and  146®39'  for  Mercury.  We 
fill  in  the  columns  of  the  second  stations  immediately  by  placing  the  differences 
between  the  numbers  of  the  first  stations  and  360®  in  the  same  rows  in  the  col¬ 
umns  of  the  second  stations:  in  the  case  of  the  given  longitude,  247®6',  235®44', 
201®58',  194®0',  and  213®21'. 

It  is  easily  understood  that,  even  if  we  do  not  choose  to  set  out  the  degrees  of 
anomaly  considered  with  respect  to  the  epicycle's  apparent  apogee,  but,  for 
greater  convenience,  those  not  truly  determined  considered  relative  to  the  peri¬ 
odic,  we  can  immediately  establish  such  a  table  by  taking  the  total  addition- 
subtraction  in  the  Tables  of  Anomaly  corresponding  to  each  number  of  periodic 
longitude  and  subtracting  it  from  the  degrees  of  apparent  anomaly  found  for 
those  up  to  180®  from  the  eccentric's  apogee  and  adding  it  for  those  beyond  180®. 
And  here  is  the  outlay  of  the  table: 


Numbers  of  Anomaly  Truly  Determined 


418 


PTOLEMY 


o 

CO  CO 


es 

CO 


CO 

l>- 

(M 

o 

o 

1-^ 

lO 

C5 

to 

,-H 

00 

o 

I>- 

o 

o 

r-i 

o 

C5 

to 

CO 

05 

o 

o 

lO 

lO 

(M 

CO 

(N 

CO 

to 

<M 

(N 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

<N 

(N 

05 

05 

05 

05 

C<l 

(N 

(M 

<N 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

t-H 

T— H 

1-H 

pH 

fH 

1— ( 

t-H 

f-H 

•fH 

t-H 

1-H 

1-H 

<N 

(M 

(M 

(N 

(N 

(N 

(N 

ca 

(M 

(M 

<M 

CM 

(M 

(M 

(M 

(M 

<N 

C<l 

(M 

cq 

<M 

CM 

r, 

?5 

05 

05 

05 

05 

CO 

00 

i-H 

■pH 

O 

to 

>— 1 

to 

Oi 

CO 

00 

OO 

<M 

CO 

O 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 

03 

03 

o 

tH 

CO'  to 

00 

03 

O 

o 

1-H 

lO 

CO 

1-H 

to 

CO 

(M 

to 

to 

Tr< 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

(M 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

Y* 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

to 

to 

to 

Ttn 

rti 

Tji  pH 

Tfl 

Ttl 

r— ( 

rH 

i-H 

pH 

i—H 

1-H 

li* 

t-H 

pH 

1-H 

iH 

03 

00 

to 

CO 

O 

O 

^H 

to 

00 

to 

00 

o 

05 

CO 

CO  . 

<35 

(35 

to 

o 

<35 

o 

CO 

CO 

O 

<35 

Si 

l-J 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

05 

pH 

to 

CO 

CO 

<35 

^H 

to 

to 

to 

CO 

^  .s 

Tt< 

Tt^ 

Tft 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co' 

05 

05 

<35 

(35 

(35 

<35 

(35 

T— H 

rH 

rH 

^H 

fH 

rH 

m 

^  zo 

03 

03 

o 

o 

o 

05 

05 

05 

05 

C5 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

05 

<35 

05 

05 

<35 

05 

05 

o 

05 

<35 

05 

<35 

05 

05 

pH 

f-4 

iH 

^H 

^H 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

^  -2 

05 

CO 

to 

o 

<35 

to 

05 

05 

to 

05 

o 

CO 

CO 

to 

CO 

O 

cb 

to 

O 

05 

o 

pH 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

05 

05 

CO 

to 

to 

(35 

05 

CO 

to 

to 

(N 

<35 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

O 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

l>- 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

OO 

OO 

00 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 

CO 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

1-H 

1—i 

1-H 

1-H 

1-H 

pH 

1-H 

pH 

pH 

pH 

t-H 

^H 

^H 

pH 

pH 

'T3 

1-^ 

05 

o 

03 

o 

00 

05 

CO 

to 

CO 

00 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

<N 

o 

05 

CO 

to 

CO 

(35 

CO 

<35 

05 

pH 

CO 

CO 

05 

rH 

to 

05 

’’T' 

to 

05 

to 

pH 

05 

to 

CO 

to 

<35 

to 

<35 

to 

CO 

to 

to 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

1-H 

1-H 

1-H 

t-H 

o 

o 

05 

05 

00 

00 

CO 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

(35 

(35 

rH 

pH 

pH 

o 

O 

^  55 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

<35 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

05 

05 

CD 

Ph 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

t“H 

pH 

1-H 

1-^ 

pH 

pH 

pH 

ipH 

pH 

^H 

< 

00 

o 

Tf 

T— H 

O 

05 

00 

to 

05 

o 

05 

o 

00 

05 

to 

CO 

00 

05 

00 

CO 

<35 

00 

<35 

05 

05 

CO 

to 

CO 

to 

CO 

to 

CO 

<35 

CO 

CO 

05 

to 

-S 

cS-2 

CO 

OO 

00 

00 

00 

05 

05 

o 

o 

05 

(35 

CO 

rtH 

to 

o 

CO 

00 

00 

00 

OO 

05 

<35 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

CD 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

iH 

tH 

"" 

iH 

rH 

»H 

»H 

i-H 

iH 

fH 

pH 

t-H 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

to 

CO 

pH 

00 

Ttl 

05 

OO 

pH 

CO 

to 

00 

00 

CO 

05 

<35 

o 

o 

(35 

CO 

05 

CO 

00 

(35 

O  05 

ss 

H  O 

to 

to 

to 

to 

TtH 

CO 

CO 

05 

05 

pH 

to 

CO 

05 

to 

CO 

<35 

pH 

to 

to 

to 

to 

Ph 

O  *42 
-S 
CO  ZQ 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

rjH 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

<35 

<35 

(35 

<35 

<35 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

H 

H 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

(35 

(35 

<35 

(N 

<35 

(35 

(35 

05 

<35 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

<35 

to 

o 

O 

05 

CO 

CO 

05 

05 

to 

CO 

05 

05 

05 

O 

o 

05 

CO 

CO 

05 

CO 

00 

O 

pH 

05 

05 

CO 

CO 

to 

05 

CO 

Ttl 

to 

<35 

CO 

to 

to 

pH 

pH 

S*J 

S  -2 

CO 

Tt^ 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 

o 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

<35 

<35 

<35 

(35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

(35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

iH 

iH 

iH 

»H 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

^H 

pH 

^H 

pH 

pH 

pH 

to 

to 

TJH 

05 

05 

CO 

05 

05 

to 

GO 

1-H 

CO 

<35 

o 

(35 

CO 

to 

05 

(35 

to 

05 

<35 

to 

CO 

1-H 

pH 

|| 

pH 

iH 

pH 

^H 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

05 

to 

to 

CO 

<05 

to 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

1  1 
CO  CO 

l:^ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

Tji 

Tfl 

Tf 

Tj^ 

Tf 

tJH 

Ph 

5^ 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

(M 

05 

05 

(35 

<35 

(35 

<35 

(35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

<35 

H 

to 

to 

CO 

00 

00 

CO 

00 

to 

05 

05 

CO 

CO 

pH 

o 

CO 

to 

CO 

00 

to 

CO 

to 

<35 

<35 

ZD 

to 

to 

to 

pH 

05 

05 

CO 

rr 

to 

(35 

CO 

Tfl 

to 

to 

^H 

05 

<35 

<35 

<35 

(35 

^  -H 
c^ 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

t-H 

pH 

pH 

iH 

pH 

t-H 

pH 

pH 

00 


§^0'^00<NOO^OO<MOO'^0(MOO'^00(MOO'^00(M;DO'^00(MOO 
S^CDiOTtiTfiCOCO(M’— tr-iOOOOOOOt-l>-OiOiOTf<rtiCO(M<NT-<T-(000:>GOGO 
K^COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO(M(M(MC^(N(M(N<M(N(M<M<M<M<M(M(Mi-Hi-i.-^f- 

S  § 

f-^'^00(MOO'^OOC<lOO'^OcO<MOOTftOOC^OO'^00(NGO"^00(MOO'^0 

r-i.— iC^COCO'^'^»OOOI>*l>-00020500»-<CQ<MCOCO'^»OiOCOCDI>-CO 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


419 


9.  Demonstration  of  Venus’  and  Mercury’s  Greatest 
Elongations  from  the  Sun 

Now  that  we  have  arranged  things  having  to  do  with  the  regressions,  it 
would  be  reasonable  next  to  demonstrate  for  each  dodecatemory  the  greatest 
elongations  from  the  sun  of  Venus  and  Mercury  as  established  from  the  given 
hypotheses.  We  have  the  expositions  of  these  with  respect  to  the  sun’s  ap¬ 
parent  passage,  with  the  stars  at  the  beginnings  of  the  dodecatemories,  and 
with  their  apogees  in  position  with  respect  to  the  tropic  and  equinoctial  points 
for  our  times — that  is,  with  Venus’  25°  within  the  Bull  and  Mercury’s  10° 
within  the  Balance.  There  will  be  a  change  in  the  greatest  elongations  be¬ 
cause  of  the  movement  of  the  apogees  and  this  can  be  easily  corrected  by  the 
same  methods  as  before;  otherwise  it  will  remain  without  any  appreciable 
difference  for  a  long  time.  And  that  the  manner  of  our  methods  may  be  easily 
understood,  it  is  necessary  to  show  first,  as  an  example,  the  greatest  morning 
and  evening  elongations  of  Venus  when  it  is  in  the  spring  equinox  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Ram. 

Then  let  there  be  through  the  apogee  of  eccentricity  A  the  straight  line 
ABODE.  And  on  it  let  R  be  supposed  the  centre  of 
regular  movement,  G  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  bear¬ 
ing  the  epicycle,  and  D  the  ecliptic’s  centre.  And,  with 
the  eccentric’s  radius  OF  drawn  through,  let  the  epi¬ 
cycle  GH  be  described  about  F;  and  let  DH  be  drawn 
tangent  to  its  morning  and  western  parts.  And  let  BFG 
and  FH  be  joined;  and  let  CA,  CLj  and  BM  be  drawn 
as  perpendiculars. 

Now,  since  DA  is  25°  within  the  Bull,  and  DH  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Ram,  therefore 
angle  Ai)i7  =  55° 

=  110°  to  2  rt. 

and  its  complement 

angle  DCA  =  70°  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CDKy 
arc  (7A=  110°, 

and 

chord  CA  =  98^18' 
hypt.  Ci)  =  120P. 

CK  =  HL  =  in' 

C2)  =  1P15' 

epic.  rad.  E77  =  43^10';  j 

FL  =  42p9' 

:  T 

ecc.  rad.  CF  =  60p. 


where 

And  therefore 
where 
and 

and,  by  subtraction, 
where  it  is  supposed 
And  therefore 


420 


PTOLEMY 
FL  =  84^18' 


where 

hypt.  CF=120p; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CFL^ 

arc  FL  =  89^16'. 

And  so  also 

angle  F(7L  =  89^16'  to  2  rt. 

And 

angle  Z)CA’  =  70°  to  2  rt., 
and  angle  LCK  is  right.  Therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  FC^  =  339°16'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  AC/^  =  20°44'  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BCM, 


arc  BM  =  20° W 

and  as  its  supplement 

arc  CM  =  159°16'. 

And  therefore 

chord  BM  =  21^35', 
chord  CM  =  118p2' 

where 

And  so  also,  where 

hypt.  BC  =  120p. 

BC  =  in5' 

and 

ecc.  rad.  CF  =  60'’, 

there  also 

and,  by  subtraction. 

BM  =  0n3', 

CM  =  ini', 

FM  =  58n0'. 

And  therefore  also 

hypt.  BF  =  58n6'. 

And  therefore 

BM  =  0^27' 

where 

BF  =  120^: 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BFM, 

arc  BM  =  0p26'. 


And  so  also 

angle  Si^C  =  0°26'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  was  shown  that 

angle  ACF  =  20°44'  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition,  as  the  angle  of  regular  longitudinal  passage, 

angle  ABF  =  21^10'  to  2  rt. 

=  10°35'. 

The  sun^s  mean  passage  will  therefore  be  10°35'  westward  from  the  apogee  A 
and  its  position,  of  course,  14°25'  within  the  Bull;  while  the  true  sun  will  be 
15°14'  within  the  Bull.  And  so  the  star,  when  it  is  at  the  beginning  of  the 


421 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


Ram,  will  have  a  greatest  western  elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  45°  14'. 
Again,  let  the  following  drawing  be  laid  out:  the  tangent  drawn  to  the 


A 

L  _ 

evening  and  eastern  parts  of  the  epicycle  and 
the  star  likewise  supposed  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Ram. 

\  By  means  of  things  already  demonstrated 

\ 

\  ^ 

\  and  with  angle  ADH  remaining  the  same, 

\  angle  DC K  =  70°  to  2  rt., 

1  and 

Wg  chord  CK  =  LH=  in' 

y  where 

E  - 

ecc.  rad.  CF  =  60‘' 

and 

And  so,  by  addition, 

epic.  rad.  7^1^  =  43^10'. 

FL=44Pll'. 

And  it  is  clear  that 

where 

FL=88p22' 

hypt.  CF  =  120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CFL, 

arc  FL  =  94°5I'. 

And  so  also 

angle  F(7L  =  94°51'  to  2  rt., 

and  as  its  complement 

angle  FCK  =  85°9'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  FCD  =  angle  BCM  =  I55°9'  to  2  rt. 
And  therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BCM, 

arc  Bilf  =  155°9', 


and  as  its  supplement 

arc  CM  =  2i°5V. 

And  therefore 

where 

chord  Bilf  =  117Pll', 
chord  CM  =  25p49' 

And  so  also,  where 

hypt.  5C'=120p. 

there  also 

5C  =  1P15', 

and,  by  addition. 

Silf  =  lPl3', 

CM  =  0p16', 

and  therefore  also 

FM  =  60P16'; 

And  therefore 

hypt.  BF  =  mm'. 

where 

BM  =  2p25' 

SF  =  120p; 

422  PTOLEMY 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BFM, 

.  1  ,  arc5M  =  2®19'. 

And  so  also 

angle  =  2°19'  to  2  rt. 

And  since  it  has  been  shown 

therefore  i)CF=  155"9'  to  2  rt., 

angleJ5CF  =  204^51' to2rt.  X 

And  therefore,  by  addition,  as  the  angle  of  the  regular  longitudinal  passage, 

angle  A^F  =  207°10' to  2  rt. 

=  103°35'. 

The  sun^s  mean  passage  wdll  therefore  be  11°25'  within  the  Water-Bearer,  and 
its  true  passage  13°38'.  And  so  the  star,  when  likewise  it  is  at.the  beginning  of 
the  Ram,  will  have  a  greatest  eastern  elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  46°22'. 

And  for  Mercury,  let  it  be  supposed  as  an  evening  star  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Scorpion  and  as  a  morning  star  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bull;  because,  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  demonstrations  of  its  heliacal  risings  on  the  ecliptic  which  will  follow, 
it  is  easier  to  find  the  starts  greatest  elongations  from  the  true  sun  in  these  posi¬ 
tions.  Now,  according  to  Mercury^s  hypothesis,  w^hen  the  starts  apparent  pass¬ 
age  is  given,  the  mean  longitudinal  passage  is  not  obtained,  because  the  straight 
line  CF  does  not  always  remain  the  same  with  and  equal  to  the  eccentric^s  radius 
as  in  the  hypothesis  of  the  others.  But  when  the  regular  longitudinal  passage  is 
given,  the  apparent  is  showm.  Therefore,  supposing  there  are  tw^o  longitudinal 
positions  for  each  dodecatemory  w^hich  can  carry  the  star  at  the  beginning  of  the 
dodecatemory  in  question,  and  calculating  the  greatest  elongations  resulting  in 
the  passages  obtained,  in  this  way  w^e  find  the  greatest  elongation  for  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  dodecatemory,  as  wdll  be  easily  understood  through  the  means  set 
forth.  And  this  wnll  be  done  first  for  the  greatest  eastern  elongation  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Scorpion.  ' 

For  let  there  be  the  diameter  ABCD  through  the  apogee  A.  And  on  it  let  C  be 
supposed  the  ecliptic’s  centre  and  B  the  centre  of  the  epicycle’s 
regular  movement.  First  let  the  epicycle’s  centre  be  conceived 
at  the  apogee  itself,  so  that  the  sun’s  mean  longitudinal  passage 
is  10°  wdthin  the  Balance,  and  its  true  one  8°.  And  with  epicy¬ 
cle  FG  described  about  A,  let  CG  be  drawn  from  C  tangent  to 
it  at  the  eastern  parts;  and  let  the  perpendicular  AG  be  joined. 

Now,  since  it  has  been  shown  by  means  already  formulated 
that  oj  // 

epic.  rad.  AG  =^22}/^^ 
where,  as  the  greatest  distance. 


Ac=m,  '  • 

B 

therefore 

-  '  if  til"  A: 

A(?=39p8' 

V  .  . 

where 

hypt.  AC=120p. 

0:^4  ^  '  vr 

And  so,  on 

the  circle  about  right  triangle  AGG, 

D 

arc  ACG=S8°4:', 

and 

'■  I:'- 

angle  ^C(t  =  38°4'  to  2  rt. 

—  sA 

=  19°2'. 

THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 


423 


And  i4C  is  10°  within  the  Balance.  Therefore  the  star  will  be  29°2'  within  the 
Balance  when  it  is  at  its  greatest  elongation  of  21°2'  from  the  true  sun. 

Again,  let  the  mean  longitude  be  supposed  3°  from  the  apogee  so  that  the 
mean  sun  is  13°  within  the  Balance,  and  the  true  sun  11°4'.  And 
with  BE  continued  through,  let  epicycle  FG  be  described  about 
centre  E.  With  CG  drawn  tangent  in  the  same  way,  let  EC  and 
EG  be  joined.  Since,  in  this  position  (that  is,  when  it  is  sup¬ 
posed 

angle  ABE  —  Z°) 

it  is  shown  by  means  already  formulated  that,  as  the  angle  of 
difference  of  eccentricity, 

angle  AC^  =  2°52', 

and,  as  the  epicycle^s  distance  at  that  time, 

C£/N68p58' 

where 

)  ’  nri  !  epic.  rad.  £JG  =  22p30'; 

therefore  .  /  ^  . 

EG =39^9' 

where  *i  if  fj  ^  ,i  * 

hypt.  CS=120p. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEGj 
arc^G  =  38°5', 

!  i 

.1  angle  ECG  =  3S°5^  to  2  rt. 

m9°3'; 


and 


and  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  ACG  =  21°25'. 

Therefore,  when  the  star  is  1°55'  within  the  Scorpion,  it  will  have  a  greatest 
elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  20°21'.  But  it  was  shown  that,  when  it  is  29°2' 
within  the  Balance,  it  will  have  a  greatest  elongation  of  21°2'  from  the  true  sun. 
Since,  then,  the  difference  between  the  positions  is  2°53',  and  the  difference  of 
the  greatest  elongations  0°11'  so  that  very  nearly  0°4'  correspond  to  the  0°58' 
from  the  first  position  to  the  beginning  of  the  Scorpion,  we  subtract  these  from 
the  21°2'  and  thus  have  for  the  beginning  of  the  Scorpion  the  greatest  eastern 
elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  20°58'. 

And  next,  for  the  greatest  western  elongation  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bull, 
first  let  the  mean  longitudinal  passage  be  39°  east  of 
the  perigee  so  that  the  mean  sun  is  19°  within  the 
Bull,  and  the  true  19°38'.  Let  a  similar  drawing  be 
laid  out  with  the  epicycle  in  a  position  east  of  the 
perigee  and  the  tangent  drawn  to  the  western  parts 
of  the  epicycle. 

Now  since,  at  this  passage  (that  is,  when  it  is  sup¬ 
posed 

0  .1  angle  Z)5iP= 39°) 

it  is  shown  by  means  Already  formulated  that.  j 
angle  Z)CjE?  =  40°57', 

?and  as  the  distance  at  that  time 

L  CS  =  55P59' 


424 

where 


PTOLEMY 


epic.  rad.  £’(?  =  22^30', 

therefore 

=  48^14' 

where 

hypt.  C£;=120P; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CEG^ 

arc  EG  = 

And  so  also 

angle  EGG -=47^2^'  to  2  rt. 

=  23°42', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  GCZ)  =  17°15'. 

And  therefore  when  Mercury  is  27®15'  within  the  Ram,  it  will  have  a  greatest 
western  elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  22°23'. 

Again,  let  the  mean  longitude  be  supposed  42°  from  the  perigee  in  the  same 
direction,  so  that  the  sun’s  mean  position  is  22°  within 
the  Bull,  and  its  true  22°31'. 

Now  since,  for  this  same  passage  (that  is,  when  it  is 
supposed 

angle  DRi^=42°) 

it  is  shown  that 

angle  Z)CJS  =  44°4', 
and,  as  the  distance  at  that  time, 

CE  =  55^50' 

where 

epic.  rad.  ji?G  =  22P30'; 

therefore 

£’G  =  48p19' 


where 

hypt.  CE  =120^; 

and,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  EGG, 

arc  EG =47^30\ 

And  so  also 

angle  EGG  =  47^80'  to  2  rt. 

=  23°45', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  GCZ)  =  20°19'. 

Therefore,  when  the  Mercury  is  0°19'  within  the  Bull,  it  will  have  a  greatest 
western  elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  22°12'.  But  it  was  shown  that,  when  it 
is  27°15'  within  the  Ram,  it  will  have  a  similar  greatest  elongation  of  22°23'. 
Now,  since  again  the  difference  of  the  positions  is  3°4',  and  of  the  greatest  elon¬ 
gations  0°11'  (so  that  very  nearly  0°10'  correspond  to  the  2°45'  from  the  first 
position  to  the  beginning  of  the  Bull),  we  subtract  these  from  the  22°23',  and 
we  have  for  the  beginning  of  the  Bull  the  greatest  western  elongation  from  the 
true  sun  of  22°13'.  Which  things  it  was  required  to  find. 

For  the  other  dodecatemories,  calculating  in  the  same  way  the  greatest  west¬ 
ern  and  eastern  elongations  of  both  stars,  we  arranged  a  table  of  them  in  12 
row’^s  and  5  columns.  In  the  first  column  we  arranged  the  beginnings  of  the 


425 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XII 

dodecatemories  beginning  with  the  Ram.  And  in  the  next  four  we  placed  the 
greatest  elongations  from  the  true  sun  as  calculated:  the  second  containing  the 
western  elongations  of  Venus  and  the  third  the  eastern;  and  again  the  fourth 
the  western  elongations  of  Mercury  and  the  fifth  the  eastern.  And  here  is  the 
table: 


10.  Greatest  Elongations  with  Respect 
TO  THE  True  Sun 


Beginnings 

VENUS 

MERCURY 

of 

the  Signs 

Western 

Eastern 

Western 

Eastern 

Ram 

45 

14 

46 

22 

24 

14 

19 

36 

Bull 

45 

17 

45 

31 

22 

13 

21 

7 

Twins 

45 

34 

44 

49 

20 

18 

23 

41 

Crab 

45 

56 

44 

25 

18 

17 

26 

16 

Lion 

46 

20 

44 

31 

16 

35 

27 

37 

Virgin 

46 

38 

44 

55 

16 

8 

26 

17 

Balance 

46 

45 

45 

41 

17 

46 

23 

31 

Scorpion 

46 

47 

46 

30 

21 

32 

20 

58 

Archer 

46 

30 

47 

13 

26 

9 

19 

28 

Goat 

46 

7 

47 

35 

28 

37 

19 

14 

Water  Bearer 

45 

41 

47 

34 

28 

17 

18 

51 

Fishes 

45 

20 

47 

7 

26 

24 

19 

0 

i 


BOOK  THIRTEEN 


1.  On  the  Hypotheses  for  the  Latitudinal  Passages 
OF  THE  Five  Planets 

Two  matters  are  still  left  for  the  treatise  on  the  five  planets:  (1)  their  latitudinal 
passage  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic,  and  (2)  the  business  of  the  distances  of  the 
heliacal  risings  and  settings.  The  latitudinal  distance  of  each  of  them  must  be 
first  cleared  up  here,  since  from  this  there  result  noteworthy  differences  in  the 
risings  and  settings.  Therefore  we  shall  again  present  first  whatever  we  suppose 
as  common  to  the  obliquities  of  their  circles. 

Now,  because  each  planet  appears  to  effect  a  double  latitudinal  difference  just 
like  the  longitudinal  anomaly — one  due  to  the  eccentric  circle  relative  to  parts 
of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  other  due  to  the  epicycle  relative  to  the  sun — in  each 
case  we  suppose  the  eccentric  inclined  to  the  ecliptic^s  plane  and  the  epicycle 
to  the  eccentric^s  plane,  although  (as  we  said)  there  is  no  noteworthy  change  re¬ 
sulting  from  this  in  the  longitudinal  passage  or  in  the  demonstrations  -of  the 
anomalies  for  such  obliquities  as  we  shall  show  in  what  follows.  And  because, 
through  observations  made  on  each  of  them,  the  stars  appear  in  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic  when  the  number  of  truly  determined  longitude  and  of  truly  determined 
anomaly  are  each  very  nearly  a  quadrant  (the  one  from  the  eccentric^s  northern 
or  southern  limit,  and  the  other  from  its  own  apogee)  we  suppose  the  inclina¬ 
tions  of  the  eccentrics  about  the  ecliptic’s  centre,  as  in  the  case  of  the  moon, 
and  relative  to  the  diameters  through  the  northern  or  southern  limits;  and 
we  suppose  those  of  the  epicycles  relative  to  their  diameters  directed  to 
the  ecliptic’s  centre  and  along  which  the  apparent  apogees  and  perigees  are 
observed. 

And  again,  in  the  case  of  the  three  planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  we  ob¬ 
served  that,  when  their  longitudinal  passages  are  near  the  eccentric’s  apogee, 
then  they  always  appear  the  farthest  north  of  the  ecliptic  and  farther  north  at 
the  passages  in  the  epicycle’s  perigees  than  at  those  in  their  apogees;  but  when 
their  longitudinal  passages  are  at  the  eccentric’s  perigee,  on  the  contrary  they 
appear  farther  south  than  the  ecliptic.  In  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  we  ob¬ 
served  that  the  eccentric’s  northernmost  limits  are  near  the  beginning  of  the 
dodecatemory  of  the  Balance,  but  in  the  case  of  Mars  near  the  end  of  Cancer 
and  almost  at  its  apogee.  And  so  we  concluded  from  these  things  that  the  points 
of  the  eccentrics  at  these  parts  of  the  ecliptic  are  inclined  towards  the  north, 
whereas  the  points  diametrically  opposite  are  equally  inclined  to  the  south; 
and  that  the  perigees  of  the  epicycles  are  always  inclined  in  the  direction  of  the 
eccentrics’  inclination,  while  the  diameters  at  right  angles  to  those  through  their 
apogees  always  remain  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

In  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  we  observed  that,  when  their  longitudinal 
passages  are  at  the  eccentric’s  apogees  or  perigees,  the  movements  at  the  epi¬ 
cycle’s  perigees  do  not  differ  latitudinally  from  those  at  the  apogees,  but  are 

426 


427 


THE  ALIMAGEST,  XIII 

alike  either  north  or  south  of  the  ecliptic:  in  the  case  of  Venus  always  north; 
and  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  on  the  contrary,  always  south.  But  the  passages 
at  the  greatest  elongations  differ  most  from  each  other  (that  is,  the  western 
from  the  eastern)  and  from  those  at  the  epicycle^s  apogees  and  perigees  (that 
is,  the  difference  with  respect  to  the  eccentric),  while  the  greatest  eastern  and 
evening  elongation,  in  the  case  of  Venus,  is  north  at  the  eccentric's  apogee 
and  south  at  its  perigee;  and  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  on  the  contrary,  south 
at  the  apogee  and  north  at  the  perigee.  But  when  their  passages  of  truly  de¬ 
termined  longitude  are  at  the  nodes,  then  the  quadrant  distances  on  each 
epicycle  from  the  apogees  or  perigees  are  both  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and 
the  passages  at  the  perigees  differ  most  from  those  at  the  apogees,  and,  in  the 
case  of  Venus,  make  the  inclination  for  the  node  in  the  subtractive  semicircle 
southward  and  for  the  opposite  one  northward.  But,  in  the  case  of  Mercury, 
again  the  contrary:  for  the  node  in  the  subtractive  semicircle  northward  and 
for  the  opposite  southward.  And  so  we  concluded  from  this  that -the  eccentrics 
move  their  obliquities  and  make  their  returns  with  the  periods  of  the  epi¬ 
cycles,  being  in  the  same  plane  vdth  the  ecliptic  when  the  epicycles  are  at  the 
nodes,  and,  when  it  is  around  the  apogees  and  perigees,  throwing  the  epicycle 
the  farthest  north  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  the  farthest  south  in  the  case  of 
Mercury.  And  we  concluded  that  the  two  epicycles  effect  differences  by  in¬ 
clining  their  diameters  through  the  apparent  apogees  the  most  at  the  ec¬ 
centric's  nodes,  and  slanting  the  diameters  perpendicular  to  these  the  most 
at  the  eccentrics'  perigees  and  apogees  (for  let  us  distinguish  this  inclination 
by  that  name),  thus  contrari^vise  putting  the  first  diameters  in  the  eccentric's 
plane  at  its  apogees  and  perigees,  and  the  second  in  the  ecliptic's  plane  at  the 
nodes.^ 

^These  appearances  of  latitudinal  variation  can  be  understood  in  the  heliocentric  theory. 
Kepler,  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars  (Part  V,  Chapters  67  and  68)  and  again  in  the  Epitome 
of  Copernican  Astronomy  (Book  VI,  Parts  2  and  3)  gives  good  accounts  of  the  transformation 
from  the  Ptolemaic  appearances  and  theory  to  his  own  theory  which  will  be  that  of  Newton 
in  the  Principia,  The  latitudinal  variations  are  caused  by  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of  each 
planet*s  orbit  to  that  of  the  earth  with  the  sun  as  centre.  These  inclinations,  according  to 
Kepler,  are  fixed.  Newton  deduces  their  fixity  except  for  very  slight  perturbations  in  the 
Principles f  Book  I,  Section  II,  Proposition  I. 

It  is  now  obvious  that  for  the  outer  planets  there  wdll  be  greatest  variations  in  latitude  at 
opposite  points  on  the  ecliptic  and  no  variation  at  the  quadrants  representing  the  nodes. 
Furthermore,  this  variation  or  inclination  will  appear  greater  the  nearer  the  earth  and  the 
planet,  and  therefore  when  the  planet  is  at  the  perigee  of  its  epicycle  in  Ptolemaic  theory. 

In  the  case  of  the  lower  planets,  Venus  and  Mercury,  it  is  evident  that,  since  its  Ptolemaic 
epicycle  represents  its  Copernican  orbit  about  the  sun,  there  will  be  two  opposite  points  on 
the  ecliptic  where  the  greatest  difference  in  latitude  will  be  at  the  greatest  elongations  and 
none  at  the  apogee  and  perigee.  And  at  the  quadrants  relative  to  these  two  points,  on  the 
contrary",  the  greatest  difference  in  latitude  will  be  at  the  perigee  and  apogee  of  the  epicycle. 
The  fact  that  the  planet  at  the  apogee  and  perigee  of  the  epicycle  in  the  case  of  the  first  two 
points  has  a  small  latitudinal  deviation  on  the  same  side  of  the  ecfiptic  is  explained  by  re¬ 
ferring  the  line  of  the  nodes  to  the  true  sun,  according  to  Kepler.  This  is  an  argument  for  the 
Keplerian  dynamical  theory  of  the  sun  as  the  centre  of  the  universe.  Thus  is  explained  the 
Ptolemaic  inclination  of  the  eccentric  which  serves  to  throw  the  latitude  more  one  side  than 
the  other. 


428 


PTOLEMY 


2.  On  the  Manner  of  the  Movement  of  the  Obliquities  and 
Slantings  According  to  the  Hypotheses 

The  general  conclusion  of  the  hypotheses  is,  then,  that  the  eccentric  circles 
of  the  five  planets  are  inclined  to  the  ecliptic^s  plane  about  the  ecliptic's 
centre:  without  movement  in  the  case  of  the  three,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars, 
so  that  diametrically  opposite  passages  of  the  epicycles  are  borne  in  contrary 
latitudinal  directions;  but  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  changing  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  epicycles  towards  the  same  latitude,  always  towards  the 
north  for  Venus  and  always  towards  the  south  for  Mercury;  and  that  those 
diameters  of  the  epicycles  through  their  apparent  apogees,  starting  some¬ 
where  in  the  eccentric's  plane,  are  carried  aside  by  little  circles  lying  beside 
the  perigeal  limits,  sa}^,  proportionate  in  size  to  the  latitudinal  deviation,  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  eccentrics'  planes,  and  having  their  centres  on  them.  These 
little  circles  are  revolved  regularly  and  in  accord  with  the  longitudinal  passages 
starting  from  an  intersection  of  the  planes  with  the  epicycles  (say  towards 
the  north)  and  at  the  same  time  carrying  the  epicycles'  planes  in  the  first 
quadrant's  turn  to  the  northernmost  limit,  of  course,  then  back  again  to  the 
eccentric's  plane;  and  in  the  third  quadrant's  turn  to  the  southernmost  limit; 
and,  finally,  at  the  return  to  the  starting  point.  The  beginning  and  return  of 
this  circuit  are  established — for  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars — from  the  inter¬ 
section  at  the  ascending  node;  in  the  case  of  Venus,  from  the  eccentric's  peri¬ 
gee;  and  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  from  the  eccentric's  apogee. 

In  the  case  of  the  three  stars,  the  diameters  perpendicular  to  these  first 
diameters  remain,  as  we  said,  always  parallel  to  the  ecliptic's  plane  or  have  an 
inappreciable  slant  to  it.  But  in  the  case  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  starting  again 
from  some  point  in  the  ecliptic's  plane,  they  are  carried  aside  by  little  circles 
lying  beside,  say,  their  eastern  limits,  again  proportionate  in  size  to  the  lati¬ 
tudinal  deviation,  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic's  plane,  and  having  their 
centres  on  diameters  parallel  to  the  ecliptic's  plane.  These  little  circles  are  re¬ 
volved  at  the  same  speed  as  the  others  starting  from  an  intersection  of  the 
planes  and  the  epicycles  again  northwards  (let  us  say),  carrying  the  eastern 
extremities  of  these  diameters  in  the  same  order  as  before.  And  again  for  these 
stars,  the  beginning  and  return  of  the  similar  circuit  are  established,  for  Venus, 
from  the  node  in  the  additive  semicircle,  and,  for  Mercury,  from  the  node 
in  the  subtractive  semicircle. 

Now,  concerning  these  little  circles  by  which  the  oscillations  of  the  epi¬ 
cycles  are  effected,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  that  they  are  bisected  by  the 
planes  about  which  we  say  the  swayings  of  the  obliquities  take  place;  for 
only  in  this  way  can  equal  latitudinal  passages  be  established  on  either  side 
of  them.  Yet  they  do  not  have  their  revolutions  with  respect  to  regular  move¬ 
ment  effected  about  the  proper  centre,  but  about  another  which  has  the  same 
eccentricity  for  the  little  circle  as  the  star's  longitudinal  eccentricity  for  the 
ecliptic.  For  the  returns  on  the  ecliptic  and  the  little  circle  are  supposed  iso¬ 
chronous  and  the  quarterly  passages  on  each  apparently  agree.  But  if  the  little 
circle's  revolutions  take  place  about  its  proper  centre,  that  which  is  required 
can  in  no  way  come  about,  since  the  passages  for  the  little  circle  travel  each 
quadrant  in  equal  time,  but  the  epicycle's  passages  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic 
do  not  because  of  the  eccentricity  assumed  in  each  case.  But  if  they  take  place 


429 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 

about  a  centre  similar  in  position  to  that  of  the  eccentric,  and  of  the  quadrants, 
the  returns  of  the  obliquities  will  traverse  corresponding  parts  of  the  ecliptic 
and  of  the  little  circle  in  equal  times. 

Let  no  one,  seeing  the  difficulty  of  our  devices,  find  troublesome  such  hypo¬ 
theses.  For  it  is  not  proper  to  apply  human  things  to  divine  things  nor  to  get 
beliefs  concerning  such  great  things  from  such  dissimilar  examples.  For  what 
is  more  unlike  than  those  which  are  always  alike  vdth  respect  to  those  which 
never  are,  and  than  those  which  are  impeded  by  anything  with  those  which 
are  not  even  impeded  by  themselves?  But  it  is  proper  to  try  and  fit  as  far  as 
possible  the  simpler  hypotheses  to  the  movements  in  the  heavens;  and  if  this 
does  not  succeed,  then  any  hypotheses  possible.  Once  all  the  appearances  are 
saved  by  the  consequences  of  the  hypotheses,  why  should  it  seem  strange  that 
such  complications  can  come  about  in  the  movements  of  heavenly  things? 
For  there  is  no  impeding  nature  in  them,  but  one  proper  to  the  yielding  and 
giving  way  to  movements  according  to  the  nature  of  each  planet,  even  if  they 
are  contrary,  so  that  they  can  all  penetrate  and  shine  through  absolutely  all 
the  fluid  media;  and  this  free  action  takes  place  not  only  about  the  particular 
circles,  but  also  about  the  spheres  themselves  and  the  axes  of  revolution.  We 
see  the  complication  and  sequence  in  their  different  movements  difficult  and 
hard  to  come  by  for  the  freedom  of  the  movements  in  the  likely  stories  con¬ 
structed  by  us,  but  in  the  heavenly  thing  never  any^vhere  impeded  by  this 
mixture.  Or  rather  it  is  not  proper  to  judge  the  simplicity  of  heavenly  things 
by  those  which  seem  so  with  us,  when  here  not  even  to  all  of  us  does  the  same 
thing  seem  likewise  simple.  For  in  this  way  not  one  of  the  heavenly  occurrences 
would  seem  simple  to  those  studying  them,  not  even  the  unchangeableness 
of  the  first  motion,  since  always  to  be  the  same  is  not  difficult  here  with  us 
but  impossible.  We  should  instead  judge  their  simplicity  from  the  unchange¬ 
ableness  of  the  natures  in  the  heavens  and  their  movements.  For  thus  they 
would  all  appear  simple,  more  than  those  things  which  seem  so  here  with  us, 
since  no  difficulty  or  trouble  could  be  conjectured  concerning  their  periods. 

3.  On  the  Size  of  Each  of  the  Obliquities  and  Slantings 

Now,  from  these  things,  one  could  calculate  the  general  position  and  order 
of  the  circles  of  obliquity.  In  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  the  apparent 
passages  at  the  given  positions  of  latitude  render  easily  calculable  for  each 
star  the  particular  quantities  of  the  arcs  which  the  obliquities  cut  off  on  the 
great  circle  dra^vn  through  the  inclined  circlets  poles  at  right  angles  to  the 
ecliptic,  and  according  to  which  the  latitudinal  passages  are  considered.  For 
when  their  longitudinal  movements  are  at  the  eccentrics^  apogees  and  perigees, 
then,  as  we  declared  from  nearby  observations  of  the  addition  resulting  for 
us,  the  stars,  as  they  pass  through  the  epicycle’s  perigees  and  apogees,  appear 
either  north  or  south  of  the  ecliptic  by  an  equal  amount,  Venus  alvrays  being 
north  by  3^®,  and  Mercury  always  south  by  34°,  so  that  from  this  the  ob¬ 
liquities  of  each  of  the  eccentrics  are  just  about  those  amounts.  But  at  the 
greatest  elongations  from  the  sun  they  both  appear  in  mean  terms  about  5° 
north  or  south  of  the  opposite  greatest  elongations.  For,  when  it  effects  this 
latitudinal  opposition  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee,  Venus  appears  very  little 
less  than  5°,  and,  when  at  the  eccentric’s  perigee,  very  little  more  than  5°; 
and  Mercury  by  at  most  more  or  less.  And  so  the  slantings  of  the  epicycle 


430  PTOLEMY 

from  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  eccentric  planes  subtend,  in  mean  terms, 
about  23^2°  of  the  circle  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic,  from  which  are  taken 
the  quantities  of  the  angles  resulting  from  the  epicycles^  slant  to  the  eccen¬ 
trics^  planes.  This  will  be  clear  from  later  demonstrations  about  them  in  what 
follows,  not  to  interrupt  at  present  what  we  have  to  say  in  common  about 
the  five  planets. 

But  when  the  movements  of  truly  determined  longitude  are  at  the  nodes 
and  mean  distances,  then,  as  Venus  makes  its  passage  about  the  epicycle's 
apogee,  it  appears  1°  north  and  south  of  the  ecliptic,  and,  about  the  epicycle's 
perigee,  very  nearly  so  that  from  this  it  is  concluded  the  epicycle's  ob¬ 
liquity  cuts  off  23^°  on  the  circle  drawn  through  its  poles  in  the  way  we  have 
described.  For  as  a  result  of  the  epicyclic  anomaly  at  the  mean  distances  we 
find  that  many  degrees  subtend,  for  the  epicycle's  apogee,  an  angle  at  the  eye 
of  F^2',  and,  for  the  epicycle's  perigee,  an  angle  of  6°22'.  And,  as  Mercury 
makes  its  passage  about  the  epicycle's  apogee,  one  would  calculate  from  its 
heliacal  risings  that  it  is  very  nearly  north  and  south  of  the  ecliptic,  and, 
about  the  epicycle's  perigee,  very  nearly  4"^;  so  that  from  this  the  obliquity 
is  established  as  634°*  For  again,  as  a  result  of  the  epicyclic  anomaly  at  the 
distances  of  the  greatest  obliquities  (that  is,  when  the  truly  determined  longi¬ 
tude  is  a  quadrant's  distance  from  the  apogee),  we  find  just  that  many  de¬ 
grees  subtend,  for  the  epicycle's  apogee,  an  angle  at  the  eye  of  1°46',  and,  for 
the  epicycle's  perigee,  an  angle  of  4°5'. 

In  the  case  of  the  others — Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars — one  could  not  im¬ 
mediately  apprehend  the  quantities  of  the  obliquities  which  are  both  always 
mixed  together,  that  effected  by  the  eccentric  with  that  effected  by  the  epi¬ 
cycle.  But  from  the  latitudinal  passages  again  observed  at  the  perigees  and 
apogees  of  the  eccentrics  and  epicycles,  we  separate  out  each  of  the  two  ob¬ 
liquities  in  this  way: 

In  the  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  let  AB  be  its  inter¬ 
section  with  the  ecliptic's  plane,  and  CD  its  inter¬ 
section  with  the  eccentric's  plane.  And  let  point  E  be 
the  ecliptic's  centre.  About  the  eccentric's  apogee  C 
and  perigee  D  on  the  intersection  of  the  planes,  let 
there  be.  drawn  in  the  plane  of  reference  the  equal 
circles  FGHK  and  LMNX  through  the  poles  of  the 
epicycles.  And  on  these  circles  let  the  epicycles' 
planes  be  inclined  at  lines  GCK  and  MDX  with  equal 
angles — of  course,  at  C  and  D,  Let  also  straight  lines 
be  drawn  from  the  ecliptic's  centre  E  where  the  eye 
is  to  the  epicycles'  apogees  and  perigees:  EG  and  EM 
to  the  epogees,  and  EK  and  EX  to  the  perigees ;  for 
the  points  K  and  X  embrace,  of  course,  the  passages 
of  acronychal  opposition,  and  G  and  M  the  synodic 
passages. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  Mars,  we  took  the  latitudinal 
passages  about  the  acronychal  oppositions  established  at  the  eccentric's  apo¬ 
gee  (that  is,  those  about  the  point  K  of  the  epicycle)  and  those  at  the  eccen¬ 
tric's  perigee  (that  is,  those  about  the  point  X  of  the  epicycle),  because  their 
difference  is  quite  sensible.  In  the  oppositions  about  the  apogee  it  is  43^*^ 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  431 

north  of  the  ecliptic,  and  in  the  oppositions  about  the  perigee  very  nearly  7® 
south  of  the  ecliptic,  so  that 

angle  = 
angle  BEX=-7^. 

Now,  with  these  things  supposed,  we  find  the  angle  contained  by  the  ec¬ 
centric’s  obliquity  (that  is,  angle  AEC)  and  that  contained  by  the  epicycle’s 
(that  is,  angle  GCF)  in  this  way.  For  since,  from  what  we  have  demonstrated 
concerning  the  anomalies  of  Mars,  it  is  easily  seen  that,  of  those  angles  sub¬ 
tended  by  equal  arcs  about  the  epicycle’s  perigeal  parts,  those  about  the 
passages  at  the  eccentric’s  apogee  have  to  those  about  the  passages  at  the 
perigee  the  ratio  which  very  nearly  5  has  to  9^  and  since  arcs  HK  and  NX 
are  equal,  therefore 

angle  CEK  :  angle  DEX  :  :  5  :  9. 

And  so,  since  angles  AEK  and  BEX  are  given,  and  the  ratio  of  angle  CEK  to 
angle  DEX  is  given,  and 

angle  AEC = single  BED, 

therefore,  if  whatever  part  the  difference  of  the  whole  quantities  is  of  the 
difference  of  the  terms  of  the  ratio,  we  take  just  that  part  of  the  terms  of  the 
ratio,  and  then  shall  have  the  quantity  in  the  proper  ratio.  For  this  is  shown 
by  a  short  arithmetical  lemma.^  Since  the  quantities  are  43^  and  7  and  their 
difference  2%,  and  the  ratio  is  5  to  9  and  their  difference  4,  and  2%  is  two- 
thirds  of  4,  therefore,  taking  two-thirds  of  5  and  9,  we  shall  have 

angle  CEK  =  3}4^, 
angle  DEX  =  6®, 

and  accordingly,  by  subtraction,  as  the  angles  of  the  eccentric’s  obliquity, 
angle  AEC  =  angle  BED  =  1°. 

And  from  these  we  shall  have  as  the  arc  of  the  epicycle’s  obliquity 

arc  HK  =  2}i^, 

because,  according  to  the  Tables  of  Anomaly,  the  quantities  found  for  angles 
CEK  and  DEX  embrace  just  that  many  degrees. 

And  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter — since  we  find  the  passages  about  the 
apogeal  sections  of  the  eccentrics  sensibly  no  different  from  those  about  the  peri¬ 
geal  sections  just  opposite — we  calculated  what  was  required,  in  another  way, 
from  the  comparison  of  those  about  the  epicycles’  apogees  with  those  about 
their  perigees.  As  we  could  easily  see  from  particular  observations,  in  the  pass¬ 
ages  about  the  heliacal  risings  and  settings,  Saturn  was  at  most  very  nearly  2® 
north  and  south,  and  Jupiter  1®;  and  in  the  passages  about  the  acronychal  oppo¬ 
sitions,  Saturn  about  3®,  Jupiter  about  2°.  Now,  since  it  is  evident  from  their 
iPor  the  distances  to  the  star  in  those  two  positions  would  be  as  (60  —  39}^ -1-6)  to  (60  — 
393^ ' —  0)  or  as  very  nearly  9  to  5.  Now,  the  arcs  being  small  and  equal  can  be  considered  as 
perpendiculars  to  the  lines  representing  the  distances  from  the  eye  to  the  star.  Then,  since  for 
small  angles  the  angles  are  as  their  sines,  the  angles  are  as  5  to  9  very  nearly.  The  same  prin¬ 
ciple  is  used  for  Saturn  and  Jupiter  in  the  next  few  pages;  but  since  their  epicycles  are  rela¬ 
tively  small  and  their  eccentricities  also,  it  is  necessary  to  make  the  comparison  between  the 
epicycle's  apogee  and  perigee. 

*For  we  have 

(7°  —  angle  BED)  :  (4%°  —  angle  BED)  :  :  9  ;  5, 

separando 

(7"  —  4}^")  :  (4>r  —  angle  BED)  :  :  (9  —  5)  :  5 

or  convertendo 

(7®  —  43^*^)  :  (7°  angle  BED)  :  :  (9  —  5)  :  9. 


432  PTOLEMY 

anomaly  that,  of  the  angles  subtended  at  the  eye  by  equal  arcs  about  the  peri- 
geal  and  apogeal  parts  of  the  epicycle,  those  formed  by  arcs  about  the  apogees 
have  to  those  formed  by  arcs  about  the  perigees,  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  the  ratio 
of  18  to  23,  and,  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  of  29  to  43,  and  since  FG  and  HK  are 
equal  arcs  of  the  epicycle,  therefore,  in  the  case  of  Saturn, 
angle  FEG  :  angle  FEK  : :  18  :  23; 

in  the  case  of  Jupiter 

angle  FEG  :  angle  FEK  : :  29  :  43. 

But  angle  GEK  is  the  difference  between  the  two  latitudinal  passages  for  both 
stars  and  is  a  remainder  of  1°.  Therefore,  if  the  1°  is  divided  according  to  these 
ratios,  we  shall  have,  in  the  case  of  Saturn, 

angle  FE'G  =  0°26'; 

and,  in  the  case  of  Jupiter, 

angle  FEG  =  Q^2^\ 

And  we  shall  have,  in  the  case  of  Saturn, 

angle  FEK  =  {)^M'] 

and,  in  the  case  of  Jupiter, 

angle  F£'A:  =  0‘=’36'. 

And  so,  by  subtraction,  there  will  remain,  as  the  angle  of  the  eccentric's  obliqui¬ 
ty  for  Saturn, 

angle  AEG  =  2°26' ; 

and,  for  Jupiter, 

angle  AEG  — 1°24'. 

For  convenience  we  use,  instead  of  these  quantities,  23^°  and  13^°.  And  im¬ 
mediately  it  is  concluded  that,  as  the  arc  of  the  epicycle's  obliquity,  for  Saturn, 

arc  = 

and,  for  Jupiter, 

arc  HK  =  2y2^, 

For,  again,  just  this  number  of  degrees  in  each  case  embrace  very  nearly,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Tables  of  Anomaly,  the  quantities  found  for  angles  FEG  and  FEK. 
Which  things  it  was  required  to  find. 

4.  Construction  of  Tables  for  Particular  Latitudinal  Passages 

By  these  means  we  have  now  established  the  general  quantities  of  the  epicy¬ 
cles'  and  eccentrics'  greatest  obliquities.  But  that  we  may  also  be  able  to  work 
out  easily  at  any  time  the  latitudinal  passages  of  the  particular  distances,  we 
constructed  five  tables  for  the  five  planets,  each  having  as  many  rows  as  the 
Tables  of  Anomaly  and  five  columns.  The  first  two  columns  contain  the  same 
numbers  as  in  those.  The  third  columns  contain  the  latitudinal  deviations  from 
the  ecliptic  corresponding  to  sections  of  the  epicycles  with  the  epicycles  at  their 
point  of  greatest  obliquity:  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  at  the  nodes  of 
the  eccentrics,  and,  for  the  other  three  stars,  at  the  northern  limits  of  the  eccen¬ 
trics.  In  the  case  of  these  latter,  the  fourth  columns  contain  the  similar  addi¬ 
tions  about  the  eccentrics'  southern  limits.  At  the  same  time  the  greatest  devia¬ 
tion  of  the  eccentrics  is  calculated  for  these  three  stars.  And,  in  the  case  of  Venus 
and  Mercury,  we  worked  out  the  sections,  again  through  one  theorem  in  this 
way: 

In  the  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic's  plane,  let  ABG  be  its  intersection 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


433 


with  the  ecliptic^s  plane,  and  DBE  its  intersection  with 
the  epicycle^s  plane.  Let  A  be  the  ecliptic’s  centre,  B 
the  epicycle’s,  and  let  A 5  be  the  distance  about  the 
greatest  obliquities  of  the  epicycles.  With  epicycle 
DFEG  drawn  about  J5,  let  diameter  FBG  be  joined  per¬ 
pendicular  to  DE.  And  let  the  epicycle’s  plane  be  sup¬ 
posed  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  reference,  so  that, 
of  the  straight  lines  drawn  perpendicular  to  DE,  only 
FG  lies  in  the  ecliptic’s  plane  and  all  the  rest  are  paral¬ 
lel  to  it. 

Given  the  ratio  of  A  B  to  BE  and  the  quantity  of  the 
obliquity  (that  is,  angle  ABE),  let  it  be  required  to  find 
the  stars’  latitudinal  passages  when,  for  example,  they 
are  45°  from  E  the  epicycle’s  perigee.  For  we  wish  to 
demonstrate  at  the  same  time,  by  means  of  these  incli¬ 
nations,  the  differences  resulting  in  the  longitudinal 
passages.  But  these  differences  must  be  the  greatest 
about  the  passages  between  the  perigee  E  and  F  and  G 
because  they  turn  out  to  be  the  same  as  those  effected 
without  the  obliquity. 

Then  let  arc  EH  be  taken  as  45°.  Let  HK  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  BE, 
and  KL  and  HM  to  the  ecliptic’s  plane.  And  let  HB,  LM,  AM,  and  AH  be 
joined. 

Now,  it  would  be  immediately  evident  that  the  quadrilateral  LKHM  is  a  rec¬ 
tangular  parallelogram  because  of  A/f’s  being  parallel  to  the  ecliptic’s  plane; 
and  that  angle  LAM  embraces  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction  and  angle 
HAM  the  latitudinal  passage,  while  angles  ALM  and  AMH  are  right  angles 
because  of  AM’s  falling  in  the  ecliptic’s  plane.  It  is  now  necessary  to  show  how 
great  the  required  passages  are  for  each  of  these  stars,  and  first  for  Venus. 
Now,  since 

arc  £7M  =  45°, 

being  at  the  epicycle’s  centre, 

angle  £'BM  =  45° 

=  90°  to  2  rt. 

And  so,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BHK, 

And  therefore 


arc  BK  =  arc  HK  =  90°. 
chord  BK  =  chord  HK  =  84^52' 


where 


And  so  also 


hypt.  BM=120p. 
=  =  30^32' 


where 

,  ,  epic.  rad.  =  43^10' 

and,  as  mean  distance, 

AB  =  60p; 

for  at  this  distance  occurs  the  epicycle’s  greatest  obliquity. 
Again,  since  it  is  supposed  that,  as  the  angle  of  obliquity, 

angle  AB^  =  2°30' 

=  5°  to  2  rt., 


434 

PTOLEMY 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about 

right  triangle  BLK, 

arc  KL  =  5°, 

and,  as  its  supplement. 

a.TcBL=n5°. 

And  therefore 

chord  KL  =  5H4:', 
chord  BL  =  119p53' 

where 

hypt.  BK  =  120P. 

And  so  also,  where 

hypt.  BK  =  Zm2', 

and 

AB  =  m^, 

there 

KL  =  1P20', 

BL =30^30', 

and,  by  subtraction, 

AL  =  29^30'. 

And 

LM=HK=2,m2'. 

And  so  it  is  concluded  that 

hypt.  AM =^2^27'. 

And  therefore,  where 

hypt.  AM  =  120p, 

there 

LM  =  86P19'; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-subtraction  for  that  time, 

angle  Li4M  =  92°0'  to  2  rt. 

=  46^0'. 


And  likewise,  since 
where 

Ailf  =  42P27', 

and  the  squares  on  them  added  together  give  the  square  on  AH,  therefore  in 
length 

=  42^29'. 


And 

where 

hypt.  AH  =  12Q^] 

and,  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  deviation, 

angle  iJAM  =  3°36'  to  2  rt. 
=  r48'. 


And  we  place  this  in  the  third  column  of  Venus’  table  in  the  row  containing  the 
number  135°. 

For  measuring  the  resulting  difference  of  the  longitudinal  addition-subtrac- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  435 

tion,  let  a  similar  drawing  be  laid  out  having  the 
epicycle  not  inclined. 

Since  we  demonstrated  that 

where 

so  that,  by  subtraction, 

AA:  =  29^28'; 

and  since 

sq.  Ai^+sq.  //i^  =  sq.  AHy 
therefore,  in  length, 

AH  =  42m'. 

And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  AiJ  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction, 

angle  HAK  =  Q2^Z'  to  2  rt. 

=  46°2' 

But  with  the  obliquity  it  was  shown  to  be  46®. 
Therefore  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction,  because  of  the  epicycle^s  obliq¬ 
uity,  is  less  by  0®2'.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

Again,  to  show  the  passages  of  Mercury,  let  there  be  laid  out  a  drawing  similar 
to  the  one  before  this,  with  the  supposition  that 
arc  EH  =  4b°] 

so  that  again 

BK  =  HK  =  S4^22' 

where 

hypt.  BH  =120^, 

And  therefore 
where 

epic.  rad.  BH  =  22^30' 

and,  as  the  distance  at  the  greatest  obliquities, 

AB  =  56^40' ; 

for  we  have  demonstrated  all  these  things  before. 

Again,  since,  as  the  angle  of  the  epicycle^s  ob¬ 
liquity,  it  is  supposed 

angle  AB£^  =  6®I5' 

=  12°30'  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BKL, 
arc  KL=  12^30' 
and,  as  its  supplement,  _ 

'  arc  JSL  =  167®30'. 

And  therefore 

chord  KL  =13H\ 
chord  BL=  119^17' 


436 

where 


PTOLEMY 


hypt.  BK  =  120P. 
And  so  also,  where  it  was  shown 

=15^55' 


and  it  is  supposed 
there  also 

and,  by  subtraction. 

And 

And  since 

we  shall  have  in  length 
where 

And  therefore 
where 

hypt.  AM  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-subtraction, 

angle  LAilf  =  42°34'  to  2  rt. 
=  2ri7'. 

And  likewise,  since 

HM  =  KL  =  IH^' 


A  =  56^40', 

5L  =  15P49' 

AL  =  40^51'. 

sq.  AL+sq.  Lilf  =  sq.  Ailf, 
AM  =  43^50' 

LM  =15^55'. 

LM  =  43^34' 


where 

AM  =  43^50', 

and  since  the  squares  on  both  of  them  added  together  give  the  square  on  AHy  we 
shall  also  have  in  length 

Aff  =  43^52'. 

And  therefore 

/7M  =  4P44' 

where 

hypt.  A/7  =  120p; 

and  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  deviation 

angle  HAM  =  4°32'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°16'. 

And  again  we  shall  place  this  in  the  third  column  of  Mercury^s  table  in  the  same 
row — that  is,  in  the  row  containing  the  number  of  135°. 

Again,  for  the  comparison  of  the  addition-subtraction,  let  the  drawing  be  laid 
out  without  the  obliquity. 

And  since  it  was  shown  that,  where 

AB  =  56^40', 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  437 

there 

HK  =  BK=\b^bb^ 

and,  by  subtraction,  clearly 

AX  =  40^45', 

and  since 

sq.  AX+sq.  XX  =  sq.  AX, 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 
AX  =  43^45' 

where 

XX  =  15^45'. 

And  therefore 

XX  =  43^39' 

where 

hypt.  AX  =  I20P; 

and  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction, 

angle  XAX  =  42®40'  to  2  rt. 

=  21^20'. 

But  it  was  shown  to  be  21°17'  with  the  ob¬ 
liquity.  Therefore,  in  this  case,  the  longitudinal 
addition-subtraction,  because  of  the  epicycle's  obliquity,  is  less  by  0°3'.  Which 
was  to  be  found. 

Now,  for  these  two  stars  we  worked  out  the  latitudinal  passages  at  the  great¬ 
est  obliquities  by  taking  them  when  the  eccentric  is  in  the  same  plane  with,  the 
ecliptic.  But,  for  the  other  three  stars,  w^e  used  another  geometrical  theorem 
since  the  epicycles'  greatest  obliquities  come  about  at  the  eccentrics'  greatest 
obliquities,  and  it  would  be  helpful  to  have  the  latitudinal  passages  combined 
from  both  obliquities  calculated  out  together. 

For  again,  in  the  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic's,  let  AX  be  its  inter¬ 
section  with  the  ecliptic's  plane,  AC  its  intersec¬ 
tion  with  the  eccentric's  plane,  and  DCE  its  in¬ 
tersection  with  the  epicycle's  plane.  Let  A  be 
supposed  the  ecliptic's  centre,  and  C  the  epicy¬ 
cle's.  About  C  let  the  epicycle  DFEG  be  drawm 
again  so  that,  of  the  straight  lines  drawn  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  DE,  the  diameter  FCG  is  in  the  eccen¬ 
tric's  plane  and  parallel  to  the  ecliptic's,  and  all 
the  rest  are  parallel  to  both  these  planes.  Like¬ 
wise  let  arc  EH  be  supposed  cut  off  at  45°.  And 
with  HK  drawn  perpendicular  from  the  star's 
point  X,  and  XX  and  XL  from  the  points  X  and 
X  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic's  plane,  let  XL 
and  A L  be  joined. 

It  is  required  to  find  the  longitudinal  addition- 
subtraction  contained  by  angle  XAL,  and  the 
latitudinal  passage  contained  by  angle  XAL. 

Then  let  KM  be  drawm  from  X  perpendicular 
to  AC,  and  let  CX  and  AX  be  joined.  And  again, 
because  of  things  already  showm,  let  it  be  sup- 


438 

posed  that 


PTOLEMY 


/ 


CK  =  HK=?>^^b2^ 

where 

hypt.  CJ?=120p. 

Then,  first  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  since  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  epi¬ 
cycle’s  radius  is  6^30'  where  the  mean  distance  is  60^,  therefore 

CK^HK-=^m& 

where 

hypt.  = 

And  since  it  is  supposed  that,  as  the  angle  of  the  epicycle’s  obliquity, 

angle  AC£?=4°30' 

=  9°  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CKM, 

arc  KM  =  9°, 

and,  as  its  supplement,  ’a'  n  \ 

Therefore 


lU  !i 

where 

And  therefore 


arc  CM  =  m\ 

chord  A:M  =  9p25', 
chord  CM  =  119^38' 

hypt.  CA:=120p. 

KM  =  0^22', 

CM =4^35' 


\i  .,1. 


where 

CK  =  4p36'. 

But,  for  the  greatest  obliquity  in  the  apogeal  semicircle,  from  theorems 
already  worked  out  for  the  anomalies,  it  is  calculated  that,  as  the  distance 
about  the  beginning  of  the  Balance, 

AC  =  62^10', 

so  that,  by  subtraction, 
where  ! 

and  therefore 
And  therefore 
where 
and 

y  angle  KAM  =  0°44'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  is  supposed  that,  as  the  angle  of  the  eccentric’s  obliquity, 

angle  KAC  =  2°  30' 

=  5°  to  2  rt. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  BAK = 5'^44'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BAK, 

arc  BK  =  5°44', 


AM  =  57^35' 
KM  =  0^22'; 

/ 

^  hypt.  AK= 57^35'. 
KM  =  0^46' 
hypt.  AK  =  120P; 


and,  as  its  supplement. 

THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  439 

arc  AB  =  I74‘’I6'. 

And  therefore 

chord  BK  =  6^0', 
chord  AJS  =  119^51' 

where 

hypt.  AK=^mp. 

And  so  also,  where 

AK  =  57m' , 

there 

BK  =  2m', 

AB  =  57m', 

and 

BL=HK=^4m'. 

And  since 

sq.  ^5+sq.  BL  =  sq,  AL^ 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 

AL  =  d7H2\ 


And  likewise,  since 

HL=BK=2f53', 

and 

sq.  AL+sq.  LH =sq.  AH, 

therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 


And  so  also 

AH  =  57H6'. 

LH  =  5m' 

where 

hypt.  AH  ==120^; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  deviation, 

angle  /fAL  =  5°44'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°52'. 

And  we  place  this  in  the  third  column  of  Saturn^s  table  alongside  of  135°. 

For  the  greatest  obliquity  in  the  perigeal  semicircle,  since,  as  the  distance 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Ram, 

AC  =  57^40' 


where  it  was  shovm 

and  likewise 

KM  =  0^22'; 

CM  =  4^35', 

and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

AM  =  53^5'; 

and  because  it  is  hardly  at  all  greater  than  AM, 


therefore 

hypt.  AK  =  5dm, 

KM=0p  50' 

where 

1  :  V  1 

'  hypt.  Aii:=120p; 

440  PTOLEMY 

and 

angle  K^M  =  0°48'  to  2  rt. 

And  it  is  supposed 

angle  ^AC  =  5°  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  BAif  =  5°48'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BAKy 

arc  5A  =  5°48', 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  A5  =  174°12'. 

And  therefore 

chord  BK  =  6^4', 
chord  A5  =  119^51' 

where 

hypt.  AA:=120p. 

And  so  also 

BK  =  2Hl'y 

AB  =  53n' 

where 

AK  =  5S^5\ 

And  since 

sq.  AB+sq.  BL  =  sq.  AL 
and  it  was  shown  that  of  the  same  parts 

BL  =  4P36', 

therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 

AL  =  53^13'. 

And  therefore 

jBL  =  10^23' 

where 

hypt.  AL  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction, 

angle  LAL  =  9°56'  to  2  rt. 

=  4°58'. 

Again,  since 

i7L  =  LL:  =  2p41' 

where 

AL  =  53P13', 

and  the  squares  on  both  added  together  give  the  square  on  AH,  therefore 
we  shall  have  in  length 

A/f  =  53Pl7'. 

And  therefore 

/7L  =  6p3' 

where 

hypt.  A/7  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  deviation, 

angle  i/AL  =  5®46'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°53'. 

And  we  place  this  in  the  fourth  column  of  the  table  beside  135°. 

Then,  to  make  the  comparison  of  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction  for 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  441 

the  perigeal  obliquity,  again  let  the  figure  be 
drawn  as  having  no  obliquity. 

And  since,  where,  as  the  distance  at  that  time, 
AC  =  57^40', 
there  it  is  supposed 

and,  by  subtraction, 

AX  =  53^4', 

and  since 

sq.  AA+sq.  HK  =  sq.  AHy 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 
Ai7  =  53^16'. 

And  so  also 

HK=  10^22' 

where 

hypt.  AH  =120^; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction, 

angle  HAK  =  9°54:'  to  2  rt. 

=  4°57'. 

But  with  the  obliquities  it  was  shovm  to  be  4°58'. 
Therefore  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction,  because  of  both  obliquities, 
is  greater  by  0°1'.  Which  was  to  be  found. 

Again,  let  there  be  first  laid  out  the  drawing  with  the  obliquities,  containing 
the  ratios  we  have  already  demonstrated  for  Ju¬ 
piter,  so  that 

CK  =  HK  =  S^S' 

where 

epic.  rad.  CH  —  11^30', 

Now  since,  as  the  angle  of  the  epicycle^s  ob¬ 
liquity,  it  is  supposed  that 

angle  ACE  =  2^30' 

=  5®  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  CKM, 
arc  KM  =  5®, 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  CM  =  175®. 

And  therefore 

chord  /Of  =  5^14', 
chord  CM  =  119^53' 

where 

hypt.  C/C=120P. 

And  so  also,  where 

CA  =  8p8' 

and,  as  the  distance  about  the  beginning  of  the  Balance, 

AC  =  62P30', 

there  also 


KM  =  mVy 
CM  =  8P8', 


442  PTOLEMY 

and,  by  subtraction, 

Ailf  =  54P22'; 

and  therefore,  since  it  is  hardly  at  all  greater  than  AM^ 

hypt.  AK  =  54^22'. 

And  therefore 

A:M  =  0p46' 

where 

hypt.  AA:=120p; 

and 

angle  KAM  =  0°44'  to  2  rt. 

But  it  is  also  supposed  that,  as  the  angle  of  the  eccentric^s  obliquity, 
f  angle  BAC  =  1°30' 

=  3°to2rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition,  ^ 

angle  ^AK  =  3°44' to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BAKy 

arc^K  =  3°44', 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  AS  =  176^6'. 

And  therefore 

chord  =  3^54', 
chord  AS  =  119^56' 

where 

hypt.  AK=120p. 

And  so  also 

SK=1P46', 

AS  =  54^20' 

where  , 

AS:  =  54p22'. 

And  by  what  has  been  already  demonstrated 

SL  =  8P8'. 

Since  the  squares  on  AS  and  BL  added  together  give  the  square  on  AL,  we 
shall  have  in  length 

AL  =  54^56'. 

And  likewise,  since 

SS  =  1P46', 

and  the  squares  on  AL  and  HL  together  give  the  square  on  AH,  we  shall  have 

Ai/  =  54P58'. 

And  so  also 

^  SL  =  3p52' 

where  \ 

hypt.  AS  =  120P; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  deviation, 

angle  SAL  =  3'^42'  to  2  rt. 

=  l%l\ 

This  we  place  in  the  third  column  of  Jupiter’s  table  beside  135°. 

Likewise,  since  again  as  the  distance  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ram 

AC -57^30', 

CAf  =  8p8' 


where  it  was  shown 


S:ikf=0P21', 


443 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 

so  that,  by  subtraction,  and  since  it  is  hardly  at  all  greater  than  AKj 

AM = AX  =  49^22'. 

And  therefore  also 

XM=0P5I' 

where 

\  hypt.  AX  =  120p; 
and  \ 

'angle  XAM  =  0®49'  to  2  rt., 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  XAX  =  3°49'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  A  KB, 

arcXX  =  3°49', 

and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  AX  =  176m'. 

And  therefore 


chord  X7^  =  3p59', 
chord  AX  =  119^56' 

hypt.  AX=120P. 

XX  =1^39', 

AX  =  49^20' 

AX  =  49^22'. 


4 


where 
And  so  also 

where 
And  therefore,  since 

BL  =  m\ 

and  the  squares  on  AX  and  XL  added  together  make  the  square  on  AL,  there¬ 
fore  we  shall  have  in  length 

AL  =  50p0'. 

And  so  also 

XL=I9p3I' 


where 

hypt.  AL=120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-subtraction, 

angle  XAL  =  ISm'  to  2  rt. 

=  9^22'.  ^ 

Again,  since 

A  XL=1P39' 

where 

AL  =  50P, 

and  the  squares  on  them  added  together  give,  the  square  on  AH,  therefore  we 
shall  have  in  length 

AX  =  50P2'. 

And  therefore  ^  ) 

XL=3p57' 

where 

hypt.  AX=  120p; 

and  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  distance 

angle  XAL  =  3®46'  to  2  rt. 

=  r53'. 


444 


PTOLEMY 


This  we  place  in  the  fourth  column  of  the  table  beside  135°.  ' 

For  the  comparison  of  the  longitudinal  addition-subtractions,  let  the  drawing 
be  laid  out  without  the  obliquities. 

Since,  at  the  given  distance,  where 
HK  =  CK  =  8^S', 
there  by  addition 

AC  =  57^30' 
and,  by  subtraction, 

Aii:  =  49^22'; 

and  since 

sq.  AiiL+sq.  HK==sq.  AHy 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 
A/7  =  50p2'. 

And  so  also 

=  19^30' 

where 

hypt.  A^  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction, 

angle  HAK  =  to  2  rt. 

=  9°21'. 

But  with  the  obliquities  it  was  shown  to  be  9°22'. 

Therefore,  again,  the  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction,  because  of  both  obliquities,  is  more  by  0°1'.  Which  it  was  required 
to  find. 

Next  for  the  ratios  of  Mars,  first  let  the  drawing  of  the  obliquities  be  laid  out, 
and  again  let  it  be  concluded  that 

CK  =  HK  =  27^5Q' 

where 

epic.  rad.  0/7  =  39^30'. 

Now,  since  as  the  angle  of  the  epicycle^s  ob¬ 
liquity  it  is  supposed  that  m 

'angle  ACS  =  2°15' 

=  4°30'  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right 
triangle  CMK, 
arcSM  =  4°30' 
and,  as  its  supplement, 

arc  CM  =  175°30'. 

And  therefore  ^ 

chord  Silf  =  4P43', 
chord  Cilf  =  119^54' 

where 

hypt.  CK  =  120P. 

And  so,  where 

CA:  =  27^56', 
and  as  greatest  distance 

AC=66P, 


there  also 

THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  445 

KM  =  W, 

CM’  =  27p54', 

and,  by  subtraction. 

A;¥=38p6'; 

and  therefore  also 

hypt.  AK=38^r. 

And  therefore 

KM =3^28' 

where 

hypt.  AK  =  120"; 

and 

angle  KAM  =  to  2  rt. 

But  it  is  supposed  that,  as  the  angle  of  the  eccentric's  obliquity, 

angle 

=  2"^  to  2  rt. 

And  therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  BAiiC  =  5°19'  to  2  rt. 

And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  BAK, 

arc  BK  =  5^id' 


and,  as  its  supplement. 

arc  AB  =  I74''41'. 

And  therefore 

chord  BK  =  5^34', 
chord  AB  =  119^52' 

where 

hypt.  AK=  120^. 

And  so  also,  where 

AK =38^V, 

there  also 

and 

BK=\H3', 

AB =38^5'. 

But 

SL  =  27^56'. 

And  since 

we  shall  have  in  length 

sq.  A5+sq.  BL =sq.  AL, 

AL  =  471-14'. 

And  since  of  like  parts 

¥L  =  l«-46' 

and 

sq.  AL+sq.  //L  =  sq.  AHf 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 

AH  =  ^7m'. 


And  so  also 


//L  =  4p29' 


446 

where 

PTOLEMY 

hypt.  AH  =  120'’; 

and  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  distance 

angle  =  to  2  rt. 

=  2°9'. 

This  we  place  in  the  third  column  of  Mars^  table  beside  135°. 
Likewise,  for  the  obliquities  at  the  least  distance,  since 

^C  =  54P 


where  it  was  shown 

CM  =  27^54' 

KM  =  1'>0', 

so  that,  by  subtraction, 

AM  =  26^6' 

and  it  is  calculated  that 

hypt.  Ai^=26P7'; 

therefore 

KM  =  5'>3' 

where 

hypt.  AiiL  =  120P; 

and 

'O' 

angle  KAM  =  4°49'  to  2  rt. 
And  for  that  reason,  by  addition,  ^ 

angle  BAK  =  Q)°W  to  2  rt. 
And  so  also,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ABK, 

arc  BK  =  6°49' 


and,  as  its  supplement. 

arc  AB  =  173°11'. 

And  therefore 

d 

chord  BK  =  7t>8', 
chord  AB  =  119^47' 

where 

hypt.  Aii:  =  120P. 

Amd  so  also 

BK  =  1'‘33' 

and 

AB  =  20H' 

where 

AK  =  2&^7', 

And  again,  of  like  parts. 


And  since 

BL  =  27p56'. 

sq.  AB+sq.  BL=sq.  AL, 

we  shall  have  in  length 

0, 

00 

CO 

II 

And  so  also 

BL =87H5' 

where 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


447 


hypt.  AL—  120P; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-subtraction, 

angle  £AL  =  94°  to  2  rt. 

=  47°. 

Likewise,  since 

i7L=lP33' 

where 

AL  =  38P12', 

and  since  the  squares  on  them  added  together  give  the  square  on  AH,  therefore 
we  shall  have  in  length 

AJT  =  38p14'. 

And  so  also 

/7L  =  4P52' 

where 

hypt.  A^=I20p; 

and  as  the  angle  of  latitudinal  distance 

angle  JTAL  =  4°40'  to  2  rt. 

^  =2°20'. 

This  we  place  in  the  fourth  column  of  the  table  beside  the  135°. 

And  now  again,  for  the  comparison  of  the  longitudinal  addition-subtractions, 
if  we  lay  out  the  drawing  without  the  obliquities,  then,  at  the  least  distance 
where  the  difference  is  necessarily  most  sensible, 

AC  :  GK  or  HK  : ;  54^  ;  27^56'; 
so  that  for  this  reason,  by  subtraction, 

AX:  =  26P4' 

and  it  is  calculated 

hypt.  ^i?  =  38Pl2'. 

And  therefore  also,  again, 

i^X  =  87P45' 

where 

hypt.  Aff  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  longitudinal  addition-sub¬ 
traction, 

angle  HAK  =  94°  to  2  rt. 

=  47°. 

But  from  calculations  with  the  obliquities  it  was 
shown  to  be  just  that  much.  Therefore,  in  the  case 
of  Mars,  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction 
does  not  differ  as  a  result  of  the  obliquities  of  the 
circles.  Which  was  to  be  found. 

The  fourth  columns  of  the  two  tables  of  Venus 
and  Mercury  will  contain  the  latitudinal  passages 
embraced  by  the  greatest  slantings  of  the  epicycles 
which  occur  at  the  eccentrics'  apogees  and  perigees.  But  these  passages  have 
been  worked  out  by  us  independently  and  separate  from  the  difference  due  to 
the  eccentrics'  obliquities.  Otherwise  we  should  need  more  tables  and  a  difficult 
calculus,  since  the  evening  and  morning  passages  will  be  unequal  and  never  at 


448  PTOLEMY 

the  same  parts  of  the  ecliptic;  and  besides,  since  the  obliquity  of  the  eccentrics 
varies,  the  differences  in  the  decreases  for  the  greatest  obliquities  would  not 
agree  with  those  in  the  decreases  for  the  greatest  slantings.  But  with  the  differ¬ 
ence  separated  out,  each  case  can  be  more  easily  handled  as  will  be  clear  from 
what  we  are  going  to  add. 

Let  AB  be  the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic's  plane  and  the  epicycle's  plane, 
point  A  being  supposed  the  ecliptic's  centre  and  B 
the  epicycle's  centre.  And  let  epicycle  CDEFG  be 
drawn  about  B  slanting  to  the  ecliptic's  plane — 
that  is,  so  that  the  straight  lines  drawn  in  them 
perpendicular  to  the  intersection  CG  make  equal 
all  the  angles  resulting  at  the  points  CG.  Let  AE 
be  produced  tangent  to  the  epicycle,  and  AFD 
cutting  it  at  random.  And  let  DH^  EK^  and  FL 
be  drawn  from  points  Z>,  E^  and  /^  perpendicular  ^ 
to  CG;  and  DAf,  EN,  and  FX  perpendicular  to 
the  ecliptic's  plane.  And  let  HM^  KN,  and  LX 
be  joined;  and  also  AN  and  AXM.  For  AXM  is 
one  straight  line,  since  the  three  points  are  in  two 
planes — that  of  the  ecliptic  and  that  through  AFD 
at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic's.  ^ 

Now,  it  is  evident  that,  for  the  given  slanting, 
angles  HAM  and  KAN  contain  the  longitudinal 
addition-subtractions  of  the  stars,  and  angles 
DAM  and  EAN  the  latitudinal  addition-sub- 
tractions. 

It  is  first  necessary  to  show  that  the  latitudinal 
passage  (angle  EAN)  formed  at  the  tangent  is 
greater  than  any  others,  just  like  the  longitudinal 
addition-subtraction. 

For,  since  angle  EAK  is  greater  than  any  others, 

EK:AE>DH:AD 
>FL  :  AF. 

But 

EK  :  EN  ::DH:  DM  :  :  FL  :  FX. 

For  the  triangles  thus  formed  are  all  equiangular  as  we  said,  and  the  angles 
at  Mj  Ny  and  X  are  right.  And,  therefore, 

EN  :AE>DM  :  AD 
>FX  :  AF. 

And,  again,  the  angles  DMA,  ENAy  and  FXA  are  right  angles;  therefore 

angle  £AiV’>angle  DAM 

and  greater  than  all  the  others  formed  in  the  same  way. 

It  is  immediately  evident  that,  of  the  differences  resulting  in  the  longi¬ 
tudinal  addition-subtractions  from  the  slanting,  the  greatest  is  effected  in 
the  greatest  passages  at  Ey  since  they  are  contained  by  the  angles  subtending 
the  differences  of  HDy  KEy  and  LF  over  HMy  KNy  and  LX.  Since  the  same 
ratio  holds  for  each,  it  follows,  relative  to  the  differences,  that  the  difference 
between  EK  and  KN  has  a  greater  ratio  to  EA  than  those  of  any  others  to 
lines  similar  to  AD.  It  is  immediately  clear  also  that,  whatever  ratio  the 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  449 

greatest  longitudinal  addition-subtraction  has  to  the  greatest  latitudinal 
passage,  that  ratio  the  longitudinal  addition-subtractions  in  each  case  have 
to  the  latitudinal  passages  for  all  sections  of  the  epicycle,  since  as  EK  is  to 
EN  so  are  all  lines  like  FL  and  DH  to  those  like  FX  and  DM,  Which  it  was 
required  to  show. 

Now,  with  these  things  worked  out,  let  us  see  first  how  great  an  angle  is 
contained,  for  each  of  the  stars,  by  the  slant  of  the  planes,  if  we  suppose,  ac¬ 
cording  to  postulates  already  assumed  at  the  beginning,  that  about  midway 
between  the  greatest  and  least  distance  each  of  them  is  at  the  most  5°  north 
and  south  of  the  opposite  passage  on  the  epicycle.  For  Venus  appears  to  make 
a  deviation  at  the  eccentric^s  perigee  and  apogee  of  hardly  more  or  less  than 
5°,  and  Mercury  of  more  and  less  than  5°. 

Now,  again,  let  ABC  be  the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  epicycle. 

With  the  epicycle  drawn  about  point  B  aslant  the 
ecliptic^s  plane  as  we  have  described,  let  AD  be 
joined  tangent  to  the  epicycle  from  the  ecliptic^s 
centre  A.  From  D  let  DF  be  drawn  perpendicular 
to  CBE^  and  DG  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic’s 
plane.  And  let  BD^  FG,  and  AG  be  joined. 

And  let  angle  DAG,  containing  half  of  the  given 
latitudinal  deviation,  be  supposed  to  be  23^°  for 
either  of  the  stars.  And  let  it  be  required  to  find 
the  slant  of  the  two  planes — that  is,  the  size  of 
angle  DFG. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  Venus,  since  where 
epic.  rad.  =  43^10', 


there 


and 


greatest  dist.  =  61^15', 
least  dist.  =58^45' 

mean  dist.  =  60^, 

AB  :BD  ::  60^  :  43^10'. 


And  likewise,  since 


we  shall  have 


therefore 
And  since 

sq.  AB — sq.  BD  =  sq.  AD, 
we  shall  have  in  length 
AD  =  41^40'. 


AB:AD:  :BD  :  DF, 


DF  =  29^58'. 

Again,  since  it  is  supposed  that 

angle  DAG  =  2°30' 

=  5°  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADG, 

arc  DG  =  5® 

and 

chord  DG  =  5p14' 


PTOLEMY 


450 

where 

And  therefore 

f 

where 

But  it  was  shown 
And  so  also 
where 

and,  as  the  angle  of  slant, 


hypt.  AI»  =  120p. 
DG=  1^50' 
AD  =  4:im'. 
Z)F =29^58'. 

DG =7^20' 
hypt.  DF=mp-, 


a 


\ 


\ 


angle  DFG=7°  to  2  rt. 

=  3°30'. 

But  since  the  excess  of  angle  DAF  over  angle  GAF  contains  the  resulting  dif¬ 
ference  of  longitudinal  addition-subtraction,  it  must  be  calculated  directly  from 
their  size.  For  since  it  was  shown  that  ( 

hypt.  AD  =  Z1H0' 

and 

Z)F  =  29^58' 

where 

Z)(7  =  lP50'; 

and  since 

sq.  AD — sq.  Z)G  =  sq.  AG, 
sq.  FD — sq.  DG  =  sq,  FG, 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 

A(?  =  4lP37', 

FG  =  29^55'. 


I 


/ 


And  so  also 
where  v.'  , 

and 

And  likewise,  since 
where 

and  we  shall  have 


=86^16' 

hypt.  AG=120p; 


angle  i?'AG  =  91°56'  to  2  rt. 
=45°58'. 


Z)/?’=86P18' 


hypt.  AZ)  =  120p,- 


angle  Z)AF  =  91°58'  to  2  rt. 

=  45‘’59'. 

Therefore  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction,  as  a  result  of  the  slant,  is  less 
by0°l'. 


u 


where  7 

And  therefore 
where 
But  also  it  was  shown 

\  ■  J 

And  so  also  ,  / 

where 

and  as  the  angle  of  slant 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  451 

And,  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  since  where 
epic,  rad.  =  22p30', 
there  it  was  shown 

greatest  dist.  =  69^, 
least  dist.  =  57^, 

and 

mean  dist.  =  63^, 

therefore 

AB:BD::  63^  :  22^30'. 

And  since 

sq.  — sq.  ^Z)  =  sq.  AD, 

we  shall  have  also  in  length 

AD  =  58^51'. 

And  likewise,  since 

AB  :  AD  :  :  DD  :  DD, 
therefore  of  the  same  parts 

DD  =  21P1'. 

Again,  since  it  is  supposed  that 

angle  DAG  =  5°  to  2  rt., 

therefore,  on  the  circle  about  right  triangle  ADG, 
arcDG  =  5°; 

and 

chord  DG  =  5p14' 
hypt.  AD  =  120P, 

DG  =  2p34' 

AD  =  58p51'. 

DD  =  21P1'. 

DG=14P40' 
hypt.  DD=120P; 


angle  DFG  =  14°  to  2  rt. 

=  7°. 

Likewise,  for  the  comparison  of  the  angles  of  addition-subtraction,  since  again 
it  was  shown 

hypt.  AD  =  58^51' 

and 

DD  =  2lPl' 

where 

DG=2p34', 

and  since 

sq.  AD-sq.  DG  =  sq.  AG, 


452 


therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 


PTOLEMY 
sq.  DF—sq.  DG  =  sq,  FG, 


And  so  also 
where 
and 


AG  =  58^47', 
FG  =  20^53'. 

FG  =  42^38' 

hypt.  AG  =  120p; 


angle  FAG=41°38'  to  2  rt. 

=  20°49'. 

And  in  the  same  way,  since 

Z)F =42^50' 

where  \  .  ■ 

hypt.  AD  =  120p, 

therefore  we  shall  have 

angle  Z)AF  =  41°50'  to  2  rt. 

=  20°55'. 

Therefore  the  longitudinal  addition-subtraction,  as  the  result  of  the  slant, 
is  less  by  0°6'.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 

Following  this,  let  us  see  if,  when  we  suppose  these  to  be  the  sizes  of  the 
slants,  we  find  the  latitudinal  passages  at  the 
greatest  and  least  distances  consistent  with  those 
gotten  by  observations. 

Again,  with  the  same  drawing,  let  Venus^  great¬ 
est  distance  be  supposed  first — that  is,  let 
AB  :  BD  ;  :  61^15'  :  43^10', 
so  that,  since 

sq.  AF-sq.  J5Z)  =  sq.  AD, 
therefore  it  is  concluded 

AD  =  43^27'. 

But 

AB  ;  AD  :  :  DD  :  DF; 

and  therefore 


DF  =  ZmT. 

Again, 

since  it  is  supposed  that,  i 

of  slant. 

angle  DFG  =  7°  to  2  rt. 

and  that 

DG=7m' 

where 

o 

(M 

II 

therefore 

DG=  1^52' 

where 

DF 

and 

AD  =  43^27'. 


And  so  also 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


453 


DC  =  5^9' 

where 

hypt.  AZ)  =  120p; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  greatest  latitudinal  deviation, 

angle  Z)AG  =  4°54'  to  2  rt, 
=  2^27'. 

And  at  the  least  distance,  since  it  is  supposed  that 

AH  =  58^45' 


where 
and  since 


epic.  rad.  HZ)  =  43^10', 


sq.  AH-sq.  HZ)  =  sq.  AD, 
therefore  we  shall  have  in  length 

AZ)  =  39^51'. 


And  likewise,  since 

AH  :  AD  ::BD:  DF, 

therefore 

DF=2^nr. 

But  it  is  supposed  that 

DFiDG::  120^  :  7^20'. 

And  therefore 

DG  =1H7' 

where 

DF=29n7' 

and 

AZ) =39^51'. 

And  so  also 

Z)G  =  5p22' 

where 

hypt.  AZ)  =  120p; 

and  as  the  angle  of  greatest  latitudinal  deviation 

angle  Z)A(j  =  5°8'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°34'. 

Therefore  the  latitudinal  deviation  is  insensibly  less  at  the  apogee,  and  in¬ 
sensibly  more  at  the  perigee,  than  the  deviation  of  2J^°  assumed  in  mean 
terms.  For  at  the  greatest  distance  it  is  less  by  0'^3',  and  at  the  least  distance 
more  by  0°4',  which  obviously  cannot  be  gotten  by  observations. 

Again,  let  the  greatest  distance  of  Mercury  be  supposed — that  is,  let 
AH  :  HZ)  :  ;  69^  :  22^30', 

so  that  by  the  same  means  as  above  it  is  concluded  that  of  the  same  parts 

AZ)  =  65^14' 

and 

Z)H  =  21P16'. 

But  here  we  have,  as  the  supposed  angle  of  slant, 
angle  DFG— 14°  to  2  rt.. 


and  therefore  we  have 


Z)G  =  14^40' 


454 

where 


PTOLEMY 


c 


hypt.  J[)F  =  120p. 

And  therefore 

DG  =  2m' 

where 

DF  =  2im' 

and 

AZ)  =  65^14'. 

And  so  also 

DG  =  4:H7' 

where 

hypt.  AD  =  120P; 

and,  as  the  angle  of  greatest  latitudinal  deviation, 
angle  Z)A(j  =  4°34'  to  2  rt. 

=  2°17'. 

At  the  least  distance  it  is  supposed  that 
AB  :BD  ::  57^  :  22^30'. 

And  since  because  of  the  same  slant  it  is  supposed 
that 

DF  :  DG  :  :  120^  :  14^40', 

therefore 

DG  =  2^S2' 


where 

and 

And  so  also 
where 


DF  =  20H0' 
A2)  =  52p22'. 
DG=5H8' 


and 


hypt.  AZ)  =  120p; 

angle  Z)AG  =  5°32'  to  2  rt. 
-2°46'. 


Therefore  the  latitudinal  deviation  at  the  apogee  differs  at  the  least  by 
0°13'  and  at  the  perigee  at  the  most  by  0°16'  from  the  deviation  of  23^®  as¬ 
sumed  in  mean  terms.  In  place  of  these  we  shall  use,  for  the  mean  correction 
in  the  calculus,  the  sensible  34°  difference  of  the  observations.  "" 

With  these  things  demonstrated — and  because,  as  the  greatest  longitudinal 
addition-subtractions  are  to  the  greatest  latitudinal  passages,  so  are  the  par¬ 
ticular  longitudinal  addition-subtractions  for  the  other  sections  of  the  epicycle 
to  the  particular  latitudinal  passages — the  filling  in  of  the  latitudinal  passages 
due  to  slanting,  in  these  fourth  columns  of  Venus’  and  Mercury’s  tables,  is 
immediately  available  to  us,  although  these  passages,  as  we  said,  are  cal¬ 
culated  with  only  the  slanting  of  the  epicycles  and  from  the  mean  addition. 
Because  of  greater  ease  in  the  calculus  which  will  be  given,  the  difference  for 
Mercury,  due  to  the  eccentrics’  obliquity  at  the  apogee  and  perigee,  will  pro¬ 
vide  the  correction. 

Since,  according  to  the  given  mean  terms,  the  greatest  latitudinal  passage 
of  both  stars  on  either  side  of  the  ecliptic  was  shown  to  be  2°30',  due  to  slant- 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII  455 

ing;  since  the  greatest  longitudinal  addition-subtraction  for  Venus  is  46®  and 
for  Mercury  very  nearly  22®;  and  since  we  have  given  in  their  Tables  of  Anom¬ 
aly  the  addition-subtractions  corresponding  to  the  particular  sections  of  the 
epicycles,  it  follows  that  whatever  part  these  latter  are  of  the  greatest  longi¬ 
tudinal  addition-subtractions  as  wholes,  we  take  that  part  of  the  2®30'  for 
each  star,  placing  the  result  in  the  fourth  columns  of  the  Tables  of  Latitude 
beside  the  same  numbers. 

We  have  the  fifth  columns  for  truly  determining,  by  the  method  of  cor¬ 
responding  sixtieths,  the  latitudinal  deviations  in  the  other  passages  of  the 
eccentrics.  For  since,  as  we  said,  the  obliquities  and  slantings  of  the  epicycles 
make  their  return  of  increase  and  decrease  proportionately  with  the  eccentric 
return,  by  the  interposition  of  little  circles,  and  the  quantities  of  all  the  ob¬ 
liquities  and  slantings  are  not  very  different  from  that  of  the  moon^s  oblique 
circle,  and  since  the  particular  deviations  for  obliquities  of  such  amounts  are 
very  nearly  proportional  and  we  have  those  of  the  moon  all  worked  out 
geometrically,  we  multiplied  each  of  the  entries  there  by  twelve  (because  the 
greatest  addition  there  is  5®  and  here  we  are  considering  it  as  60®) .  The  results 
we  have  placed  beside  the  proper  numbers  in  each  of  the  fifth  columns.  The 
tabulated  exposition  follows: 


2 

ibers 

m 

)gee 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

306 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


5 

Six- 

tieihs 

59  36 

58  36 

57  0 

54  36 

52  0 

48  24 

44  24 

40  0 

35  12 

30  0 

24  24 

18  24 

12  24 

6  24 

0  0 

3  12 

6  24 

9  24 

12  24 

15  24 

18  24 

21  24 

24  24 

27  12 

30  0 

32  36 

35  12 

37  36 

40  0 

42  12 

44  24 

46  36 

48  24 

50  12 

52  0 

53  12 

54  36 

56  0 

57  0 

57  48 

58  36 

59  12 

59  36 

59  48 

60  0 


PTOLEMY 

5.  Exposition  of  the  Tables  of  Latitude 


5 

Six- 


JUPITER'S 

OBLIQUITIES 

5 


Six- 


From 
South¬ 
ern 
Limit 
2  2 
2  3 

2  3 

2  4 

2  5 

2  7 

2  8 
2  10 
2  12 
2  15 
2  18 
2  21 
2  24 
2  27 
2  30 
2  31 
2  33 
2  34 
2  36 
2  37 
2  39 
2  40 
2  42 
2  43 
2  45 
2  46 
2  48 
2  49 
2  51 
2  53 
2  54 
2  55 
2  56 
2  57 
2  58 

2  59 

3  0 

3  1 

3  2 

3  2 

3  3 

3  3 

3  4 


tieths 

59 

36 

58 

36 

57 

0 

54 

36 

52 

0 

48 

24 

44 

24 

40 

0 

35 

12 

30 

0 

24 

24 

18 

24 

18 

24 

6 

24 

0 

0 

3 

12 

6 

24 

9 

24 

12 

24 

15 

24 

18 

24 

21 

24 

24 

24 

27 

12 

30 

0 

32 

36 

35 

12 

37 

36 

40 

0 

42 

12 

44 

22 

46 

36 

48 

24 

50 

12 

52 

0 

53 

12 

54 

36 

56 

0 

57 

0 

57 

48 

58 

36 

59 

12 

59 

36 

59 

48 

60 

0 

From 
Nor¬ 
thern 
Limit 
1  7 
1  8 
1  8 
1  9 
1  10 
1  11 
1  12 
1  13 
1  14 
1  16 
1  18 
1  21 
1  24 
1  27 
1  30 
1  31 
1  33 
1  34 
1  36 
1  37 
1  39 
1  40 
1  42 
1  43 
1  45 
1  46 
1  47 
1  49 
1  50 
1  51 
1  52 
1  53 
1  55 
1  56 
1  58 

1  59 

2  0 
2  1 
2  2 
2  2 
2  3 
2  3 
2  4 
2  4 
2  4 


4 

From 
South¬ 
ern 
Limit 
1  5 

1  6 
1  6 
1  7 

1  8 
1  9 

1  10 
1  11 
1  13 

1  16 
1  18 
1  21 
1  24 
1  27 
1  30 
1  31 
1  33 
1  34 
1  36 
1  37 
1  39 
1  40 
1  42 
1  43 
1  45 
1  46 
1  48 
1  49 
1  51 
1  53 
1  54 
1  55 
1  57 

1  59 

2  0 

2  1 
2  3 

2  4 

2  5 

2  6 
2  6 
2  7 

2  7 

2  8 
2  8 


tieths 

59 

36 

58 

36 

57 

0 

54 

36 

52 

0 

48 

24 

44 

24 

40 

0 

35 

12 

30 

0 

24 

24 

18 

24 

12 

24 

6 

24 

0 

0 

3 

12 

6 

24 

9 

24 

12 

24 

15 

24 

18 

24 

21 

24 

24 

24 

27 

12 

30 

0 

32 

36 

35 

12 

37 

36 

40 

0 

42 

12 

44 

24 

46 

36 

48 

24 

50 

12 

52 

0 

53 

12 

54 

36 

56 

0 

57 

0 

57 

48 

58 

36 

59 

12 

59 

36 

59 

48 

60 

0 

3 

From 
Nor¬ 
thern 
Limit 
0  8 
0  9 

0  11 
0  13 
0  14 
0  15 
0  18 
0  21 
0  24 
0  28 
0  32 
0  36 
0  41 
0  46 
0  52 
0  55 
0  59 
1  3 

1  6 
1  10 
1  14 
1  18 
1  23 
1  28 
1  34 
1  41 
1  48 

1  54 

2  1 

2  9 

2  16 
2  25 
2  34 
2  44 

2  54 

3  5 
3  16 
3  27 
3  38 

3  49 

4  0 

4  10 
4  14 

4  18 
4  21 


2 

ihers 

)m 

jgee 

354 

348 

342 

336 

330 

324 

318 

312 

360 

300 

294 

288 

282 

276 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


Table  5 — Continued 


NUS^  OBLIQUITIES 


MERCURY’S 

OBLIQUITIES 


Six- 


Ob- 
liquity 
1  2 
1  1 
1  0 
0  59 
0  57 
0  55 
0  51 
0  46 
0  41 
0  35 
0  29 
0  23 
0  16 
0  8 
0  0 
0  5 

0  10 
0  15 
0  20 
0  26 
0  32 
0  38 
0  44 
0  50 
0  59 
1  8 
1  18 
1  28 
1  38 
1  48 

1  59 

2  11 
2  23 

2  43 

3  3 
3  23 

3  44 

4  5 
4  26 

4  49 

5  13 
5  36 

5  52 

6  7 
6  22 


Slantr 
ing 
0  8 
0  16 
0  25 
0  33 
0  41 
0  49 
0  57 
1  5 

1  13 
1  20 
1  28 
1  35 
1  42 
1  50 

1  57 

2  0 

2  3 

2  6 
2  9 

2  12 
2  15 
2  17 
2  20 
2  22 
2  24 
2  26 
2  27 
2  29 
2  30 
2  30 
2  30 
2  29 
2  28 
2  26 
2  22 
2  18 
2  12 
2  4 

1  55 
1  42 
1  27 
1  9 

0  48 
0  25 
0  0 


Six- 


tieths 

59 

36 

58 

36 

57 

0 

54 

36 

52 

0 

48 

24 

44 

24 

40 

0 

35 

12 

30 

0 

24 

24 

18 

24 

12 

24 

6 

24 

0 

0 

3 

12 

6 

24 

9 

24 

12 

24 

15 

24 

18 

24 

21 

24 

24 

24 

27 

12 

30 

0 

32 

36 

35 

12 

37 

36 

40 

0 

42 

12 

44 

24 

46 

36 

48 

24 

50 

12 

52 

0 

53 

12 

54 

36 

56 

0 

57 

0 

57 

48 

58 

36 

59 

12 

59 

36 

59 

48 

60 

0 

Ob¬ 
liquity 
1  45 
1  44 
1  43 
1  40 
1  36 
1  30 
1  23 
1  16 
1  8 
0  59 
0  49 
0  38 
0  26 
0  16 
0  0 
0  8 
0  15 
0  23 
0  31 
0  40 
0  48 
0  57 
1  6 
1  16 
1  25 
1  35 
1  45 

1  55 

2  6 
2  16 
2  27 
2  37 
2  47 

2  57 

3  7 
3  17 
3  26 
3  34 
3  42 
3  48 
3  54 

3  58 

4  2 

4  4 

4  5 


Slantr 
ing 
0  11 
0  22 
0  33 
0  44 
0  55 
1  6 
1  16 
1  26 
1  35 
1  44 

1  52 

2  0 

2  7 

2  14 
2  20 
2  23 
2  25 
2  27 
2  28 
2  29 
2  29 
2  30 
2  30 
2  30 
2  29 
2  28 
2  26 
2  23 
2  20 
2  16 
2  11 
2  6 
2  0 
1  53 
1  46 
1  38 
1  29 
1  20 
1  10 
0  59 
0  48 
0  36 
0  24 
0  12 
0  0 


tieths 

59 

36 

58 

36 

57 

0 

54 

36 

52 

0 

48 

24 

44 

24 

40 

0 

35 

12 

30 

0 

24 

24 

18 

24 

12 

24 

6 

24 

0 

0 

3 

12 

6 

24 

9 

24 

12 

24 

15 

24 

18 

24 

21 

24 

24 

24 

27 

12 

30 

0 

32 

36 

35 

12 

37 

36 

40 

0 

42 

12 

44 

24 

46 

36 

48 

24 

50 

12 

52 

0 

53 

12 

54 

36 

56 

0 

57 

0 

57 

48 

58 

36 

59 

12 

59 

36 

59 

48 

60 

0 

457 


458 


PTOLEMY 


6.  Calculus  op  the  Latitudinal  Deviation  op  the  Five  Planets 

With  these  things  so  established,  we  shall  work  out  the  latitudinal  calculus  of 
the  five  planets  in  this  way. 

In  the  case  of  the  three  stars,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  we  carry  the  truly 
determined  longitude  to  the  numbers-  of  the  proper  table,  that  of  Mars  as  it  is, 
Jupiter^s  with  a  subtraction  of  20°,  and  Saturn^s  with  an  addition  of  50°.  We 
record  the  sixtieths  in  the  fifth  columns  of  latitude  corresponding  to  it,  and  like¬ 
wise  we  carry  the  truly  determined  number  of  anomaly  to  the  same  numbers.  If 
the  truly  determined  longitude  is  in  the  first  15  rows,  we  multiply  the  corre¬ 
sponding  latitudinal  difference  in  the  third  column  by  the  given  number  of  six¬ 
tieths;  but  if  it  is  in  the  rows  following,  we  multiply  that  in  the  fourth  column. 
We  shall  have  the  star  north  of  the  ecliptic  by  the  number  of  degrees  resulting 
from  these  operations  if  we  have  taken  the  latitudinal  difference  from  the  third 
column;  but  south  of  it  by  that  much  if  we  have  taken  it  from  the  fourth  column. 

But  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  we  first  carry  the  truly  determined 
number  of  anomaly  to  the  numbers  of  the  proper  table,  and  we  record  separately 
the  corresponding  numbers  in  the  third  and  fourth  columns  of  latitude— those 
in  three  of  the  columns  as  they  are,  but  those  in  the  fourth  column  of  Mercury 
with  a  subtraction  of  10°  if  the  truly  determined  longitude  is  in  the  first  15  rows, 
and  with  an  addition  of  10°  if  below.  Then,  for  Venus,  we  always  add  90°  to  the 
truly  determined  longitude,  and  for  Mercury  270°,  subtracting  a  circle  if  we  can. 
The  result  we  carry  to  the  same  numbers ;  and  whatever  number  of  sixtieths  in 
the  fifth  column  correspond  to  these  numbers,  just  so  many  do  we  take  of  the 
numbers  recorded  from  the  third  column.  When  the  longitude  with  the  given 
addition  is  in  the  first  15  rows,  ive  shall  set  out  the  result  as  south,  if  the  truly 
determined  number  of  anomaly  is  in  the  first  15  rows,  but  as  north  if  it  is  in 
those  that  follow.  And  when  this  number  of  longitude  falls  in  the  rows  below  the 
first  15,  we  shall  set  out  the  result  as  north  if  the  number  of  anomaly  is  in  the 
first  15  rows,  but  as  south  if  it  is  in  those  that  follow. 

Next  we  carry  the  truly  determined  longitude  to  the  same  numbers:  in  the 
case  of  Venus,  simply  as  it  is,  but  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  with  an  addition  of 
180°.  Whatever  number  of  sixtieths  lie  beside  it  in  the  fifth  column,  just  so  many 
do  we  take  of  the  numbers  recorded  from  the  fourth  column.  And  when,  as  we 
said,  the  longitude  we  carried  over  falls  in  the  first  15  rows,  we  shall  set  out  the 
result  as  north  if  the  truly  determined  number  of  anomaly  is  among  those  up  to 
180°,  but  as  south  if  above  180°.  When  this  longitude  falls  below  these  15  rows, 
we  shall  set  back  the  result  as  south  if  the  anomalistic  number  is  among  those  up 
to  180°,  but  as  north  if  above. 

Finally  taking,  of  these  sixtieths  found  from  the  second  carrying  over  the 
longitude,  the  same  part  as  they  were  of  60,  we  shall  set  forth,  for  Venus,  of 
the  result  always  to  the  north,  and  for  Mercury,  %  of  the  result  always  to  the 
south.  Thus,  from  the  mixture  of  the  three  settings  forth,  we  get  their  apparent 
latitudinal  passage  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic. 

7.  On  the  Hell4Cal  Risings  and  Settings  of  the  Five  Planets 

Now  that  we  have  worked  through  the  latitudinal  deviation  of  the  five  stars, 
we  have  left  the  filling  out  of  those  things  which  must  be  considered  concerning 
their  heliacal  risings  and  settings.  For,  just  as  we  described  them  in  detail  in  the 


459 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 

treatise  on  the  fixed  stars,  it  turns  out  that  their  elongations  on  the  ecliptic  with 
respect  to  the  sun  are  differently  unequal  in  the  case  of  their  risings  and  settings 
for  many  causes.  The  first  of  these  is  due  to  the  inequality  in  their  magnitudes; 
the  second  to  the  dissimilarity  of  the  ecliptic ^s  inclinations  to  the  horizon^s;  and 
the  third  to  their  latitudinal  passages. 

For  if,  again,  we  consider  the  sections  of  great  circles  {AB  of  the  horizon  and 

CD  of  the  ecliptic);  if  we  suppose  the 
point  E  their  intersection  either  eastern  or 
western,  and  points  C  and  A  lying  on  the 
meridian,  and  D  the  sun^s  centre;  and  if 
we  draw  through  it  and  the  horizon^s  pole 
section  DBF  of  a  great  circle,  and  suppose 
the  star  to  rise  or  set  on  the  horizon  AEB 
(clearly  at  E  when  on  the  ecliptic;  at  G 
when  north  of  the  ecliptic ;  and  at  H  when 
south  of  it),  and  draw  from  G  and  H  the 
perpendiculars  GK  and  HL,  then  again  we 
shall  have  arc  BD,  as  always,  equal  to  the  arc  of  the  sun^s  distance  below  the 
earth  when  the  star  will  first  be  seen  or  disappear.  For  at  equal  distances  below 
the  earth,  along  the  great  circle  so  drawn,  the  sun's  rays  give  the  same  light.  But 
since  first  this  distance  is  established  later  on  to  be  unequal  for  the  different  un¬ 
equal  stars,  necessarily,  even  if  all  the  other  things  are  the  same,  the  ecliptic  arcs 
subtending  the  right  angle  subtending  the  right  angle  (that  is,  the  distances 
similar  to  ED)  are  different,  evidently  less  for  the  larger  stars,  and  greater  for 
the  smaller. 

Likewise,  if  BD  is  the  same  for  the  same  star,  and  BED  the  angle  of  inclina¬ 
tion  of  the  ecliptic  is  unequal  either  from  the  differences  of  the  dodecatemories 
or  from  those  of  the  latitudes;  again  the  arc  ED  will  differ  and  will  be  greater 
when  the  given  angle  is  decreased,  and  smaller  when  it  is  increased.  And  like¬ 
wise  even  if  the  inclination's  first  presupposed  the  same,  but  the  star  not  on  the 
ecliptic  but  north  at  G  or  south  at  Hj  then  it  will  no  longer  appear  or  disappear 
first  when  it  is  arc  DE  away;  but,  when  it  is  north  of  the  ecliptic,  DK  will  be 
less,  and  when  south,  DEL  will  be  greater. 

Therefore  it  is  necessary  for  the  examination  of  particular  cases  that  general 
sizes  of  the  arcs  BD  be  first  given,  for  each  of  the  five  planets,  from  carefully 
observed  risings.  Such  would  be  those  in  summer  about  the  Crab  because  of  the 
lightness  and  clearness  of  the  air  at  that  season,  and  because  of  the  mean  value 
of  the  ecliptic's  inclination  to  the  horizon.  Then  we  find  by  this  examination 
of  the  morning  observations  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Crab,  Saturn  rises 
generally  when  it  is  14®  from  the  true  sun;  Jupiter  likewise  when  it  is  12^4° 
away ;  and  the  evening  Mercury  when  it  is  1 1 away. 

With  these  things  supposed,  let  the  figure  of  the  preceding  drawing  be  laid  out 
since  there  is  no  difference  in  the  case  of  arcs  of  this  size  if,  for  facility  in  cal¬ 
culation,  we  take  the  ratios  of  the  chords  (for  they  are  sensibly  no  different). 
And  let  point  E  of  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon  be  the  rising 
point  in  the  foregoing  appearances  at  the  beginning  of  the  Crab  for  the  three 
morning  planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars;  and  the  setting  point,  of  course, 
for  the  evening  planets  Venus  and  Mercury.  And  let  the  latitude  be  taken 
as  the  parallel  through  Phoenicia  where  the  longest  day  is  1434  equatorial 


460 


PTOLEMY 


hours,  since  especially  at  and  near  this  parallel  the  most  and  trustworthy  ob¬ 
servations  have  been  made,  those  of  the  Chaldeans  on  it,  and  those  of  Greece 
and  Egypt  near  it. 

Since,  then,  from  the  previous  demonstration  concerning  angles  [ii,  13],  when 
the  beginning  of  the  Crab  rises  in  the 
given  latitude,  we  find 

angle  £EZ)  =  103°  to  2  rt., 
and  therefore  the  ratio  of  the  sides  about 
the  right  angles  is  very  nearly  94  to  75  to 
the  hypotenuse^s  120;  and  since  by  means 
of  the  latitudinal  theory,  when  the  three 
lone  stars  rise  near  the  beginning  of  the 
Crab  (that  is,  are  passing  near  the  apogees 
of  the  epicycle  so  as  never  to  be  farther 
from  the  apogee  than  a  dodecatemory), 
we  find  Saturn  and  Jupiter  practically  on  the  ecliptic,  but  Mars  nearly 
north;  therefore  DE  will  be  the  elongation  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  from  the 
sun  along  the  ecliptic,  but  DK  that  of  Mars  because  of  its  being  farther  north  by 
the  12'  of  arc  KG. 

And  since 


therefore 


KG  :KE::  94  ;  75, 


KE'=0n0\ 

And  it  is  assumed  in  the  case  of  Mars 


so  that  altogether 


Z)A  =  14H^ 

i)E  =  14®40'. 


In  the  case  of  Saturn,  it  is  14°;  and  of  Jupiter,  12^°.  And  so,  since  again 

DE:DB::  120  : 94, 

we  shall  have  arc  DB  of  the  great  circle  drawn  through  the  poles  of  the  horizon 
equal  to  11°  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  10°  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  and  very  nearly 
11)^°  in  the  case  of  Mars. 

Likewise  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury — since,  when  the  beginning  of  the 
Crab  sets,  it  makes  the  same  angle  and  inclination  with  the  horizon  as  the  fore¬ 
going,  and  it  is  supposed  that  about  this  part  the  evening  Venus  rises  5^^°  from 
the  true  sun  and  Mercury  11^° — fbe  true  sun  will  be  situated  at  their  risings 
24J4°  within  the  Twins  in  the  case  of  Venus,  183^°  in  the  case  of  Mercury;  the 
mean  sun,  25°  in  the  case  of  Venus,  and  very  nearly  19°  in  the  case  of  Mercury. 
Therefore,  the  mean  longitudinal  movement  of  these  stars  was  that  number  of 
degrees.  When  with  this  longitude  they  appear  at  the  beginning  of  the  Crab, 
Venus  is  found  to  be  about  14°  from  the  epicycle's  apogee,  and  Mercury  about 
32°.  This  is  shown  by  the  theorems  already  expounded  on  the  anomaly.  Conse¬ 
quently,  in  these  passages,  Venus  is  found  1°  north  of  the  ecliptic  and  Mercury 
very  nearly  1^^°,  which  of  course  is  KG.  And  so,  since 

KG  :  KK  :  ;  94  :  75  :  :  1  : 

or  very  nearly 

KG  :  KK  :  :  1^  :  1^, 
in  the  case  of  Venus  we  shall  have 

EK  =  H^; 


in  the  case  of  Mercury 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


461 


And  it  is  supposed,  in  the  case  of  Venus, 

where  DK  is  the  elongation  of  either  planet  from  the  sun;  and  in  the  case  of 
Mercury 


Therefore  we  shall  have  altogether 

in  the  case  of  Venus;  and  in  the  case  of  Mercury 

DKE 


And  so,  since  again 

:  BD  :  :  120  :  94  :  :  6^  :  5, 


or  very  nearly 

ED:BD::\2  10, 

we  shall  have  the  arc  BD^  the  value  of  the  general  distance  as  5®  in  the  case  of 
Venus,  and  10®  in  the  case  of  Mercury.  Which  it  was  required  to  find. 


8.  That  the  Particularities  of  the  Heliacal  Risings  and  Settings 
OF  Venus  and  Mercury  Agree  with  the  Hypotheses 

We  can  thus  understand  that  even  the  extraordinary  things  concerning  the 
heliacal  risings  and  settings  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  consequent  upon  these 
hypotheses;  that  is,  that  in  the  case  of  Venus  the  time  from  the  evening  setting 
to  the  morning  rising  about  the  beginning  of  the  Fishes  is  about  2  days,  but 
about  the  beginning  of  the  Virgin  16  days;  and  that  in  the  case  of  Mercury  the 
evening  risings  are  eclipsed  when  it  should  appear  at  the  beginning  of  the  Scor¬ 
pion;  and  the  morning  risings  when  it  should  appear  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Bull.  And  first  the  case  of  Venus. 

For  let  a  drawing  of  the  apparitions  similar  to  the  preceding  one  be  laid  out. 

Let  point  E  be  first  supposed  near  the  beginning 
of  the  Fishes  where  Venus,  when  at  the  perigee 
of  its  epicycle,  is  north  of  the  ecliptic  by  very 
nearly  63^®.  Let  it  also  be  supposed  [to  represent] 
the  figure  of  the  evening  setting  where  angle  BED 
in  the  given  latitude  totals  154®  to  2  right  angles' 
360®,  with  the  greater  side  of  those  about  the 
right  angle  as  117  to  the  hypotenuse's  120,  and 
the  lesser  side  very  nearly  27.  Therefore,  where 
the  arc  DB  of  the  general  distance  is  5®,  there 
DE  =  b^^'. 

But  since  the  star  is  63^®  north  of  the  ecliptic  or 
arc  KG,  and 

117:27::6)^:1J^ 
very  nearly,  therefore 

KE=^iy2^, 
and,  by  subtraction, 

A:D  =  3®38' 

which  is  the  elongation  of  the  star  eastward  from  the  sun,  in  its  evening  setting. 

Again,  in  a  similar  drawing,  since  in  the  morning  rising 


462 


PTOLEMY 


angle  jBj5Z)  =  69°  to  2  rt., 
therefore  the  lesser  of  the  sides  about  the  right 
angle  is  68  to  the  hypotenuse’s  120,  and  the 
greater  is  99.  And 

68°  :  120°  :  :  5°  :  8°49', 

68°  :  99°  :  :  6^°  :  9°13'; 
therefore  we  shall  have  s:  J  ^ 

Z)£7  =  8°49', 

and  the  difference  due  to  latitude 
K£:  =  9°13'; 

and,  by  subtraction,  eastward  of  the  sun, 

Z)A:  =  0°24'. 

And  at  the  evening  setting  it  was  likewise  eastward  3°38'.  Therefore  it  has 
moved,  in  the  time  from  the  evening  setting  to  the  morning  rising,  less  than 
the  sun’s  movement — that  is,  less  than  its  proper  longitudinal  passage,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  epicyclic  retrogression  of  3°14'.  Since,  then,  the  star  moves  west¬ 
ward  by  so  many  degrees,  as  is  easily  seen  from  the  Table  of  Anomaly,  when 
it  has  moved  lj^°  at  the  perigee  of  the  epicycle,  and  passes  through  these 
in  mean  motion  in  very  nearly  2  days,  it  is  evident  that  just  so  much  time 
would  be  taken  for  that  distance  in  conformity  with  the  appearances. 

Again,  in  a  similar  drawing,  let  the  point  E  be  supposed  at  the  beginning 

of  the  Virgin  where  Venus,  when  at  the 
epicycle’s  perigee,  appears  very  nearly 
63^°  south  of  the  ecliptic.  And  let  the 
evening  setting  be  first  proposed  when 
angle  5^Z)  =  69°  to  2  rt., 
and  the  lesser  of  the  sides  about  the 
right  angle  is  68  to  the  hypotenuse’s 
120,  and  the  greater  very  nearly  99. 
Since  the  same  ratios  are  here  as  those 
relative  to  the  morning  rising  of  the 
Fishes,  the  latitudinal  distance  being 
equal,  we  shall  have 
arc  £'Z)  =  8°49',  / 

and,  as  difference  due  to  latitude, 

L£  =  9°13', 

and,  as  the  total  elongation  of  the  star  eastward  from_the  sun, 

Z)L=  18°2'. 

By  the  Table  of  Anomaly,  as  we  said,  to  that  number  of  degrees  of  the  sun’s 
and  star’s  retrogression  in  mean  motion  correspond  very  nearly  73^°  from 
the  epicycle’s  perigee.  I 

Likewise  since,  at  the  morning  rising  near  the  beginning  of  the  Virgin  when 
angle  BED  =  154°  to  2  rt.,  1  / 

the  greater  side  about  the  right  angle  is  117  to  the  hypotenuse’s  120,  and  the 
lesser  side  27,  and  the  same  ratios  are  deduced  as  those  set  out  for  the  evening 
setting  in  the  Fishes,  we  shall  have 

arc  DE  =  5°8', 

and  as  difference  in  latitude 

£L=1°30', 


463 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


and,  as  the  total  elongation  of  the  star  westward  from  the  sun, 

i)L  =  6°38'. 

In  the  same  way  to  these  correspond  very  nearly  23^®  from  the  epicycle's 
perigee.  Therefore  Venus,  from  the  evening  setting  to  the  morning  rising,  will 
move  10°  which  it  passes  through  in  very  nearly  16  days  in  conformity  with 
the  appearances. 

These  things  being  proved,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  incidents  of  Mer¬ 
cury  regarding  the  eclipsed  risings;  and  first  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Scorpion,  even  if  it  is  at  its  greatest  elongation  eastward  from  the  sun,  the 
evening  rising  cannot  appear.  i 

For  let  the  drawing  of  these  risings  be  laid  out,  E  being  supposed  the  point 

on  the  ecliptic  near  the  beginning  of  the 
Scorpion,  where  at  the  setting 

angle  BED  =  Q9°  to  2  rt., 
and  the  lesser  side  about  the  right  angle 
is  68  to  the  hypotenuse's  120,  and 
the  greater  99.  Therefore  where  BD,  the 
general  distance,  is  10°,  there 
DE^  17^39'. 

But  when  the  star  has  that  position,  it  is 
very  nearly  3°  south  of  the  ecliptic.  And 
so,  since  for  the  given  ratios 
LE  =  4^22' 
where,  as  arc  of  latitude, 

and  the  total 


DEL  =  22\ 

This  is  the  elongation  of  the  star  from  the  true  sun  necessary  for  its  first  ap¬ 
pearing.  And  so,  since  its  greatest  elongation  from  the  true  sun  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Scorpion  is  only  20°58'  (for  this  was  proved  by  us  in  the  demon¬ 
strations  concerning  the  greatest  elongations),  it  is  evident  that  such  risings 
are  eclipsed. 

But  again  if — with  a  similar  drawing  of  the  risings  set  out — we  suppose 
the  point  E  the  beginning  of  the  Bull  at  the  morning  rising,  then,  when  the 
star  in  the  given  passages  is  very  nearly  33^°  south  of  the  ecliptic  and  the 
ratios  about  the  right  angles  are  the  same  as  before,  we  shall  have 

Z)£=17°39', 

and 


LE=r  37' 


where  as  arc  of  latitude 
and  the  total 


HL  =  3^0', 


DEL  =  22^9', 

And  so  the  star  will  have  to  have  an  elongation  from  the  true  sun  of  just  that 
amount  to  be  first  seen.  Since  at  the  most  its  elongation  does  not  exceed 
22°13'  as  shown  above  [Book  XII],  risings  of  this  kind  are  eclipsed.  And  the 
things  proposed  have  been  shown  by  us  to  be  consonant  with  the  appearances 
and  with  the  given  hypotheses. 


464 


PTOLEMY 


9.  The  Method  for  the  Particular  Distances  from  the  Sun 
OF  the  Risings  and  Settings 

It  is  immediately  evident  that,  in  general  (arcs  BD  being  supposed  for  each 
of  the  stars  and  the  beginning  of  the  dodecatemories  being  given  at  the  in¬ 
tersection  E  and  therefore  angle  BED),  DE  will  also  be  given  and  the  star’s 
latitudinal  passage  at  this  elongation — that  is,  KG  or  HL;  and,  therefore, 
KE  or  EL,  and  also  the  apparent  distance  DK  or  DL.  In  this  way  we  have 
calculated  for  every  dodecatemory  (not  to  make  the  treatise  long)  the  ap¬ 
parent  elongations  of  the  risings  and  settings  from  the  true  sun  for  each  of  the 
5  stars,  and  for  the  given  latitude  only,  as  being  sufficient.  Using  only  the  be¬ 
ginnings  of  the  dodecatemories,  we  have  arranged  them  below,  for  easy  use, 
in  5  tables  for  the  5  stars,  each  containing  12  rows.  The  first  of  them  we  have 
arranged  in  columns  of  3,  the  first  columns  containing  the  beginnings  of  the 
dodecatemories;  the  second,  the  elongations  of  the  morning  risings;  and  the 
third  the  elongations  of  the  evening  settings.  Next  we  have  arranged  the 
tables  of  Venus  and  Mercury  in  columns  of  5,  the  first  likewise  containing 
the  beginnings  of  the  dodecatemories,  the  second  the  elongations  of  the  eve¬ 
ning  risings,  the  third  again  those  of  the  evening  settings,  the  fourth  again 
those  of  the  morning  risings,  and  the  fifth  those  of  the  morning  settings.  And 
here  is  the  exposition  presented  in  tables: 


THE  ALMAGEST,  XIII 


465 


10.  Exposition  of  the  Tables  Containing  the  Heliacal  Risings 
AND  Settings  of  the  Five  Planets 


SATURN 

JUPITER 

MARS 

Beginnings 

Morn¬ 

Eve¬ 

Morn¬ 

Eve¬ 

Morn¬ 

Eve¬ 

of  the 

ing 

ning 

ing 

ning 

ing 

ning 

Doedcatemories 

Rising 

Setting 

Rising 

Setting 

Rising 

Setting 

Ram 

23 

1 

11 

28 

20 

10 

10 

19 

21 

12 

11 

40 

Bull 

21 

57 

11 

41 

19 

6 

10 

29 

20 

8 

11 

48 

Twins 

17 

52 

12 

26 

15 

51 

11 

10 

17 

21 

12 

30 

Crab 

14 

2 

14 

2 

12 

46 

12 

46 

14 

33 

14 

33 

Lion 

11 

34 

15 

34 

10 

40 

14 

31 

12 

28 

17 

19 

Virgin 

10 

53 

16 

53 

10 

1 

16 

12 

11 

46 

20 

5 

Balance 

10 

48 

17 

6 

9 

57 

16 

34 

11 

38 

21 

1 

Scorpion 

10 

53 

16 

53 

10 

1 

16 

12 

11 

48 

20 

19 

Archer 

11 

34 

15 

34 

10 

40 

14 

31 

12 

34 

*17 

32 

Goat 

14 

2 

14 

2 

12 

46 

12 

46 

14 

45 

14 

45 

Water  Bearer 

17 

52 

12 

26 

15 

51 

11 

10 

17 

35 

12 

36 

Fishes 

21 

57 

11 

41 

19 

6 

10 

29 

20 

26 

11 

49 

VENUS 

MERCURY 

Beginnings 

Eve¬ 

Eve¬ 

Morn¬ 

Morn¬ 

Eve¬ 

Eve¬ 

Morn¬ 

Morn¬ 

of  the 

ning 

ning 

ing 

ing 

ning 

ning 

ing 

ing 

Dodecatemories 

Rising  Setting 

Rising 

Setting 

Rising 

Setting 

Rising 

Setting 

Ram 

5 

10 

4 

9 

3 

0 

10 

28 

9 

58 

9 

43 

23 

58 

23 

38 

Bull 

5 

8 

4 

16 

6 

16 

9 

40 

10 

4 

10 

15 

22 

15 

22 

15 

Twins 

5 

12 

5 

7 

9 

15 

7 

36 

10 

18 

11 

47 

18 

0 

16 

44 

Crab 

5 

36 

8 

23 

9 

50 

5 

59 

12 

22 

15 

34 

14 

4 

12 

30 

Lion 

6 

16  13 

3 

8 

2 

5 

5 

13 

43 

19 

59 

11 

25 

10 

21 

Virgin 

7 

22 

18 

2 

6 

38 

4 

54 

18 

1 

23 

13 

10 

21 

9 

59 

Balance 

7 

53 

17 

43 

5 

41 

4 

54 

22 

49 

23 

16 

9 

51 

10 

0 

Scorpion 

8 

20  13 

47 

5 

28 

4 

55 

20 

1 

22 

1 

9 

44 

10 

19 

Archer 

7 

49 

8 

1 

4 

39 

5 

16 

18 

11 

17 

25 

9 

25 

11 

19 

Goat 

6 

25 

4 

8 

2 

43 

6 

35 

13 

54 

12 

10 

9 

36 

14 

5 

Water  Bearer 

5 

51 

3 

16 

0 

30 

8 

33 

11 

10 

9 

50 

12 

27 

17 

50 

Fishes 

5 

22 

3 

38 

0 

24 

10 

16 

10 

11 

9 

43 

19 

15 

21 

46 

II.  Epilogue 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  added,  Syrus,  and  to  my  mind  about  all 
things  which  ought  to  be  considered  in  such  a  treatise  have  been  worked  out 
as  much  as  the  time  to  the  present  affords  for  discovery  and  more  accurate 
revision,  and  annals  suggest  as  useful  for  the  theory  and  not  just  as  demon¬ 
stration,  it  is  therefore  fitting  and  proper  that  this  treatise  end  here. 


APPENDIX  A 


1.  Ptolemaic  Dates,  the  Era  of  Nabonassar,  and  the  Christian  Era 
The  following  is  a  translation  from  the  Greek  of  the  Chronological  Table 
of  the  Kings,  published  by  Halma  in  his  edition  of  the  Almagest,  and  by  F. 
K.  Grinzel  in  his  Handbuch  der  Mathemalischen  und  Technischen  Chronologie 
(3  Vols.,  Leipzig,  1906). 


Years  of  the  Kings  before  the  Death  of 
Alexander  and  the  Years  of  Alexander^ 


Of  the  Assyrians  and  Medes 

Years 

Totals 

Nabonassar 

14 

14 

Nadius 

2 

16 

Chinzer  and  Poms 

5 

21 

Iloulaius 

5 

26 

Mardokempad 

12 

38 

Arkean 

5 

43 

First  Interregnum 

2 

45 

Bilib 

3 

48 

Aparanad 

6 

54 

Rhegebel 

1 

55 

Mesesimordak 

4 

59 

Second  Interregnum 

8 

67 

Asaradin 

13 

80 

Saosdouchin 

20 

100 

Kinelanadan 

22 

122 

Nabopolassar 

21 

143 

Nabokolassar 

43 

186 

lUoaroudam 

2 

188 

Nerigasolassar 

4 

192 

Nabonadius 

17 

209 

Of  the  Persian  Kings 


Cyrus 

9 

218 

Cambyses 

8 

226 

Darius  I 

36 

262 

Xerxes 

21 

283 

Artaxerxes  I 

41 

324 

Darius  II 

19 

343 

Artaxerxes  II 

46 

389 

Ochus 

21 

410 

Arogus 

2 

412 

Darius  III 

4 

416 

Alexander  of  Macedonia 

8 

424 

Years  of  the  Macedonian  Kings  after  the 
Death  of  Alexander  the  King 


Of  the  Macedonian  Kings 

Years  Totals 

Philip 

7 

7 

Alexander  II 

12 

19 

Ptolemy  Lagus 

20 

39 

Philadelphus 

38 

77 

Euergetes  I 

25 

102 

Philopator 

17 

119 

Epiphanes 

24 

143 

Philometor 

35 

178 

Euergetes  II 

29 

207 

Soter 

36 

243 

Dionysius  the  Younger 

29 

276 

Cleopatra 

22 

294 

Of  the  Roman  Kings 

Augustus 

43 

337 

Tiberius 

22 

359 

Gaius 

4 

363 

Claudius 

14 

377 

Nero 

14 

391 

Vespasian 

10 

401 

Titus 

3 

404 

Domitian 

15 

419 

Nerva 

1 

420 

Trajan 

19 

439 

Hadrian 

21 

460 

Alelius-Antonine 

23 

483 

A  year  is  counted  from  Thoth  1  preceding 
the  beginning  of  the  king^s  reign.  Kings  not 
ruling  a  year  are  not  mentioned. 


^The  names  of  the  Assyrian  kings,  as  rendered  by  modem  scholars,  are  as  follows:  (1) 
Nabu-nasir,  (2)  Nabu-nadin-zer,  (3)  Ukinzer  and  Pulu,  (4)  Ululai,  (5)  Marduk-apal-iddin, 
(6)  Sargon,  (7)  Behibni,  (8)  Ashur-nadin-shum,  (9)  Nergal-ushezib,  (10)  Mushezib-Marduk, 
(11)  Esarhaddon,  (12)  Shamash-shim-ukin,  (13)  Kandalanu,  (14)  Nabu-apal-usur,  (15) 
Nebuchadrezzar,  (16)  Amel-Marduk,  (17)  Nergal-shar-usur  (Neriglissar),  (18)  Nabu-na^id 
(Nabonidius).  Among  the  Persian  kings,  Arogus  is  called  Arses. 

466 


APPENDIX  A 


467 


The  Egyptian  year  used  by  Ptolemy  consists  of  365  days.  This  contains 
12  months  of  30  days  each,  followed  by  5  intercalary  days.  This  year,  of  course, 
changes  with  respect  to  the  equinoxes  and  soltices.  But  it  is  simpler  and  more 
practical  than  any  other.  The  months  occur  in  the  following  order: 

1.  Thoth  4.  Choiak  7.  Phamenoth  10.  Payni 

2.  Phaophi  5.  Tybi  8.  Pharmouthi  11.  Epiphi 

3.  Athyr  6.  Mechir  9.  Pachom  12.  Mesore 

Five  Intercalary  Days 

The  era  used  by  Ptolemy  is  the  so-called  Era  of  Nabonassar,  whose  be¬ 
ginnings  or  epoch  is  Thoth  1,  midday,  the  year  1  of  the  reign  of  Nabonassar. 
The  table  just  given  permits  one  to  calculate  the  years  from  the  epoch  to 
the  given  date. 

If  one  wishes  to  pass  from  the  Era  of  Nabonassar  to  the  Christian  Era, 
certain  complications  arise.  For  the  Christian  Era  is  computed  in  two  styles, 
the  Julian  and  the  Gregorian.  The  Christian  Era  up  to  October  4,  1582,  is 
computed  in  terms  of  the  Julian  year,  which  is  the  year  made  up  of  365  days 
ordinarily  and  every  fourth  year  or  leap  year  of  366  days;  that  is,  the  Julian 
year  averages  36534  days.  Since,  however,  the  solar  year  is  approximately 
365  days  14'  48"  according  to  Ptolemy’s  calculations  in  Book  iii  of  the  AU 
magesty  the  Julian  year  will  fall  behind  the  solar  year.  Thus  in  the  year  a.d.  325 
(after  the  birth  of  Christ),  the  year  of  the  Council  of  Nicea,  the  spring  equinox 
fell  on  March  21.  In  the  year  a.d.  1582,  the  spring  equinox  fell  on  March  11. 

And  so,  in  order  to  make  the  calendar  year  more  nearly  equal  to  the  solar 
year  for  liturgical  reasons.  Pope  Gregory  XIII  ordered  the  day  following 
October  4,  1582,  to  be  counted  as  October  15,  1582.  Further,  the  years  ending 
in  two  zeros  which  were  not  divisible  by  400  were  no  longer  to  be  leap  years. 
Thus  the  years  a.d.  1700,  1800,  1900  would  not  be  leap  years.  The  Gregorian 
reform  was  followed  at  first  only  by  southern  Europe,  but  since  the  eighteenth 
century  it  has  been  followed  by  the  whole  of  Europe  and  the  New  World. 

The  Christian  Era,  therefore,  is  counted  by  Julian  Years  before  and  after 
the  birth  of  Christ,  up  until  October  4,  1582;  thereafter  by  the  Julian  3^ear 
modified  according  to  the  reform  instituted  by  Gregory,  as  just  explained. 

But  the  Christian  Era  is  also  counted  in  two  ways:  the  historical  and  the 
astronomical.  In  the  historical  way,  there  is  no  year  between  the  3^ear  1  b.c. 
(before  the  birth  of  Christ)  and  the  year  a.d.  1  (after  the  birth  of  Christ). 
In  the  astronomical  way,  since  the  years  before  Christ  are  written  as  negative 
numbers,  the  first  year  before  Christ  or  the  year  1  b.c.  (historical  way)  is  the 
year  0.  And  so,  up  until  a.d.  1582,  all  years  divisible  by  4  are  leap  years  both 
according  to  the  historical  and  to  the  astronomical  ways  of  counting.  Re¬ 
specting  the  years  before  Christ,  those  years  are  leap  years  which  are  divisible 
by  4  with  a  remainder  of  1  in  the  historical  way;  in  the  astronomical  way, 
those  years  which  are  divisible  by  4  as  for  the  years  after  Christ. 

The  Julian  year  is  made  up  of  12  unequal  months  as  follows: 

1.  January,  31  days  7.  July,  31  days 

2.  February,  28  days  (leap  year  29  days)  8.  August,  31  days 

3.  March,  31  days  9.  September,  30  days 

4.  April,  30  days  10.  October,  31  da^^s 

5.  May,  31  days  11.  November,  30  days 

6.  June,  30  days  12.  December,  31  days. 


468  PTOLEMY 

The  correspondence  of  the  Era  of  Nabonassar  and  the  Christian  Era  is  as 
follows: — Thoth  1,  midday,  the  year  of  Nabonassar  corresponds  to  February 
27,  midday,  747  b.c.  (historical  way),  or  746  b.c.  (astronomical  way). 

But  a  further  distinction  has  to  be  made.  Since  Ptolemy,  the  astronomical 
day  begins  with  midday  and  the  civil  day  with  midnight.  Therefore  February 
27,  midday  (civil  style)  corresponds  to  February  26,  midday  (astronomical 
style).  And  so  Thoth  1,  midday,  the  year  1  of  Nabonassar  corresponds  to 
February  26,  midday  (astronomical  style),  747  b.c.  (historical  way). 

One  can  now  pass  safely  from  Ptolemy^s  dates,  which  are  always  given 
finally  in  terms  of  Egyptian  years  and  the  Era  of  Nabonassar,  to  dates  of  the 
Christian  Era. 

The  Julian  year  and  Julian  style,  explained  above,  are  not  to  be  confused 
with  the  Julian  Period,  an  era  constructed  by  Joseph  Scaliger  in  the  17th 
century.  The  Julian  Period  is  a  cycle  of  7980  Julian  years.  The  first  year  of 
the  Julian  Period  is  January  1,  4713  b.c.,  or  4712  b.c.  (astronomical  way). 
This  period  is  the  product  of  28,  19,  and  15 — representing,  respectively,  the 
solar  cycle,  lunar  cycle,  and  indiction.  The  solar  cycle  of  28  Julian  years  is 
the  period  in  which  the  same  day  of  the  week  falls  again  on  the  same  day 
of  the  month  of  the  Julian  year.  The  lunar  cycle  of  19  Julian  years  is  a  period 
in  which  the  solar  years  and  the  synodic  months  fall  together  again. 

2.  Equivalent  Modern  Terms  for  Determining  the  Positions  of 
Stars,  and  for  the  Solar  and  Lunar  Cycles 

We  shall  now  set  down  the  modern  astronomical  terms  and  their  Ptolemaic 
equivalents  for  those  who  wish  to  pass  easily  from  ancient  to  modern  litera¬ 
ture.  In  doing  this,  we  get  a  brief  review  of  the  astronomical  appearances  and 
the  Ptolemaic  measurements  which  are  very  close  to  the  modern  ones  when 
they  are  not  exactly  the  same. 

First,  we  must  remember  that  there  are  three  systems  of  coordinates  for 
determining  the  positions  of  the  stars:  (1)  With  respect  to  the  equator  and  the 
great  circle  through  the  equator^ s  poles  and  the  equinoxes^  that  is,  the  meridian 
through  the  equinoxes.  In  modern  terms,  the  arc  of  the  equator  cut  off  by  the 
meridian  through  the  star  and  by  the  spring  equinox,  taken  eastward  from 
the  spring  equinox,  is  called  the  star’s  right  ascension.  And  the  smaller  arc 
of  the  meridian  cut  off  by  the  equator  and  by  the  star  is  called  its  declination. 
(2)  With  respect  to  the  ecliptic  and  to  the  great  circle  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles 
and  the  spring  equinox.  This  is  the  system  most  used  by  Ptolemy.  The  ancient 
and  modern  terms  are  the  same.  The  arc  of  the  ecliptic  cut  off  by  the  great 
circle  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles  and  the  star  and  by  the  spring  equinox, 
taken  eastward  from  the  spring  equinox,  is  called  the  star’s  longitude.  And 
the  smaller  arc  of  the  great  circle  through  the  ecliptic’s  poles  and  the  star, 
cut  off  by  the  ecliptic  and  by  the  star,  is  called  its  latitude.  (3)  With  respect 
to  the  horizon  and  the  meridian  or  great  circle  through  the  zenith  and  the  equator’s 
poles.  In  modern  terms,  the  arc  of  the  horizon  cut  off  by  the  great  circle  through 
the  zenith  and  the  star  and  by  the  intersection  of  the  meridian  with  the  horizon 
nearer  the  southern  pole  taken  clockwise  is  called  the  star’s  azimuth.  It  is 
indeterminate,  of  course,  when  either  of  the  poles  is  the  zenith.  And  the  smaller 
arc  of  the  great  circle  through  the  zenith  and  the  star,  cut  off  by  the  star  and 
the  horizon,  is  called  the  star’s  height  or  altitude. 


APPENDIX  A 


469 


Now,  the  sun  is  considered  in  two  cycles:  (1)  Its  passage  from  one  equinoctial 
point  hack  to  the  same.  This  is  called  the  solar  year  both  by  Ptolemy  and  by 
the  moderns.  (2)  Its  passage  from  one  fixed  star  hack  to  the  same.  This  is  now 
called  the  sidereal  year.  These  two  cycles  are  not  equal,  since  the  spring 
equinox  moves  from  east  to  west  along  the  ecliptic  about  1°  in  100  years  ac¬ 
cording  to  Ptolemy,  or  1.396°  in  100  years  according  to  modern  calculations. 
Hence  the  sidereal  3^ear  is  a  bit  longer  than  the  solar  year.  By  Ptolemy^s  cal¬ 
culations,  in  36,000  solar  years  there  would  be  35,999  sidereal  years.  At  that 
time  the  solar  year  and  the  sidereal  year  would  finish  at  the  same  point,  if 
one  considered  them  as  beginning  from  the  same  point.  This  is  the  period  of 
those  two  cycles. 

The  difference  between  the  mean  sun  and  true  sun  reduced  to  time  is  called 
in  modern  terms  the  equation  of  time.  The  method  of  calculating  it  is  given  by 
Ptolemy  in  Book  iii.  Section  9. 

As  described  in  Books  IV  and  V,  the  moon  has  a  great  many  cycles.  For 
it  must  be  considered  in  its  movement  (1)  with  respect  to  the  sun,  (2)  with 
respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  (3)  with  respect  to  its  irregularity  of  movement 
longitudinally  about  the  ecliptic,  and  (4)  with  respect  to  its  movement  lati- 
tudinally  back  and  forth  across  the  ecliptic.  There  is  also  (5)  its  cycle  of  anom¬ 
aly  with  respect  to  its  movement  relative  to  the  sun,  and  (6)  the  inclination 
of  the  epicycle. 

The  first  four  are  spoken  of  as  four  kinds  of  months.  We  shall  state  their 
modern  names  and  add  the  Ptolemaic  name  when  it  is  different.  We  also  add 
their  magnitude  in  terms  of  mean  solar  days;  the  modern  calculations  of 
these  magnitudes  are  carried  to  five  decimals,  the  same  as  those  of  Ptolemy. 

(1)  The  lunar  month  is  the  period  from  full  moon  to  full  moon — that  is, 
from  the  moon's  opposition  to  the  sun  to  its  next  opposition.  The  mean  lunar 
month  is  29.53059  mean  solar  days. 

(2)  The  sidereal  month  is  the  period  from  the  moon's  conjunction  with  a 
fixed  star  to  its  next  conjunction  with  the  same  fixed  star.  The  mean  sidereal 
month  is  27.32166  mean  solar  days.  It  is  called  by  Ptolemy  the  longitudinal 
cycle. 

(3)  The  anomalistic  month  is  the  cycle  of  the  moon's  irregular  motion  in 
longitude;  it  is  called  by  Ptolemy  the  moon's  first  anomaly  or  longitudinal 
anomaly.  The  mean  anomalistic  month  is  27.55455  mean  solar  days. 

(4)  The  nodical  month  is  the  period  from  the  moon's  passage  at  one  node 
back  to  its  next  passage  at  the  same  node.  The  moon's  nodes  are  the  points 
where  its  oblique  circle  crosses  the  ecliptic.  These  nodes  move  westward  along 
the  ecliptic  about  13^°  in  a  lunar  month.  Ptolemy  gives  it  as  3'  a  day.  The 
mean  nodical  month  is  27.21222  mean  solar  days.  This  is  called  by  Ptolemy 
the  latitudinal  cycle. 

Since  all  these  cycles  overlap  and  impinge  on  each  other,  any  given  one  of 
these  months  is  longer  or  shorter  than  the  mean  because  of  the  intertwining 
of  the  other  cycles.  To  get  them  separated  out  in  their  purity,  it  is  necessary 
to  find  the  period  at  the  end  of  which  they  all  finish  out  together,  or  nearly 
so.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  in  Book  iv  Ptolemy  reports  that  Hipparchus 
found  that  in  126,007  mean  solar  days  and  1  hour  there  occurred  4,267  lunar 
months,  4,573  anomalistic  months,  and  4,612  sidereal  months  less  7^^°  of  a 
month,  where  each  month  is  taken  as  360°.  In  this  time  the  sun  made  345 


470 


PTOLEMY 


revolutions  about  the  ecliptic,  less  73^°.  All  of  this  is  with  respect  to  the  fixed 
stars  rather  than  the  spring  equinox.  Hipparchus  also  found  that  there  oc¬ 
curred  5,923  nodical  months  in  5,458  lunar  months.  Except  for  slight  cor¬ 
rections  in  the  case  of  the  anomalistic  and  nodical  months,  Ptolemy  uses 
these  figures  of  Hipparchus  to  calculate  the  mean  periods  of  the  respective 
months  as  we  have  given  them  above. 


APPENDIX  B 

The  Passage  from  the  Ptolemaic  to  the  Copernican  System, 

AND  thence  to  THAT  OF  KePLER 

The  passage  from  Ptolemy  to  Copernicus  depends  on  the  interpretation  of 
certain  fundamental  numbers  resulting  from  observation  and  from  the  Ptole¬ 
maic  system.  And  furthermore  certain  laws  of  Kepler  come  from  a  scrutiny 
of  these  same  numbers  and  a  certain  correlation  of  them.  The  great  revolutions 
in  astronomical  theory  have  not  depended  as  much  as  one  might  think  on 
more  accurate  observations  or  on  better  instruments,  but  rather  on  the  re¬ 
interpretation  of  the  symbols  presented  by  the  appearances  and  of  the  numbers 
immediately  symbolizing  these  symbols.  Indeed,  we  have  already  indicated 
in  our  Introduction  and  in  our  commentary  to  the  third  section  of  Book  xii 
that  the  Copernican  system  was  known  in  its  essentials  to  the  Greeks.  Here 
the  matter  will  be  shown  in  detail;  and  also  how  Kepler,  by  considering  these 
same  numbers,  formulated  his  law  that  the  periodic  times  of  the  planets  are 
in  the  triplicate  of  the  subduplicate  ratios  of  their  distances  from  the  sun — a 
law  which  first  set  up  an  interdependence  of  time  and  space  and  led  to  the 
possibility  of  formulating  a  celestial  dynamics. 

We  shall  set  out  these  numbers  in  the  following  fundamental  table: 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Planets 

Cycles 

of 

Anomaly 

Revolutions 

of 

longitude 

Solar  years 

Radius 
of  Ec¬ 
centric 

Radius 
of  Epi¬ 
cycle 

Line 

between 

centers 

Saturn 

57 

2+(l+M+Mo)° 

59+(l+M+M) 

60 

Jupiter 

65 

6— (4+H+H)“ 

71 — (4+J4+/4+M5) 

60 

IIH 

2^ 

Mars 

37 

42+ (3  K)” 

79+(3+K+Mo) 

60 

393^ 

6 

Sun 

1 

1 

1 

60 

2^ 

Venus 

5 

8-(2i4)° 

8-(2+M+>^0) 

60 

43H 

IJi 

Mercury 

145 

46+(l)‘> 

46+(lMo) 

60 

22H 

3 

The  numbers  in  parentheses  in  the  column  of  Revolutions  of  longitude 
represent  three-hundred-and-sixtieths  of  a  complete  circle;  and  those  in 


APPENDIX  B 


471 


parentheses  in  the  next  column  represent  days  or  three-hundred-and-sixty- 
fifths  of  a  cycle. 

In  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  the  numbers  in  the  second  and  third 
columns  should  be  equal  and  any  discrepancy  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  cycles 
have  not  been  taken  at  periods  of  complete  returns  with  all  the  cycles  in  the 
same  position  as  at  the  starting  point.  This  error  is  always  taken  care  of  by 
Ptolemy  in  the  case  of  each  planet  by  a  chapter  on  the  correction  of  the  planet^s 
periodic  movements. 

In  the  case  of  Saturn,  Jupiter  and  Mars,  Ptolemy  remarks  that  the  first 
column  plus  the  second  column  gives  the  third  column.  Any  discrepancy  is 
again  due  to  the  same  error  as  mentioned  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  This 
property  of  the  numbers  is  an  accident  in  the  Ptolemaic  system,  but  it  is  al¬ 
ready  evident  in  the  commentary  on  Paragraph  3,  Book  xii,  that  it  is  essential 
for  passing  to  the  Copernican  system.  But  it  can  be  seen  more  directly  as 
follows: — 

In  the  first  place,  according  to  the  Ptolemaic  planetary  theory,  the  planets 
move  on  the  epicycle  in  the  same  direction  that  the  epicycle  moves  on  the  defer¬ 
ent.  This  means,  in  the  Copernican  theory,  that  the  earth  and  the  planets  move 
about  the  sun  in  the  same  direction  and  not  in  opposite  directions. 

For  let  S  be  the  sun,  E  the  earth  on  its  nearly  circular  orbit  about  the  sun, 

and  P  one  of  the  three  outer  planets  (Mars, 
Jupiter,  Saturn)  on  its  nearly  circular  orbit 
about  the  sun.  Now,  when  E  and  P  are  on 
the  same  side  of  S  and  in  a  straight  line  with 
it,  then  P  is  at  its  perigee;  and  when  E  and 
P  are  on  opposite  sides  of  S  and  in  a  straight 
line  with  it,  then  P  is  at  its  apogee  (the  as¬ 
sumption  of  Ptolemy  in  Book  x).  Perigee 
and  apogee  are  here  spoken  of  relative  to 
the  epicycle  only  and  not  to  the  zodiacal 
anomaly.  Now,  if  P  and  Ey  when  on  the 
same  side  of  5,  moved  in  opposite  directions 
with  respect  to  each  other,  then  they  would 
move  in  opposite  directions  with  respect  to 
<S.  It  follows  that  they  would  move  in  the 
same  direction  with  respect  to  each  other  when  on  opposite  sides  of  S.  Hence 
the  fastest  movement  of  P  with  respect  to  E  would  be  at  the  perigee,  and  the 
slowest  at  the  apogee.  But  the  reverse  is  the  case  according  to  the  Ptolemaic 
theory  and  according  to  the  appearances.  Hence,  in  the  Copernican  theory, 
this  means  that  the  planet  moves  about  the  sun  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
earth. 

By  interchanging  P  and  E  the  reader  can  easily  prove  for  himself  that  the 
same  thing  holds  for  the  inner  planets.  Mercury  and  Venus.  Kepler  will  use 
these  facts  to  advance  a  dynamical  theory  of  the  planet^s  motions.  Since,  by 
the  observation  of  sun  spots,  the  sun  seems  to  whirl  on  its  axis  in  that  same  di¬ 
rection,  he  supposes  that  the  sun  thus  possesses  a  motor  virtue  which  whirls  the 
planets  about  it. 

Further,  it  must  be  remarked  that  for  the  outer  planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and 
Mars,  the  Ptolemaic  cycles  of  anomaly,  in  the  Copernican  system,  represent  the 


472 


PTOLEMY 


earth^s  movement  on  its  orbit  with  respect  to  the  sun.  To  see  this,  the  reader 
should  first  imagine  himself  on  the  sun.  The  planet  would  then  appear  to  move, 
about  the  ecliptic  more  or  less,  in  a  regular  motion  (except  for  the  minor  zodiacal 
anomalies).  This  would  be  the  planet’s  longitudinal  motion  with  respect  to  the 
sun.  If  now,  instead  of  standing  on  the  sun,  the  reader  imagines  himself  to  be  on 
the  earth  moving  around  the  sun,  on  an  orbit  well  within  the  orbit  of  the  planet, 
then,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  earth,  the  planet  will  appear  to  add  an  epi- 
cyclic  motion  to  its  regular  longitudinal  motion.  Thus,  for  the  outer  planets,  the 
cycles  of  anomaly  are,  according  to  the  Copernican  theory,  produced  by  the 
earth’s  motion  about  the  sun. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  earth’s  orbit  lies  outside  that  of  the  planet,  the  cycle 
of  anomaly,  on  the  contrary,  is  produced  by  the 
planet’s  own  motion  about  the  sun;  and  it  is  also 
immediately  evident  why  the  inner  planets,  Venus 
and  Mercury,  have  limited  elongations  from  the 
sun.  See  the  figure.  For,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  earth,  the  sun  and  planet  represent  a  system 
moving  about  the  earth.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
outer  planets  can  be  at  any  angular  distance  with 
respect  to  the  sun  as  seen  from  the  earth.  And  so, 
again,  this  distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of 
planets — those  whose  elongations  from  the  sun  are 
limited,  and  those  whose  elongations  are  not — is  ac¬ 
cidental  in  the  Ptolemaic  system  but  follows  necessarily  from  the  first  premises 
of  the  Copernican. 

Now,  once  the  Copernican  system  is  supposed,  it  is  immediately  possible  to 
deduce  from  the  Ptolemaic  numbers,  and  without  further  observations,  two 
things  which  are  extremely  important  for  Kepler  and  Newton:  (1)  the  periodic 
times  of  the  planets  about  the  sun  and  ^2)  the  relative  distances  of  the  planets 
from  the  sun. 

First,  we  can  now  deduce  the  periodic  times  of  the  planets  about  the  sun;  that 
is,  the  time  of  a  complete  longitudinal  revolution  of  the  planet  about  the  sun. 
Let  us  first  consider  an  inner  planet  such  as  Venus.  According  to  the  Ptolemaic 
numbers,  there  are  5  cycles  of  anomaly  for  Venus  in  nearly  8  solar  years;  that  is, 
Venus  appears  to  make  5  longitudinal  revolutions  about  the  sun  while  the  earth 
makes  nearly  8.  Therefore  Venus  either  moves  faster  or  slower  about  the  sun 
than  the  earth.  But  we  know  it  must  move  faster,  for  otherwise  it  would  have  to 
move  in  the  opposite  direction  on  the  epicycle  from  the  direction  of  the  epicycle’s 
movement  on  the  deferent  in  the  Ptolemaic  system.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the 
appearances;  therefore,  in  the  Copernican  hypothesis,  Venus  moves  about  the 
sun  at  an  angular  velocity  greater  than  that  of  the  earth.  Now,  if  from  the 
earth  Venus  appears  to  make  5  revolutions  about  the  sun  while  the  earth  makes 
nearly  8,  and  since  Venus  moves  faster  than  the  earth,  then  in  nearly  8  revolu¬ 
tions  of  the  earth,  Venus  has  overtaken  the  earth  exactly  5  times.  Hence  in 
nearly  8  revolutions  of  the  earth  about  the  sun,  or  in  nearly  8  solar  years,  Venus 
has  made  13  revolutions  about  the  sun.  The  periodic  time  of  Venus  about  the 
sun  is  therefore  very  nearly  ^3  of  a  solar  year  or,  roughly,  224i%3  days.  Like¬ 
wise,  Mercury  has  a  periodic  time  about  the  sun  of  very  nearly  ^^91  of  a  solar 
year  or,  roughly,  87^^91  days. 


APPENDIX  B 


473 


Next  let  us  consider  an  outer  planet  such  as  Mars.  Mars  makes  42  longitudinal 
revolutions  and  37  cycles  of  anomaly  in  very  nearly  79  solar  years.  In  other 
words,  since  the  cycles  of  anomaly  are  a  reflection  of  the  earth's  motion  with 
respect  to  the  sun,  Mars  makes  42  revolutions  about  the  sun  in  79  solar  years, 
while  the  earth  overtakes  Mars  37  times.  Therefore  the  periodic  time  of  Mars 
about  the  sun  is  very  nearly  of  a  solar  year  or  roughly  1  year  and  321^^2 
days  or  6873^4  days.  Likewise  Jupiter's  periodic  time  is  very  nearly  ll.%o  solar 
years  or  4,345  days.  And  Saturn's  periodic  time  is  very  nearly  29'^^oo  solar 
years,  or  10,750  days.  In  the  case  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  the  fractions  in  columns 
2  and  3  have  been  taken  into  account. 

Now,  since  the  earth  overtakes  Mars  37  times  while  Mars  makes  42  revolu¬ 
tions  about  the  sun,  it  is  evident  that  in  overtaking  Mars  37  times,  the  earth 
makes  37+42  revolutions  about  the  sun.  Hence,  while  in  the  Ptolemaic  system 
it  is  accidental  that  for  the  planets  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn  the  sum  of  the 
numbers  in  the  first  two  columns  is  equal  to  the  numbers  in  the  third,  on  the 
contrary  in  the  Copernican  system  this  follows  necessarily  from  the  funda¬ 
mental  premisses  of  the  system. 

Secondly,  we  can  find  the  ratio  of  the  mean  distances  of  the  different  planets 
from  the  sun.  For  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury  the  radius  of  the  epicycle 
represents  the  planet's  mean  distance  from  the  sun  as  compared  with  the 
radius  of  the  eccentric  which  represents  the  earth's  mean  distance  from  the 
sun.  Hence  the  mean  distances  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  respectively  433^ 
and  223^  to  the  earth's  distance  of  60.  In  the  case  of  the  other  planets,  how¬ 
ever,  the  epicycle's  radius  represents  the  earth's  mean  distance  from  the  sun 
as  compared  with  the  eccentric's  radius  which  represents  the  planet's  mean 
distance.  Thus  the  mean  distance  of  Mars  from  the  sun  is  60  to  the  earth's 
393^;  of  Jupiter,  60  to  113^;  and  of  Saturn,  60  to  the  earth's  63^. 

We  can  now  present  a  table  of  the  periodic  times  and  relative  mean  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  sun,  the  earth  now  being  considered  a  planet  instead  of  the  sun: 


Planets 

Periodic  Times 

Distances  from  Sun 

Saturn 

10,750 

553.84 

Jupiter 

4,345 

313.04 

Mars 

687 

91.14 

Earth 

365.25 

60.00 

Venus 

225 

43.16 

Mercury 

88 

22.50 

The  mean  distances  of  the  outer  planets  are  here  easily  deduced  from  the 
formula  in  the  case  of  Mars, 

60  :  393^  : :  X  :  60; 

and  mutatis  mutandis  for  the  others. 

For  Kepler,  these  numbers  must  have  some  unifying  relationship,  since  it  is 


474 


PTOLEMY 


not  sufficient  for  numbers  merely  to  save  the  appearances.  Hence  in  his  first 
work,  The  Cosmographical  Mystery^  he  shows  that  these  mean  distances  are 
in  the  ratio  of  the  radii  of  the  spheres  inscribing  and  circumscribing  the  five 
regular  solids  of  Plato  and  Euclid,  if  the  solids  are  placed  one  within  another, 
from  the  outside  inwards  (in  the  order  of  cube,  tetrahedron,  dodecahedron, 
icosahedron,  octohedron)  and  if  the  inscribed  sphere  of  one  becomes  the 
circumscribed  sphere  of  the  next. 

This  theory  fits  quite  well  except  for  the  earth  which  lies  on  the  sphere 
inscribed  in  the  dodecahedron  and  circumscribed  about  the  icosahedron. 
Moreover,  the  periodic  times  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  string-lengths  of  important 
musical  harmonies,  if  they  are  properly  considered,  as  demonstrated  in  the 
treatise  On  the  Harmonies  of  the  Worlds  where  even  the  eccentricities  of  the 
orbits  are  shown  to  serve  the  harmonious  whole.  These  eccentricities  manifest 
themselves  in  the  numbers  of  column  6  of  the  first  table.  If,  then,  the  dis¬ 
tances  and  times  were  the  ones  a  function  of  the  others  in  terms  of  some  in¬ 
telligible  law,  the  deviation  of  the  earth  would  be  mathematically  necessary 
for  the  harmony  of  the  whole.  And  this  deviation  would  be  a  real  necessity, 
tolerated  only  in  view  of  the  greater  harmony  achieved,  as  in  the  Timaeus, 
This  is  exactly  the  view  of  Kepler  in  The  Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy , 
Book  IV.  It  is  here  also  that  the  function  or  law  relating  the  distances  and 
times  is  finally  given. 

This  is  the  celebrated  Third  Law  of  Kepler  which  states  that  the  squares 
of  the  periodic  times  are  as  the  cubes  of  the  mean  distances.  Thus,  in  the 
case  of  the  earth  and  Mercury, 

(87)2  .  (365.25)2  :  :  (22.50)^  :  (60.00)^; 

and  this  is  very  nearly  true,  even  with  these  approximations.  This  law  was 
later  deduced  by  Newton  from  his  more  general  three  laws  and  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  an  inverse-square  field  of  force. 

We  have  now  finished  with  the  passage  from  Ptolemy ^s  geocentric  system 
to  Copernicus^  heliocentric  system  as  far  as  the  planetary  heliacal  anomalies 
are  concerned.  Both  of  these  systems  were  known  to  the  Greeks  of  the  times 
of  Hipparchus  and  Aristarchus.  The  originality  of  Ptolemy  seems  to  consist 
in  the  additional  anomalies  of  the  eccentric  and  equant.  We  can  therefore 
safely  assume  that  the  originality  of  Copernicus  lies  mainly  in  the  translation 
he  gives  of  these  in  his  own  system.  Since  the  epicycles  of  Ptolemy  have  dis¬ 
appeared  in  Copernicus^  system,  Copernicus  now  has  two  instruments,  the 
epicycle  and  the  eccentric,  with  which  to  take  care  of  the  two  remaining 
anomalies.  He  can  therefore  avoid  the  use  of  the  equant,  and  this,  in  his  eyes, 
is  the  greatest  merit  of  his  system. 

We  have  already  remarked  that,  in  the  case  of  the  outer  planets,  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  epicycle^s  centre  about  the  deferent  in  the  Ptolemaic  system  cor¬ 
responds  to  the  revolution  of  the  planet  about  the  mean  sun  in  the  Copernican; 
and  that  the  radius  of  the  deferent  corresponds  to  the  planet^s  mean  distance 
from  the  sun.  Hence,  in  periodic  time  and  radius,  the  orbit  of  the  epicycle’s 
centre  about  the  earth  in  the  Ptolemaic  system  is  exactly  that  of  the  planet 
about  the  mean  sun  in  the  Copernican,  if  no  account  is  taken  of  the  two  zo¬ 
diacal  anomalies.  The  problem  of  Copernicus,  therefore,  is  to  find  a  combina¬ 
tion  of  epicycle  and  eccentric  with  reference  to  the  mean  sun  which  will  be 
exactly  equivalent  to  Ptolemy’s  eccentric  and  equant  with  respect  to  the 


APPENDIX  B 


475 


eaxth.  The  following  is  the  solution  which  Copernicus  devised,  equivalent  in 
all  respects  save  one  which  did  not  seem  important  since  it  had  to  do  "with 
linear  distance  rather  than  angular  distance.  But  it  is  this  very  difference 
which  proved  the  undoing  of  the  Copernican  system  and  helped  to  bring 
about  the  Keplerian  revolution  with  its  elliptical  orbits,  the  so-called  First 
Law  of  Kepler. 

Consider,  first,  the  Ptolemaic  system  of  Mars  without  the  epicycle.  Let  A  be 
the  earth,  B  the  centre  of  the  eccentric,  C  the  centre  of  the  equant,  B  the  apogee, 
and  D  the  perigee.  Now  since 
AB  =  BC 

and 

AB  :  BE  :  60, 

we  can  let  AB  and  BC  be  each  1000  and 
BE  10,000  according  to  the  decimal  sys¬ 
tem  used  by  Copernicus.  Then 

11,000  AD  =  9,000; 

and,  if  we  draw  CF  perpendicular  to  DE, 
then  F  and  G  represent  the  positions  of 
the  epicycle^s  centre  at  the  quadrants  of 
the  periodic  time.  Then _ 

AF  =  V  (10,000^—1,000^) +2, 000^ 

since 

CF^=BF^—B(F. 

Now  consider  the  Copernican  equiva¬ 
lent.  Let  A'  be  the  mean  sun,  B'  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  eccentric,  and  let  the  radius  of  the  eccentric 

1  =  10,000 


and 

A'B'  =  ^  (2,000)  =  1500. 

Let  1  be  the  aphelion  and  3  the  peri¬ 
helion.  Let  the  planet  be  placed  on  an 
epicycle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  34 
(2,000)  or  500.  When  the  epicycle’s 
centre  is  at  the  aphelion  1,  let  the 
planet  be  at  the  perihelion  of  the  epi¬ 
cycle  E\  and  let  the  planet  move  on 
the  epicycle  in  the  same  direction  as 
the  epicycle  on  the  deferent  and  at 
the  same  angular  velocity,  so  that  at 
the  quadrants  and  at  the  half  of  the 
periodic  time  the  planet  occupies  the 
positions  F',  D',  and  G\  Then 
A'F'  =  11,000  A'D'  =  9,000 
just  as  in  the  Ptolemaic  system.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  at  the  quadrants  of  the 
periodic  time  2  and  4,  the  planet  occupies  the  positions  F'  and  G'  which  are  on 
the  perpendicular  to  E'D'  at  C'  which  is  exactly  2,000  from  A',  8,000  from 
F',  and  12,000  from  Z)',  just  as  in  the  Ptolemaic  C  is  2,000  from  A,  8,000 
from  F,  and  12,000  from  Z).  The  fact  that  the  position  of  C'  with  respect  to 


476 


PTOLEMY 


B'  is  different  from  that  of  C  with  respect  to  B  makes  no  difference,  for  B'  and 
B  have  no  immediate  physical  significance. 

But  the  distance 

A' B'=  10, 0002 +2, 0002, 

which  is  considerably  larger  than  the  corresponding  distance  AB  in  the  Ptole¬ 
maic  system.  The  orbit  of  the  planet  in  the  Copernican  system  bulges  at  the 
quadrants  of  the  periodic  time  compared  to  that  of  the  Ptolemaic.  The  appear¬ 
ances  here  favor  the  Ptolemaic  system  as  Kepler  points  out.  But  even  the 
Ptolemaic  system  does  not  draw  the  planet  in  enough  at  these  quadrants.  This 
is  one  of  the  dilemmas  which  led  Kepler  to  conjecture  an  elliptical  orbit  as 
worked  out  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars  and  later  in  the  Epitome.  It  is  easy  to 
see  from  the  first  table  why  Mars  should  be  the  planet  chosen.  For  of  all  the 
planets  it  has  the  largest  eccentricity,  and  the  discrepancies  would  be  most 
manifest. 

Hence,  in  the  case  of  the  outer  planets,  the  three  Ptolemaic  points,  (1)  the 
earth,  (2)  the  centre  of  the  eccentric,  and  (3)  the  centre  of  the  equant,  are  exact¬ 
ly  transformed  in  the  Keplerian  theory  into  (1)  the  sun  at  one  focus  of  the  el¬ 
lipse,  (2)  the  centre  of  the  ellipse,  and  (3)  the  other  focus  of  the  ellipse.  The 
numbers  remain  approximately  the  same.  But  a  new  definition  of  regular  motion 
is  needed:  it  must  be  supposed  that  the  planet  on  the  ellipse  sweeps  across  equal 
areas  in  equal  times  with  respect  to  the  sun  at  the  focus.  This  is  the  so-called 
Second  Law  of  Kepler.  All  this  is  worked  out  in  detail  and  with  the  proper  de¬ 
ductions  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars  and  in  the  Epitome. 

In  the  case  of  the  inner  planets,  Venus  and  Mercury,  the  Copernican  solution 
of  the  zodiacal  anomalies  is  necessarily  different,  for  here  the  epicycles  are  the 
orbits  of  the  planets  about  the  sun.  The  details  of  this  solution  are  worked  out 
in  the  latter  part  of  Book  V  of  the  treatise  on  The  Revolutions  of  the  Celestial 
Spheres. 

One  difficulty  remains  in  passing  from  the  Ptolemaic  to  the  Copernican 
system.  Unless  the  radius  of  the  earth^s  motion  about  the  sun  is  negligible 
with  respect  to  its  distance  to  the  fixed  stars,  the  sun,  abstraction  made  of  its 
eccentric  anomaly,  would  not  seem  to  move  regularly  with  respect  to  any  of 
the  fixed  stars  as  it  does  in  the  geocentric  theory  and  as  it  appears  to  do. 
Copernicus  gives  the  detail  of  this  proof  in  On  Revolutions  in,  15.  And  so  we 
are  not  surprised  that  Archimedes  reports  in  the  Sand-Reckoner  (translation 
of  Heath):  “But  Aristarchus  of  Samos  brought  out  a  book  consisting  of  some 
hypotheses,  in  which  the  premisses  lead  to  the  result  that  the  universe  is 
many  times  greater  than  that  now  so  called.  His  hypotheses  are  that  the 
fixed  stars  and  the  sun  remain  unmoved,  that  the  earth  revolves  about  the 
sun  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  the  sun  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  orbit, 
and  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  situated  about  the  same  centre  as  the 
sun,  is  so  great  that  the  circle  in  which  he  supposes  the  earth  to  revolve  bears 
such  a  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars  as  the  centre  of  the  sphere 
bears  to  its  surface/' 


APPENDIX  C 


477 


APPENDIX  C 

Since  this  understanding  of  the  Timaeus  is  followed  by  few  scholars,  we 
stop  to  outline  the  arguments  for  it.  Timaeus  says  first  that  the  planets  are 
placed  in  circles  the  ratios  of  whose  radii  (presumably)  are  as  1,  2,  3,  4,  8,  9, 
2.  .  .  .  With  respect  to  what  as  centre  these  circles  and  the  distances  are  taken 
and  which  planets  are  placed  in  which,  is  carefully  left  unexplained.  Their 
motions  are  then  described  for  an  observer  on  the  earth  (36d,  5 — ).  Later  the 
planets  are  named  and  placed  in  these  circles  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
earth,  but  no  connection  is  made  with  the  series  of  numbers: 

6  deos  Wr]€v  .  ,  .  ceXrjvrjv  ixev  ets  tov  wept  yrjv  wpcoTOVy  rj\eov  de  els  rbv  devTcaov  vires 
7^s  .  .  . 

Then  follow  Mercury  and  Venus  and  their  peculiar  motions  with  respect  to 
the  sun  as  seen  from  the  earth;  the  others  are  described  as  too  complicated 
to  give  here  (38c9-d8).  The  angular  speeds  of  the  different  planets  are  then 
given,  abstraction  made  of  their  daily  revolution  with  the  fixed  stars,  exactly 
contrary  to  Aristotle’s  account  in  the  Heavens  ii,  8  which  follows  the  completely 
geocentric  Eudoxean  hypothesis.  It  is  again  mentioned  that  the  sun  has  been 
placed  in  the  second  circle  relative  to  the  earth  as  a  measure  of  all  these  move¬ 
ments  : 

<f>(hs  b  Seos  avrjxl/ev  ev  rfj  irpos  yrjp  bevTpa  tojv  wepLobcjjv  (39a,  b). 

Now  follows  the  famous  passage  (40b8-d4)  which  for  the  first  time  gives 
in  an  absolute  point  of  reference: 

yrjv  be  rpocjybv  pev  ijperepav,  elWopevrjv  b^  irepl  tov  bia  iravrbs  irbXov  rerapevov 
ipuXaKa  Kal  brjpLOvpybv  vvktos  re  Kai  rjpepas  eprjxavijaaTO  .  .  .  , 

‘‘and  he  contrived  the  earth  revolving  about  the  pole  set  through  the  universe 
as  the  guardian  and  creator  of  night  and  day  ...”  We  here  translate  el\\opevr)v 
as  did  Aristotle,  the  earliest  commentator  on  the  passage,  in  the  Heavens,  ii,  13, 
14.  Then  follows  a  description  of  the  appearances  which  such  a  revolution 
of  the  earth  would  be  used  to  explain  the  change  of  the  planets,  their  pro¬ 
gressions  and  regressions  which,  for  the  planets  other  than  Mercury  and 
Venus,  are  explained  most  easily  by  the  swinging  of  the  earth  about  the  sun 
as  centre  of  the  universe.  For  in  the  heliocentric  theory  the  regressions  of  the 
outer  planets  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  are  only  the  reflections  of  the  earth’s 
motion  about  the  sun.  And  it  was  well  known  at  the  time  that  the  speeds  of 
all  the  planets  along  the  ecliptic,  their  regressions  and  stations,  are  tied  to 
their  oppositions  to  and  conjunctions  with  the  sun,  for  such  things  were  in¬ 
corporated  in  the  system  of  Eudoxus. 

If  the  sun  is  taken  as  centre,  then  it  is  extremely  easy  to  compute  the  relative 
distances  of  the  planets  from  the  sun  by  means  of  their  regressions.  This  is 
shown  in  Appendix  B  to  this  book.  The  ratios  of  the  distances  of  Mercury, 
Venus,  the  Earth,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  are  nearly  as  1,  2,  3,  4,  14,  25. 
Jupiter’s  14  is  the  only  one  far  off  from  the  series  assigned  by  Timaeus.  The 
moon  would  be  assigned  8  completely  without  justification  except  that  this 
series  is  fundamental  to  the  musical  scale  of  the  great  diatonic,  but  it  is 
very  unlikely  there  were  any  calculations  of  the  relative  distances  of  the 
sun  and  moon  at  that  time.  With  the  heliocentric  hypothesis  it  is  easy  to 


478  PTOLEMY 

assign  fairly  accurate  ratios;  it  is  impossible  to  do  so  in  a  purely  geocentric 
theory  like  Ptolemy^s  with  the  instruments  the  Greeks  possessed,  and  thal 
is  why,  perhaps,  no  such  numerical  assignment  is  made  in  the  Republic. 

We  can  now  get  the  force  of  that  strange  and  isolated  statement  in  the 
Laws  (vii,  822a)  that  each  planet^s  motion  is  one  and  simple  and  not  the  re¬ 
sultant  as  it  appears  of  many  different  motions.  This  is  only  possible  in  the 
heliocentric  theory  and  if  the  apparently  faster  planets  are  considered  the 
slower. 


Introduction, 

Symbols  and  Abbreviations, 
and  a  Short  Bibliography  to 
Copernicus  and  Kepler 


478 


v'HOhmax 

:-wp»!gn  fiur^y  i-atioa;  rt  is  iT.piiseiitAv  do  so  ii'  a  piit^y  g<!>ocfntric 

th»«r>-  like  Kolcmy  6  witlj  the  4-  tl»  Groets  poesea^/and  that 

U  why,  pexIiaDfs,  no  atich  uumenc&l  hi3ij?Bin<  at  ts  made  ki  the  Sdpuhfif. 

Vi  6  can  now  got  the  fofce  of  that  s^ir&iigK  wd  isolated  statemeiit  in  th* 
l&iffS  (vn,  o2^a>  t^i  each  planet -6  motion  -j  one  ami  aimple  end  not  the  i»- 
fridi^nt  it  *pp«ai*s  of  mtoy  differ^t  motiorj--.  This  is  -mly  poesiblc  in  thJ 
heliocentric  t^eorr  ftnd  if  the  apparent^  tVlor  pJaaets  are  conidered  the 
sloiver,  ■  "  . 

( '  (  '  '  ■  ‘  rts  *  f  j '  ij'iT**#/  ■* 


<noharjbo'i1fiI 

'  V  ■> 

^  fenobfir/sidclA  bns  <ilodin’(8 
V  oJ  ^dqiiTgoildiH  iiodS  b  bne 
•«*«.  <*  V  bfi£  ajJoimaqoD 


\  -  I  • 


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION 


Why  did  Copernicus  refrain  so  long  from  publishing  De  revolutionibus  orbium 
coelestium? 

Because,  at  least  in  part,  he  feared  that  at  a  time  of  ecclesiastical  jitteriness, 
which  arose  out  of  the  dissensions  between  Catholics  and  Protestants,  his  work 
might  occasion  sufficient  scandal  for  him  to  be  charged  with  impugning  the 
authority  of  the  Church  on  the  grounds  that  the  assertion  that  the  earth  was 
neither  at  rest  nor  at  the  centre  of  the  world  might  be  construed  as  contradicting 
one  possible  literal  interpretation  of  certain  passages  in  the  Bible.  But  he  does 
not  explicitly  foresee  that  anyone  would  be  scandalized  by  construing  as  a  loss 
to  man's  dignity  the  assertion  that  the  corporeal  heavens  do  not  revolve  around 
man's  domicile.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  scholastic  theological  thought  man 
was  a  rather  humble  creature:  the  highest  of  the  animals  but  the  lowest  of  the 
created  intellects,  one  whose  original  dignity  had  been  corrupted  by  original 
sin,  and  whose  present  little  dignity  arose  from  the  assumption  of  human  nature 
by  the  Word  of  God  in  the  Incarnation  and  not  from  any  supposed  revolution  of 
the  corporeal  heavens  about  man's  domicile. 

But  was  not  the  humanistic  effect  of  the  Copernican  revolution  actually  to  lower  the 
dignity  of  man  in  the  imaginations  of  menf 

Maybe  so.  But  do  not  forget  that  the  so-called  Copernican  revolution  may 
only  be  a  part  of  a  story  we  have  constructed  in  order  to  explain  why  we  no 
longer  understand  in  what  the  real  dignity  of  man  might  consist.  If  we  wish  to 
talk  poetically  and  humanistically,  we  may  still  ask  out  of  what  feeling  about 
man's  rank  in  the  universe  can  the  assertion  of  the  earth's  motion  be  said  to 
spring. 

How  shall  we  go  about  answering  that  question? 

First,  let  us  try  to  find  out  how  “true"  Copernicus  considered  the  mobility  of 
the  earth  to  be;  then,  let  us  look  into  the  workings  of  the  history  of  astronomy 
itself;  and,  thirdly,  the  relation  of  the  mobility  of  the  earth  to  certain  larger 
ideas  which  entered  into  the  speculation  of  the  times.  And  I  shall  leave  it  up  to 
you  to  apply  our  discussion  of  these  topics  to  the  burning  question  of  the  dignity 
of  man. 

Will  you  first  say  something  about  what  the  job  of  an  astronomer  is? 

Let  us  define  the  job  of  the  astronomer  in  the  classical  phrase  as  “saving  the 
appearances"  of  the  celestial  movements.  Now  we  may  distinguish  two  sides  to 
saving  the  appearances.  First,  an  astronomical  theory  must  “save"  in  the  sense 
of  “preserve" — that  is  to  say,  it  must  not  deny  any  of  the  apparent  celestial 
movements  as  appearances,  and  in  this  bare  sense,  it  might  merely  comprise  a 
record  of  observed  positions  of  the  planets.  But,  if  that  were  all,  it  would  not  be 

481 


482 


taking  into  account  all  the  apparent  movements  but  would  be  merely  including 
past  movements  and  leaving  out  future  movements  and  thus,  in  order  to  take 
into  account  all  the  apparent  movements,  it  must  be  able  to  predict  apparent 
movements  in  the  future  from  those  observed  in  the  past.  But  in  order  to  be 
able  to  look  backwards  and  forwards  beyond  recorded  positions  of  the  planets, 
it  must  arrange  the  celestial  movements  in  a  pattern  of  orderly  recurrence.  And 
by  setting  up  this  pattern  of  order,  it  saves  the  appearances  in  a  second  sense;  I 
mean  to  say,  that  it  gives  them  salvation,  as  it  were,  by  making  them  intelligible 
and  by  explicating  them  in  terms  of  a  permanent  order. 

Does  Copernicus  lay  down  any  general  rules  or  principles  as  to  how  appearances 
must  best  he  saved? 

He  talks  as  if  the  principle  of  intelligibility  and  order  can  be  fulfilled  only  if 
the  astronomer  takes  the  movements  of  the  celestial  bodies  to  be  regular,  circu¬ 
lar,  everlasting,  or  compounded  out  of  circular  movements;  that  is  to  say,  in 
case  the  moving  planetary  body  does  not  appear  to  describe  a  perfect  circle,  its 
path  must  be  reconstructed  as  the  resultant  of  a  configuration  of  purely  circular 
movements,  whereof  in  any  given  circle  equal  arcs  are  traversed  in  equal  times. 
Those  are  the  general  limits  within  which  there  is  a  field  free  for  the  further 
delimitations  demanded  by  given  apparent  movements.  That  is  to  say,  the  mov¬ 
ing  circles  which  combine  with  one  another  may  be  homocentric  (circles  of  equal 
radii  and  of  the  same  centre  but  of  different  axes  of  revolution),  or  eccentric 
(circles  or  equal  radii  but  of  different  centres),  or  epicyclical  (where  the  centre 
of  one  circle  is  located  on  the  circumference  of  another),  or  related  according  to 
any  number  of  permutations  and  combinations  of  those  elements. 

Now,  the  formulation  of  those  general  limits  has  been  called  classically  by  the 
name  of  ^^axioms^^  or  ^ ^principles, and  the  further  determinations  within  those 
limits  by  the  name  of  ^ ^hypotheses.”  As  Copernicus  always  employs  the  term 
principia  in  conjunction  with  hypotheses  and  as  he  refers  to  the  proposition  that 
the  movements  of  the  celestial  bodies  are  regular  and  circular  as  an  axiom,  I 
shall  employ  the  term  ‘^axiom”  to  denote  the  formulation  of  the  limiting  con¬ 
ditions  of  intelligible  order.  But  he  clearly  uses  the  term  ^^hypothesis”  to  signify 
any  determination  made  within  the  field  delimited  by  the  axiom,  in  order  to  ex¬ 
plain  given  apparent  movements  and  to  provide  a  geometric  basis  for  computa¬ 
tion  and  prediction. 

How  true  does  Copernicus  consider  the  axioms  and  hypotheses  to  he? 

He  argues  at  some  length  to  the  effect  that  the  state  of  affairs  defined  by  the 
axiom  of  regular  and  circular  movement  must  really  exist  in  the  heavens  and 
that  the  mind  would  shudder  at  any  other  supposition. 

Now  an  hypothesis  must  fulfil  two  conditions:  first,  it  must  conform  to  the 
axiom;  and  second,  it  must  underlie  particular  propositions  about  the  combina¬ 
tion  of  regular,  circular  movements  and  the  planetary  tables.  That  is  to  say,  it 
further  delimits  the  ground  covered  by  the  axiom;  for  example,  the  generality  of 
regular  circular  movement  may,  in  a  given, case,  be  further  determined  as  move¬ 
ment  on  the  second  epicycle  of  an  eccentric  circle,  where  the  magnitudes  of  the 
circles  and  directions  and  periods  of  the  movements  are  given;  and  by  this  de¬ 
limitation  the  hypothesis  makes  possible  the  accurate  prediction  of  particular 
movements.  Thus  within  the  single  field  of  the  axiom  there  is  room  for  many 


483 


equivalent  or  alternative  hypotheses:  these  hypotheses  are  equivalent  in  that 
the  same  set  of  appearances  may  be  saved  formally  just  as  well  by  one  hypothe¬ 
sis  as  by  another;  for  example,  an  epicycle  on  a  homocentric  circle  or  an  eccentric 
circle  whose  eccentricity  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  epicycle  may  be  the  geo¬ 
metric  formal  causes  which  account  for  the  same  apparent  movement;  they  are 
alternative  in  the  sense  that,  if  interpreted  physically,  in  terms  of  solid  circles  or 
something  else  necessary  for  the  mechanical  explanation  of  the  phenomena  by 
efficient  causes  (in  contradistinction  to  the  geometric  explanation  through 
formal  causes),  the  two  configurations  of  circles  cannot  both  exist  in  the  heav¬ 
ens,  for  example,  a  planet  cannot  wheel  around  on  the  rim  of  an  epicycle  revolv¬ 
ing  on  an  homocentric  at  the  same  time  that  it  wheels  around  on  the  rim  of  a 
rotating  eccentric,  even  if  the  path  described  in  space  by  the  planet  affixed  to 
the  epicycle  coincide  with  the  circumference  of  the  eccentric  circle. 

Now,  just  as  Copernicus  regarded  the  axiom  of  regular  circular  movement  as 
designating  a  reality  in  the  heavens,  so  too  he  regarded  alternative  hypotheses 
not  merely  as  devices  for  prediction,  whereof  the  one  or  the  other  might  be  rel¬ 
atively  more  convenient  for  use  in  constructing  planetary  tables,  but  as  desig¬ 
nating  real  possibilities  within  the  field  of  physical  actuality  defined  by  the 
axiom — although,  as  he  admits,  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  determine,  in  a 
given  case,  whether  it  is  eccentric  or  epicycle  which  really  exists  in  the  heavens. 

Now,  what  about  the  mobility  of  the  earth? 

Ptolemy  had  remarked  that  although  it  would  be  possible  to  save  the  ap¬ 
pearances  by  treating  the  earth  as  if  it  v/ere  in  motion  but  that  such  a  supposi¬ 
tion  would  be  no  more  than  a  convenient  device  for  computation,  since  Aris- 
totle^s  cosmology  demanded  an  unmoving  earth  at  the  centre  of  the  world;  he 
preferred  to  make  the  supposition  which  w^ould  be  physically  true  in  the  light  of 
the  Aristotelian  analysis. 

Osiander^s  unauthorized  preface  to  De  revolutionibus  tries  to  reduce  the  mo¬ 
bility  of  the  earth  to  a  point  of  mere  convenience  in  constructing  tables  of  move¬ 
ments;  but  that  attempt  is  clearly  at  variance  with  the  intentions  of  the  author 
as  exhibited  in  the  body  of  the  text  itself.  For  if  Copernicus  had  looked  upon  the 
mobility  of  the  earth  merely  as  a  fiction  useful  as  a  computing  device,  he  would 
have  had,  on  the  outside,  no  reason  to  fear  that  his  book  would  occasion  a  scan¬ 
dal;  and,  on  the  inside,  no  reason  for  composing  arguments  on  behalf  of  the 
natural  possibility  of  the  movement  of  the  earth. 

Then,  is  the  movement  of  the  earth  to  be  regarded  as  the  one  of  two  hypotheses  desig¬ 
nating  alternative  real  possibilities  which  is  chosen,  say,  for  the  sake  of  convenience? 
That  is  to  say,  supposing  the  movement  of  the  earth  is  really  possible,  does  Coper¬ 
nicus  find  it  hard  to  determine  whether  it  is  actually  the  case  in  the  heavens? 

No.  Copernicus  looked  upon  it  as  more  certain  than  that.  For  he  appears  to 
find  the  astronomical  consequences  following  from  the  supposition  of  the  mo¬ 
bility  of  the  earth  sufficiently  weighty  to  place  it  in  the  same  order  of  truth  as 
the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  since  he  insinuates  that  his  opponents  are  to  be 
classed  with  Lactantius,  who  had  denied  that  there  were  antipodes. 


484 

Then  if  Copernicus  regarded  the  motion  of  the  earth  as  certain,  why  did  he  refer  to  it 
as  an  hypothesis? 

Because  it  underlies  all  his  other  hypotheses,  as  he  indicates  in  speaking  of  the 
movement  of  the  earth  as  a  principium  and  hypothesis — a  starting  point  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  which  he  maps  out  his  hypotheses  as  to  the  given  apparent  movements 
of  other  bodies  besides  the  earth.  The  application  of  the  term  “hypothesis’^  sig¬ 
nifies  not  that  the  motion  of  the  earth  is  advanced  merely  as  a  tentative  pro¬ 
posal  to  be  taken  or  left  but  that  it  forms  an  underlying  principle  from  which 
further  determinations  of  celestial  movements  may  be  deduced. 

Why  did  time  wait  so  long  for  a  man  to  declare  that  the  earth  was  in  movement? 

That  is  not  wholly  the  case.  The  school  of  Pythagoras  had  held  that  the  earth 
as  well  as  the  sun  were  in  motion  around  the  central  fire.  Herakleides  of  Pontus, 
who  may  have  studied  under  Plato,  taught  the  daily  rotation  of  the  earth,  and 
Aristarchus  of  Samos,  who  studied  under  a  student  of  a  student  of  Aristotle’s, 
suggested  that  the  annual  movement  as  well,  belonged  to  the  earth  and  not  to 
the  sun.  And  some  early  Renaissance  philosophers,  of  whom  I  shall  speak  later, 
also  imputed  movement  to  the  earth  in  various  ways.  But  none  of  these  men 
used  that  supposition  as  a  starting  point  for  giving  a  detailed  and  systematic 
account  of  the  apparent  celestial  movements. 

Why  did  not  Ptolemy  himself  do  so? 

Because,  as  I  have  said,  the  supposition  of  the  earth’s  motion  was  contrary  to 
the  conclusions  of  Aristotelian  physics.  Now  Aristotelian  cosmology  might  be 
termed  an  hypothetical  construction  designed,  among  other  reasons,  to  save  the 
appearances  given  by  the  following  simple  experiment:  if  you  light  a  fire,  the 
flame  rises  upwards  through  the  air;  and  if  you  shake  earth,  air,  and  water  to¬ 
gether  in  a  closed  container  and  then  allow  them  to  settle,  the  air  will  rise  in 
bubbles  to  the  surface  and  the  earth  will  sink  to  the  bottom.  Therefore  the 
earth,  as  the  heaviest  element,  will  always  be  at  the  bottom  of  things,  or,  in  a 
spherical  cosmos,  at  the  centre,  which  is  the  earth’s  natural  place,  just  as  the 
elements  of  water,  air,  and  fire  belong  to  concentric  spheres  arranged  around  the 
earth.  Now  since  the  earth  is  in  its  natural  place,  it  is  in  possession  of  its  end, 
and  therefore  there  is  no  reason  for  it  to  move,  either  by  rotating  or  in  any  other 
fashion;  while  conversely,  the  stars,  the  sun,  and  the  five  planets  (which  are  un¬ 
changeable  except  with  respect  to  place)  attain  certain  natural  ends  by  their 
diurnal  and  other  movements. 

The  general  outlines  of  Aristotelian  cosmology  were  acceptable  to  Ptolemy  as 
a  framework  within  which  to  work  out  a  detailed  account  of  the  movements  of 
the  celestial  bodies,  because  Aristotle’s  physics  on  the  whole  was  more  sophis¬ 
ticated  than  that  of  the  atomists  and  was  more  fully  elaborated  and  less  oracular 
in  statement  than  Plato’s  physics  (in,  say,  the  Timaeus,  which  ^yas  itself  perhaps 
even  more  sophisticated  than  Aristotle’s  in  its  grasp  of  fundamental  problems). 
Ptolemaic  astronomy  however  differed  specifically  from  the  Aristotelian  in  that 
Aristotle  constructed  an  elaborate  system  (based  on  that  of  Eudoxus,  Plato’s 
pupil)  of  many  solid  spheres  having  the  same  centre  but  different  axes  of  rota¬ 
tion  in  order  to  account  both  geometrically  and  mechanically  for  the  apparent 
celestial  movements,  while  Ptolemy,  employing  systems  of  circles  on  circles  and 
circles  off  centre,  left  it  doubtful  as  to  whether  these  epicycles  and  eccentrics. 


485 

were  to  be  accorded  a  physical  and  mechanical  interpretation  as  well  as  the 
geometrical,  with  respect  to  saving  the  phenomena. 

Do  you  want  to  say  something  about  the  history  of  astronomy  between  Ptolemy  and 
Copernicus? 

Most  of  the  astronomers  of  Islam  were  more  concerned  ^vith  the  problem  of 
efficient  causation  than  Ptolemy  had  been  in  the  Syntaxis  (which  was  translated 
into  Arabic  about  a.d.  820),  and  they  endeavored  to  reformulate  any  plane  ge¬ 
ometry  of  planetary  motions  as  the  projection  on  a  plane  of  the  movements  of  a 
system  of  spheres.  Thus  A1  Kaswini,  Abu’l  Faraj,  and  A1  Jagmini — three  as¬ 
tronomers  probably  of  the  thirteenth  century — would  transform  an  epicycle  on 
a  homocentric  into  an  epicyclic  sphere  between  two  homocentric  crystalline 
spheres,  which  was  tangent  to  the  inner  surface  of  the  outer  and  to  the  outer  sur¬ 
face  of  the  inner  sphere  and  which  rolled  around  within  their  space  in  between — 
with  further  permutations  and  combinations  of  eccentric,  epicyclic,  and  homo¬ 
centric  spheres  for  apparent  movements  of  greater  irregularity. 

In  similar  fashion,  A1  Betrugi,  an  astronomer  of  the  twelfth  century,  tried  to 
renovate  the  homocentric  spheres  of  Aristotle  and  Eudoxus  so  as  to  take  care  of 
the  irregularities  in  celestial  movements  which  had  made  their  appearance  to 
observers  since  the  time  of  Aristotle.  And  in  the  thirteenth  century  a  great  and 
very  ingenious  astronomer,  A1  Tusi,  constructed  a  system  of  spheres,  within 
which  a  single  configuration  would  involve  two  homocentric  spheres  with  an 
episphere  in  between  and  a  series  of  spheres  internally  tangent  within  the  epi- 
sphere.  But  as  far  as  formal  causes  go;  A1  Betrugi^s  system  was  not  better  at 
saving  the  appearances  than  Ptolemy’s;  nor  was  A1  Tusi’s  more  intrinsically 
simple  than  Ptolemy’s. 

The  important  astronomers  of  Christendom  at  first  followed  closely  after 
Ptolemy  but  with  an  eye  on  the  astronomers  of  Islam.  The  Syntaxis  was  trans¬ 
lated  from  the  Arabic  into  Latin  by  Gerard  of  Cremona  in  1175.  Amateurs  at 
astronomy  were  more  inclined  than  professionals  to  play  with  the  supposition 
that  the  sun  was  at  the  center  of  some  planetary  movements  or  that  the  earth 
was  in  motion.  The  encyclopedist  Martianus  Capella,  in  the  Wedding  of  Philol¬ 
ogy  and  Mercury j  had  placed  the  orbits  of  Venus  and  Mercury  around  the  sun, 
and  in  the  ninth  century,  John  Scot  Erigena,  the  great  neo-Platonist  theologian, 
extended  this  heliocentricity  to  Jupiter  and  Mars  as  well. 

In  the  fifteenth  century  theological  reasons  led  Nicholas,  Cardinal  of  Cues,  to 
assert  that  the  world,  although  not  infinite,  was  without  centre  or  circumference 
and  that  consequently  everything  in  the  world  participated  in  motion  to  some 
extent.  In  On  Learned  Ignorance  he  goes  no  further  than  to  suggest  that  the 
earth  has  some  movement  of  rotation  but  none  of  translation;  but  a  note  of  his 
on  the  fly-leaf  of  another  man’s  work  draws  a  fuller  sketch  of  a  system  of  solar 
and  terrestrial  motion,  as  follows:  there  is  a  general  proviso  that  there  are  no 
perfect  circles  described  by  bodies  or  absolutely  fixed  poles  of  rotation.  The 
appearances  of  the  diurnal  movement  are  saved  by  making  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  and  the  stars  revolve  from  east  to  west  twice  in  twenty-four  hours, 
and  the  earth  in  the  same  direction  once  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  apparent 
annual  movement  of  the  sun  is  accounted  for  by  two  hypotheses:  first,  it  lags 
slightly  behind  the  heavens  in  the  daily  rotation:  but  that  retardation  by  itself 
would  give  the  sun  merely  an  annual  motion  in  a  plane  identical  with  or  parallel 


486 


to  the  celestial  equator,  hence  there  is  need  of  some  other  movement  to  account 
for  the  oblique  direction  along  the  ecliptic.  Therefore,  secondly,  there  are  situ¬ 
ated  in  the  plane  of  the  equator  two  poles,  around  which  the  earth  revolves 
once  in  twenty-four  hours  (and  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  in  slightly  less  time, 
in  order,  unsuccessfully,  to  account  for  precession),  while  the  sun  is  on  a  small 
circle  about  23°  distant  from  one  of  the  poles  and  revolves  in  slightly  less  time 
than  the  earth  wherefrom  the  sun  thus  appears,  in  its  annual  passage  around 
the  heavens,  to  move  from  the  tropic  of  Cancer  to  the  tropic  of  Capricorn 
and  back  again.  Nicholas'  numbers  here  were  a  little  off,  as  he  made  the  sun's 
retardation  in  both  cases  equal  to  K64th  of  a  circle  instead  of  Although 

it  is  unlikely  that  Copernicus  was  acquainted  with  this  particular  theory,  that 
is  the  sort  of  thing  which  was  germinating  in  the  seed-bed  of  the  times  out  of 
which  Copernicus'  own  system  grew. 

A  younger  contemporary  of  the  Cardinal's,  George  Peurbach,  published  a 
highly  reputed  textbook.  New  Theories  of  the  Planets y  wherein  he  adapted  solid 
spheres  to  the  accepted  Ptolemaic  planetary  theory;  and  he  was  engaged  in  the 
search  for  Greek  manuscripts  of  Ptolemy,  as  the  available  translation  from  the 
Arabic  were  not  wholly  trustworthy.  It  was  not  until  ]515  that  the  twelfth- 
century  translation  of  Ptolemy's  Syntaxis  was  printed  for  the  first  time,  and  in 
1528  was  published  a  new  translation,  made  from  the  Greek  by  George  of  Tre- 
bizond;  and  finally  the  original,  together  with  Theo  of  Alexandria's  Commen¬ 
tary,  was  printed  at  Basle  in  1538.  A  pupil  of  Peurbach's,  John  Regiomontanus, 
collected  Greek  astronomical  manuscripts  in  Italy,  settled  in  Nuremberg,  where 
he  erected  an  observatory  and  started  a  printing  press,  and  completed  a  text¬ 
book  begun  by  Peurbach,  Epitome  of  Ptolemy^ s  Almagest.  Men  like  Peurbach 
and  Regimontanus  were  instrumental  in  keeping  alive  the  scientific  grammar, 
which  a  great  talent  like  that  of  Copernicus  had  to  have  before  him  in  order  to 
transform  it. 

In  the  third  decade  of  the  sixteenth  century,  just  before  the  publication  of 
De  revolutionibus,  were  printed  two  works  which  tried  to  renovate  systems  of 
homocentric  spheres,  namely  Fracastoro's  Homocentrica,  which  had  the  novelty 
of  employing  spheres  whose  axes  of  movement  were  situated  at  right  angles  to 
one  another  and  which  demanded  seventy-nine  spheres,  all  in  all,  in  order  to 
account  for  the  celestial  phenomena,  and  On  the  Movements  of  the  Celestial 
Bodies  according  to  Peripatetic  Principles  without  Eccentrics  and  Epicycles  by 
Giovanni  Amici,  a  brilliant  young  man,  who,  incidentally,  was  murdered  before 
he  was  thirty. 

But  by  now  the  unpublished  work  of  Copernicus  had  acquired  an  under¬ 
ground  reputation;  Celio  Calagnini,  once  a  soldier  of  fortune  and  now  a  cleric, 
who  had  visited  at  Cracow  in  1518,  composed  before  1524  a  highly  periphrastic 
essay  in  which  he  attempted  to  argue  that  all  the  apparent  movements  in  the 
heavens  could  be  saved  by  rotatory  movements  of  the  earth ! 

What  induced  Copernicus  himself  to  think  of  the  eartKs  being  in  motion? 

You  will  read  Copernicus'  own  answer  to  that  in  Book  i  of  De  revolutionibus^ 
insofar  as  it  was  occasioned  by  astronomical  considerations. 


487 

You  are  implying  that  it  was  occasioned  by  other  considerations  besides  the  astro¬ 
nomical? 

Yes.  For  in  any  given  age  distinct  arts  and  sciences  may  share  in  formal  pat¬ 
terns  which  are  not  the  peculiar  property  of  any  single  one  of  them.  Or  there 
may  be  a  certain  leading  idea  which  serves  to  organize  apparently  diverse  ma¬ 
terials:  I  speak  roughly,  but  consider  the  continuum  as  a  master-builder  idea 
which  has  received  varying  embodiments  in  modern  biology,  mathematics, 
physics,  psychology,  metaphysics,  and  the  novel;  or  the  modern  preoccupation 
with  time  from  Calvin's  theology  and  Galileo's  physics  to  Proust's  Remembrance 
of  Things  Past.  Sometimes  some  special  science  lays  claim  as  to  its  own  property 
to  the  discovery  and  anal3^sis  of  these  formal  patterns  or  leading  ideas,  and  sets 
up  rules  for  the  reduction  of  many  other  disciplines  to  some  single  one  which  is 
viewed  as  architectonic.  For  example,  the  Marxists  today  have  contrived  a 
method  of  exegesis  which  reads  poetry,  theology,  mathematics,  and  politics  as 
symbols  for  economic  realities,  just  at  St.  Augustine  saw  human  nature  as  made 
up  of  mirror-images  of  the  Trinity,  and  St.  Bonaventura  found  foot-prints  of  the 
Incarnation,  the  Christian  way  of  life,  and  the  beatific  vision  in  all  the  arts 
which  human  beings  practice.  Similarly,  the  Freudians  would  like  to  reduce  the 
world  that  man  constructs  for  himself  to  a  number  of  erotic  categories,  the  most 
justly  famous  of  which  is  the  Oedipus  complex. 

What  analogous  architectonic  idea  do  you  find  at  the  time  of  Copernicus? 

As  formulated  mythologically,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  microcosm  and  the 
macrocosm,  the  ^fiittle  world"  and  the  ‘^big  world."  Pico  della  Mirandola  tells 
the  story  of  it  as  follows:  ^^God  by  the  laws  of  his  hidden  wisdom  had  con¬ 
structed  the  world.  Creation  was  complete:  everything  was  filled  up;  all  things 
had  been  laid  out  in  the  highest,  the  lowest,  and  the  mean  orders.  He  had 
adorned  the  supercelestial  region  with  intelligences,  and  He  had  animated  the 
celestial  globes  with  immortal  souls  and  with  the  primal  animals.  But  now  that 
the  work  was  all  done,  the  Master-Builder  desired  some  creature  that  should 
contemplate  the  organization  of  the  created  world,  love  its  beauty,  and  wonder 
at  its  greatness.  But  there  was  nothing  left  among  the  archetypal  ideas  from 
which  He  could  form  a  new  sprout  nor  an3"thing  in  his  storehouses  which  He 
could  bestow  as  an  heritage  upon  this  new  son  nor  an  empty  judiciary  seat  where 
this  contemplator  of  the  universe  could  sit.  But  the  paternal  power  could  not 
fail  in  the  final  birth-throes,  as  if  worn  out  through  child-bearing;  wisdom,  in  a 
case  of  necessity,  could  not  be  at  a  loss  for  want  of  a  plan,  the  loving-kindness 
which  would  praise  liberality  in  others  could  not  be  forced  to  condemn  itself. 
Finally,  the  Master-Builder  decided  that  that  to  which  nothing  which  should  be 
its  very  own  could  be  given  should  be,  in  composite  fashion,  whatsoever  had  be¬ 
longed  individually  to  each  and  every  thing."  Therefore  He  made  man  to  be  a 
mirror  of  the  whole  universe,  a  creature  whose  nature  was  distinguished  from 
all  other  natures  by  being  limited  to  no  single  nature  but  embracing  all  natures 
in  the  world:  a  body  which  tends  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  a  growing 
vegetable  rooted  in  one  place,  an  animal  having  desire  and  local  movement,  and 
an  angel  uniting  contrary  forms  in  oneness  of  intuition. 


488 


I  can  see  how  man  may  be  regarded  poetically  as  a  small  world  which  mirrors  the 
great  world  of  which  he  is  a  part.  But  what  does  that  have  to  do  with  Copernicus? 

As  you  will  see,  Copernicus  substituted  the  daily  rotation  of  the  earth  for  the 
rotation  of  the  total  heavens,  made  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  depend  upon 
a  conical  revolution  of  the  axis  of  the  terrestrial  ecliptic  around  the  axis  of  the 
terrestrial  equator  (rather  than  upon  a  conical  revolution,  so  to  speak,  of  the 
axis  of  the  celestial  ecliptic  around  the  axis  of  the  celestial  equator),  and  trans¬ 
ferred  the  annual  revolution  from  the  sun  to  the  earth.  By  this  last  step  he  tele¬ 
scoped  into  one  circle  (viz.,  the  annual  orbit  of  the  earth)  five  planetary  circles 
(viz.,  the  eccentric  circles  of  Mercury  and  Venus  and  the  major  epicycles  of 
Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn).  Thus  the  Copernican  earth  is  to  the  Ptolemaic 
heavens  as  microcosm  is  to  macrocosm;  or,  to  keep  the  metaphor  sharp,  perhaps 
we  should  say  that  the  Copernican  earth  is  a  little  heaven,  or  microuranus,  while 
the  Ptolemaic  heavens  are  a  big  earth,  or  macroge.  If  you  choose  to  interpret 
either  system  literally,  you  may  read  the  other  as  a  mirror-symbol  of  the  first  by 
way  of  the  microcosm-macrocosm  transformation. 

Do  any  analogies  hold  between  Copernican  astronomy  and  any  other  sciences  of  the 
times? 

There  is  an  anology  between  Copernican  astronomy  and  the  analytic  geom¬ 
etry  developed  out  of  the  work  of  Descartes.  Or,  more  fully,  as  Copernicus  is  to 
Ptolemy,  so  is  analytic  to  the  synthetic  geometry  of  Euclid  or  Apollonius  of 
Perga. 

Now  Ptolemy,  as  you  have  seen,  built  up  separately  his  schemes  for  each  of 
the  planets  and  established  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  major  epicycle  and 
the  epicycle-bearing  circle  of  one  and  the  same  planet.  But,  on  his  own  grounds, 
he  had  no  way  of  determining  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  epicycle-bearing 
circle  of  one  planet  in  comparison  with  that  of  another,  and  therefore  no  way  of 
determining  intrinsically  the  distances  and  order  of  the  planets.  Later  on, 
Proclus — the  disciple  of  Plotinus  and  commentator  on  Plato  and  Euclid — pro¬ 
posed  the  rule  which  was  adopted  by  the  Moslem  and  Renaissance  astronomers, 
namely,  that,  if  the  order  of  the  planets  be  taken  according  to  the  speed  of  their 
revolutions,  then,  within  that  order,  their  relative  distances  should  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  making  the  apogee  of  the  nearest  planet  immediately  precede  the 
perigee  of  the  next  planet  and  so  on,  the  apogee  of  the  higher  immediately  fol¬ 
lowing  the  perigee  of  the  lower.  But  that  was  a  surmise  or  an  extrinsic  hypothe¬ 
sis.  However,  within  the  Ptolemaic  set-up,  it  was  remarkable  and  unexplained 
that  the  period  of  the  epicycle-bearing  circles  of  Mercury  and  Venus  should  be 
equal  to  a  year  and  the  sun  should  always  be  on  a  line  with  the  centre  of  the 
epicycle,  and  that  in  the  case  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  (within  any  cycle  of 
time  common  to  the  epicycle-bearing  circle  and  to  the  epicycle),  the  sum  of  the 
revolutions  of  the  two  circles  should  be  equal  to  the  number  of  solar  years,  the 
number  of  revolutions  of  the  sun  within  that  same  cycle  of  time. 

Now  Copernicus,  as  you  will  see  and  as  I  shall  not  explain  right  now,  inter¬ 
preted  as  mirror-images  of  the  earth’s  annual  movement  the  epicycle-bearing 
circles  of  Venus  and  Mercury  and  the  epicycles  of  the  upper  planets  (in  such 
fashion  that  the  difference  between  the  movement  of  an  upper  planet  on  its  epi¬ 
cycle  in  one  year  and  the  movement  on  the  epicycle-bearing  circle  is  redefined 
as  the  difference  between  the  earth’s  movement  and  the  planet’s  during  that 


489 


same  time).  In  this  way,  by  telescoping  five  circles  into  one,  he  set  up  an  hypoth¬ 
esis  which  should  underlie  the  Ptolemaic  hypotheses  and  from  it  was  able  to 
deduce  the  distances  of  the  planets  in  comparison  with  one  another. 

Similarly,  Apollonius  of  Perga  had  built  up  elaborate  demonstrations,  for 
example,  of  the  constructibility  of  conic  sections,  separate  and  distinct  demon¬ 
strations  for  the  circle,  parabola,  hyperbola,  and  ellipse,  which  analytic  geome¬ 
try  redefines  with  greater  symbolical  and  operational  simplicity,  in  the  general 
equation  of  the  second  degree: 

ax^  -f  bxy + cy  ^ + dx  -f  ey + f = 0 . 

That  is  to  say,  the  operational  unity  of  symbols  to  which  analytics  reduces  syn¬ 
thetic  Euclidean  geometry  is  like  the  notorious  Copernican  simplification  of 
Ptolemaic  hypotheses. 

Do  analogies  hold  between  Copernican  astronomy  and  anything  else  outside  the 
strict,  scientific  field? 

Yes,  for  his  astronomical  system  is  neo-classical,  in  a  way  that  the  tragedies 
of  Corneille  and  Racine  were  neo-classical  a  century  later.  For  Renaissance 
literary  critics  rigorously  interpreted  Aristotle^s  unity  of  action,  which  was 
merely  the  explicit  statement  of  a  property  which  would  be  found  in  any  good 
tragedy,  as  a  formal  rule  for  the  construction  of  a  plot,  and  from  it  deduced 
unity  of  time  and  unity  of  place.  Thus  they  transformed  a  generalization  about 
existing  tragedies  into  a  law  which  must  be  obeyed  by  all  future  tragedies  and 
an  insight  into  a  system. 

Similarly,  Copernicus  interpreted  the  axiom  of  regular  circular  motion  with  a 
neo-classical  rigor  that  Ptolemy  had  not  employed.  For  example,  in  his  lunar 
and  planetary  hypotheses,  Ptolemy  would  set  up  a  circle,  on  the  circumference 
of  which  regular  movement  took  place.  But  (to  state  the  simplest  case)  the  regu¬ 
larity  of  the  movement  would  be  measured,  not  according  as  equal  angles  at 
the  centre  measured  equal  times  but  according  as  equal  angles  around  some 
other  fixed  point  measured  equal  times;  that  is  to  say,  the  “centre  of  distance’’ 
was  not  the  same  as  the  “centre  of  regular  motion.”  Ptolemy  found  that  all 
right:  there  was  one  circle  on  whose  circumference  the  motion  took  place,  and 
another  circle  around  whose  centre  the  regularity  of  the  motion  could  be 
measured.  Hence  the  requirement  of  regular  and  circular  motion  was  fulfilled. 

But  Copernicus  argued  that  such  a  reading  of  the  axiom  destroyed  it  while 
purporting  to  save  it,  that  the  notion  of  regular,  circular  movement  was  paro¬ 
died  by  having  the  movement  on  one  circle  and  the  regularity  on  another,  and 
that  the  axiom  strictly  demanded  that  equality  of  distance  and  regularity  of 
motion  be  measured  on  one  circumference — or,  in  other  words,  that  the  circles 
of  distance  and  regular  movement  be  one  and  the  same. 

How  was  De  revolutionibus  received  by  the  men  of  the  times? 

People  were  divided  for  and  against  it.  Those  who  received  it  favorably  num¬ 
bered  astronomers  and  ecclesiastics;  those  who  received  it  unfavorably  num¬ 
bered  ecclesiastics  and  astronomers.  The  objections  raised  against  the  mobility 
of  the  earth  had  to  do  both  with  theology  and  with  natural  science.  One  hun¬ 
dred  years  or  more  earlier  all  theologians  would  have  been  more  sophisticated 
in  their  literal  interpretation  of  certain  parts  of  Scripture  (just  as  St.  Thomas 
Aquinas  had  remarked  that  analogical  arguments  raised  by  speculative  reason 


490 


for  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  were  of  no  greater  probability  than  the  epicycles 
and  eccentrics  of  Ptolemy)  and  would  not  have  found  the  motion  of  the  earth 
in  contradiction  with  Job^s  “who  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place  and  the  pil¬ 
lars  thereof  tremble/'  But  the  dissensions  between  Catholics  and  Protestants 
made  both  sects  fearful  of  any  scandal  which  might  appear  to  undermine  respect 
for  the  Church  of  the  Bible,  and  consequently  they  became  over-literal  in  their 
reading  of  Scripture  and  were  inclined  to  condemn  any  assertion  which  could 
be  construed  as  contradicting  any  literal  interpretation  of  any  passage  in  the 
Bible.  Luther  blustered  that  “the  fool  will  upset  the  whole  science  of  astron¬ 
omy,  but  as  the  Holy  Scripture  shows,  it  was  the  sun  and  not  the  earth  which 
Joshua  ordered  to  stand  still."  And  even  Melanchthon  condemned  Copernicus' 
opinion. 

Giordano  Bruno,  however,  the  ecclesiastical  reformer  and  philosopher,  'who  in 
1600  was  burned  at  the  stake  for  heresy,  in  his  cosmology  praised  Copernicus 
highly;  while  Diego  de  Stuniga,  a  doctor  of  divinity  of  the  University  of  Toledo, 
in  a  commentary  on  Job  interpreted  the  aforementioned  passage  in  the  light  of 
Copernican  astronomy.  But  in  1616  the  Inquisition  at  Rome  declared  the  as¬ 
sertion  of  the  earth's  motion  to  be  heretical,  and  the  Sacred  Congregation  sol¬ 
emnly  suspended  De  revolutionihus  and  Stuhiga's  commentary  “until  they 
should  be  corrected."  Copernicus'  book,  along  with  Kepler's  Epitome  and  Gali¬ 
leo's  Dialogue  on  the  Two  Chief  Systems  of  the  World  wherein  he  had  sophistically 
ignored  the  existence  of  Tycho  Brahe's  system,  were  not  removed  from  the  In¬ 
dex  until  1822. 

The  main  difficulty  raised  by  physicists  was  to  the  effect  that,  if  the  earth 
were  in  rotation,  then  falling  bodies  would  not  appear  to  describe  a  plumb-line 
but  some  other  curve  in  relation  to  the  merely  apparent  stillness  of  the  earth. 
Galileo  was  probably  the  first  experimenter  to  drop  a  stone  from  the  top  to  the 
foot  of  the  mast  of  a  moving  ship.  There  was  no  philosophic  solution  to  the  diffi¬ 
culty  before  Galilean  kinetics:  with  respect  to  a  short  fall  in  a  brief  time,  the 
motion  of  a  body  falling  to  the  earth  could  be  explained  by  analogy  with  the 
rectangle  of  movement  of  a  projectile,  where  the  rotation  of  the  earth  (as  if  the 
horizontal  component)  does  not  interfere  with  the  pull  of  gravity  towards  the 
centre  of  the  earth  (as  if  the  vertical  component), 

Tycho  Brahe,  nearly  as  great  an  astronomer  as  Copernicus  or  Kepler,  found 
unanswerable  the  objections  based  on  the  Scriptures  and  on  the  apparent  course 
of  falling  bodies;  but  approved  the  simplification  introduced  into  the  planetary 
theories  by  making  a  point  around  the  sun  the  centre  of  all  the  planets'  orbits. 
Accordingly,  he  adopted  the  Copernican  system  with  a  slight  revision:  he  cen¬ 
tred  all  the  planets  around  the  sun  but  kept  the  sun  revolving  round  the  earth, 
which  remained  motionless  at  the  centre  of  the  world.  Tycho's  main  work,  how¬ 
ever,  lay  less  in  the  construction  of  a  new  system  of  the  heavenly  motions  (for 
the  Tychonic  is  derived  by  a  simple  transformation  of  the  Copernican)  than  in 
taking  new  observations  in  order  to  determine  with  greater  accuracy  the  ap¬ 
parent  course  of  the  planets — and  it  was  out  of  Tycho's  observations  as  material 
that  Kepler  built  his  system. 

As  a  young  man,  Tycho  had  met  Pierre  de  la  Ramee,  professor  of  philosophy 
and  rhetoric  at  the  College  Royal  at  Paris,  who  had  been  intellectually  nursed 
in  scholasticism  but  ever  afterwards  was  a  violent  Orestes  towards  any  Aris¬ 
totelian  Clytemnaestra.  De  la  Ramfe,  who  thought  epicycles  and  eccentrics  too 


491 


arbitrary  a  way  of  saving  the  appearances,  demanded  an  “astronomy  without 
hypotheses.”  Tycho  pointed  out  to  him  the  unsophistication  of  his  demand,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  motions  would  always  need  to  be  represented  by  geometric  figures, 
and  the  simplest  astronomical  conception — that  of  a  recurrence  or  cycle  of 
movements,  without  which  no  science  would  be  possible — presupposes  some¬ 
thing  like  a  circle;  but  he  agreed  with  de  la  Ramee  that  some  other  figures  be¬ 
sides  the  epicycles  and  eccentrics  of  the  ancients  might  form  a  more  convenient 
or  more  beautiful  way  of  saving  the  appearances;  and  consequently  he  gathered 
together  his  “storehouse  of  observations”  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  making 
precise  the  eccentricities  and  the  number  of  epicycles,  but  also  for  the  sake  of 
any  revolutions  in  theory  which  they  might  make  possible. 

Among  scientists  who  were  not  primarily  astronomers  the  most  influential 
Corpernican  was  William  Gilbert,  a  physician  of  London,  who  in  1600  published 
On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies  and  on  the  Great  Magnet  the  Earthy  the 
first  great  treatise  on  magnetism. 

The  loadstone  or  natural  magnet,  he  argues,  is  of  the  same  nature  as  iron  or 
iron  ore.  The  attraction  subsisting  between  a  loadstone  and  iron  is  not  due 
merely  to  the  action  of  the  loadstone  but  is  the  joint  work  of  the  two.  The  force 
of  attraction,  or  “coition”  (as  he  prefers  to  call  it),  is  strongest  at  the  poles  of 
the  loadstone  but  is  present  throughout  its  whole  body,  since  a  needle  brought 
into  contact  with  a  loadstone  will  not  move  towards  a  pole,  although  it  will  turn 
until  it  is  directed  in  line  with  the  poles.  On  two  magnetized  iron  bodies  the 
force  of  coition  proceeds  from  unlike  pole  to  unlike  pole.  But  principally,  the 
loadstone  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  earth  and  is  but  a  part  of  the  earth  ho¬ 
mogeneous  with  the  whole ;  and  a  spherical  loadstone  is  a  little  earth,  or  microgej 
while  the  earth  itself  (which  possesses  magnetic  poles,  meridians,  and  equator) 
is  a  big  magnet  or  macromagnes — on  the  grounds  that  a  piece  of  iron  or  a  load¬ 
stone  behaves  in  the  same  way  towards  the  whole  earth  as  a  piece  of  iron  or 
small  loadstone  does  towards  a  larger  spherical  loadstone.  And  just  as  the  human 
soul  is  the  principle  which  gives  order  and  unity  to  the  various  powers  and  oper¬ 
ations  of  man,  so  the  magnetic  force  of  a  loadstone  is  like  a  soul  which  underlies 
the  diverse  magnetic  powers  of  coition  and  direction.  As  a  spherical  loadstone 
has  the  power  of  rotating  (as  witnessed  by  the  fact  that  it  can  rotate  around  the 
axis  of  a  meridian,  if  one  of  its  poles  faces  the  like  pole  on  another  loadstone), 
then  the  daily  rotation  of  the  earth  is  probably  due  to  its  magnetic  energy  and 
to  the  influence  of  the  sun;  and  more  universally  still,  all  the  planetary  motions 
may  be  due  to  magnetism.  Although  in  neither  case  does  he  give  a  detailed  ex¬ 
planation  as  to  how  celestial  movements  may  be  conditioned  magnetically,  yet 
he  is  here  giving  the  bare  suggestion  for  the  transformation  of  the  heavens  into 
a  macrogcy  which  Kepler  attempted  with  more  specificity  and  Newton  carried 
out  in  a  different  fashion. 

How  did  Kepler  conceive  of  the  task  of  saving  the  appearances? 

He  held  a  view  of  the  nature  of  empirical  science  which  is  not  fashionable  to¬ 
day,  nor  was  it  fashionable  among  his  contemporaries.  As  a  pious  Christian 
Kepler  believed  that  the  world  had  been  created  according  to  an  archetypal  plan 
in  the  intellect  of  God;  and,  as  a  philosopher,  he  held  that  the  human  mind  was 
adequate  to  comprehend  the  order  of  the  natural  world  by  observation  through 
the  senses  and  by  understanding;  and  that  this  order,  when  discovered  and 


492 

understood,  could  be  formulated  with  precision  and  certainty  in  a  deductive 
system  w'hose  governing  principle  would  be  that  nature  was  created  according 
to  an  archetypal  plan  which  was  itself  in  the  image  of  God. 

Did  he  not  affirm  with  dogmatic  extravagance  that  he  had  deduced  the  appearances 
a  priori  from  archetypal  principles? 

In  so  far  as  he  seems  to  say  that,  he  was  carried  away  more  by  poetic  enthu¬ 
siasm  than  by  unlicensed  dogmatism.  While  he  held  that  the  appearances  would 
ultimately  be  deducible  from  archetypal  principles,  he  laid  no  claim  to  having 
made  any  final  deductions.  He  calls  upon  any  one  to  improve  upon  his  work 
who  can  do  so.  His  own  deductions  are  designed  to  be  tentative  and  exemplary 
rather  than  final.  For  example,  in  searching  for  some  law  that  would  bind  to¬ 
gether  the  distances  of  the  planets,  after  a  series  of  trials  and  errors  he  hit  upon 
the  circumscribed  and  inscribed  spheres  of  the  five  regular  solids  as  a  measuring 
rod.  And  again,  after  many  trials  and  errors,  he  at  last  discerned  an  aspect  of 
the  planetary  movements  that  could  be  measured  by  the  ratios  of  musical  har¬ 
monies.  But  he  judged  that  insofar  as  his  particular  conclusions  were  true,  they 
must  fit  together  into  a  final  deductive  system.  And  he  himself  merely  strove  to 
build  up  what  should  be  a  logical  and  rhetorical  foreshadowing  of  the  same.  A 
reading  of  Book  v  of  the  Harmonies  will  make  all  that  clear. 

But  is  it  not  arbitrary  to  try  to  measure  the  distances  of  the  planets  according  to  the 
spheres  in  and  around  the  five  regular  solids  and  fantastic  to  apply  musical  ratios  to 
celestial  movements? 

In  what  way  are  the  spheres  of  the  five  solids  a  more  arbitrary  measuring  rod 
for  the  distances  of  the  planets  than  successive  increments  of  whole  numbers  as 
in  ‘‘Bode^s  Law,''  or  than  an  hyperbola  as  a  measuring-rod  for  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  volume  and  pressure  of  a  gas  under  constant  temperature? 

Similarly,  it  would  have  struck  Kepler  as  obscure  that  the  set  of  numbers 
which  measured  the  relative  lengths  of  harmonically  tuned  strings  should  be 
said  to  be  limited  to  them  alone. 

But  does  not  Kepler  also  pretend  to  account  for  the  number  of  the  planets  by  means 
of  the  five  solids?  What  would  he  say  about  the  planets  more  recently  discovered 
through  the  telescope? 

Well,  as  Peter  Johannides  aptly  remarked,  do  not  the  five  regular  solids  save 
the  appearances  of  all  the  primary  planets  which  are  visible  to  the  naked,  un¬ 
tutored  eye? 

Why  have  you  chosen  to  translate  these  particular  works? 

De  revolutionibus  orbium  caelestium  is  Copernicus'  major  and  almost  single 
work.  I  have  not  translated  his  CommentarioluSy  which  is  a  brief  sketch  of  his 
system,  written  at  an  earlier  date,  or  the  Letter  Against  Werner,  which  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  variation  in  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  because  these 
works  are  themselves  of  secondary  importance  and  are  already  available  in 
English. 

In  the  case  of  Kepler,  there  might  be  some  doubt  as  to  why  I  have  translated 
the  Epitomes  astronomiae  rather  than  the  Astronomia  nova,  and  a  part  of  the 
Epitomes  rather  than  the  whole.  Now  the  Astronomia  nova  is  a  work  designed 


493 


for  study  by  the  professional  astronomer — one  which  presupposes  in  the  reader 
a  technical  knowledge  of  astronomy  and  is,  so  to  speak,  built  directly  up  out  of 
observations  and  computations — while  the  Epitomes ^  as  written  for  the  educated 
amateur  as  well  as  for  the  practitioners,  comprehends  a  fuller  and  more  explicit 
account  of  the  elements  of  Keplerian  astronomy  and  is  less  wrapped  up  in  the 
interplay  of  observation  and  computation.  I  have  omitted  Books  i~iii,  because 
they  deal  merely  with  spherical  astronomy  (that  is  to  say,  the  phenomena  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  daily  rotation)  and  add  nothing  to  Ptolemy  and  Copernicus.  I 
have  omitted  Books  vi-vii  principally  for  reasons  of  space  and  time.  They  can, 
without  too  great  loss,  be  omitted,  because  they  are  subordinate  to  Books  iv 
and  V,  as  being  concerned  with  the  application  of  the  general  hypotheses  and 
calculus  established  in  Books  iv  and  v  to  the  specific  details  of  the  planetary 
movements.  I  have  also  included  Book  v  of  the  Harmonies  becuase  it  is  the  work 
which  Kepler  himself  set  most  store  by,  because  it  is  a  model  of  elegance  and 
dramatic  suspense  in  scientific  exposition,  because  it  contains  the  original  pres¬ 
entation  of  Kepler's  ^Third  law,”  because  its  discussion  of  the  “music  of  the 
spheres”  forms  a  needed  supplement  to,  and  explication  of,  parts  of  Book  iv  of 
the  Epitomes^  because  it  shows  most  clearly  the  role  that  Kepler  conceived  tech¬ 
nical  astronomy  to  play  in  a  complete  science  of  nature,  because  it  shows  very 
clearly  the  method  followed  by  Kepler  as  a  practising  astronomer,  and  because 
it  presents  a  system  of  mathematical  measurement  which  is  self-contained, 
speculative,  and  non-practical.  I  have  been  able  to  omit  Books  i-iv  of  the 
Harmonices  mundi  with  a  relatively  clear  conscience,  because  they  are  not  con¬ 
cerned  directly  with  astronomy. 

What  has  been  your  method  of  translating? 

There  are  two  methods  of  translating  which  I  have  employed  according  to 
the  topic  of  the  discourse  in  the  originals.  One,  in  the  case  of  expository  passages 
which  do  not  involve  numerical  computation  to  any  great  extent,  I  have  used  a 
straight  prose  and  have  not  been  concerned  if  I  stayed  very  close  to  the  syntax 
of  the  original.  For  while  the  job  of  a  translator  is  not  to  reconstruct  in  one 
language  the  word-patterns  of  another  but  to  put  across  into  the  new  language 
the  ideas  expressed  in  the  old,  still  only  a  presumptuous  translator  would  sup¬ 
pose  that  he  can  recover  all  the  interrelations  among  ideas  which  are  as  it  were 
co-signified  by  the  specific  syntax  of  the  original  statements:  therefore  a  certain 
strict  awkwardness  of  English  syntax  may  serve  to  roughen  too  smooth  a  flow 
of  words  and  thus  to  remind  the  hurrying  reader  that  there  are  relations  of  ideas 
that  elegance  must  gloss  over.  On  the  other  hand,  in  places  where  numerical 
computations  occur  at  length,  I  have  schematized  the  verbal  format  to  the  end 
that  “he  who  runs  may  read,”  which  is  the  manner  whereby  passages  of  com¬ 
putation  should  be  read. 

Are  there  any  sign-posts  so  that  the  reader ^  if  need  be^  can  check  the  translation 
against  the  original  text? 

The  pagination  of  the  originals  is  indicated  by  bracketed  numbers  within  the 
English  text.  In  the  cases  of  De  revolutionibus  and  Epitomes  Astronomiae  the 
page-numbers  are  those  of  the  first  editions,  while  in  the  case  of  Harmonices 
mundi  the  page-numbers  are  those  of  Frisch's  edition.  In  translating  explicit 
page-references  made  by  Kepler  himself  in  the  body  of  the  text,  I  have  used  the 


494 


term  folium  to  signify  that  the  page-number  refers  to  the  original  edition  and 
not  to  the  translation. 

In  conclusion,  I  should  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Mr.  Elliott  Carter, 
who  patiently  read  through  my  manuscript  translation  of  Book  v  of  The  Har¬ 
monies  of  the  World j  suggested  improvements  in  the  musical  terminology,  and 
liberally  placed  at  my  disposal  a  set  of  notes  on  Kepler^s  musical  system,  which 
are  incorporated  in  the  present  text ;  but  needless  to  say,  all  the  failings  of  the 
present  translation  are  my  own.  I  should  also  like  to  acknowledge  my  indebted¬ 
ness  to  Dr.  R.  Catesby  Taliaferro,  to  Dr.  George  Comenetz,  to  Dr.  Jacob  Klein, 
and  especially  to  Mr.  Peter  H.  Jackson  for  criticisms  and  suggestions  as  to  the 
revision  of  the  earlier  drafts  of  these  translations,  and  also  for  various  kinds  of 
labour  in  the  preparation  of  these  earlier  drafts,  which  were  published  in  mimeo¬ 
graphed  form  at  St.  John^s  College,  Annapolis,  in  1938-9,  to  Mrs.  Edward  F. 
Lathrop,  Mr.  Hirsh  Nadel,  Mr.  Lee  M.  Mace,  and  to  Mr.  Harvey  Dubinsky. 

C.  G.  Wallis 


Symbols  and  Abbreviations 

The  translator  here  appends  a  list  of  examples  of  symbols  and  abbreviations 
which  have  been  used  in  these  works: 


b  for  Saturn 
Ql  for  Jupiter 
cf  for  Mars 

T  for  Ram  (Aries) 
b'  for  Bull  (Taurus) 

K  for  Twins  (Gemini) 
@  for  Crab  (Cancer) 
Q  for  Lion  (Leo) 

TCP  for  Virgin  (Virgo) 


O  for  Earth 
9  for  Venus 
5  for  Mercury 

—  for  Balance  (Libra) 

TH  for  Scorpion  (Scorpio) 
for  Archer  (Sagittarius) 
for  Goat  (Capricornus) 

«»  for  Waterboy  (Aquarius) 
K  for  Fishes  (Pisces) 


sq.  AB  for  square  on  AB  > 

rect.  ABj  CD  for  rectangle  AR,  CD 
trgl.  for  triangle 
sect,  for  sector 

AB  :  CD  EF  :  GH  for  AB  has  to  CD  a  greater  ratio  than  EF  to  GH 
ch.  AB  for  chord  AB 

Y2  ch.  2  AB  for  one  half  the  chord  subtending  twice  arc  AB 
dmt.  sph.  for  diameter  of  the  sphere 

AB  gr.  circ.  sph.  for  arc  AB  on  the  great  circle  of  the  sphere 
AB  :  CD  =  AB  :  BC  comp.  BC  :  CD  for  the  ratio  of  AB  to  CD  is  equal  to  the 
ratio  of  AB  to  BC  compounded  with  the  ratio  of  BC  to  CD. 

AB  =  CD  for  AB  is  equal  to  CD 

AB  =CD  for  AB  is  approximately  equal  to  CD 

AB>CD  for  AB  is  not  less  than  CD 

add.  AB  =  Q%2'  for  addition-subtraction  AB  is  equal  to  6®42' 
add.  for  additive  addition-subtraction 
-add.  for  subtractive  addition-subtraction 


495 


5°10'12"  for  5  degrees  10  minutes  12  seconds  of  the  given  circle  of  360  degrees 
6p5'14"  for  6  degrees  5  minutes  14  seconds  of  the  given  diameter  (or  radius)  of 
60  degrees 

seg.  circ.  ABC  for  segment  ABC  of  the  circle 

ecc.  for  eccentricity 

rad.  ep.  for  radius  of  epicycle 

gnom.  ABC  for  gnomon  ABC 

comp,  area  ABC  for  composite  area  ABC 

sag.  AB  for  sagitta  AB 

Short  Bibliography  of  Copernicus  and  Kepler 

Nicolai  Copernici  Torinensis.  De  revolutionibus  orbium  coelestium,  Norimbergae, 
1543. 

Nicolai  Copernici  Torinensis.  Astronomia  instaurata.  Restiiuta  notisque  Ulus- 
trataj  opera  et  studio  D.  Nicolai  Mulerii.  Amstelrodami,  1617. 

Nicolai  Copernici  Torinensis.  De  Revolutionibus  Orbium  Caelestium.  Ex  auctoris 
autographo  recudi  curavit  Societas  Copernicana  Thorunensis.  Thoruni,  1873. 
Joanne  Kepplero.  Epitomes  Astronomiae  Copernicanae  Liber  Quartus.  Lentus  ad 
Danubium,  1620. 

Joanne  Kepplero.  Epitomes  Astronomiae  Copernicanae  Libri  F,  F7,  VII.  Fran- 
cofurti,  1621. 

Joannis  Kepleri  Opera  Omnia^  ed.  Dr.  Cl.  Frisch.  Volumen  V.  Harmonices 
Mundi  Libri  V.  Francofurti,  1864. 


Sldi  .iflWiboiiata/nA  .iiisUiM  ibIooiVI  Al 
wioS:»«)  x3.  wiiW-tO  &\r<b«oiUji<mSl  ^CI  .araa^nhoT  ioiaiixioO  ixilooiVI 

,f;T81  ^iiimodT  jbvn^t  (ys^qo-r^oUio 


V  /<?r  li\ii!  Vu^\rdii)  '  TO  /or  iSr-nrpio)  ^  j 

R  Jy‘i'  Tw  iiiji  '^»  f^fjFuinj^  ^  ^or  <\T  'h^r  ■  ! 

®  /rr  |  i 

^ '  r  {.lui'f-*)  I-  .  r..sv  L  I 

ftp  Vinr^j  {Vip|;f*;  3 


1^.  >4X/  for  ^iimrc  on  Ali 


X0CU  4b^  CD  Jot  r.i^u^iy^h  AB\  CD 

URL/t)r  t  ria?iglc 

a»ct  jiT  e^Xor  l^is9^^2 

.1 B  f  'D  EF  xGU  JrfT  4  to  CD 

ch.  AJl  Jnr  cliprd  -ifi 

ch.  2  ABf&r  ooe  half  ths  fw  ,/':-XJ 

iJi/i?..  isph.  A'^'-f^Winotcr  of  tbfc  -p’*  •  • 

AJj  sji’.  circ.  8i)h.  /  '.  w  AB  cai  <h<*  Rrejit  f'  f ;  v  f  .,<»  pr-hei 
AB  :pi>-.l/?  ^omp,  liC :  CDM  Uie  ("u.<  /,  //to  ( 

.■i.piitj-)  of  AB.  U><BC «;  jr,;3oCia<Je<l,%\ith  tlio  r^*i'•  '*/  '  *o  ( 

A  B  »  CD  f»r  .1^  aa2  w>  CO  ' 

AB  ^CD  ji.v.A  i>  b  wv-K-  J  U>  CD 

.  ‘.'••CO  foT  A  R  is  Ai  ~  v'^sk  CD 

/  *>' ^BniK^a.'U  ;  .  iJ*-J 
^'.>  fm  aoditjf’c  ■.■i<i;ii«*a-nt,i';j«jtic«i  -; 

r;d<i.  /(►r  <A>(>t97tc«(vo  sddit <  ;’->ir)btnic.Utti^ 


Nicolaus  Copernicus 
ON  THE  REVOLUTIONS  OF 
THE  HEAVENLY  SPHERES 


'ii 


» 


:  r 


V'  % 

k;';.  * 


f' 


I 


•  ..A* 
‘  »* 


I  j,i-' 


:v 


..I 


auDimsqoO  bubIodM 

"io  awoiTUJOvafl  sht  vio 

eaaaHaa  YawavAan  anx 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Nicolaus  Copernicus,  1473-1543 


Copernicus  was  born  February  19,  1473,  at 
Torun,  Poland,  the  youngest  of  the  four  chil¬ 
dren  of  a  prosperous  merchant.  Upon  the 
father^s  death  in  1484,  the  children  were  a- 
dopted  by  their  maternal  uncle,  Lucas  Watzel- 
rode,  a  priest  of  some  scholarly  attainments 
who  became  Bishop  of  Ermland  in  1489 ;  it  was 
decided  that  Nicolaus  should  be  trained  for  the 
church. 

At  the  University  of  Cracow,  which  he  en¬ 
tered  in  1491,  Copernicus  first  became  serious¬ 
ly  interested  in  mathematics.  He  studied  par¬ 
ticularly  with  Albert  Brudzewski,  the  author 
of  a  commentary  on  Peurbach’s  text-book  of 
Ptolemaic  astronomy,  and  the  leader  of  the 
humanist  faction  at  the  university.  From  him 
Copernicus  not  only  learned  mathematics  and 
astronomy,  but  also  acquired  an  attraction  for 
the  new  humanistic  studies.  He  left  Cracow  in 
1494,  without  taking  his  examinations  for  a 
degree. 

After  it  had  become  apparent  that  his  uncle 
would  provide  him  with  a  sinecure,  Copernicus 
went  to  Italy.  He  remained  there  from  1496  to 
1506  perfecting  his  education  in  many  different 
fields.  He  first  attended  the  University  of 
Bologna,  where  he  followed  the  course  in  canon 
law  as  a  preparation  for  administrative  work 
in  the  church.  But  mathematics  and  astron¬ 
omy  continued  to  be  his  particular  interest, 
and  he  became  closely  associated  with  Dome¬ 
nico  Maria  de  Novara,  a  Platonist  who  had 
detected  the  diminution  in  the  obliquity  of  the 
ecliptic  and  the  variation  in  latitude.  Although 
he  obtained  his  appointment  as  canon  of  the 
cathedral  of  Frauenburg  in  1497,  he  immedi¬ 
ately  obtained  a  leave  of  absence  to  continue 
his  studies.  In  the  jubilee  year  of  1500  he 
visited  Rome  and  lectured  on  mathematics. 
The  following  year  he  returned  to  Ermland 
and  obtained  an  extension  of  his  leave  of  ab¬ 
sence  so  that  he  might  study  medicine  at 
Padua.  Except  for  the  interval  in  1503  when  he 
completed  his  doctorate  in  canon  law  at  Fer¬ 
rara,  Copernicus  studied  from  1501  to  1505  in 


the  medical  school  at  Padua.  When  he  returned 
to  Poland  the  following  year,  he  was  not  only  a 
humanist  learned  in  Greek,  mathematics,  and 
astronomy,  but  also  a  jurist  and  a  physician. 

Copernicus  did  not  actively  assume  his  du¬ 
ties  as  a  canon  until  six  years  after  his  de¬ 
parture  from  Italy.  Until  1512  he  resided  at 
the  episcopal  palace  of  Heilsberg  as  physician 
to  his  uncle,  the  bishop.  Upon  the  death  of  his 
uncle  in  that  year  he  took  up  residence  as  a 
canon  of  the  rich  cathedral  of  Frauenburg  on 
the  Baltic.  Although  he  never  took  holy  orders, 
and  only  those  vows  necessary  for  his  office  as 
a  canon,  he  was  the  official  representative  of 
the  cathedral  chapter  in  the  many  disputes  in 
which  it  was  involved.  After  the  war  between 
Poland  and  the  Teutonic  Knights  from  1519  to 
1521,  he  planned  and  aided  the  reconstruction 
of  Ermland.  He  served  as  commissary  for  the 
diocese  of  Ermland,  and  his  medical  skill  was 
always  at  the  service  of  the  poor  and  frequent¬ 
ly  in  demand  by  the  rich.  In  1522  he  presented 
a  scheme  for  the  reform  of  the  currency  before 
the  Diet  of  Graudenz.  He  never  became  per¬ 
sonally  involved  in  the  conflicts  of  the  Refor¬ 
mation. 

While  engaged  in  many  practical  duties, 
Copernicus  continued  his  intellectual  pursuits. 
His  first  work,  published  in  1509,  was  a  Latin 
translation  of  the  fictitious  correspondence  of 
famous  men  written  by  Theophylact  Simocat- 
ta,  a  seventh-century  Byzantine  historian.  The 
introductory  poem  written  by  a  college  friend 
provided  the  first  public  praise  of  Copernicus 
as  an  astronomer,  who  “explores  the  rapid 
course  of  the  moon  and  the  changing  move¬ 
ments  of  the  fraternal  star  and  the  whole  fir¬ 
mament  with  the  planets. Copernicus  him¬ 
self  said  that  it  was  in  1506,  immediately  after 
his  return  from  Italy,  that  he  began  to  develop 
his  astronomical  system  and  to  write  it  down. 
The  astronomical  observations,  which  he  had 
begun  in  Italy,  were  continued  in  Poland,  par¬ 
ticularly  at  Frauenburg,  where  he  established 
an  observatory.  By  1514  his  reputation  as  an 


499 


500  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


astronomer  led  to  his  being  invited  by  the 
Lateran  Council  to  give  his  opinion  on  the  pro¬ 
posed  reform  of  the  calendar.  He  declined  on 
the  ground  that  the  movements  of  the  sun  and 
the  moon  had  not  yet  been  determined  with 
sufficient  accuracy.  Although  continually  mak¬ 
ing  observations  and  elaborating  his  own  doc¬ 
trine,  Copernicus  showed  great  reluctance  to 
publish  the  result  of  his  work.  His  Letter 
Against  Werner^  which  appeared  in  1524,  tried 
to  demolish  the  old  explanation  of  the  alleged 
variation  in  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes 
but  revealed  nothing  of  his  new  theory. 

It  was  not  until  1530  that  Copernicus  pro¬ 
vided  in  the  Commentariolus  a  preliminary  out¬ 
line  of  his  heliocentric  theory.  It  immediately 
attracted  great  attention.  At  Ptome,  Johann 
Albrecht  Widmanstadt  lectured  upon  the  new 
doctrine;  Pope  Clement  VII  gave  his  approval; 


Cardinal  Schonberg  entreated  the  author  to 
make  public  his  full  thought  upon  the  subject. 
In  the  spring  of  1539  Copernicus  was  visited  by 
Joachim  Rheticus,  a  protege  of  Melanchthon 
and  at  the  age  of  twenty-five  professor  of 
mathematics  at  the  University  of  Wittenberg. 
Rheticus  stayed  for  some  time,  studied  the  de¬ 
tails  of  Copernicus’  planetary  system,  and  in 
1540  composed  and  published,  with  Coper¬ 
nicus’  approval,  a  general  account  of  it  entitled 
Narratio  Prima.  At  length  Copernicus  was  pre¬ 
vailed  upon  by  his  friends  to  allow  Rheticus  to 
publish  the  De  revolutionihus  orhium  coelestium. 
Copernicus  lived  only  long  enough  to  witness 
its  appearance.  Towards  the  close  of  1542  he 
was  seized  with  apoplexy  and  paralysis;  on 
May  24, 1543,  an  advance  copy  of  his  work  was 
presented  to  him,  and  on  the  same  day  he  died. 
He  was  buried  in  the  Frauenburg  Cathedral. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note 

To  THE  Reader 

Preface  and  Dedication  to  Pope 

Paul  hi 

BOOK  ONE 

1.  The  World  Is  Spherical 

2.  The  Earth  Is  Spherical  Too 

3.  How  Land  and  Water  Make  Up  a 
Single  Globe 

4.  The  Movement  of  the  Celestial  Bodies 
Is  Regular 

5.  Does  the  Earth  Have  a  Circular 
Movement? 

6.  On  the  Immensity  of  the  Heavens 

7.  Why  the  Ancients  Thought  the  Earth 
Was  at  Rest 

8.  Answer  to  the  Aforesaid  Reasons 

9.  Whether  Many  Movements  Can  Be 
Attributed  to  the  Earth 

10.  On  the  Order  of  the  Celestial  Orbital 
Circles 

11.  A  Demonstration  of  the  Threefold 
Movement  of  the  Earth 

12.  On  the  Straight  Lines  in  a  Circle 
Tables  of  the  Chords  in  a  Circle 

13.  On  the  Sides  and  Angles  of  Plane  Rec¬ 
tilinear  Triangles 

14.  On  Spherical  Triangles 

BOOK  TWO 

1.  On  the  Circles  and  Their  Names 

2.  On  the  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic  and 
the  Distance  of  the  Tropics 

3.  On  the  Arcs  and  Angles  of  the  Inter¬ 
sections  of  the  Equator,  Ecliptic,  and 
Meridian 

Table  of  Declinations  of  the  Degrees 

of  the  Ecliptic 

Table  of  Right  Ascensions 

Table  of  the  Meridian  Angles 

4.  How  to  Determine  the  Declination 
and  Right  Ascension  of  Any  Star 
Whose  Latitude  and  Longitude  Have 
Been  Established 


5.  On  the  Sections  of  the  Horizon  565 

6.  What  the  Differences  Between  the 

Midday  Shadows  Are  566 

7.  How  the  Longest  Day,  the  Distance 

of  Rising,  and  the  Inclination  of  the 
Sphere  Are  Derived  From  One  An¬ 
other  568 

Tables  of  the  Difference  of  the  Ascen¬ 
sions  in  an  Oblique  Sphere  571 

8.  On  the  Hours  and  Parts  of  the  Day 

and  Night  576 

9.  On  the  Oblique  Ascension  of  the  Parts 

of  the  Ecliptic  576 

10.  On  the  Angle  of  Section  of  the  Eclip¬ 
tic  with  the  Horizon  577 

Table  of  the  Ascensions  of  the  Signs 

in  the  Revolution  of  the  Right  Sphere  579 
Tables  of  the  Ascensions  in  the  Ob¬ 
lique  Sphere  580 

Table  of  Angles  Made  by  the  Ecliptic 
with  the  Horizon  582 

11.  On  the  Use  of  These  Tables  583 

12.  On  the  Angles  and  Arcs  of  the  Circles 
WTiich  Pass  Through  the  Poles  of  the 
Horizon  and  Intersect  the  Same  Circle 

of  the  Ecliptic  583 

13.  On  the  Rising  and  Setting  of  the  Stars  584 

14.  On  Investigating  the  Positions  of  the 

Stars  585 

BOOK  THREE 

1.  On  the  Precessions  of  the  Solstices 

and  Equinoxes  622 

2.  History  of  the  Observations  Confirm¬ 

ing  the  Irregular  Precession  of  the 
Solstices  and  Equinoxes  623 

3.  The  Hypotheses  by  Means  of  Which 

the  Change  of  the  Equinoxes  and  of 
the  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic  and  the 
Equator  Are  Demonstrated  626 

4.  How  the  Reciprocal  IMovement  or 
Movement  of  Libration  Is  Composed 

of  Circular  Movements  628 

5.  Demonstration  of  the  Irregularity  of 

the  Equinoctial  Precession  and  the 
Obliquity  629 


499 

505 

506 

511 

511 

512 

513 

514 

516 

517 

518 

520 

521 

529 

532 

539 

543 

545 

557 

558 

559 

562 

563 

564 

564 


501 


502  COPERNICUS 

6.  On  the  Regular  Movements  of  the  Movement  Are  Unfolded 

Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  and  of  23.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Anomaly  of 


the  Inclination  of  the  Ecliptic  631 

Tables  of  Movement  of  the  Precession 
of  the  Equinoxes  634 

7.  What  the  Greatest  Difference  Is  Be¬ 

tween  the  Regular  and  the  Apparent 
Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  636 

8.  On  the  Particular  Differences  of  the 

Movements  and  the  Table  of  Them  638 
Additions -and -subtractions  of  Equi¬ 
noxes.  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic  639 

9.  On  the  Examination  and  Correction 

of  That  Which  Was  Set  Forth  Con¬ 
cerning  the  Precession  of  the  Equi¬ 
noxes  640 

10.  What  the  Greatest  Difference  Is  Be¬ 

tween  the  Intersections  of  the  Equa¬ 
tor  and  the  Ecliptic  642 

11.  On  Determining  the  Positions  of  the 

Regular  Movements  of  the  Equinoxes 
and  of  the  Anomaly  643 

12.  On  the  Computation  of  the  Precession 

of  the  Spring  Equinox  and  the  Ob¬ 
liquity  644 

13.  On  the  Magnitude  and  Difference  of 

the  Solar  Year  646 

14.  On  the  Regular  and  Mean  Move¬ 

ments  of  the  Revolutions  of  the  Cen¬ 
tre  of  the  Earth  649 

Tables  of  Movement  of  the  Sun  650 

15.  Theorems  Prerequisite  for  Demon¬ 

strating  the  Apparent  Irregularity  of 
the  Movement  of  the  Sun  653 

16.  On  the  Apparent  Irregularity  of  the 

Sun  657 

17.  Demonstration  of  the  First  and  An¬ 

nual  Irregularity  of  the  Sun  Together 
with  Its  Particular  Differences  661 

18.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Regular 

Movement  in  Longitude  662 

19.  On  Determining  the  Positions  of  the 

Regular  Movement  of  the  Sun  at  the 
Beginning  [of  Years]  663 

20.  On  the  Second  and  Twofold  Irregu¬ 

larity  Which  Occurs  in  the  Case  of 
the  Sun  on  Account  of  the  Change  of 
the  Apsides  664 

21.  How  Great  the  Second  Difference  in 

the  Irregularity  of  the  Sun  Is  667 

22.  How  the  Regular  Movement  of  the 
Apogee  of  the  Sun  and  the  Irregular 


the  Sun  and  the  Determination  of  Its 
Prior  Positions 

24.  Table  of  the  Differences  between 
Regular  and  Apparent  Movement 
Tables  of  Additions-and-subtractions 
of  Movement  of  the  Sun 

25.  On  the  Calculation  of  the  Apparent 
Movement  of  the  Sun 

26.  On  the  Ntxghmepon,  {.e.,  the  Differ¬ 
ence  of  the  Natural  Day 

BOOK  FOUR 

1.  The  Hypotheses  of  the  Circles  of  the 
Moon  According  to  the  Opinion  of  the 
Ancients 

2.  On  the  Inadequacy  of  Those  As¬ 
sumptions 

3.  Another  Theory  of  the  Movement  of 
the  Moon 

4.  On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Moon  and 
Its  Particular  Movements 

Tables  of  Lunar  Movement 

5.  Demonstration  of  the  First  Irregular¬ 
ity  of  the  Moon,  Which  Occurs  at  the 
New  and  at  the  Full  Moon 

6.  Confirmation  of  What  Has  Been  Set 
Out  Concerning  the  Moon’s  Move¬ 
ments  of  Anomaly  in  Longitude 

7.  On  the  Positions  of  the  Moon  in  Lon¬ 
gitude  and  Anomaly 

8.  On  the  Second  Irregularity  of  the 
Moon  and  What  Ratio  the  First  Epi¬ 
cycle  Has  to  the  Second 

9.  On  the  Remaining  Difference,  by 
Reason  of  Which  the  Moon  Seems  to 
Move  Irregularly  Away  from  the 
Highest  Apsis  of  Its  Epicycle 

10.  How  the  Apparent  Movement  of  the 
Moon  Is  Demonstrated  from  the  Reg¬ 
ular  Movements 

11.  On  the  Table  of  the  Lunar  Additosub- 
tractions  or  Aequationes 

Table  of  the  Additions-and-subtrac- 
tions  of  the  Moon 

12.  On  the  Computation  of  the  Course  of 
the  Moon 

13.  How  the  Movement  of  Lunar  Lati¬ 
tude  Is  Examined  and  Demonstrated 

14.  On  the  Positions  of  Lunar  Anomaly 
in  Latitude 


668 

669 

669 

670 

671 

672 


675 

677 

678 

680 

682 

685 

692 

693 

694 

695 

696 
698 

700 

701 
701 
703 


503 


CONTENTS 


15.  Construction  of  the  Instrument  for 

Observing  Parallaxes  705 

16.  How  the  Parallaxes  of  the  Moon  Are 

Determined  706 

17.  Distance  of  the  Moon  from  the  Earth  707 

18.  On  the  Diameters  of  the  Moon  and  of 

the  Terrestrial  Shadow  709 

19.  How  the  Distances  of  the  Sun  and 
Moon  from  the  Earth,  Their  Diam¬ 
eters  and  That  of  the  Shadow  at  the 
Place  of  Crossing  of  the  Moon,  and 
the  Axis  of  the  Shadow  Are  Demon¬ 


strated  Simultaneously  710 

20.  On  the  Magnitude  of  These  Three 

Celestial  Bodies  713 

21.  On  the  Apparent  Diameter  of  the  Sun 

and  Its  Parallaxes  713 

22.  On  the  Unequal  Apparent  Diameter 

of  the  Moon  and  Its  Parallaxes  714 

23.  What  the  Ratio  of  Difference  Between 

the  Shadows  of  the  Earth  Is  715 

24.  On  the  Table  of  the  Particular  Paral¬ 

laxes  in  the  Circle  Passing  Through 
the  Poles  of  the  Horizon  716 

Table  of  Parallaxes  of  the  Sun  and 
Moon  720 

Table  of  the  Semidiameters  of  the 
Sun,  Moon,  and  Shadow  721 

25.  On  Computing  the  Parallax  of  the 

Sun  and  Moon  722 

26.  How  the  Parallaxes  of  Longitude  and 

Latitude  Are  Distinguished  722 

27.  Confirmation  of  What  Has  Been  Ex¬ 
pounded  Concerning  the  Parallaxes 

of  the  Moon  724 

28.  On  the  Mean  Oppositions  and  Con¬ 
junctions  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  725 

29.  On  the  Close  Examination  of  the 
True  Conjunctions  and  Oppositions 

of  the  Sun  and  Moon  726 

30.  How  the  Ecliptic  Conjunctions  and 

Oppositions  Are  Distinguished  from 
the  Others  727 

31.  How  Great  An  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  or 

Moon  Will  Be  728 

32.  How  to  Know  Beforehand  How  Long 

an  Eclipse  Will  Last  729 

BOOK  FIVE 

1.  On  Their  Revolutions  and  Mean 
Movements  732 

Tables  of  the  Movement  of  Parallax 
of  the  Five  Planets  784 


2.  Demonstration  of  the  Regular  and 

Apparent  Movements  of  These  Plan¬ 
ets  According  to  the  Theory  of  the 
Ancients  740 

3.  General  Demonstration  of  Apparent 

Irregularity  on  Account  of  the  Move¬ 
ment  of  the  Earth  740 

4.  Why  the  Proper  Movements  of  the 

Planets  Appear  Irregular  742 

5.  Demonstration  of  the  Movement  of 

Saturn  744 

6.  On  Three  Other  Solar  Oppositions  of 

Saturn  Recently  Observed  749 

7.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Move¬ 
ment  of  Saturn  755 


8.  On  Determining  Positions  of  Saturn  755 

9.  On  the  Parallaxes  of  Saturn,  Which 
Arise  from  the  Annual  Orbital  Circle 
of  the  Earth  and  How  Great  the  Dis¬ 


tance  of  Saturn  Is  755 

10.  Demonstrations  of  the  Movement  of 

Jupiter  758 

11.  On  Three  Other  Oppositions  of  Jupi¬ 
ter  Recently  Observed  760 

12.  Confirmation  of  the  Regular  Move¬ 
ment  of  Jupiter  765 

13.  Positions  to  Be  Assigned  to  the  Move¬ 
ment  of  Jupiter  765 

14.  On  Investigating  the  Parallaxes  of 

Jupiter  and  Its  Altitude  in  Relation 
to  the  Orbital  Circle  of  Terrestrial 
Revolution  766 

15.  On  the  Planet  Mars  768 

16.  On  Three  Other  Solar  Oppositions 

of  Mars  Which  Have  Been  Observed 
Recently  771 

17.  Confirmation  of  the  Movement  of 

Mars  774 

18.  Determination  of  the  Position  of  Mars  774 

19.  How  Great  the  Orbital  Circle  of  Mars 

Is  in  Terms  of  the  Parts  of  Which  the 
Annual  Orbital  Circle  of  the  Earth  Is 
the  Unit  775 

20.  On  the  Planet  Venus  777 

21.  What  the  Ratio  of  the  Diameters  of 

the  Orbital  Circle  of  the  Earth  and  of 
Venus  Is  778 

22.  On  the  Twofold  Movement  of  Venus  779 

23.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Movement 

of  Venus  781 

24.  On  the  Positions  of  the  Anomaly  of 

Venus  784 

25.  On  Mercury  784 


504 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


36. 


COPERNICUS 


On  the  Positions  of  the  Highest  and 
Lowest  Apsides  of  Mercury  786 

How  Great  the  Eccentricity  of  Mer¬ 
cury  Is  and  What  the  Commensur- 
ability  of  Its  Circles  Is  787 

Why  the  Angular  Digressions  of  Mer¬ 
cury  At  Around  60°  from  the  Perigee 
Appear  Greater  Than  Those  at  the 
Perigee  790 

Examination  of  the  Mean  Movements 
of  Mercury  791 

On  Three  Modem  Observations  of  the 
Movements  of  Mercury  793 

On  Determining  the  Former  Positions 
of  Mercury  799 

On  Another  Explanation  of  Approach 
and  Withdrawal  799 

On  the  Tables  of  Additions-and-sub- 
tractions  of  the  Five  Wandering  Stars  800 
Tables  of  the  Additosubtractions  of 
the  Five  Planets  801 

How  the  Positions  in  Longitude  of 
the  Five  Planets  Are  Calculated  806 

On  the  Stations  and  Retrogradations 
of  the  Five  Wandering  Stars  807 


How  the  Times,  Positions,  and  Arcs  of 
the  Retrogradations  Are  Determined  810 


BOOK  SIX 

1.  General  Exposition  of  the  Digression 

in  Latitude  of  the  Five  Wandering 
Stars  813 

2.  Hypotheses  of  the  Circles  on  Which 
the  Planets  Are  Moved  in  Latitude  815 

3.  How  Great  the  Inclinations  of  the  Or¬ 

bital  Circles  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and 
Mars  Are  818 

4.  On  the  Exposition  of  the  Other  Lati¬ 
tudes  in  Particular  and  in  General  820 

5.  On  the  Latitudes  of  Venus  and  Mer¬ 
cury  821 

6.  On  the  Second  Transit  of  Venus  and 

Mercury  According  to  the  Obliqua- 
tion  of  Their  Orbital  Circles  in  the 
Apogee  and  Perigee  825 

7.  How  Great  the  Angles  of  Obliquation 

of  Venus  and  Mercury  Are  826 

8.  On  the  Third  Aspect  of  the  Latitude 

of  Venus  and  Mercury,  Which  They 
Call  the  Deviation  831 

Tables  of  the  Latitudes  of  the  Five 
Planets  835 

9.  On  the  Calculation  of  the  Latitudes  of 

the  Five  Wandering  Stars  837 


INTRODUCTION 


To  THE  Reader  Concerning  the  Hypotheses  of  this  Work^ 

[z^pSince  the  newness  of  the  hypotheses  of  this  work — which  sets  the  earth  in 
motion  and  puts  an  immovable  sun  at  the  centre  of  the  universe — has  already 
received  a  great  deal  of  publicity,  I  have  no  doubt  that  certain  of  the  savants 
have  taken  grave  offense  and  think  it  wrong  to  raise  any  disturbance  among 
liberal  disciplines  which  have  had  the  right  set-up  for  a  long  time  now.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  they  are  willing  to  weigh  the  matter  scrupulously,  they  will  find  that  the 
author  of  this  work  has  done  nothing  which  merits  blame.  For  it  is  the  job 
of  the  astronomer  to  use  painstaking  and  skilled  observation  in  gathering  to¬ 
gether  the  history  of  the  celestial  movements,  and  then — since  he  cannot  by 
any  line  of  reasoning  reach  the  true  causes  of  these  movements — to  think  up 
or  construct  whatever  causes  or  hypotheses  he  pleases  such  that,  by  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  these  causes,  those  same  movements  can  be  calculated  from  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  geometry  for  the  past  and  for  the  future  too.  This  artist  is  markedly 
outstanding  in  both  of  these  respects:  for  it  is  not  necessary  that  these  hypo¬ 
theses  should  be  true,  or  even  probably;  but  it  is  enough  if  they  provide  a 
calculus  which  fits  the  observations — unless  by  some  chance  there  is  anyone  so 
ignorant  of  geometry  and  optics  as  to  hold  the  epicycle  of  Venus  as  probable 
and  to  believe  this  to  be  a  cause  why  Venus  alternately  precedes  and  follows 
the  sun  at  an  angular  distance  of  up  to  40®  or  more.  For  who  does  not  see  that 
it  necessarily  follows  from  this  assumption  that  the  diameter  of  the  planet  in 
its  perigee  should  appear  more  than  four  times  greater,  and  the  body  of  the 
planet  more  than  sixteen  times  greater,  than  in  its  apogee?  Nevertheless  the 
the  experience  of  all  the  ages  is  opposed  to  that.^  There  are  also  other  things 
in  this  discipline  which  are  just  as  absurd,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  examine 
them  right  now.  For  it  is  suflaciently  clear  that  this  art  is  absolutely  and  pro¬ 
foundly  ignorant  of  the  causes  of  the  apparent  irregular  movements.  And  if 
it  constructs  and  thinks  up  causes — and  it  has  certainly  thought  up  a  good 


^This  foreword,  at  first  ascribed  to  Copernicus,  is  held  to  have  been  written  by  Andrew 
Osiander,  a  Lutheran  theologian  and  friend  of  Copernicus,  who  saw  the  De  Revolutionibics 
through  the  press. 

^The  numbers  within  the  brackets  refer  to  the  pages  of  the  first  edition, 
published  in  1543  at  Nuremberg. 

Ttolemj^  makes  Venus  move  on  an  epicycle  the  ratio  of  whose  radius 
to  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle  carrying  the  epicycle  itself  is  nearly 
three  to  four.  Hence  the  apparent  magnitude  of  the  planet  would  be  ex¬ 
pected  to  vary  with  the  varying  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  Earth,  in 
the  ratios  stated  by  Osiander. 

Moreover,  it  was  found  that,  whenever  the  planet  happened  to  be  on 
the  epicycle,  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  appeared  in  line  with  EPA. 
And  so,  granted  the  ratios  of  epicycle  and  eccentric,  Venus  would  never 
appear  from  the  Earth  to  be  at  an  angular  distance  of  much  more  than  40°  from  the  centre  of 
her  epicycle,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  as  it  turned  out  by  observation. 


505 


506  COPERNICUS 

many — nevertheless  it  does  not  think  them  up  in  order  to  persuade  anyone  of 
their  truth  but  only  in  order  that  they  may  provide  a  correct  basis  for  calcula¬ 
tion.  But  since  for  one  and  the  same  movement  varying  hypotheses  are  pro¬ 
posed  from  time  to  time,  as  eccentricity  or  epicycle  for  the  movement  of  the  sun, 
the  astronomer  much  prefers  to  take  the  one  which  is  easiest  to  [ii^]  grasp.  May¬ 
be  the  philosopher  demands  probability  instead;  but  neither  of  them  will  grasp 
anything  certain  or  hand  it  on,  unless  it  has  been  divinely  revealed  to  him. 
Therefore  let  us  permit  these  new  hypotheses  to  make  a  public  appearance 
among  old  ones  which  are  themselves  no  more  probable,  especially  since  they 
are  wonderful  and  easy  and  bring  with  them  a  vast  storehouse  of  learned 
observations.  And  as  far  as  hypotheses  go,  let  no  one  expect  anything  in 
the  way  of  certainty  from  astronomy,  since  astronomy  can  offer  us  nothing 
certain,  lest,  if  anyone  take  as  true  that  which  has  been  constructed  for  an¬ 
other  use,  he  go  away  from  this  discipline  a  bigger  fool  than  when  he  came 
to  it.  Farewell. 


Preface  and  Dedication  to  Pope  Paul  hi 

[ii^]  I  can  reckon  easily  enough.  Most  Holy  Father,  that  as  soon  as  certain 
people  learn  that  in  these  books  of  mine  which  I  have  written  about  the  revo¬ 
lutions  of  the  spheres  of  the  world  I  attribute  certain  motions  to  the  terrestrial 
globe,  they  will  immediately  shout  to  have  me  and  my  opinion  hooted  off  the 
stage.  For  my  own  works  do  not  please  me  so  much  that  I  do  not  weigh  what 
judgments  others  will  pronounce  concerning  them.  And  although  I  realize  that 
the  conceptions  of  a  philosopher  are  placed  beyond  the  judgment  of  the  crowd, 
because  it  is  his  loving  duty  to  seek  the  truth  in  all  things,  in  so  far  as  God  has 
granted  that  to  human  reason;  nevertheless  I  think  we  should  avoid  opinions 
utterly  foreign  to  rightness.  And  when  I  considered  how  absurd  this  “lecture'^ 
would  be  held  by  those  who  know  that  the  opinion  that  the  Earth  rests  immov¬ 
able  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  as  if  their  centre  had  been  confirmed  by  the 
judgments  of  many  ages — if  I  were  to  assert  to  the  contrary  that  the  Earth 
moves;  for  a  long  time  I  was  in  great  difficulty  as  to  whether  I  should  bring  to 
light  my  commentaries  written  to  demonstrate  the  Earth’s  movement,  or 
whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Pythagoreans  and 
certain  others  who  used  to  hand  down  the  mysteries  of  their  philosophy  not  in 
writing  but  by  word  of  mouth  and  only  to  their  relatives  and  friends — witness 
the  letter  of  Lysis  to  Hipparchus.  They  however  seem  to  me  to  have  done  that 
not,  as  some  judge,  out  of  a  jealous  unwillingness  to  communicate  their  doc¬ 
trines  but  in  order  that  things  of  very  great  beauty  which  have  been  investi¬ 
gated  by  the  loving  care  of  great  men  should  not  be  scorned  by  those  who  find 
it  a  bother  to  expend  any  great  energy  on  letters — except  on  the  money-making 
variety — or  who  are  provoked  by  the  exhortations  and  examples  of  others  to 
the  liberal  study  of  philosophy  but  on  account  of  their  natural  [m®]  stupidity 
hold  the  position  among  philosophers  that  drones  hold  among  bees.  Therefore, 
when  I  weighed  these  things  in  my  mind,  the  scorn  which  I  had  to  fear  on 
account  of  the  newness  and  absurdity  of  my  opinion  almost  drove  me  to  aban¬ 
don  a  work  already  undertaken. 

But  my  friends  made  me  change  my  course  in  spite  of  my  long-continued 
hestitation  and  even  resistance.  First  among  them  was  Nicholas  Schonberg, 
Cardinal  of  Capua,  a  man  distinguished  in  all  branches  of  learning;  next  to  him 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES  507 

was  my  devoted  friend  Tiedeman  Giese,  Bishop  of  Culm,  a  man  filled  with  the 
greatest  zeal  for  the  divine  and  liberal  arts:  for  he  in  particular  urged  me 
frequently  and  even  spurred  me  on  by  added  reproaches  into  publishing  this 
book  and  letting  come  to  light  a  work  which  I  had  kept  hidden  among  my 
things  for  not  merely  nine  years,  but  for  almost  four  times  nine  years.  Not  a 
few  other  learned  and  distinguished  men  demanded  the  same  thing  of  me, 
urging  me  to  refuse  no  longer — on  account  of  the  fear  which  I  felt — to  contri¬ 
bute  my  work  to  the  common  utility  of  those  who  are  really  interested  in  mathe¬ 
matics:  they  said  that  the  absurder  my  teaching  about  the  movement  of  the 
Earth  now  seems  to  very  many  persons,  the  more  wonder  and  thanksgiving 
will  it  be  the  object  of,  when  after  the  publication  of  my  commentaries  those 
same  persons  see  the  fog  of  absurdity  dissipated  by  my  luminous  demonstra¬ 
tions.  Accordingly  I  was  led  by  such  persuasion  and  by  that  hope  finally  to 
permit  my  friends  to  undertake  the  publication  of  a  work  which  they  had  long 
sought  from  me. 

But  perhaps  Your  Holiness  will  not  be  so  much  surprised  at  my  giving  the 
results  of  my  nocturnal  study  to  the  light — after  having  taken  such  care  in  work¬ 
ing  them  out  that  I  did  not  hesitate  to  put  in  writing  my  conceptions  as  to  the 
movement  of  the  Earth — as  you  will  be  eager  to  hear  from  me  what  came  into 
my  mind  that  in  opposition  to  the  general  opinion  of  mathematicians  and  almost 
in  opposition  to  common  sense  I  should  dare  to  imagine  some  movement  of 
the  Earth.  And  so  I  am  unwilling  to  hide  from  Your  Holiness  that  nothing 
except  my  knowledge  that  mathematicians  have  not  agreed  with  one  another 
in  their  researches  moved  me  to  think  out  a  different  scheme  of  drawing  up 
the  movements  of  the  spheres  of  the  world.  For  in  the  first  place  mathematicians 
are  so  uncertain  about  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  moon  that  they  can 
neither  demonstrate  nor  observe  the  unchanging  magnitude  of  the  [m^]  revolv¬ 
ing  year.  Then  in  setting  up  the  solar  and  lunar  movements  and  those  of  the 
other  five  wandering  stars,  they  do  not  employ  the  same  principles,  assump¬ 
tions,  or  demonstrations  for  the  revolutions  and  apparent  movements.  For  some 
make  use  of  homocentric  circles  only,  others  of  eccentric  circles  and  epicycles, 
by  means  of  which  however  they  do  not  fully  attain  what  they  seek.  For  al¬ 
though  those  who  have  put  their  trust  in  homocentric  circles  have  shown  that 
various  different  movements  can  be  composed  of  such  circles,  nevertheless 
they  have  not  been  able  to  establish  anything  for  certain  that  would  fully 
correspond  to  the  phenomena.  But  even  if  those  who  have  thought  up  eccen¬ 
tric  circles  seem  to  have  been  able  for  the  most  part  to  compute  the  apparent 
movements  numerically  by  those  means,  they  have  in  the  meanwhile  admitted 
a  great  deal  which  seems  to  contradict  the  first  principles  of  regularity  of  move¬ 
ment.  Moreover,  they  have  not  been  able  to  discover  or  to  infer  the  chief  point 
of  all,  i.e,y  the  form  of  the  world  and  the  certain  commensurability  of  its  parts. 
But  they  are  in  exactly  the  same  fix  as  someone  taking  from  different  places 
hands,  feet,  head,  and  the  other  limbs — shaped  very  beautifully  but  not  with 
reference  to  one  body  and  without  correspondence  to  one  another — so  that 
such  parts  made  up  a  monster  rather  than  a  man.  And  so,  in  the  process  of 
demonstration  which  they  call  ^^method,^^  they  are  found  either  to  have  omitted 
something  necessary  or  to  have  admitted  something  foreign  which  by  no  means 
pertains  to  the  matter;  and  they  would  by  no  means  have  been  in  this  fix,  if 
they  had  followed  sure  principles.  For  if  the  hypotheses  they  assumed  were  not 


508  COPERNICUS 

false,  everything  which  followed  from  the  hypotheses  would  have  been  verified 
without  fail;  and  though  what  I  am  saying  may  be  obscure  right  now,  neverthe¬ 
less  it  Tvill  become  clearer  in  the  proper  place. 

Accordingly,  when  I  had  meditated  upon  this  lack  of  certitude  in  the  tra¬ 
ditional  mathematics  concerning  the  composition  of  movements  of  the  spheres 
of  the  world,  I  began  to  be  annoyed  that  the  philosophers,  who  in  other  respects 
had  made  a  very  careful  scrutiny  of  the  least  details  of  the  world,  had  dis¬ 
covered  no  sure  scheme  for  the  movements  of  the  machinery  of  the  world, 
which  has  been  built  for  us  by  the  Best  and  Most  Orderly  Workman  of  all. 
Wherefore  I  took  the  trouble  to  reread  all  the  books  by  philosophers  which  I 
could  get  hold  of,  to  see  if  any  of  them  even  supposed  that  the  movements  of 
the  spheres  of  the  world  [iv^]  were  different  from  those  laid  down  by  those  who 
taught  mathematics  in  the  schools.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  found  first  in 
Cicero  that  Nicetas  thought  that  the  Earth  moved.  And  afterwards  I  found 
in  Plutarch  that  there  were  some  others  of  the  same  opinion:  I  shall  copy  out 
his  words  here,  so  that  they  may  be  kno^vn  to  all: 

Some  think  that  the  Earth  is  at  rest;  but  Philolaus  the  Pythagorean  says  that  it 
moves  around  the  fire  with  an  obliquely  circular  motion,  like  the  sun  and  moon,  Herak- 
leides  of  Pontus  and  Ekphantus  the  P;^hagorean  do  not  give  the  Earth  any  movement 
of  locomotion,  but  rather  a  limited  movement  of  rising  and  setting  around  its  centre, 
like  a  wheel. ^ 

Therefore  I  also,  having  found  occasion,  began  to  meditate  upon  the  mobility 
of  the  Earth.  And  although  the  opinion  seemed  absurd,  nevertheless  because  I 
knew'  that  others  before  me  had  been  granted  the  liberty  of  constructing  what¬ 
ever  circles  they  pleased  in  order  to  demonstrate  astral  pheonmena,  I  thought 
that  I  too  would  be  readily  permitted  to  test  whether  or  not,  by  the  laying 
down  that  the  Earth  had  some  movement,  demonstrations  less  shaky  than  those 
of  my  predecessors  could  be  found  for  the  revolutions  of  the  celestial  spheres. 

And  so,  having  laid  down  the  movements  which  I  attribute  to  the  Earth 
farther  on  in  the  work,  I  finally  discovered  by  the  help  of  long  and  numerous 
observations  that  if  the  movements  of  the  other  w^andering  stars  are  correlated 
with  the  circular  movement  of  the  Earth,  and  if  the  movements  are  computed 
in  accordance  wdth  the  revolution  of  each  planet,  not  only  do  all  their  phe¬ 
nomena  follow’  from  that  but  also  this  correlation  binds  together  so  closely  the 
order  and  magnitudes  of  all  the  planets  and  of  their  spheres  or  orbital  circles 
and  the  heavens  themselves  that  nothing  can  be  shifted  around  in  any  part 
of  them  without  disrupting  the  remaining  parts  and  the  universe  as  a  w’hole. 

Accordingly,  in  composing  my  work  I  adopted  the  following  order:  in  the 
first  book  I  describe  all  the  locations  of  the  spheres  or  orbital  circles  together 
wdth  the  movements  which  I  attribute  to  the  earth,  so  that  this  book  contains 
as  it  w'ere  the  general  set-up  of  the  universe.  But  afterwards  in  the  remaining 
books  I  correlate  all  the  movements  of  the  other  planets  and  their  spheres  or 
orbital  circles  wdth  the  mobility  of  the  Earth,  so  that  it  can  be  gathered  from 
that  how  far  the  apparent  movements  of  the  remaining  planets  and  their 
orbital  circles  can  be  saved  by  being  correlated  with  the  movements  of  the 
Earth.  And  I  have  no  doubt  that  talented  and  learned  mathematicians  will 
agree  with  me,  if — as  philosophy  [iv^]  demands  in  the  first  place — they  are 
w’illing  to  give  not  superficial  but  profound  thought  and  effort  to  what  I  bring 

^De  placiiis  philosophoruvif  in.  13. 


509 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES 

forward  in  this  work  in  demonstrating  these  things.  And  in  order  that  the 
unlearned  as  well  as  the  learned  might  see  that  I  was  not  seeking  to  flee  from 
the  judgment  of  any  man,  I  preferred  to  dedicate  these  results  of  my  nocturnal 
study  to  Your  Holiness  rather  than  to  anyone  else;  because,  even  in  this  remote 
corner  of  the  earth  where  I  live,  you  are  held  to  be  most  eminent  both  in  the 
dignity  of  your  order  and  in  your  love  of  letters  and  even  of  mathematics; 
hence,  by  the  authority  of  your  judgment  you  can  easily  provide  a  guard  against 
the  bites  of  slanderers,  despite  the  proverb  that  there  is  no  medicine  for  the 
bite  of  a  sycophant. 

But  if  perchance  there  are  certain  “idle  talkers^ ^  who  take  it  upon  themselves 
to  pronounce  judgment,  although  wholly  ignorant  of  mathematics,  and  if  by 
shamelessly  distorting  the  sense  of  some  passage  in  Holy  Writ  to  suit  their  pur¬ 
pose,  they  dare  to  reprehend  and  to  attack  my  work;  they  worry  me  so  little 
that  I  shall  even  scorn  their  judgments  as  foolhardy.  For  it  is  not  unknown  that 
Lactantius,  otherwise  a  distinguished  writer  but  hardly  a  mathematician,  speaks 
in  an  utterly  childish  fashion  concerning  the  shape  of  the  Earth,  when  he  laughs 
at  those  who  have  affirmed  that  the  Earth  has  the  form  of  a  globe.  And  so  the 
studious  need  not  be  surprised  if  people  like  that  laugh  at  us.  Mathematics  is 
written  for  mathematicians;  and  among  them,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  my  labours 
will  be  seen  to  contribute  something  to  the  ecclesiastical  commonwealth,  the 
principate  of  which  Your  Holiness  now  holds.  For  not  many  years  ago  under 
Leo  X  when  the  Lateran  Council  was  considering  the  question  of  reforming  the 
Ecclesiastical  Calendar,  no  decision  was  reached,  for  the  sole  reason  that  the 
magnitude  of  the  year  and  the  months  and  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  moon 
had  not  yet  been  measured  with  sufficient  accuracy.  From  that  time  on  I  gave 
attention  to  making  more  exact  observations  of  these  things  and  was  encouraged 
to  do  so  by  that  most  distinguished  man,  Paul,  Bishop  of  Fossombrone,  who  had 
been  present  at  those  deliberations.  But  what  have  I  accomplished  in  this  matter 
I  leave  to  the  judgment  of  Your  Holiness  in  particular  and  to  that  of  all  other 
learned  mathematicians.  And  so  as  not  to  appear  to  Your  Holiness  to  make  more 
promises  concerning  the  utility  of  this  book  than  I  can  fulfill,  I  now  pass  on  to 
the  body  of  the  work. 


BOOK  ONF 


Among  the  many  and  varied  literary  and  artistic  studies  upon  which  the  natural 
talents  of  man  are  nourished,  I  think  that  those  above  all  should  be  embraced 
and  pursued  with  the  most  loving  care  which  have  to  do  with  things  that  are 
very  beautiful  and  very  worthy  of  knowledge.  Such  studies  are  those  which  deal 
with  the  godlike  circular  movements  of  the  world  and  the  course  of  the  stars, 
their  magnitudes,  distances,  risings  and  settings,  and  the  causes  of  the  other  ap¬ 
pearances  in  the  heavens;  and  which  finally  explicate  the  whole  form.  For  what 
could  be  more  beautiful  than  the  heavens  which  contain  all  beautiful  things? 
Their  very  names  make  this  clear:  Caelum  (heavens)  by  naming  that  which  is 
beautifully  carved;  and  Mundus  (world),  purity  and  elegance.  Many  philoso¬ 
phers  have  called  the  world  a  visible  god  on  account  of  its  extraordinary  excel¬ 
lence.  So  if  the  worth  of  the  arts  were  measured  by  the  matter  with  which  they 
deal,  this  art — which  some  call  astronomy,  others  astrology,  and  many  of  the 
ancients  the  consummation  of  mathematics — ^would  be  by  far  the  most  out¬ 
standing.  This  art  which  is  as  it  were  the  head  of  all  the  liberal  arts  and  the  one 
most  worthy  of  a  free  man  leans  upon  nearly  all  the  other  branches  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  Arithmetic,  geometry,  optics,  geodesy,  mechanics,  and  whatever  others, 
all  offer  themselves  in  its  service.  And  since  a  property  of  all  good  arts  is  to  draw 
the  mind  of  man  away  from  the  vices  and  direct  it  to  better  things,  these  arts 
can  do  that  more  plentifully,  over  and  above  the  unbelievable  pleasure  of  mind 
[which  they  furnish].  For  who,  after  applying  himself  to  things  which  he  sees 
established  in  the  best  order  and  directed  by  divine  ruling,  would  not  through 
diligent  contemplation  of  them  and  through  a  certain  habituation  be  awakened 
to  that  which  is  best  and  would  not  wonder  at  the  Artificer  of  all  things,  in 
Whom  is  all  happiness  and  every  good?  For  the  divine  Psalmist  surely  did  not 
say  gratuitously  that  he  took  pleasure  in  the  workings  of  God  and  rejoiced  in  the 
works  of  His  hands,  unless  by  means  of  these  things  as  by  some  sort  of  vehicle 
we  are  transported  to  the  contemplation  of  the  highest  Good. 

Now  as  regards  the  utility  and  ornament  which  they  confer  upon  a  common¬ 
wealth — to  pass  over  the  innumerable  advantages  they  give  to  private  citizens 
— Plato  makes  an  extremely  good  point,  for  in  the  seventh  book  of  the  Laws  he 
says  that  this  study  should  be  pursued  in  especial,  that  through  it  the  orderly 
arrangement  of  days  into  months  and  years  and  the  determination  of  the  times 
for  solemnities  and  sacrifices  should  keep  the  state  alive  and  watchful ;  and  he 
says  that  if  anyone  denies  that  this  study  is  necessary  for  a  man  who  is  going 
to  take  up  any  of  the  highest  branches  of  learning,  then  such  a  person  is  think¬ 
ing  foolishly ;  and  he  thinks  that  it  is  impossible  for  anyone  to  become  godlike 
or  be  called  so  who  has  no  necessary  knowledge  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  other 
stars. 

However,  this  more  divine  than  human  science,  which  inquires  into  the  high- 

^The  three  introductory  paragraphs  are  found  in  the  Thorn  centenary  and  Warsaw  editions. 

510 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  511 

est  things,  is  not  lacking  in  difficulties.  And  in  particular  we  see  that  as  regards 
its  principles  and  assumptions,  which  the  Greeks  call  “hypotheses,’’  many  of 
those  who  undertook  to  deal  with  them  were  not  in  accord  and  hence  did  not 
employ  the  same  methods  of  calculation.  In  addition,  the  courses  of  the  planets 
and  the  revolution  of  the  stars  cannot  be  determined  by  exact  calculations  and 
reduced  to  perfect  knowledge  unless,  through  the  passage  of  time  and  with  the 
help  of  many  prior  observations,  they  can,  so  to  speak,  be  handed  down  to  pos¬ 
terity.  For  even  if  Claud  Ptolemy  of  Alexandria,  who  stands  far  in  front  of  all 
the  others  on  account  of  his  wonderful  care  and  industry,  with  the  help  of  more 
than  forty  years  of  observations  brought  this  art  to  such  a  high  point  that  there 
seemed  to  be  nothing  left  which  he  had  not  touched  upon;  nevertheless  we  see 
that  very  many  things  are  not  in  accord  with  the  movements  which  should  fol¬ 
low  from  his  doctrine  but  rather  with  movements  which  were  discovered  later 
and  were  unkno^\^l  to  him.  Whence  even  Plutarch  in  speaking  of -the  revolving 
solar  year  says,  “So  far  the  movement  of  the  stars  has  overcome  the  ingenuity  of 
the  mathematicians.”  Now  to  take  the  year  itself  as  my  example,  I  believe  it  is 
well  known  how  many  different  opinions  there  are  about  it,  so  that  many  people 
have  given  up  hope  of  making  an  exact  determination  of  it.  Similarly,  in  the  case 
of  the  other  planets  I  shall  try — with  the  help  of  God,  without  Whom  we  can  do 
nothing — to  make  a  more  detailed  inquiry  concerning  them,  since  the  greater 
the  interval  of  time  between  us  and  the  founders  of  this  art — whose  discoveries 
we  can  compare  ^vith  the  new  ones  made  by  us — the  more  means  we  have  of 
supporting  our  o^vn  theory.  Furthermore,  I  confess  that  I  shall  expound  many 
things  differently  from  my  predecessors — although  with  their  aid,  for  it  was  they 
who  first  opened  the  road  of  inquiry  into  these  things. 

1.  The  World  is  Spherical 

[1*^]  In  the  beginning  we  should  remark  that  the  world  is  globe-shaped;  wheth¬ 
er  because  this  figure  is  the  most  perfect  of  all,  as  it  is  an  integral  whole  and 
needs  no  joints;  or  because  this  figure  is  the  one  having  the  greatest  volume  and 
thus  is  especially  suitable  for  that  which  is  going  to  comprehend  and  conserve 
all  things;  or  even  because  the  separate  parts  of  the  world  Le.,  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars  are  viewed  under  such  a  form;  or  because  everything  in  the  world 
tends  to  be  delimited  by  this  form,  as  is  apparent  in  the  case  of  drops  of  water 
and  other  liquid  bodies,  when  they  become  delimited  of  themselves.  And  so  no 
one  would  hesitate  to  say  that  this  form  belongs  to  the  heavenly  bodies. 

2.  The  Earth  is  Spherical  Too 

The  Earth  is  globe-shaped  too,  since  on  every  side  it  rests  upon  its  centre. 
But  it  is  not  perceived  straightway  to  be  a  perfect  sphere,  on  account  of  the 
great  height  of  its  mountains  and  the  lowness  of  its  valleys,  though  they  modify 
its  universal  roundness  to  only  a  very  small  extent. 

That  is  made  clear  in  this  way.  For  when  people  journey  northward  from 
anywhere,  the  northern  vertex  of  the  axis  of  daily  revolution  gradually  moves 
overhead,  and  the  other  moves  downward  to  the  same  extent;  and  many  stars 
situated  to  the  north  are  seen  not  to  set,  and  many  to  the  south  are  seen  not  to 
rise  any  more.  So  Italy  does  not  see  Canopus,  which  is  visible  to  Egypt.  And 
Italy  sees  the  last  star  of  Fluvius,  which  is  not  visible  to  this  region  situated  in 
a  more  frigid  zone.  Conversely,  for  people  who  travel  southward,  the  second 


512  COPERNICUS 

group  of  stars  becomes  higher  in  the  sky;  while  those  become  lower  which  for 
us  are  high  up. 

Moreover,  the  inclinations  of  the  poles  have  everywhere  the  same  ratio  with 
places  at  equal  distances  from  the  poles  of  the  Earth  and  that  [1^]  happens  in 
no  other  figure  except  the  spherical.  Whence  it  is  manifest  that  the  Earth  it¬ 
self  is  contained  between  the  vertices  and  is  therefore  a  globe. 

Add  to  this  the  fact  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  East  do  not  perceive  the  eve¬ 
ning  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon;  nor  the  inhabitants  of  the  West,  the  morning 
eclipses;  while  of  those  who  live  in  the  middle  region — some  see  them  earlier  and 
some  later. 

Furthermore,  voyagers  perceive  that  the  waters  too  are  fixed  within  this  fig¬ 
ure;  for  example,  when  land  is  not  visible  from  the  deck  of  a  ship,  it  may  be 
seen  from  the  top  of  the  mast,  and  conversely,  if  something  shining  is  attached 
to  the  top  of  the  mast,  it  appears  to  those  remaining  on  the  shore  to  come  down 
gradually,  as  the  ship  moves  from  the  land,  until  finally  it  becomes  hidden,  as 
if  setting. 

Moreover,  it  is  admitted  that  water,  which  by  its  nature  fiows,  always  seeks 
lower  places — the  same  way  as  earth — and  does  not  climb  up  the  shore  any  far¬ 
ther  than  the  convexity  of  the  shore  allows.  That  is  why  the  land  is  so  much 
higher  where  it  rises  up  from  the  ocean. 

3.  How  Land  and  Water  Make  Up  a  Single  Globe 

And  so  the  ocean  encircling  the  land  pours  forth  its  waters  ever3rwhere  and 
fills  up  the  deeper  hollows  with  them.  Accordingly  it  was  necessary  for  there 
to  be  less  water  than  land,  so  as  not  to  have  the  whole  earth  soaked  with  water — 
since  both  of  them  tend  toward  the  same  centre  on  account  of  their  weight — 
and  so  as  to  leave  some  portions  of  land — such  as  the  islands  discernible  here 
and  there — for  the  preservation  of  living  creatures.  For  what  is  the  continent 
itself  and  the  orbis  terrarum  except  an  island  which  is  larger  than  the  rest?  We 
should  not  listen  to  certain  Peripatetics  who  maintain  that  there  is  ten  times 
more  water  than  land  and  who  arrive  at  that  conclusion  because  in  the  trans¬ 
mutation  of  the  elements  the  liquefaction  of  one  part  of  earth  results  in  ten  parts 
of  water.  And  they  say  that  land  has  emerged  for  a  certain  distance  because, 
having  hollow  spaces  inside,  it  does  not  balance  everywhere  with  respect  to 
weight  and  so  the  centre  of  gravity  is  different  from  the  centre  of  magnitude. 
But  they  fall  into  error  through  ignorance  of  geometry;  for  they  do  not  know 
that  there  cannot  be  seven  times  more  water  than  land  and  some  part  of  the 
land  still  remain  dry,  unless  the  land  abandon  its  centre  of  gravity  and  give 
place  to  the  waters  as  being  heavier.  For  spheres  are  to  one  another  as  the 
cubes  of  their  diameters.  If  therefore  there  were  seven  parts  of  water  and  one 
part  of  land,  [2^]  the  diameter  of  the  land  could  not  be  greater  than  the  radius 
of  the  globe  of  the  waters.  So  it  is  even  less  possible  that  the  water  should  be 
ten  times  greater.  It  can  be  gathered  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the 
centres  of  magnitude  and  of  gravity  of  the  Earth  from  the  fact  that  the  con¬ 
vexity  of  the  land  spreading  out  from  the  ocean  does  not  swell  continuously,  for 
in  that  case  it  would  repulse  the  sea-waters  as  much  as  possible  and  would  not 
in  any  way  allow  interior  seas  and  huge  gulfs  to  break  through.  Moreover,  from 
the  seashore  outward  the  depth  of  the  abyss  would  not  stop  increasing,  and  so 
no  island  or  reef  or  any  spot  of  land  would  be  met  with  by  people  voyaging  out 


513 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

very  far.  Now  it  is  well  known  that  there  is  not  quite  the  distance  of  two  miles 
— ^at  practically  the  centre  of  the  orbis  terrarum — between  the  Egyptian  and  the 
Red  Sea.  And  on  the  contrary,  Ptolemy  in  his  Cosmography  extends  inhabitable 
lands  as  far  as  the  median  circle,  and  he  leaves  that  part  of  the  Earth  as  un¬ 
known,  where  the  moderns  have  added  Cathay  and  other  vast  regions  as  far  as 
60°  longitude,  so  that  inhabited  land  extends  in  longitude  farther  than  the  rest 
of  the  ocean  does.  And  if  you  add  to  these  the  islands  discovered  in  our  time 
under  the  princes  of  Spain  and  Portugal  and  especially  America — named  after 
the  ship^s  captain  who  discovered  her — which  they  consider  a  second  orbis  ter¬ 
rarum  on  account  of  her  so  far  unmeasured  magnitude — besides  many  other  is¬ 
lands  heretofore  unknown,  we  would  not  be  greatly  surprised  if  there  were  anti- 
phodes  or  antichthones.  For  reasons  of  geometry  compel  us  to  beUve  that 
America  is  situated  diametrically  opposite  to  the  India  of  the  Ganges. 

And  from  all  that  I  think  it  is  manifest  that  the  land  and  the  water  rest 
upon  one  centre  of  gravity;  that  this  is  the  same  as  the  centre  of  magnitude  of 
the  land,  since  land  is  the  heavier;  that  parts  of  land  which  are  as  it  were  ya^vn- 
ing  are  filled  with  water;  and  that  accordingly  there  is  little  water  in  comparison 
with  the  land,  even  if  more  of  the  surface  appears  to  be  covered  by  water. 

Now  it  is  necessary  that  the  land  and  the  surrounding  waters  have  the  figure 
which  the  shadow  of  the  Earth  casts,  for  it  eclipses  the  moon  by  projecting  a 
perfect  circle  upon  it.  Therefore  the  Earth  is  not  a  plane,  as  Empedocles  and 
Anaximenes  opined;  or  a  tympanoid,  as  Leucippus;  or  a  scaphoid,  as  Hera- 
cleitus;  or  hollowed  out  in  any  other  way,  as  Democritus;  or  again  a  cylinder,  as 
Anaximander;  and  it  is  not  infinite  in  its  lower  part,  with  the  density  increasing 
rootwards,  as  Xenophanes  thought;  but  it  is  perfectly  round,  as  the  philosophers 
perceived. 

4.  The  Movement  of  the  Celestial  Bodies  Is  Regular,  Circular, 
AND  Everlasting — Or  Else  Compounded  of  Circular  Movements 

[2^]  After  this  we  will  recall  that  the  movement  of  the  celestial  bodies  is  cir¬ 
cular.  For  the  motion  of  a  sphere  is  to  turn  in  a  circle ;  by  this  very  act  expressing 
its  form,  in  the  most  simple  body,  where  beginning  and  end  cannot  be  discovered 
or  distinguished  from  one  another,  while  it  moves  through  the  same  parts  in  it¬ 
self. 

But  there  are  many  movements  on  account  of  the  multitude  of  spheres  or 
orbital  circles  ^  The  most  obvious  of  all  is  the  daily  revolution — which  the 
Greeks  call  wxOrjjjLepov;  i.c.,  having  the  temporal  span  of  a  day  and  a  night.  By 
means  of  this  movement  the  whole  world — ^^vith  the  exception  of  the  Earth — is 
supposed  to  be  borne  from  east  to  west.  This  movement  is  taken  as  the  common 
measure  of  all  movements,  since  we  measure  even  time  itself  principally  by  the 
number  of  days. 

Next,  we  see  other  as  it  were  antagonistic  revolutions;  z.c.,  from  west  to  east, 
on  the  part  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  wandering  stars.  In  this  way  the  sun  gives 
us  the  year,  the  moon  the  months — the  most  common  periods  of  time;  and  each 
of  the  other  five  planets  follows  its  own  cycle.  Nevertheless  these  movements  are 

^The  "orbital  circle^^  (orbis)  is  the  great  circle  whereon  the  planet  moves  in  its  sphere 
(sphaera).  Copernicus  uses  the  word  orbis  which  designates  a  circle  primarily  rather  than  a 
sphere  because,  while  the  sphere  may  be  necessary  for  the  mechanical  explanation  of  the  move¬ 
ment,  onty  the  circle  is  necessary  for  the  mathematical. 


514  COPERNICUS 

manifoldly  different  from  the  first  movement.  First,  in  that  they  do  not  revolve 
around  the  same  poles  as  the  first  movement  but  follow  the  oblique  ecliptic; 
next,  in  that  they  do  not  seem  to  move  in  their  circuit  regularly.  For  the  sun  and 
moon  are  caught  moving  at  times  more  slowly  and  at  times  more  quickly.  And 
we  perceive  the  five  wandering  stars  sometimes  even  to  retrograde  and  to  come 
to  a  stop  between  these  two  movements.  And  though  the  sun  always  proceeds 
straight  ahead  along  its  route,  they  wander  in  various  ways,  straying  sometimes 
towards  the  south,  and  at  other  times  towards  the  north — whence  they  are 
called  ‘‘planets.^^  Add  to  this  the  fact  that  sometimes  they  are  nearer  the  Earth 
— and  are  then  said  to  be  at  their  perigee — and  at  other  times  are  farther  away — 
and  are  said  to  be  at  their  apogee. 

We  must  however  confess  that  these  movements  are  circular  or  are  composed 
of  many  circular  movements,  in  that  they  maintain  these  irregularities  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  a  constant  law  and  with  fixed  periodic  returns:  and  that  could  not 
take  place,  if  they  were  not  circular.  For  it  is  only  the  circle  which  can  bring 
back  what  is  past  and  over  with;  and  in  this  way,  for  example,  the  sun  by  a 
movement  composed  of  circular  movements  brings  back  to  us  the  inequality  of 
days  and  nights  and  the  four  seasons  of  the  year.  [3^]  Many  movements  are  rec¬ 
ognized  in  that  movement,  since  it  is  impossible  that  a  simple  heavenly  body 
should  be  moved  irregularly  by  a  single  sphere.  For  that  would  have  to  take 
place  either  on  account  of  the  inconstancy  of  the  motor  virtue — whether  by 
reason  of  an  extrinsic  cause  or  its  intrinsic  nature — or  on  account  of  the  in¬ 
equality  between  it  and  the  moved  body.  But  since  the  mind  shudders  at  either 
of  these  suppositions,  and  since  it  is  quite  unfitting  to  suppose  that  such  a  state 
of  affairs  exists  among  things  which  are  established  in  the  best  system,  it  is 
agreed  that  their  regular  movements  appear  to  us  as  irregular,  whether  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  circles  having  different  poles  or  even  because  the  earth  is  not  at 
the  centre  of  the  circles  in  which  they  revolve.  And  so  for  us  watching  from  the 
Earth,  it  happens  that  the  transits  of  the  planets,  on  account  of  being  at  unequal 
distances  from  the  Earth,  appear  greater  when  they  are  nearer  than  when  they 
are  farther  away,  as  has  been  shown  in  optics:  thus  in  the  case  of  equal  arcs  of  an 
orbital  circle  which  are  seen  at  different  distances  there  will  appear  to  be  un¬ 
equal  movements  in  equal  times.  For  this  reason  I  think  it  necessary  above  all 
that  we  should  note  carefully  what  the  relation  of  the  Earth  to  the  heavens  is, 
so  as  not — ^when  we  wish  to  scrutinize  the  highest  things — to  be  ignorant  of 
those  which  are  nearest  to  us,  and  so  as  not — by  the  same  error — to  attribute  to 
the  celestial  bodies  what  belongs  to  the  Earth. 

5.  Does  the  Earth  Have  a  Circular  Movement?  And  of  Its  Place 

Now  that  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Earth  too  has  the  form  of  a  globe,  I 
think  we  must  see  whether  or  not  a  movement  follows  upon  its  form  and  what 
the  place  of  the  Earth  is  in  the  universe.  For  without  doing  that  it  will  not  be 
possible  to  find  a  sure  reason  for  the  movements  appearing  in  the  heavens.  Al¬ 
though  there  are  so  many  authorities  for  saying  that  the  Earth  rests  in  the  centre 
of  the  world  that  people  think  the  contrary  supposition  inopinable  and  even 
ridiculous;  if  however  we  consider  the  thing  attentively,  we  will  see  that  the 
question  has  not  yet  been  decided  and  accordingly  is  by  no  means  to  be  scorned. 
For  every  apparent  change  in  place  occurs  on  account  of  the  movement  either  of 
the  thing  seen  or  of  the  spectator,  or  on  account  of  the  necessarily  unequal  move- 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  515 

ment  of  both.  For  no  movement  is  perceptible  relatively  to  things  moved  equally 
in  the  same  directions — I  mean  relatively  to  the  thing  seen  and  the  spectator. 
Now  it  is  from  the  Earth  that  the  celestial  circuit  is  beheld  and  presented  to  our 
sight.  Therefore,  if  some  movement  should  belong  to  the  Earth  [3^]  it  will  ap¬ 
pear,  in  the  parts  of  the  universe  which  are  outside,  as  the  same  movement  but 
in  the  opposite  direction,  as  though  the  things  outside  were  passing  over.  And 
the  daily  revolution  in  especial  is  such  a  movement.  For  the  daily  revolution 
appears  to  carry  the  whole  universe  along,  with  the  exception  of  the  Earth  and 
the  things  around  it.  And  if  you  admit  that  the  heavens  possess  none  of  this 
movement  but  that  the  Earth  turns  from  west  to  east,  you  will  find — if  you 
make  a  serious  examination — that  as  regards  the  apparent  rising  and  setting  of 
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  the  case  is  so.  And  since  it  is  the  heavens  which  con¬ 
tain  and  embrace  all  things  as  the  place  common  to  the  universe,  it  will  not  be 
clear  at  once  why  movement  should  not  be  assigned  to  the  contained  rather 
than  to  the  container,  to  the  thing  placed  rather  than  to  the  thing  providing  the 
place. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Pythagoreans  Herakleides  and  Ekphantus  were  of  this 
opinion  and  so  was  Hicetas  the  Syracusan  in  Cicero;  they  made  the  Earth  to 
revolve  at  the  centre  of  the  world.  For  they  believed  that  the  stars  set  by 
reason  of  the  interposition  of  the  Earth  and  that  with  cessation  of  that  they  rose 
again.  Now  upon  this  assumption  there  follow  other  things,  and  a  no  smaller 
problem  concerning  the  place  of  the  Earth,  though  it  is  taken  for  granted  and 
believed  by  nearly  all  that  the  Earth  is  the  centre  of  the  world.  For  if  anyone 
denies  that  the  Earth  occupies  the  midpoint  or  centre  of  the  world  yet  does  not 
admit  that  the  distance  [between  the  two]  is  great  enough  to  be  compared  with 
[the  distance  to]  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  but  is  considerable  and  quite  ap¬ 
parent  in  relation  to  the  orbital  circles  of  the  sun  and  the  planets;  and  if  for 
that  reason  he  thought  that  their  movements  appeared  irregular  because  they 
are  organized  around  a  different  centre  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  he  might 
perhaps  be  able  to  bring  forward  a  perfectly  sound  reason  for  movement  which 
appears  irregular.  For  the  fact  that  the  wandering  stars  are  seen  to  be  some¬ 
times  nearer  the  Earth  and  at  other  times  farther  away  necessarily  argues  that 
the  centre  of  the  Earth  is  not  the  centre  of  their  circles.  It  is  not  yet  clear  wheth¬ 
er  the  Earth  draws  near  to  them  and  moves  away  or  they  draw  near  to  the 
Earth  and  move  away  . 

And  so  it  would  not  be  very  surprising  if  someone  attributed  some  other  move¬ 
ment  to  the  earth  in  addition  to  the  daily  revolution.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Philo- 
laus  the  Pythagorean — no  ordinary  mathematician,  whom  Platons  biographers 
say  Plato  went  to  Italy  for  the  sake  of  seeing — is  supposed  to  have  held  that 
the  Earth  moved  in  a  circle  and  wandered  in  some  other  movements  and  was 
one  of  the  planets. 

Many  however  have  believed  that  they  could  show  by  geometrical  reasoning 
that  the  Earth  is  in  the  middle  of  the  world;  that  it  has  the  proportionality  of 
a  point  in  relation  to  the  immensity  of  the  heavens,  occupies  the  central  posi¬ 
tion,  and  for  this  reason  is  immovable,  because,  when  the  universe  moves,  the 
centre  [4^]  remains  unmoved  and  the  things  which  are  closest  to  the  centre  are 
moved  the  most  slowly. 


516 


COPERNICUS 


6.  On  the  Immensity  of  the  Heavens  in  Relation  to  the 
Magnitude  of  the  Earth 

It  can  be  understood  that  this  great  mass  which  is  the  Earth  is  not  compar¬ 
able  with  the  magnitude  of  the  heavens,  from  the  fact  that  the  boundary  circles 
— for  that  is  the  translation  of  the  Greek  dpL^ovres — cut  the  whole  celestial 
sphere  into  two  halves;  for  that  could  not  take  place  if  the  magnitude  of  the 
Earth  in  comparison  with  the  heavens,  or  its  distance  from  the  centre  of  the 
world,  were  considerable.  For  the  circle  bisecting  a  sphere  goes  through  the 
centre  of  the  sphere,  and  is  the  greatest  circle  which  it  is  possible  to  circum¬ 
scribe. 

Now  let  the  horizon  be  the  circle  ABCD^  and  let  the  Earth,  where  our  point 
of  view  is,  be  E,  the  centre  of  the  horizon  by  which  the 
visible  stars  are  separated  from  those  which  are  not 
visible.  Now  with  a  dioptra  or  horoscope  or  level  placed  at 
E,  the  beginning  of  Cancer  is  seen  to  rise  at  point  C;  and 
at  the  same  moment  the  beginning  of  Capricorn  appears  to 
set  at  A.  Therefore,  since  AEC  is  in  a  straight  line  with 
the  dioptra,  it  is  clear  that  this  line  is  a  diameter  of  the 
ecliptic,  because  the  six  signs  bound  a  semicircle,  whose 
centre  E  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  horizon.  But  when  a 
revolution  has  taken  place  and  the  beginning  of  Capri¬ 
corn  arises  at  J5,  then  the  setting  of  Cancer  will  be  visible  at  Z),  and  BED  will 
be  a  straight  line  and  a  diameter  of  the  ecliptic.  But  it  has  already  been  seen 
that  the  line  AEC  is  a  diameter  of  the  same  circle;  therefore,  at  their  common 
section,  point  E  will  be  their  centre.  So  in  this  way  the  horizon  always  bisects 
the  ecliptic,  which  is  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere.  But  on  a  sphere,  if  a  circle 
bisects  one  of  the  great  circles,  then  the  circle  bisecting  is  a  great  circle.  There¬ 
fore  the  horizon  is  a  great  circle;  and  its  centre  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  ecliptic, 
as  far  as  appearance  goes;  although  nevertheless  the  line  passing  through  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  and  the  line  touching  to  the  surface  are  necessarily  different; 
but  on  account  of  their  immensity  in  comparison  with  the  Earth  they  are  like 
parallel  lines,  which  on  account  of  the  great  distance  between  the  termini  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  one  line,  when  the  space  contained  between  them  [4^]  is  in  no  per¬ 
ceptible  ratio  to  their  length,  as  has  been  shown  in  optics. 

From  this  argument  it  is  certainly  clear  enough  that  the  heavens  are  immense 
in  comparison  with  the  Earth  and  present  the  aspect  of  an  infinite  magnitude, 
and  that  in  the  judgment  of  sense-perception  the  Earth  is  to  the  heavens  as  a 
point  to  a  body  and  as  a  finite  to  an  infinite  magnitude.  But  we  see  that  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  that  has  been  shown,  and  it  does  not  follow  that  the  Earth  must 
rest  at  the  centre  of  the  world.  And  we  should  be  even  more  surprised  if  such  a 
vast  world  should  wheel  completely  around  during  the  space  of  twenty-four 
hours  rather  than  that  its  least  part,  the  Earth,  should.  For  saying  that  the 
centre  is  immovable  and  that  those  things  which  are  closest  to  the  centre  are 
moved  least  does  not  argue  that  the  Earth  rests  at  the  centre  of  the  world.  That 
is  no  different  from  saying  that  the  heavens  revolve  but  the  poles  are  at  rest  and 
those  things  which  are  closest  to  the  poles  are  moved  least.  In  this  way  Cyno- 
sura  [the  pole  star]  is  seen  to  move  much  more  slowly  than  Aquila  or  Canicula 
because,  being  very  near  to  the  pole,  it  describes  a  smaller  circle,  since  they  are 


517 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

all  on  a  single  sphere,  the  movement  of  which  stops  at  its  axis  and  which  does 
not  allow  any  of  its  parts  to  have  movements  which  are  equal  to  one  another. 
And  nevertheless  the  revolution  of  the  whole  brings  them  round  in  equal  times 
but  not  over  equal  spaces. 

The  argument  which  maintains  that  the  Earth,  as  a  part  of  the  celestial 
sphere  and  as  sharing  in  the  same  form  and  movement,  moves  very  little  be¬ 
cause  very  near  to  its  centre  advances  to  the  following  position:  therefore  the 
Earth  will  move,  as  being  a  body  and  not  a  centre,  and  will  describe  in  the  same 
time  arcs  similar  to,  but  smaller  than,  the  arcs  of  the  celestical  circle.  It  is 
clearer  than  daylight  how  false  that  is;  for  there  would  necessarily  always  be 
noon  at  one  place  and  midnight  at  another,  and  so  the  daily  risings  and  settings 
could  not  take  place,  since  the  movement  of  the  whole  and  the  part  would  be 
one  and  inseparable. 

But  the  ratio  between  things  separated  by  diversity  of  nature  is  so  entirely 
different  that  those  which  describe  a  smaller  circle  turn  more  quickly  than  those 
which  describe  a  greater  circle.  In  this  way  Saturn,  the  highest  of  the  wandering 
stars,  completes  its  revolution  in  thirty  years,  and  the  moon  which  is  without 
doubt  the  closest  to  the  Earth  completes  its  circuit  in  a  month,  and  finally  the 
Earth  itself  will  be  considered  to  complete  a  circular  movement  in  the  space  of  a 
day  and  a  night.  So  this  same  problem  concerning  the  daily  revolution  comes  up 
again.  And  also  the  question  about  the  place  of  the  Earth  becomes  even  less 
certain  on  account  of  what  was  just  said.  For  that  demonstration  proves  nothing 
except  that  the  heavens  are  of  an  indefinite  magnitude  with  respect  to  the 
Earth.  But  it  is  not  at  all  clear  how  far  this  immensity  stretches  out.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  since  the  minimal  and  indivisible  corpuscles,  which  are  called  atoms,  are 
not  perceptible  to  sense,  they  do  not,  when  taken  in  twos  or  in  some  small  num¬ 
ber,  constitute  a  visible  body;  but  they  can  be  taken  in  such  a  large  quantity 
that  there  will  at  last  be  enough  to  form  a  visible  magnitude.  So  it  is  as  regards 
the  place  of  the  earth;  for  although  it  is  not  at  the  centre  of  the  world,  neverthe¬ 
less  the  distance  is  as  nothing,  particularly  in  comparison  with  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars. 

7.  Why  the  Ancients  Thought  the  Earth  Was  at  Rest  at  the 
Middle  of  the  World  as  Its  Centre 

[5^]  Wherefore  for  other  reasons  the  ancient  philosophers  have  tried  to  affirm 
that  the  Earth  is  at  rest  at  the  middle  of  the  world,  and  as  principal  cause  they 
put  forward  heaviness  and  lightness.  For  Earth  is  the  heaviest  element;  and  all 
things  of  any  weight  are  borne  towards  it  and  strive  to  move  towards  the  very 
centre  of  it. 

For  since  the  Earth  is  a  globe  towards  which  from  every  direction  heavy 
things  by  their  own  nature  are  borne  at  right  angles  to  its  surface,  the  heavy 
things  would  fall  on  one  another  at  the  centre  if  they  were  not  held  back  at  the 
surface;  since  a  straight  line  making  right  angles  with  a  plane  surface  where  it 
touches  a  sphere  leads  to  the  centre.  And  those  things  which  are  borne  toward 
the  centre  seem  to  follovr  along  in  order  to  be  at  rest  at  the  centre.  Ail  the  more 
then  will  the  Earth  be  at  rest  at  the  centre;  and,  as  being  the  receptacle  for  fall¬ 
ing  bodies,  it  will  remain  immovable  because  of  its  weight. 

They  strive  similarly  to  prove  this  by  reason  of  movement  and  its  nature.  For 


518  COPERNICUS 

Aristotle  says  that  the  movement  of  a  body  which  is  one  and  simple  is  simple, 
and  the  simple  movements  are  the  rectilinear  and  the  circular.  And  of  rectilinear 
movements,  one  is  upward,  and  the  other  is  downward.  As  a  consequence,  every 
simple  movement  is  either  toward  the  centre,  i.e.,  downward,  or  away  from  the 
centre,  f.e.,  upward,  or  around  the  centre,  i.e.,  circular.  Now  it  belongs  to  earth 
and  water,  which  are  considered  heavy,  to  be  borne  downward,  f.e.,  to  seek  the 
centre:  for  air  and  fire,  which  are  endowed  with  lightness,  move  upward,  t.e., 
away  from  the  centre.  It  seems  fitting  to  grant  rectilinear  movement  to  these 
four  elements  and  to  give  the  heavenly  bodies  a  circular  movement  around  the 
centre.  So  Aristotle.  Therefore,  said  Ptolemy  of  Alexandria,  if  the  Earth  moved, 
even  if  only  by  its  daily  rotation,  the  contrary  of  what  was  said  above  would 
necessarily  take  place.  For  this  movement  which  would  traverse  the  total  circuit 
of  the  Earth  in  twenty-four  hours  would  necessarily  be  very  headlong  and  of  an 
unsurpassable  velocity.  Now  things  which  are  suddenly  and  violently  whirled 
around  are  seen  to  be  utterly  unfitted  for  reuniting,  and  the  more  unified  are 
seen  to  become  dispersed,  unless  some  constant  force  constrains  them  to  stick 
together.  And  a  long  time  ago,  he  says,  the  scattered  Earth  would  have  passed 
beyond  the  heavens,  as  is  certainly  ridiculous;  [5^]  and  a  fortiori  so  would  all 
the  living  creatures  and  all  the  other  separate  masses  which  could  by  no  means 
remain  unshaken.  Moreover,  freely  falling  bodies  would  not  arrive  at  the  places 
appointed  them,  and  certainly  not  along  the  perpendicular  line  which  they  as¬ 
sume  so  quickly.  And  we  would  see  clouds  and  other  things  fioating  in  the  air  al¬ 
ways  borne  toward  the  west. 

8.  Answer  to  the  Aforesaid  Reasons  and  Their  Inadequacy 

For  these  and  similar  reasons  they  say  that  the  Earth  remains  at  rest  at  the 
middle  of  the  world  and  that  there  is  no  doubt  about  this.  But  if  someone  opines 
that  the  Earth  revolves,  he  will  also  say  that  the  movement  is  natural  and  not 
violent.  Now  things  which  are  according  to  nature  produce  effects  contrary  to 
those  which  are  violent.  For  things  to  which  force  or  violence  is  applied  get 
broken  up  and  are  unable  to  subsist  for  a  long  time.  But  things  which  are  caused 
by  nature  are  in  a  right  condition  and  are  kept  in  their  best  organization.  There¬ 
fore  Ptolemy  had  no  reason  to  fear  that  the  Earth  and  all  things  on  the  Earth 
would  be  scattered  in  a  revolution  caused  by  the  efficacy  of  nature,  which  is 
greatly  different  from  that  of  art  or  from  that  which  can  result  from  the  genius 
of  man.  But  why  didnT  he  feel  anxiety  about  the  world  instead,  whose  move¬ 
ment  must  necessarily  be  of  greater  velocity,  the  greater  the  heavens  are  than 
the  Earth?  Or  have  the  heavens  become  so  immense,  because  an  unspeakably 
vehement  motion  has  pulled  them  away  from  the  centre,  and  because  the 
heavens  would  fall  if  they  came  to  rest  anywhere  else? 

Surely  if  this  reasoning  were  tenable,  the  magnitude  of  the  heavens  would  ex¬ 
tend  infinitely.  For  the  farther  the  movement  is  borne  upward  by  the  vehement 
force,  the  faster  will  the  movement  be,  on  account  of  the  ever-increasing  cir¬ 
cumference  which  must  be  traversed  every  twenty-four  hours:  and  conversely, 
the  immensity  of  the  sky  would  increase  with  the  increase  in  movement.  In  this 
way,  the  velocity  would  make  the  magnitude  increase  infinitely,  and  the  mag¬ 
nitude  the  velocity.  And  in  accordance  with  the  axiom  of  physics  that  that  which 
is  infinite  cannot  be  traversed  or  moved  in  any  way,  then  the  heavens  will  neces¬ 
sarily  come  to  rest. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  519 

But  they  say  that  beyond  the  heavens  there  isnT  any  body  or  place  or  void 
or  anything  at  all;  and  accordingly  it  is  not  possible  for  the  heavens  to  move  out¬ 
ward:  in  that  case  it  is  rather  surprising  that  something  can  be  held  together  by 
nothing.  But  if  the  heavens  were  infinite  and  were  finite  only  with  respect  to  a 
hollow  space  inside,  then  it  will  be  said  with  more  truth  that  there  is  nothing 
outside  the  heavens,  since  anything  [6^]  which  occupied  any  space  would  be  in 
them;  but  the  heavens  will  remain  immobile.  For  movement  is  the  most  power¬ 
ful  reason  wherewith  they  try  to  conclude  that  the  universe  is  finite. 

But  let  us  leave  to  the  philosophers  of  nature  the  dispute  as  to  whether  the 
world  is  finite  or  infinite,  and  let  us  hold  as  certain  that  the  Earth  is  held  to¬ 
gether  between  its  two  poles  and  terminates  in  a  spherical  surface.  Why  there¬ 
fore  should  we  hesitate  any  longer  to  grant  to  it  the  movement  which  accords 
naturally  with  its  form,  rather  than  put  the  whole  world  in  a  commotion — the 
world  whose  limits  we  do  not  and  cannot  know?  And  why  not  admit  that  the 
appearance  of  daily  revolution  belongs  to  the  heavens  but  the  reality  belongs 
to  the  Earth?  And  things  are  as  when  Aeneas  said  in  Virgil:  ^^We  sail  out  of  the 
harbor,  and  the  land  and  the  cities  move  away.'^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when  a 
ship  floats  on  over  a  tranquil  sea,  all  the  things  outside  seem  to  the  voyagers  to 
be  moving  in  a  movement  which  is  the  image  of  their  own,  and  they  think  on 
the  contrary  that  they  themselves  and  all  the  things  with  them  are  at  rest.  So 
it  can  easily  happen  in  the  case  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth  that  the  whole 
world  should  be  believed  to  be  moving  in  a  circle.  Then  what  would  we  say 
about  the  clouds  and  the  other  things  floating  in  the  air  or  falling  or  rising  up, 
except  that  not  only  the  Earth  and  the  watery  element  with  which  it  is  con¬ 
joined  are  moved  in  this  way  but  also  no  small  part  of  the  air  and  whatever 
other  things  have  a  similar  kinship  with  the  Earth?  whether  because  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  air,  which  is  mixed  with  earthly  and  watery  matter,  obeys  the  same 
nature  as  the  Earth  or  because  the  movement  of  the  air  is  an  acquired  one,  in 
which  it  participates  without  resistance  on  account  of  the  contiguity  and  per¬ 
petual  rotation  of  the  Earth.  Conversely,  it  is  no  less  astonishing  for  them  to 
say  that  the  highest  region  of  the  air  follows  the  celestial  movement,  as  is  shown 
by  those  stars  which  appear  suddenly — I  mean  those  called  ^^comets^^  or  “beard¬ 
ed  stars^^  by  the  Greeks.  For  that  place  is  assigned  for  their  generation;  and  like 
all  the  other  stars  they  rise  and  set.  We  can  say  that  that  part  of  the  air  is  de¬ 
prived  of  terrestrial  motion  on  account  of  its  great  distance  from  the  Earth. 
Hence  the  air  which  is  nearest  to  the  Earth  and  the  things  floating  in  it  will 
appear  tranquil,  unless  they  are  driven  to  and  fro  by  the  wind  or  some  other 
force,  as  happens.  For  how  is  the  wind  in  the  air  different  from  a  current  in  the 
sea? 

But  we  must  confess  that  in  comparison  with  the  world  the  movement  of 
falling  and  of  rising  bodies  is  twofold  and  is  in  general  compounded  of  the  recti¬ 
linear  and  the  circular.  As  regards  things  which  move  downward  on  account 
of  their  weight  [6^]  because  they  have  very  much  earth  in  them,  doubtless 
their  parts  possess  the  same  nature  as  the  whole,  and  it  is  for  the  same  reason 
that  fiery  bodies  are  drawn  upward  with  force.  For  even  this  earthly  fire  feeds 
principally  on  earthly  matter;  and  they  define  flame  as  glowing  smoke.  Now  it 
is  a  property  of  fire  to  make  that  which  it  invades  to  expand;  and  it  does  this 
with  such  force  that  it  can  be  stopped  by  no  means  or  contrivance  from  breaking 
prison  and  completing  its  job.  Now  expanding  movement  moves  away  from  the 


520 


COPERNICUS 

centre  to  the  circumference;  and  so  if  some  part  of  the  Earth  caught  on  fire,  it 
would  be  borne  away  from  the  centre  and  upward.  Accordingly,  as  they  say, 
a  simple  body  possesses  a  simple  movement — this  is  first  verified  in  the  case  of 
circular  movement — as  long  as  the  simple  body  remain  in  its  unity  in  its  natural 
place.  In  this  place,  in  fact,  its  movement  is  none  other  than  the  circular,  which 
remains  entirely  in  itself,  as  though  at  rest.  Rectilinear  movement,  however,  is 
added  to  those  bodies  which  journey  av/ay  from  their  natural  place  or  are  shov¬ 
ed  out  of  it  or  are  outside  it  somehow.  But  nothing  is  more  repugnant  to  the 
order  of  the  whole  and  to  the  form  of  the  world  than  for  anything  to  be  outside 
of  its  place.  Therefore  rectilinear  movement  belongs  only  to  bodies  which  are 
not  in  the  right  condition  and  are  not  perfectly  conformed  to  their  nature — 
when  they  are  separated  from  their  whole  and  abandon  its  unity.  Furthermore, 
bodies  which  are  moved  upward  or  downward  do  not  possess  a  simple,  uniform, 
and  regular  movement — even  without  taking  into  account  circular  movement. 
For  they  cannot  be  in  equilibrium  with  their  lightness  or  their  force  of  weight. 
And  those  which  fall  downward  possess  a  slow  movement  at  the  beginning  but 
increase  their  velocity  as  they  fall.  And  conversely  we  note  that  this  earthly 
fire — and  we  have  experience  of  no  other — when  carried  high  up  immediately 
dies  down,  as  if  through  the  acknowledged  agency  of  the  violence  of  earthly 
matter. 

Now  circular  movement  always  goes  on  regularly,  for  it  has  an  unfailing 
cause;  but  [in  rectilinear  movement]  the  acceleration  stops,  because,  when  the 
bodies  have  reached  their  own  place,  they  are  no  longer  heavy  or  light,  and  so 
the  movement  ends.  Therefore,  since  circular  movement  belongs  to  wholes  and 
rectilinear  to  parts,  we  can  say  that  the  circular  movement  stands  with  the  recti¬ 
linear,  as  does  animal  with  sick.  And  the  fact  that  Aristotle  divided  simple 
movement  into  three  genera:  away  from  the  centre,  toward  the  centre,  and 
around  the  centre,  will  be  considered  merely  as  an  act  of  reason,  just  as  we  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  line,  point,  and  surface,  though  none  of  them  can  subsist  with¬ 
out  the  others  or  [7^]  without  body. 

In  addition,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  state  of  immobility  is  regarded  as  more 
noble  and  godlike  than  that  of  change  and  instability,  which  for  that  reason 
should  belong  to  the  Earth  rather  than  to  the  world.  I  add  that  it  seems  rather 
absurd  to  ascribe  movement  to  the  container  or  to  that  which  provides  the  place 
and  not  rather  to  that  which  is  sontained  and  has  a  place,  f.e.,  the  Earth.  And 
lastly,  since  it  is  clear  that  the  wandering  stars  are  sometimes  nearer  and  some¬ 
times  farther  away  from  the  Earth,  then  the  movement  of  one  and  the  same 
body  around  the  centre — and  they  mean  the  centre  of  the  Earth — will  be  both 
away  from  the  centre  and  toward  the  centre.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  that 
movement  around  the  centre  should  be  taken  more  generally;  and  it  should  be 
enough  if  each  movement  is  in  accord  with  its  own  centre.  You  see  therefore  that 
for  all  these  reasons  it  is  more  probably  that  the  Earth  moves  than  that  it  is  at 
rest — especially  in  the  case  of  the  daily  revolution,  as  it  is  the  Earth’s  very  own. 
And  I  think  that  is  enough  as  regards  the  first  part  of  the  question. 

9.  Whether  Many  Movements  Can  Be  Attributed  to  the  Earth, 
AND  Concerning  the  Centre  of  the  World 

Therefore,  since  nothing  hinders  the  mobility  of  the  Earth,  I  think  we  should 
now  see  whether  more  than  one  movement  belongs  to  it,  so  that  it  can  be  re- 


521 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

garded  as  one  of  the  wandering  stars.  For  the  apparent  irregular  movement  of 
the  planets  and  their  variable  distances  from  the  Earth — which  cannot  be  un¬ 
derstood  as  occurring  in  circles  homocentric  with  the  Earth — make  it  clear  that 
the  Earth  is  not  the  centre  of  their  circular  movements.  Therefore,  since  there 
are  many  centres,  it  is  not  foolhardy  to  doubt  whether  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  Earth  rather  than  some  other  is  the  centre  of  the  world.  I  myself  think  that 
gravity  or  heaviness  is  nothing  except  a  certain  natural  appetency  implanted  in 
the  parts  by  the  divine  providence  of  the  universal  Artisan,  in  order  that  they 
should  unite  ’with  one  another  in  their  oneness  and  wholeness  and  come  together 
in  the  form  of  a  globe.  It  is  believable  that  this  affect  is  present  in  the  sun, 
moon,  and  the  other  bright  planets  and  that  through  its  efficacy  they  remain  in 
the  spherical  figure  in  which  they  are  visible,  though  they  nevertheless  accom¬ 
plish  their  circular  movements  in  many  different  ways.  Therefore  if  the  Earth 
too  possesses  movements  different  from  the  one  around  its  centre,  then  they  will 
necessarily  be  movements  which  similarly  appear  on  the  outside  in  the  many 
bodies;  and  we  find  the  yearly  revolution  among  these  movements.  For  if  the 
annual  revolution  were  changed  from  being  solar  to  being  terrestrial,  and  im¬ 
mobility  were  granted  to  the  sun,  [7^]  the  risings  and  settings  of  the  signs  and  of 
the  fixed  stars — ^whereby  they  become  morning  or  evening  stars — will  appear  in 
the  same  way;  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  stoppings,  retrogressions,  and  pro¬ 
gressions  of  the  wandering  stars  are  not  their  own,  but  are  a  movement  of  the 
Earth  and  that  they  borrow  the  appearances  of  this  movement.  Lastly,  the  sun 
will  be  regarded  as  occupying  the  centre  of  the  world.  And  the  ratio  of  order  in 
which  these  bodies  succeed  one  another  and  the  harmony  of  the  whole  world 
teaches  us  their  truth,  if  only — as  they  say — we  would  look  at  the  thing  with 
both  eyes. 


10.  On  the  Order  of  the  Celestial  Orbital  Circles 

I  know  of  no  one  who  doubts  that  the  heavens  of  the  fixed  stars  is  the  highest 
up  of  all  visible  things.  We  see  that  the  ancient  philosophers  wished  to  take  the 
order  of  the  planets  according  to  the  magnitude  of  their  revolutions,  for  the 
reason  that  among  things  which  are  moved  with  equal  speed  those  which  are 
the  more  distant  seem  to  be  borne  along  more  slowly,  as  Euclid  proves  in  his 
Optics.  And  so  they  think  that  the  moon  traverses  its  circle  in  the  shortest  period 
of  time,  because  being  next  to  the  Earth,  it  revolves  in  the  smallest  circle.  But 
they  think  that  Saturn,  which  completes  the  longest  circuit  in  the  longest  period 
of  time,  is  the  highest.  Beneath  Saturn,  Jupiter.  After  Jupiter,  Mars. 

There  are  different  opinions  about  Venus  and  Mercury,  in  that  they  do  not 
have  the  full  range  of  angular  elongations  from  the  sun  that  the  others  dob 
Wherefore  some  place  them  above  the  sun,  as  Timaeus  does  in  Plato;  some,  be¬ 
neath  the  sun,  as  Ptolemy  and  a  good  many  moderns.  Alpetragius  makes  Venus 
higher  than  the  sun  and  Mercurj’’  lower.  Accordingly,  as  the  followers  of  Plato 
suppose  that  all  the  planets — ^which  are  otherwise  dark  bodies — shine  with  light 
received  from  the  sun,  they  think  that  if  the  planets  were  below  the  sun,  they 
would  on  account  of  their  slight  distance  from  the  sun  be  viewed  as  only  half — 
or  at  any  rate  as  only  partly — spherical.  For  the  light  which  they  receive  is  re- 

^The  greatest  angular  elongation  of  Venus  from  the  sun  is  approximately  45°;  that  of  Mer¬ 
cury,  approximately  24°;  while  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  have  the  full  range  of  possible  an- 
guto  elongation,  f.e.,  up  to  180°. 


522  COPERNICUS 

fleeted  by  them  upward  for  the  most  part,  z.e.,  towards  the  sun,  as  we  see  in  the 
case  of  the  new  moon  or  the  old.  Moreover,  they  say  that  necessarily  the  sun 
would  sometimes  be  obscured  through  their  interposition  and  that  its  light 
would  be  eclipsed  in  proportion  to  their  magnitude;  and  as  that  has  never  ap¬ 
peared  to  take  place,  they  think  that  these  planets  cannot  by  any  means  be  be¬ 
low  the  sunk 

On  the  contrary,  those  who  place  Venus  and  Mercury  below  the  sun  claim  as 
a  reason  the  amplitude  of  the  space  which  they  find  between  the  sun  and  the 
moon.  [8^]  For  they  find  that  the  greatest  distance  between  the  Earth  and  the 
moon,  i.e.,  64  units,  whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth  is  one,  is  contained  almost 
18  times  in  the  least  distance  between  the  sun  and  the  Earth.  This  distance  is 
1160  such  units,  and  therefore  the  distance  between  the  sun  and  the  moon  is 
1096  such  units.  And  then,  in  order  for  such  a  vast  space  not  to  remain  empty, 
they  find  that  the  intervals  between  the  perigees  and  apogees — according  to 
which  they  reason  out  the  thickness  of  the  spheres^ — add  up  to  approximately 
the  same  sum:  in  such  fashion  that  the  apogee  of  the  moon  may  be  succeeded  by 
the  perigee  of  Mercury,  that  the  apogee  of  Mercury  may  be  followed  by  the 
perigee  of  Venus,  and  that  finally  the  apogee  of  Venus  may  nearly  touch  the 
perigee  of  the  sun.  In  fact  they  calculate  that  the  interval  between  the  perigee 
and  the  apogee  of  Mercury  contains  approximately  177J^  of  the  aforesaid  units 
and  that  the  ramaining  space  is  nearly  filled  by  the  910  units  of  the  interval  be¬ 
tween  the  perigee  and  apogee  of  Venus^.  Therefore  they  do  not  admit  that  these 
planets  have  a  certain  opacity,  like  that  of  the  moon;  but  that  they  shine  either 
by  their  own  proper  light  or  because  their  entire  bodies  are  impregnated  with 
sunlight,  and  that  accordingly  they  do  not  obscure  the  sun,  because  it  is  an  ex¬ 
tremely  rare  occurrence  for  them  to  be  interposed  between  our  sight  and  the 
sun,  as  they  usually  withdraw  [from  the  sun]  latitudinally.  In  addition,  there  is 
the  fact  that  they  are  small  bodies  in  comparison  with  the  sun,  since  Venus  even 

^The  transit  of  Venus  across  the  face  of  the  sun  was  first  observed — 
by  means  of  a  telescope — in  1639. 

^That  is  to  say,  the  thickness  of  the  sphere  would  measured  by  the 
ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  epicycle  to  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  or,  in 
the  accompanying  diagram,  by  the  distance  between  the  inmost  and  the 
outmost  of  the  three  homocentric  circles. 

®The  succession  of  the  orbital  circles  according  to  their  perigees  and 
apogees  may  be  represented  in  the  following  diagram,  which  has  been 
drawn  to  scale. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  523 

though  larger  than  Mercury  can  cover  scarcely  one  one-hundredth  part  of  the 
sun,  as  al-Battani  the  Harranite  maintains,  who  holds  that  the  diameter  of  the 
sun  is  ten  times  greater,  and  therefore  it  would  not  be  easy  to  see  such  a  little 
speck  in  the  midst  of  such  beaming  light.  Averroes,  however,  in  his  paraphrase 
of  Ptolemy  records  having  seen  something  blackish,  when  he  observed  the  con¬ 
junction  of  the  sun  and  Mercury  which  he  had  computed.  And  so  they  judge 
that  these  two  planets  move  below  the  solar  circle. 

But  how  uncertain  and  shaky  this  reasoning  is,  is  clear  from  the  fact  that 
though  the  shortest  distance  of  the  moon  is  38  units  whereof  the  radius  of  the 
Earth  is  one  unit — according  to  Ptolemy,  but  more  than  49  such  units  by  a  truer 
evaluation,  as  will  be  shown  below — nevertheless  we  do  not  know  that  this  great 
space  contains  anything  except  air,  or  if  you  prefer,  what  they  call  the  fiery 
element. 

Moreover,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  diameter  of  the  epicycle  of  Venus — by 
reason  of  which  Venus  has  an  angular  digression  of  approximately  45°  on  either 
side  of  the  sun — would  have  to  be  six  times  greater  than  the  distance  from  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  to  its  perigee,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  proper  place h  Then 
what  will  they  say  is  contained  in  all  this  apace,  which  [8^]  is  so  great  as  to  take 
in  the  Earth,  air,  ether,  moon  and  Mercury,  and  which  moreover  the  vast  epi¬ 
cycle  of  Venus  would  occupy  if  it  revolved  around  an  immobile  Earth? 

Furthermore,  how  unconvincing  is  Ptolemy^s  argument  that  the  sun  must 
occupy  the  middle  position  between  those  planets  which  have  the  full  range  of 
angular  elongation  from  the  sun  and  those  which  do  not  is  clear  from  the  fact 
that  the  moon's  full  range  of  angular  elongation  proves  its  falsity. 

But  what  cause  will  those  vrho  place  Venus  below  the  sun,  and  Mercury  next, 
or  separate  them  in  some  other  order — what  cause  will  they  allege  why  these 
planets  do  not  also  make  longitudinal  circuits  separate  and  independent  of 
the  sun,  like  the  other  planets^ — if  indeed  the  ratio  of  speed  or  slowness  does  not 
falsify  their  order?  Therefore  it  will  be  necessary  either  for  the  Earth  not  to  be 
the  centre  to  which  the  order  of  the  planets  and  their  orbital  circles  is  referred, 
or  for  there  to  be  no  sure  reason  for  their  order  and  for  it  not  to  be  apparent  why 
the  highest  place  is  due  to  Saturn  rather  than  to  Jupiter  or  some  other  planet. 
Wherefore  I  judge  that  w^hat  Martianus  Capella — who  wrote  the  Encyclopedia 
— and  some  other  Latins  took  to  be  the  case  is  by  no  means  to  be  despised.  For 
they  hold  that  Venus  and  Mercury  circle  around  the  sun  as  a  centre;  and  they 
hold  that  for  this  reason  Venus  and  Mercury  do  not  have  any  farther  elongation 

^According  to  Ptolemy,  the  ratio  of  the  radius  of  Venus’  epicycle  to  the  radius  of  its  eccen¬ 
tric  is  between  2  to  3  and  3  to  4,  or  approximately  433^  to  60.  Now  since  at  perigee  the  epi¬ 
cycle  subtracts  from  the  mean  distance,  or  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle,  that  which  at  apogee 
it  adds  to  the  mean  distance,  the  ratio  of  Venus’  distance  at  perigee  to  its  distance  at  apogee  is 
approximately  1  to  6.  That  is  to  say,  in  the  passage  from  apogee  to  perigee,  the  ratio  of  in¬ 
crease  in  the  apparent  magnitude  of  the  planet  should  be  approximately  36  to  1,  as  the  ap¬ 
parent  magnitude  varies  inversely  in  the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distance.  But  no  such 
increase  in  the  magnitude  of  the  planet  is  apparent.  This  opposition  between  an  appearance 
and  the  consequences  of  an  hypothesis  made  to  save  another  appearance  is  still  present 
witliin  Copernicus’  own  scheme. 

^Ptolemy  makes  the  centres  of  the  epicycles  of  Venus  and  Mercury  travel  around  the  Earth 
longitudinally  at  the  same  rate  as  the  mean  sun,  and  in  such  fashion  that  the  mean  sun  is  al¬ 
ways  on  the  straight  line  extending  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  through  the  centres  of  their 
epicycles,  while  the  centres  of  the  epicycles  of  the  upper  planets  may  be  at  any  angular  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  mean  sun. 


524  COPERNICUS 

from  the  sun  than  the  convexity  of  their  orbital  circles  permits;  for  they  do 
not  make  a  circle  around  the  earth  as  do  the  others,  but  have  perigee  and  apo¬ 
gee  interchangeable  [in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars].  Now  what  do  they  mean 
except  that  the  centre  of  their  spheres  is  around  the  sun?  Thus  the  orbital  circle 
of  Mercury  will  be  enclosed  within  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus —  which  would 
have  to  be  more  than  twice  as  large — and  will  find  adequate  room  for  itself 
within  that  amplitude^  Therefore  if  anyone  should  take  this  as  an  occasion  to 
refer  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  also  to  this  same  centre,  provided  he  under¬ 
stands  the  magnitude  of  those  orbital  circles  to  be  such  as  to  comprehend  and 
encircle  the  Earth  remaining  within  them,  he  would  not  be  in  error,  as  the  table 
of  ratios  of  their  movements  makes  clear^.  For  it  is  manifest  that  the  planets 
are  always  nearer  the  Earth  at  the  time  of  their  evening  rising,  i.e.,  when  they 
are  opposite  to  the  sun  and  the  Earth  is  in  the  middle  between  them  and  the 
sun.  But  they  are  farthest  away  from  the  Earth  at  the  time  of  their  evening 
setting,  i.e.j  when  they  are  occulted  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun,  namely, 
when  we  have  the  sun  between  them  and  the  Earth.  All  that  shows  clearly 
enough  that  their  centre  is  more  directly  related  to  the  sun  and  is  the  same  as 

^As  in  the  following  diagram  which  has 
been  drawn  to  scale. 

®Take  the  case  of  Mars.  In  Ptolemy,  the 
ratio  of  its  epicycle  to  its  eccentric  is  39J^  to 
60,  or  approximately  2  to  3.  Mars  has  37  cycles 
of  anomaly,  or  movement  on  the  epicycle,  and 
42  cycles  of  longitude,  or  movement  of  the 
epicycle  on  the  eccentric,  in  79  solar  years;  or 
for  the  sake  of  easiness  let  us  say  that  the  ratio 
of  the  sun’s  movement  to  either  of  the  planets’  two  movements  is  2  to  1.  Copernicus  is  here 
suggesting  that  if  the  centre  of  the  planet’s  movement  is  placed  around  the  moving  sun, 
then  the  Ptolemaic  cycles  of  anomaly  will  represent  the  number  of  times  the  sun  has  over¬ 
taken  the  planet  in  longitude:  thus  the  37  cycles  of  anomaly  plus  the  42  cycles  of  longi¬ 
tude  add  up  to  the  79  solar  revolutions.  That  is  to  say,  the  sun  will  now  be  traveling  around 
the  Earth  on  a  circle  which  has  the  same  relative  magnitude  as  the  Martian  epicycle  in 
Ptolemy  and  bears  an  epicycle  having  the  same  relative  magnitude  as  Ptolemy’s  Martian 
eccentric  circle,  on  which  epicycle  Mars  travels  in  the  opposite  direction  at  half  the  speed 
of  the  sun.  Under  both  hypotheses  the  appearances  from  the  Earth  will  be  the  same,  as  can 
be  seen  in  the  following  diagrams. 

For  according  to  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis,  let'  the  Earth  be  at  the  center  of  the  approxi¬ 
mately  homocentric  circles  of  the  sun,  Mars,  and  the  ecliptic.  Let  the  radius  of  the  planet’s 
epicycle  be  to  the  radius  of  the  planet’s  eccentric  as  2  to  3.  Now,  first,  let  the  sun  be  viewed 
at  the  beginning  of  Leo,  and  let  the  planet  at  the  perigee  of  its  epicycle  be  viewed  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Aquarius,  in  opposition  to  the  sun.  Next,  let  the  sun  move  240°  eastwards,  to  the 
beginning  of  Aries;  and  during  the  same  interval  let  the  epicycle  move  120°  eastwards,  to 
the  beginning  of  Gemini,  and  the  planet  120°  eastwards  on  the  epicycle.  Now  the  planet  will 
be  found  to  appear  in  Taurus,  about  36°  west  of  the  sun. 

But  if  according  to  the  semi-Copernican  hypothesis,  the  sun  is  made  to  revolve  around 
the  Earth  on  a  circle  having  the  same  relative  magnitude  as  Mars’  Ptolemaic  epicycle,  while 
Mars  is  placed  on  an  epicycle  which  has  the  same  relative  magnitude  as  its  Ptolemaic  ec¬ 
centric  and  has  its  centre  at  the  sun ;  and  if  the  apparent  positions  of  Mars  and  the  sun  are 
first  the  same  as  before,  and  the  sun  moves  240°  eastwards,  bearing  along  the  deferent  of 


525 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

that  to  which  Venus  and  Mercury  refer  their  revolutions^.  But  as  they  all  have 
one  common  centre,  it  is  necessary  that  the  space  left  between  the  convex  orbi¬ 
tal  circle  of  Venus  and  the  concave  orbital  circle  of  Mars  should  be  viewed  as  an 
orbital  circle  [9^]  or  sphere  homocentric  with  them  in  respect  to  both  surfaces, 
and  that  it  should  receive  the  Earth  and  its  satellite  the  moon  and  whatever  is 
contained  beneath  the  lunar  globe.  For  we  can  by  no  means  separate  the  moon 
from  the  Earth,  as  the  moon  is  incontestably  very  near  to  the  Earth — especially 
since  we  find  in  this  expanse  a  place  for  the  moon  which  is  proper  enough  and 
sufficiently  large.  Therefore  we  are  not  ashamed  to  maintain  that  this  totality — 
which  the  moon  embraces — and  the  centre  of  the  Earth  too  traverse  that  great 
orbital  circle  among  the  other  wandering  stars  in  an  annual  revolution  around 
the  sun;  and  that  the  centre  of  the  world  is  around  the  sun.  I  also  say  that  the 
sun  remains  forever  immobile  and  that  whatever  apparent  movement  belongs 
to  it  can  be  verified  of  the  mobility  of  the  Earth;  that  the  magnitude  of  the 
world  is  such  that,  although  the  distance  from  the  sun  to  the  Earth  in  relation 


Conjunction  Opposition 
ACCORDING  TO  PTOLEMY 


^Copernicus  is  asking  what  reason 
there  is  why  the  planets  are  always 
found  to  be  at  their  apogees  at  the 
time  of  conjunction  with  the  sun,  and 
at  their  perigees  at  the  time  of  opposi¬ 
tion,  since  according  to  the  Ptolemaic 
scheme  the  reverse  is  also  possible — as 
is  evident  from  the  accompanying  dia¬ 
gram. 

But  if  the  sun  and  not  the  Earth  is  the  centre  of  the  planet^s  movements,  the  reason  is 
obvious. 


Conjunction  Opposition 
ACCORDING  TO  COPERNICUS 


Mars,  while  Mars  moves  120®  westwards  on  its  epicycle;  then  Mars  will  once  more  be 
found  to  appear  in  Taurus,  approximately  36®  west  of  the  sun. 


PTOLEMAIC  HYPOTHESIS  SEMI-COPERNICAN  HYPOTHESIS 


Movemenf  of  Sun=240* 
Movement  of  Eccentric=«120* 
Movement  of  Epicycle=120® 


Movement  of  Sun  =240* 
Movement  of  Mars=120* 


526  COPERNICUS 

to  whatsoever  planetary  sphere  you  please  possesses  magnitude  which  is  suffici¬ 
ently  manifest  in  proportion  to  these  dimensions,  this  distance,  as  compared 
with  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  is  imperceptible.  I  find  it  much  more  easy  to 
grant  that  than  to  unhinge  the  understanding  by  an  almost  infinite  multitude  of 
spheres — as  those  who  keep  the  earth  at  the  centre  of  the  world  are  forced  to 
do.  But  we  should  rather  follow  the  wisdom  of  nature,  which,  as  it  takes  very 
great  care  not  to  have  produced  anything  superfluous  or  useless,  often  prefers 
to  endow  one  thing  with  many  effects.  And  though  all  these  things  are  difficult, 
almost  inconceivable,  and  quite  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  multitude,  never¬ 
theless  in  what  follows  we  will  with  God^s  help  make  them  clearer  than  day — 
at  least  for  those  who  are  not  ignorant  of  the  art  of  mathematics. 

Therefore  if  the  first  law  is  still  safe — for  no  one  will  bring  forward  a  better 
one  than  that  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  orbital 
circles  should  be  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  magnitude 
of  time — then  the  or¬ 
der  of  the  spheres  will 
follow  in  this  way — 
beginning  with  the 
highest:  the  first  and 
highest  of  all  is  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars,  which  compre¬ 
hends  itself  and  all 
things,  and  is  accord¬ 
ingly  immovable.  In 
fact  it  is  the  place  of 
the  universe,  i.e.,  it  is 
that  to  which  the 
movement  and  posi¬ 
tion  of  all  the  other 
stars  are  referred.  For 
in  the  deduction  of 
terrestrial  movement, 
we  will  however  give 
the  cause  why  there 
are  appearances  such 
as  to  make  people  believe  that  even  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  somehow  moves. 
Saturn,  the  first  of  the  wandering  stars  follows;  it  completes  its  circuit  in  30 
years.  After  it  comes  Jupiter  moving  in  a  12-year  period  of  revolution.  Then 
Mars,  which  completes  a  revolution  every  2  years.  The  place  fourth  in  order  is 
occupied  by  the  annual  revolution  [9^]  in  which  we  said  the  Earth  together 
with  the  orbital  circle  of  the  moon  as  an  epicycle  is  comprehended.  In  the  fifth 
place,  Venus,  which  completes  its  revolution  in  73^  months.  The  sixth  and  final 
place  is  occupied  by  Mercury,  which  completes  its  revolution  in  a  period  of  88 
daysh  In  the  center  of  all  rests  the  sun.  For  who  would  place  this  lamp  of  a  very 

qn  order  to  see  how  Copernicus  derived  the  length  of  his  periods  of  revolution,  consider  the 
following  Ptolemaic  ratios  for  the  lower  planets: 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  527 

beautiful  temple  in  another  or  better  place  than  this  wherefrom  it  can  illumi¬ 
nate  everything  at  the  same  time?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  not  unhappily  do  some 
call  it  the  lantern;  others,  the  mind  and  still  others,  the  pilot  of  the  world. 
Trismegistus  calls  it  a  “visible  god^^’  Sophocles’  Electra,  “that  which  gazes  up- 


Cycles  of 

Cycles  of 

Solar 

anomaly 

longitude 

years 

Mercury 

145 

46 -h 

46 -f- 

Venus 

5 

8- 

8- 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  number  of  cycles  of  longitude  in  one  year  is  equal  to  the  number 
of  solar  cycles.  Moreover,  the  two  planets  have  a  limited  angular  elongation  from  the  sun.  In 
order  to  explain  these  two  peculiar  appearances  Copernicus  sets  the  Earth  in  motion  on  the 
circumference  of  a  circle  which  encloses  the  orbits  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  vdth  the  sun  at  the 
centre  of  all  three  orbits.  Thus  the  planet’s  cycles  of  anomaly  in  so  many  years  become  the 
number  of  times  the  planet  has  overtaken  the  Earth,  as  they  revolve  around  the  sun.  That  is 
to  say,  in  so  many  solar  years  the  planet  will  have  traveled  around  the  sun  a  number  of  times 
which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  cycles  of  anomaly  and  its  cycles  in  longitude.  Thus,  for 
example,  Venus  travels  around  the  sun  approximately  13  times  in  8  solar  years;  hence  its 
period  of  revolution  is  approximately  7^  months;  and  similarly,  that  of  Mercury  is  approx¬ 
imately  88  days — although  for  some  obscure  reason  Copernicus  actually  writes  down  9 
months  for  Venus  (nono  mense  reducitur)  and  80  days  for  Mercury  {octaginta  dierum  spatio 
circumcurrens). 

The  reader  may  intuit  from  the  following  diagrams  the  equipoUence,  wdth  respect  to 
the  appearances,  of  the  Ptolemaic  and  the  Copernican  explanations  of  the  movement  of 
Venus. 

Now,  on  Ptolemy’s  hypothesis,  let  the 
Earth  be  placed  at  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic, 
the  solar  circle,  and  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus, 
which  carries  the  planetary  epicycle.  The  ra¬ 
dius  of  the  epicycle  is  to  that  of  the  orbital 
circle  approximately  as  3  is  to  4.  First  let  the 
sun  be  situated  at  the  middle  of  Scorpio,  and 
let  Venus  be  in  conjunction  vdth  the  sun  and 
at  the  perigee  of  its  epicycle.  Next  let  the  sun 
move  180®  eastwards  to  the  middle  of  Taurus, 
and  similarly  the  centre  of  the  epicycle;  during 
this  same  interval  the  planet  vdll  move  112}^° 
eastwards  on  its  epicycle  and  vdll  be  found  to 
appear  in  the  middle  of  Aries  approximately, 
or  30®  west  of  the  sun. 

But  according  to  the  Copernican  hypothe¬ 
sis,  let  us  place  the  sun  at  the  centre  of  the 
orbital  circles  of  Venus  and  the  Earth,  which 
preserve  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  Ptole¬ 
maic  epicycle  and  orbital  circle  of  Venus,  but 
let  us  keep  the  Earth  at  the  centre  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  as  far  as  appearances  go,  since  the  distance 
between  the  Earth  and  the  sun  is  imper¬ 
ceptible  in  comparison  with  the  magnitude  of 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  Now  if  the  Earth 
is  placed  in  the  middle  of  Taurus,  as  viewed 
from  the  sun,  and  the  planet  at  its  perigee  be¬ 
tween  the  Earth  and  the  sun,  in  such  fashion 
that  Venus  and  the  sun  would  appear  in  the 
middle  of  Scorpio,  while  Venus  moves  east¬ 
wards  292 J^®,  then  the  sun  will  be  found  to 
appear  in  the  middle  of  Taurus,  and  the  planet 
itself  in  middle  of  Aries  or  30®  west  of  the  sun. 


COPERNICAN  HYPOTHESIS 


Movement  of  Earth  =180" 
Movement  of  Venus=292!/i" 


528 


COPERNICUS 

on  all  things/^  And  so  the  sun,  as  if  resting  on  a  kingly  throne,  governs  the  fam¬ 
ily  of  stars  which  wheel  around.  Moreover,  the  Earth  is  by  no  means  cheated 
of  the  services  of  the  moon;  but,  as  Aristotle  says  in  the  De  AnimalibuSj  the 
earth  has  the  closest  kinship  with  the  moon.  The  Earth  moreover  is  fertilized 
by  the  sun  and  conceives  offspring  every  year. 

Therefore  in  this  ordering  we  find  [10^]  that  the  world  has  a  wonderful  com- 
mensurability  and  that  there  is  a  sure  bond  of  harmony  for  the  movement  and 
magnitude  of  the  orbital  circles  such  as  cannot  be  found  in  any  other  wayh  For 
now  the  careful  observer  can  note  why  progression  and  retrogradation  appear 
greater  in  Jupiter  than  in  Saturn  and  smaller  than  in  Mars;  and  in  turn  greater 
Tet  us  recall  the  Ptolemaic  ratios  between  the  radius  of  the  epicycle  and  that  of  the  ec- 


centric  circle,  and  also  the  eccentricity. 

Epicycle 

Eccentric 

Eccerdricity 

Mercury 

22H 

60 

3 

Venus 

431^ 

60 

IM 

Mars 

39J^ 

60 

6 

Jupiter 

IIM 

60 

2% 

Saturn 

6H 

60 

3J4 

By  the  Ptolemaic  scheme  it  is  impossible  to  compute  the  magnitudes  of  the  eccentric  circles 
themselves  relative  to  one  another,  as  there  is  no  common  measure.  But  now  that  the  ec¬ 
centric  circles  of  Mercury  and  Venus  and  the  epicycles  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn  have  all 
been  reduced  to  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth,  it  is  easy  to  calculate  the  relative  magnitudes 
of  the  orbital  circles — heretofore  the  epicycles  of  the  lower  planets  and  the  eccentric  circles  of 
the  upper — since,  by  reason  of  the  necessary  commensurability  between  epicycle  and  eccen¬ 
tric,  they  are  aU  commensurable  with  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth.  Thus,  for  example,  if  we 
take  the  distance  from  the  Earth  to  the  sun  as  1,  the  planets  will  observe  the  following  ap>- 
proximate  distances  from  the  sun. 

Mercury  Earth  1  Jupiter  5 

Venus  %  Mars  Saturn  9 

But  let  us  turn  to  the  three  upper  planets. 


Cycles  of 

Cycles  of 

Solar 

anomaly 

Imigitude 

years 

Mars 

37 

42 -f- 

79 

Jupiter 

65 

6 — 

71— 

Saturn 

57 

2  + 

59 — 

It  is  here  noteworthy  that  according  to  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis  the  sum  of  the  revolutions 
of  the  eccentric  circle  and  the  revolutions  in  anomaly  is  equal  to  the  number  of  solar  cycles; 
and  also  that,  the  conjunctions  with  the  sun  take  place  at  the  planet’s  apogee,  and  the  oppo¬ 
sitions  at  its  perigee.  But  according  to  Copernicus  the  Ptolemaic  cycles  of  anomaly  w^ill  now 
represent  the  number  of  times  the  Earth  has  overtaken  the  planet;  and  the  period  of  revolu¬ 
tion  in  longitude  will  stay  the  same.  Thus,  for  example,  Saturn  will  have  two  revolutions  in 
longitude  in  59  years,  or  one  revolution  around  the  sun  in  about  30  years.  The  planet  w'ill  be 
revolving  directly  on  its  eccentric  circle  instead  of  on  its  Ptolemaic  epicycle,  and  the  Earth 
wdll  noW'  be  revolving  on  an  inner  circle  w^hich  has  the  same  relative  magnitude  as  the  former 
epicycle.  The  tw^o  h3q)otheses,  of  course,  are  equipollent  here  too,  with  respect  to  appearances. 

In  other  w’ords,  in  constructing  a  theory  to  account  for  four  coincidences  w^hich  w^ere  left 
unexplained  by  Ptolemy,  namely,  (1)  the  equality  between  the  number  of  cycles  in  longitude 
and  the  solar  cycles,  in  the  two  low^er  planets;  (2)  the  equahty  betw^een  the  solar  cycles  and  the 
sum  of  the  cycles  of  anomaly  and  longitude,  in  the  upper  planets;  (3)  the  limited  angular  di¬ 
gressions  of  Mercury  and  Venus  aw’ay  from  the  sun;  and  (4)  the  apogeal  conjunctions  and 
perigeal  oppositions  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars;  Copernicus  has  telescoped  the  eccentric 
circle  of  Venus  and  that  of  Mercury  into  one  circle  carrying  the  Earth;  and  he  has  furthermore 
collapsed  the  three  epicycles  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  into  this  same  one  circle.  That  is  to 
say,  one  circle  is  now  doing  the  work  of  five. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  529 

in  Venus  than  in  Mercury^  And  why  these  reciprocal  events  appear  more  often 
in  Saturn  than  in  Jupiter,  and  even  less  often  in  Mars  and  Venus  than  in  Mer- 
cury2.  In  addition,  why  when  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  are  in  opposition  [to 
the  mean  position  of  the  sun]  they  are  nearer  to  the  Earth  than  at  the  time 
of  their  occupation  and  their  reappearance.  And  especially  why  at  the  times 
when  Mars  is  in  opposition  to  the  sun,  it  seems  to  equal  Jupiter  in  magnitude 
and  to  be  distinguished  from  Jupiter  only  by  a  reddish  color,  but  when  dis¬ 
covered  through  careful  observation  by  means  of  a  sextant  is  found  with 
difficulty  among  the  stars  of  second  magnitude^?  All  these  things  proceed  from 
the  same  cause,  which  resides  in  the  movement  of  the  Earth. 

But  that  there  are  no  such  appearances  among  the  fixed  stars  argues  that 
they  are  at  an  immense  height  away,  which  makes  the  circle  of  annual 
movement  or  its  image  disappear  from  before  our  eyes  since  every  visible 
thing  has  a  certain  distance  beyond  which  it  is  no  longer  seen,  as  is  shown 
in  optics.  For  the  brilliance  of  their  lights  shows  that  there  is  a  very  great  dis¬ 
tance  between  Saturn  the  highest  of  the  planets  and  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 
It  is  by  this  mark  in  particular  that  they  are  distinguished  from  the  planets,  as 

it  is  proper  to  have  the  greatest  difference  between 
the  moved  and  the  unmoved.  How  exceedingly  fine 
is  the  godlike  work  of  the  Best  and  Greatest  Artist ! 

11.  A  Demonstration  of  the  Threefold 
Movement  of  the  Earth 
Therefore  since  so  much  and  such  great  testi¬ 
mony  on  the  part  of  the  planets  is  consonant  with 
the  mobility  of  the  Earth,  we  shall  now  give  a 
summary  of  its  movement,  insofar  as  the  appear- 

^In  the  three  upper  planets,  the  angles  which  measure  the 
apparent  progression  and  retrogradation  have  as  their  ver¬ 
tex  the  centre  of  the  planet  and  as  their  sides  the  tangents 
drawn  to  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth.  In  the  two  lower 
planets,  however,  the  vertex  of  the  angle  is  at  the  centre  of 
the  Earth  and  the  sides  are  the  tangents  drawn  to  the  or¬ 
bital  circle  of  the  planet.  It  is  easy  to  see  that,  on  account  of 
the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  orbital  circles,  the  arcs  of 
progression  and  retrogradation  will  appear  smaller  in 
Saturn  than  in  Jupiter,  and  smaller  in  Jupiter  than  in  Mars, 
and  greater  in  Venus  than  in  Mercury. 

^The  interchanges  of  progression  and  retrogradation  are 
proportional  to  the  number  of  times  the  Earth  overtakes 
the  outer  planets  and  the  inner  planets  overtake  the  Earth. 
Now  the  Earth  overtakes  Saturn  more  often  than  Jupiter, 
Jupiter  more  often  than  Mars,  Mars  more  often  than  over¬ 
taken  by  Venus,  and  overtaken  less  often  by  Venus  than  by 
Mercury.  Hence  the  frequency  of  progression  and  retro¬ 
gradation  is  in  that  order. 

^According  to  the  Ptolemaic  scheme,  it  can  be  inferred 
only  from  the  changes  in  magnitude  of  the  planet  Mars 
what  its  relative  distances  from  the  Earth  are  at  perigee 
and  apogee.  But  according  to  the  Copernican  scheme,  it 
follows  from  the  relative  distances  of  the  planet  at  perigee 
and  at  apogee— which  are  as  1  to  5— that  the  apparent  di- 

_  ameter  of  the  planet  should  vary  inversely  in  that  ratio — 

assuming  that  the  planet  could  be  seen  when  in  conjunction 
with  the  sun. 


530  COPERNICUS 

ances  can  be  shown  forth  by  its  movement  as  by  an  hypothesis.  We  must  al¬ 
low  a  threefold  movement  altogether. 

The  first — which  we  said  the  Greeks  called  wxOrjiJLepLvos —  is  the  proper  cir¬ 
cuit  of  day  and  night,  which  goes  around  the  axis  of  the  earth  from  west  to  east 
— as  the  world  is  held  to  move  in  the  opposite  direction — and  describes  the  equa¬ 
tor  or  the  equinoctial  circle — which  some,  imitating  the  Greek  expression  [10^] 
i<T7)epLPos,  call  the  equidial. 

The  second  is  the  annual  movement  of  the  centre,  which  describes  the  circle 
of  the  [zodiacal]  signs  around  the  sun  similarly  from  west  to  east,  i.e.,  towards 
the  signs  which  follow  [from  Aries  to  Taurus]  and  moves  along  between  Venus 
and  Mars,  as  we  said,  together  with  the  bodies  accompanying  it.  So  it  happens 
that  the  sun  itself  seems  to  traverse  the  ecliptic  with  a  similar  movement.  In  this 
way,  for  example,  when  the  centre  of  the  Earth  is  traversing  Capricorn,  the  sun 
seems  to  be  crossing  Cancer;  and  when  Aquarius,  Leo,  and  so  on,  as  we  were 
saying. 

It  has  to  be  understood  that  the  equator  and  the  axis  of  the  Earth  have  a 
variable  inclination  with  the  circle  and  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  For  if  they  re¬ 
mained  fixed  and  only  followed  the  movement  of  the  centre  simply,  no  inequal¬ 
ity  of  days  and  nights  would  be  apparent,  but  it  would  always  be  the  summer 
solstice  or  the  winter  solstice  or  the  equinox,  or  summer  or  winter,  or  some  other 
season  of  the  year  always  remaining  the  same.  There  follows  then  the  third 
movement,  which  is  the  declination:  it  is  also  an  annual  revolution  but  one 
towards  the  signs  which  precede  [from  Aries  to  Pisces],  or  westwards,  Le.,  turn¬ 
ing  back  counter  to  the  movement  of  the  centre;  and  as  a  consequence  of  these 
two  movements  which  are  nearly  equal  to  one  another  but  in  opposite  direc¬ 
tions,  it  follows  that  the  axis  of  the  Earth  and  the  greatest  of  the  parallel  circles 
on  it,  the  equator,  always  look  towards  approximately  the  same  quarter  of  the 
world,  just  as  if  they  remained  immobile.  The  sun  in  the  meanwhile  is  seen  to 
move  along  the  oblique  ec¬ 
liptic  with  that  movement 
with  which  the  centre  of  the 
earth  moves,  just  as  if  the 
centre  of  the  earth  were  the 
centre  of  the  world — provid¬ 
ed  you  remember  that  the 
distance  between  the  sun  and 
the  earth  in  comparison  with 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
is  imperceptible  to  us. 

Since  these  things  are  such 
that  they  need  to  be  pre¬ 
sented  to  sight  rather  than 
merely  to  be  talked  about, 
let  us  draw  the  circle  ABCD^ 
which  will  represent  the  an¬ 
nual  circuit  of  the  centre  of 
the  earth  in  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  and  let  E  be  the  sun 
around  its  centre.  I  will  cut 


531 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

this  circle  into  four  equal  parts  by  means  of  the  diameters  AEC  and  BED.  Let 
the  point  A  be  the  beginning  of  Cancer;  B  of  Libra;  E  of  Capricorn;  and  D  of 
Aries.  Now  let  us  put  the  centre  of  the  earth  first  at  A,  around  which  we  shall 
describe  the  terrestrial  equator  FGHI,  but  not  in  the  same  plane  [as  the  ecliptic] 
except  that  the  diameter  GAI  is  the  common  section  of  the  circles,  z.e.,  of  the  e- 
quator  and  the  ecliptic.  Also  let  the  diameter  FAH  be  drawm  at  right  angles  to 
GAI;  and  let  F  be  the  limit  of  the  greatest  southward  declination  [of  the  equa¬ 
tor],  and  H  of  the  northward  declination.  With  this  set-up,  the  Earth-dweller 
will  see  the  sun — which  is  at  the  centre  E — at  the  point  of  the  winter  solstice  in 
Capricorn — [11®]  which  is  caused  by  the  greatest  northward  declination  at  H 
being  turned  toward  the  sun;  since  the  inclination  of  the  equator  with  respect  to 
line  AE  describes  by  means  of  the  daily  revolution  the  winter  tropic,  which  is 
parallel  to  the  equator  at  the  distance  comprehended  by  the  angle  of  inclination 
EAH.  Now  let  the  centre  of  the  Earth  proceed  from  west  to  east;  and  let  F,  the 
limit  of  greatest  declination,  have  just  as  great  a  movement  from  east  to  west, 
until  at  B  both  of  them  have  traversed  quadrants  of  circles.  Meanwhile,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  equality  of  the  revolutions,  angle  EAI  will  always  remain  equal  to 
angle  AEB;  the  diameters  will  always  stay  parallel  to  one  another — FAH  to 
FBH  and  GAI  to  GBI;  and  the  equator  will  remain  parallel  to  the  equator.  And 
by  reason  of  the  cause  spoken  of  many  times  already,  these  lines  will  appear  in 
the  immensity  of  the  sky  as  the  same.  Therefore  from  the  point  B  the  beginning 
of  Libra,  E  will  appear  to  be  in  Aries,  and  the  common  section  of  the  two  circles 
[of  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator]  vdll  fall  upon  line  GBIEy  in  respect  to  which  the 
daily  revolution  has  no  declination;  but  every  declination  will  be  on  one  side 
or  the  other  of  this  line.  And  so  the  sun  will  be  soon  in  the  spring  equinox.  Let 
the  centre  of  the  Earth  advance  under  the  same  conditions;  and  when  it  has 
completed  [11^]  a  semicircle  at  C,  the  sun  will  appear  to  be  entering  Cancer.  But 
since  F  the  southward  declination  of  the  equator  is  now  turned  toward  the  sun, 
the  result  is  that  the  sun  is  seen  in  the  north,  traversing  the  summer  tropic  in 
accordance  with  angle  of  inclination  EOF.  Again,  when  F  moves  on  through  the 
third  quadrant  of  the  circle,  the  common  section  GI  will  fall  on  line  ED;  whence 
the  sun,  seen  in  Libra,  will  appear  to  have  reached  the  autumn  equinox.  But 
then  as,  in  the  same  progressive  movement,  HF  gradually  turns  in  the  direction 
of  the  sun,  it  will  make  the  situation  at  the  beginning  return,  which  was  our 
point  of  departure. 

In  another  way:  Again  in  the  underlying  plane  let  AEC  be  both  the  diameter 

[of  the  ecliptic] 
and  its  common 
section  with  the 
circle  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  its  plane. 
In  this  circle  let 
DGFIj  the  meri- 
dian  passing 
through  the  poles 
of  the  Earth  be 

described  around  A  and  C,  in  turn,  i.e.,  in  Cancer  and  in  Capricorn.  And  let 
the  axis  of  the  Earth  be  DF,  the  north  pole  D,  the  south  pole  F,  and  GI  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  equator.  Therefore  wheii  F  is  turned  in  the  direction  of  the  sun, 


532  COPERNICUS 

which  is  at  E,  and  the  inclination  of  the  equator  is  northward  in  proportion  to 
angle  lAE,  then  the  movement  around  the  axis  will  describe — ^^vith  the  diam¬ 
eter  KL  and  at  the  distance  LI — parallel  to  the  equator  the  southern  circle, 
which  appears  with  respect  to  the  sun  as  the  tropic  of  Capricorn.  Or — to  speak 
more  correctly — this  movement  around  the  axis  describes,  in  the  direction  of 
AE,  a  conic  surface,  which  has  the  centre  of  the  earth  as  its  vertex  and  a  circle 
parallel  to  the  equator  as  its  base^  Moreover  in  the  opposite  sign,  C,  the  same 
things  take  place  but  conversely.  Therefore  it  is  clear  how  the  two  mutually 
opposing  movements,  i.e,,  that  of  the  centre  and  that  of  the  inclination,  force 
the  axis  of  the  Earth  to  remain  balanced  in  the  same  way  and  to  keep  a  similar 
position,  and  how  they  make  all  things  appear  as  if  they  were  movements  of  the 
sun. 

Now  we  said  that  the  yearly  revolutions  of  the  centre  and  of  the  declination 
were  approximately  equal,  because  if  they  were  exactly  so,  then  the  points  of 
equinox  and  solstice  and  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  in  relation  to  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars  could  not  change  at  all.  But  as  the  difference  is  very  slight,  [12^] 
it  is  not  revealed  except  as  it  increases  with  time:  as  a  matter  of  fact,  from  the 
time  of  Ptolemy  to  ours  there  has  been  a  precession  of  the  equinoxes  and  sol¬ 
stices  of  about  21°.  For  that  reason  some  have  believed  that  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  was  moving,  and  so  they  choose  a  ninth  higher  sphere.  And  when 
that  was  not  enough,  the  moderns  added  a  tenth,  but  without  attaining  the 
end  which  we  hope  we  shall  attain  by  means  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth. 
We  shall  use  this  movement  as  a  principle  and  a  hypothesis  in  demonstrating 
other  things. 

12.  On  the  Straight  Lines  in  a  Circle 

Because  the  proofs  which  we  shall  use  in  almost  the  entire  work  deal  with 
straight  lines  and  arcs,  with  plane  and  spherical  triangles,  and  because  Euclid^s 
Elements,  although  they  clear  up  much  of  this,  do  not  have  what  is  here  most 
required,  namely,  how  to  find  the  sides  from  the  angles  and  the  angles  from  the 
sides,  since  the  angle  does  not  measure  the  subtending  straight  line — ^just  as  the 
line  does  not  measure  the  angle — but  the  arc  does,  there  has  accordingly  been 
found  a  method  whereby  the  lines  subtending  any  arc  may  become  known.  By 
means  of  these  lines,  or  chords,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  arc  corresponding 
to  the  angle:  and  conversely  by  means  of  the  arc  to  determine  the  straight  line, 
or  chord,  which  subtends  the  angle.  So  it  does  not  seem  irrelevant,  if  we  treat 
of  these  lines,  and  also  of  the  sides  and  angles  of  plane  and  spherical  triangles — 
which  Ptolemy  discussed  a  few  at  a  time  here  and  there — in  order  that  these 
questions  may  be  answered  here  once  and  for  all  and  that  what  we  are  going  to 
teach  may  become  clearer.  Now,  by  the  common  agreement  of  mathematicians, 
we  divide  the  circle  into  360  degrees.  Now  the  ancients  employed  a  diameter  of 
120  parts.  But  in  order  to  avoid  the  complication  of  minutes  and  seconds  in  the 
multiplication  and  division  of  the  numbers  attached  to  the  lines,  as  the  lines 
are  usually  incommensurable  in  length,  and  often  in  square  too;  some  of  their 
successors  established  a  rational  diameter  of  1,200,000  parts  or  of  2,000,000 
parts,  or  of  some  other  rational  quantity — from  the  time  when  Arabic  numerals 

^Or,  in  other  words,  the  axis  of  the  terrestrial  equator  describes  around  the  axis  of  the  ter¬ 
restrial  ecliptic  a  double  conic  surface  having  its  vertices  at  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  in  a  period 
of  revolution  equal  approximately  to  that  of  the  Earth's  centre. 


533 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 

came  into  general  use.  This  mathematical  notation  surpasses  any  other — 
Greek  or  Latin — [12^"]  in  a  certain  singular  ease  of  employment  and  readily  ac¬ 
commodates  itself  to  every  class  of  computation.  For  that  reason  we  too  have 
taken  a  division  of  the  diameter  into  200,000  parts  as  sufficient  to  exclude  any 
very  noticeable  error.  For  as  regards  things  which  are  not  related  as  number 
to  number,  it  is  enough  to  attain  a  close  approximation.  But  we  will  unfold  this 
in  six  theorems  and  a  problem — following  Ptolemy  fairly  closely. 

First  Theorem 

The  diameter  of  a  circle  being  given,  the  sides  of  the  triangle,  tetragon,  hexagon, 
and  decagon,  which  the  same  circle  circumscribes,  are  also  given. 

Half  the  diameter,  or  the  radius,  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  hexagon,  [Euclid, 

IV,  15];  the  square  on  the  side  .of  the  triangle 
ACE  B  D  is  three  times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 

hexagon,  [Euclid,  xiii,  12];  and  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  tetragon  is  t^\dce  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  hexagon,  Euclid  as  is  shown  in  Euclid^s  Elements  [iv,  9  and  i,  47]. 
Therefore  the  side  of  a  hexagon  is  given  in  length  as  100,000  parts,  that  of  the 
tetragon  as  141,422  parts,  and  that  of  the  triangle  as  173,205  parts. 

Now  let  AB  be  the  side  of  the  hexagon;  and  by  Euclid,  ii,  11,  or  vi,  30,  let 
it  be  cut  in  mean  and  extreme  ratio  at  point  C;  and  let  CB  be  the  greater  seg¬ 
ment  to  which  its  equal  BD  is  added.  Therefore  the  whole  ABD  will  have  been 
cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and  the  lesser  segment  BD  will  be  the  side  of  the 
decagon  inscribed  in  the  circle,  and  AB  will  be  the  side  of  the  inscribed  hexagon, 
as  is  made  clear  by  Euclid,  xiii,  5  and  9. 

But  BD  mil  be  given  in  this  way:  let  ABh^  bisected  at  E,  and  it  will  be  clear 
from  Euclid,  xiii,  3  that 

sq.  EBD  =  5  sq.  EB, 

But 

£5  =  50,000. 

Whence 

5  sq.  EB  is  given. 

Hence 

£55  =  111,803. 

And 

BD  =  EBD—EB  =  1 1 1,803— 50,000  =  61,803, 
which  is  the  side  of  the  decagon  sought. 

Moreover  the  side  of  the  pentagon,  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  on  the  side  of  the  decagon  [Ele¬ 
ments,  XIII,  10],  is  given  as  117,557  parts. 

Therefore  the  diameter  of  the  circle  being  given,  the  sides  of  the  triangle, 
tetragon,  pentagon,  hexagon  and  decagon,  which  may  be  inscribed  in  the  same 
circle,  have  been  given — as  was  to  be  shown. 

PORISM 

Furthermore,  it  is  clear  that  when  the  chord  subtending  an  arc  has  been  given,  that 
chord  too  can  be  found  which  subtends  the  rest  [13^]  of  the  semicircle. 

Since  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  is  right,  and  in  right  triangles  the  square  on 
the  chord  subtending  the  right  angle,  i,e,,  the  square  on  the  diameter,  is  equal 


534  COPERNICUS 

to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  sides  comprehending  the  right  angle;  therefore 
— since  the  side  of  the  decagon,  which  subtends  36°  of  the  circumference,  has 
been  shown  to  have  61,803  parts  whereof  the  diameter  has  200,000  parts — the 
chord  which  subtends  the  remaining  144°  of  the  semicircle  has  190,211  parts. 

And  in  the  case  of  the  side  of  the  pentagon,  which  is  equal  to  117,557  parts  of 
the  diameter  and  subtends  an  arc  of  72°,  a  straight  line  of  161,803  parts  is 
given,  and  it  subtends  remaining  108°  of  the  circle. 


Second  Theorem 


//  a  quadrilateral  is  inscribed  in  a  circle^  the  rectangle  comprehended  by  the  diago¬ 
nals  is  equal  to  the  two  rectangles  which  are  comprehended  by  the  two  pairs  of 
opposite  sides. 

For  let  the  quadrilateral  ABCD  be  inscribed  in  a  circle ;  I  say  that  the  rectan¬ 
gle  comprehended  by  the  diagonals  AC  and  DB  is  equal 
to  those  comprehended  by  AB^  CD  and  by  AZ),  BC. 

For  let  us  make 

angle  =  angle  CBD. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  ASD  =  angle  EBC, 
taking  angle  EBD  as  common  to  both.  Moreover 
angle  AC^  =  angle  BDA. 

because  they  stand  on  the  same  segment  of  the  circle ;  and 
accordingly  the  two  similar  triangles  BCE  and  BDA  will 
have  their  sides  proportional.  Hence 

BC  :BD  =  EC  :AD. 

And 

rect.  EC,  BD  =  rect.  BC,  AD, 

But  also  the  triangles  ABE  and  CBD  are  similar,  because 

angle  =  angle  CBD. 

And 


angle  (7  =  angle  BDC, 

because  they  intercept  the  same  arc  of  the  circle. 
So  again, 

AB:BD=AE:CD 


And 


rect.  AB,  DC = rect.  AE,  BD. 

But  it  has  already  been  made  clear  that 

rect.  AD,  DC  =  rect.  BD,  EC. 
Accordingly,  taken  as  a  whole, 

rect.  BD,  AC  =  rect.  AD,  DC+rect.  AB,  CD, 
as  it  was  opportune  to  have  sho^vn. 


Third  Theorem 

Hence  if  straight  lines  subtending  unequal  arcs  in  a  semicircle  are  given,  the  chord 
subtending  the  arc  whereby  the  greater  arc  exceeds  the  smaller  is  also  given. 

[13^]  In  the  semicircle  ABCD  with  diameter  AD,  let  the  straight  lines  AB  and 
AC  subtending  unequal  arcs  be  given.  To  us,  who  wish  to  discover  the  chord 
subtending  BC,  there  are  given  by  means  of  the  aforesaid  the  chords  BD  and 
CD  subtending  the  remaining  arcs  of  the  semicircle,  and  these  chords  bound 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  535 


the  quadrilateral  ABCD  in  the  semicircle.  The  diag¬ 
onals  AC  and  BD  have  been  given  together  with  the 
three  sides  AB,  ADy  and  CD.  And,  as  has  already 
been  shown, 

rect.  ACy  BD  —  rect.  ABy  CD+rect.  ADy  BC, 
Therefore, 

rect.  ADy  5(7  =  rect.  ACy  BD-x^ci.  ABy  CD. 


Accordingly,  in  so  far  as  the  division  may  be  carried  out, 
{AC-BD  --AB-CD)  -^AD  =  BCy 


which  was  sought. 

Further  when,  for  example,  the  sides  of  the  pentagon  and  hexagon  are  given 
from  the  above,  by  this  computation  a  line  is  given  subtending  12° — which  is 
the  difference  between  the  arcs — and  it  is  equal  to  20,905  parts  of  the  diameter. 


Fourth  Theorem 


Given  a  chord  subtending  any  arc,  the  chord  subtending  half  of  the  arc  is  also  given. 
Let  us  describe  the  circle  ABC y  whose  diameter  is  ACy  and  let  the  arc  BC  be 
given  together  with  the  chord  subtending  it,  and  let  the 
line  EF  from  the  centre  E  cut  BC  at  right  angles.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  by  Euclid,  iii,  3,  it  will  bisect  chord  BC  at  F, 
and  the  arc  at  D.  Let  the  chords  subtending  arcs  AB 
and  BD  be  drawn.  Since  the  triangles  ABC  and  EFC  are 
right  and  also  similar — ^for  they  have  angle  ECF  in  com¬ 
mon;  therefore,  as 

CF  =  y2  BFCy 
so 

EF  =  y2AB. 

But  chord  AB  is  given,  for  it  subtends  the  remaining  arc 
of  the  semicircle.  Therefore  EF  is  given;  and  so  is  line  DF  the  remainder  of  the 
radius.  Let  the  diameter  DEG  be  completed,  and  let  BG  be  joined.  Therefore  in 
triangle  BDG  line  BF  falls  from  the  right  angle  at  B  perpendicular  to  the  base. 
Accordingly, 

rect.  GDy  Z)F  =  sq.  BD. 

Therefore  BD  is  given  in  length,  and  it  subtends  half  of  the  arc  BDC. 

And  since  a  chord  subtending  12°  has  already  been  given,  the  chord  subtend¬ 
ing  6°  is  given  as  10,467  parts;  that  subtending  3°,  as  5235  parts;  that  subtend¬ 
ing  13^°,  as  2618  parts;  and  that  subtending  45',  as  1309  parts. 


[14^]  Fifth  Theorem 

Again y  when  chords  are  given  subtending  two  arcs, 
the  chord  subtending  the  whole  arc  made  up  of  them  is 
also  given. 

Let  there  be  given  in  the  circle  the  two  chords  sub¬ 
tending  the  arcs  AB  and  BC;  I  say  that  the  chord  sub¬ 
tending  the  whole  arc  ABC  is  also  given. 

For  let  the  diameters  AFD  and  BFE  be  drawm,  and 
also  the  chords  BD  and  CF,  ^vhich  are  given  by  means 
of  the  foregoing,  on  account  of  chords  AB  and  BC  being 
given;  and 


536  COPERNICUS 

chord  !)£'  =  chord  AB, 

The  joining  of  CD  completes  the  quadrilateral  BCDE,  whose  diagonals  BD  and 
CE  are  given  together  with  the  three  sides  BCy  DEy  and  BE;  and  the  remaining 
side  CD  will  be  given  by  the  second  theorem;  accordingly  chord  CA  which  sub¬ 
tends  the  remaining  part  of  the  semicircle  will  be  given,  and  it  subtends  the 
whole  arc  ABC  and  is  w’hat  was  sought. 

Furthermore,  since  so  far  there  have  been  discovered  chords  which  subtend 
3°,  and  34°;  by  means  of  these  intervals  a  table  can  be  constructed  with 
the  most  exact  ratios.  Nevertheless  if  we  ascend  through  the  degrees  and  add 
one  arc  to  another  arc  either  by  halves  or  by  some  other  mode,  there  is  not  un¬ 
justified  doubt  concerning  the  chords  subtending  those  arcs,  as  the  graphical 
ratios  by  which  they  can  be  shown  are  lacking  to  us.  Nothing,  however,  prevents 
us  from  going  on  with  that  by  some  mode  which  is  this  side  of  error  perceptible 
to  sense  and  which  is  least  unconsonant  with  the  assumed  number.  This  was 
what  Ptolemy  too  sought  as  regards  the  chords  subtending  arcs  of  or  of  34°; 
and  he  admonished  us  in  the  first  place. 

Sixth  Theorem 

The  ratio  of  the  arcs  is  greater  than  the  ratio  of  the  greater  to  the  smaller  of  the  chords. 

Let  there  be  in  a  circle  two  unequal  successive  arcs  AB  and  BC,  and  let  BC 
be  the  greater. 

I  say  that 

arc  BC  :  ard  AB>chord  BC  :  chord  AB. 

These  chords  comprehend  angle  By  and  let  that  be 
bisected  by  line  BD.  And  let  AC  be  joined,  which  cuts 
BD  at  point  E.  Similarly  let  AD  and  CD  be  joined; 
then 

AD==CDy 

because  they  subtend  equal  arcs. 

Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  ABCy  the  line  which 
bisects  the  angle  also  cuts  AC  [14^]  at  jE,  then 
ECy  segment  of  base  :  AE  —  BC  :  AB  [Euclid,  vi,  3) 
and  since 

BOABy 

then 

EOEA. 

Let  DF  be  erected  perpendicular  to  AC;  it  will  bisect  AC  at  point  F.  And  F 
must  necessarily  be  found  in  the  greater  segment  EC.  And  since  in  every  triangle 
the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater  side,  in  the  triangle  DEF 

side  Z)£'>side  DFy 

and  further, 

AD>DEy 

wheretofore  the  circumference  described  with  D  as  center  and  DE  as  radius 
will  cut  AD  and  pass  beyond  DF.  Therefore  let  it  cut  AD  at  Hy  and  let  it  be 
extended  in  the  straight  line  DFI. 

Since 

sect.  ED/>trgl.  EDFy 

while 

trgl.  DEA>sect.  DEH, 


therefore 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 


537 


trgl.  DEF  :  trgl.  Z)£'A<sect.  DEI :  sect.  DEH, 

But  sectors  are  proportional  to  their  arcs  or  to  the  angles  at  the  centre;  while 
triangles  under  the  same  vertex  are  proportional  to  their  bases.  Accordingly 
angle  EDF  :  angle  AZ)£'>base  EF  :  base  AE, 

Therefore,  componendo, 

angle  FDA  :  angle  ADE>bsise  AF  :  base  AE. 

And,  in  the  same  way, 

angle  CDA  :  angle  ADE>hsise  AC  :  base  AE. 

But,  separandOj 

angle  CDE  :  angle  EDA>hsise  CE  :  base  EA. 


But 


And 


angle  CDE  :  angle  EDA  =arc  CB  :  arc  AB.  » 


Therefore 


base  CE  :  base  =  chord  CB  :  chord  AB. 


arc  CB  :  arc  AJ5>chord  BC  :  chord  AB, 
as  was  to  be  shown. 


Problem 

But  since  the  arc  is  always  greater  than  the  straight  line  subtending  it — as 
the  straight  line  is  the  shortest  of  those  lines  which  have  the  same  termini — 
nevertheless  in  going  from  greater  to  lesser  sections  of  the  circle,  the  inequality 
approaches  equality,  so  that  finally  the  circular  line  and  the  straight  line  go  out 
of  existence  simultaneously  at  the  point  of  tangency  on  the  circle.  Therefore 
it  is  necessary  that  just  before  that  moment  they  differ  from  one  another  by 
no  discernible  difference. 

For  example,  let  arc  AB  be  3°  and  arc  AC  It  has  been  shown  that 

ch.  AB  =  5235, 
where  diameter  =  200,000, 
and  that 

ch.  4C  =  2618. 


And  though 
Yet 


and 

But  if  we  make 


arc  AB  =  2  [15^]  arc  AC, 
ch.  A^<2  ch.  AC 
ch.  AC — 2617  =  1. 


and 


then 

and 


arc  AB  =  13^° 

arc  = 
ch.  A5  =  2618 
ch.  AC  =1309, 


and  even  though  chord  AC  ought  to  be  greater  than  half  of  chord  AD,  it  is  seen 
to  be  no  different  from  the  half.  And  the  ratios  of  the  arcs  and  the  straight 


538  COPERNICUS 

lines  are  now  apparently  the  same.  Therefore,  since  we  see  that  we  have  come 
so  far  that  the  difference  between  the  straight  and  the  circular  line  evades 
sense-perception  as  completely  as  if  there  were  only  one  line,  we  do  not  hesi¬ 
tate  to  take  1309  as  subtending  and  in  the  same  ratio  to  fit  the  chord  to 
the  degree  and  to  the  remaining  parts  [of  the  degree] ;  and  so  with  the  addition 
of  to  the  we  establish  1°  as  subtended  by  1745,  by  8723^,  and 
by  approximately  582. 

Nevertheless  I  think  it  will  be  enough  if  in  the  table  we  give  only  the  halves 
of  the  chords  subtending  twice  the  arc,  whereby  we  may  concisely  comprehend 
in  the  quadrant  what  it  used  to  be  necessary  to  spread  out  over  the  semicircle; 
and  especially  because  the  halves  come  more  frequently  into  use  in  demonstra¬ 
tion  and  calculation  than  the  whole  chords  do.  Now  we  have  set  forth  a  table 
increasing  by  and  having  three  columns.  In  the  first  column  are  the  de¬ 
grees  and  sixth  parts  of  a  degree.  The  second  contains  the  numerical  length  of 
half  the  chord  subtending  twice  the  arc.  The  third  contains  the  difference 
between  the  numerical  lengths  of  each  half  chord,  and  by  means  of  these  differ¬ 
ences  we  can  make  proportional  additions  in  taking  half-chords  of  a  particular 
number  of  minutes.  The  table  follows: 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  539 


Table  of  the  Chords  in  a  Circle 


Halves 

Differ- 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

chords 

be- 

chords 

be¬ 

chords 

be¬ 

Arcs 

sub- 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

twice 

half- 

twice 

half¬ 

twice 

half¬ 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

0 

10 

291 

291 

7 

40 

13341 

288 

15 

10 

26163 

280 

0 

20 

582 

291 

7 

50 

13629 

288 

15 

20 

26443 

281 

0 

30 

873 

290 

8 

0 

13917 

288 

15 

30 

26724 

280 

0 

40 

1163 

291 

8 

10 

14205 

288 

15 

40 

27004 

280 

0 

50 

1454 

291 

8 

20 

14493 

288 

15 

50 

27284 

280 

1 

0 

1745 

291 

8 

30 

14781 

288 

16 

0 

27564 

279 

1 

10 

2036 

291 

8 

40 

15069 

287 

16 

10 

27843 

279 

1 

20 

2327 

290 

8 

50 

15356 

287 

16 

20 

28122 

279 

1 

30 

2617 

291 

9 

0 

15643 

288 

16 

30 

28401 

279 

1 

40 

2908 

291 

9 

10 

15931 

287 

16 

40 

28680 

279 

1 

50 

3199 

291 

9 

20 

16218 

287 

16 

50 

28959 

278 

2 

0 

3490 

291 

9 

30 

16505 

287 

17 

0 

29237 

278 

2 

10 

3781 

290 

9 

40 

16792 

286 

17 

10 

29515 

278 

2 

20 

4071 

291 

9 

50 

17078 

287 

17 

20 

29793 

278 

2 

30 

4362 

291 

10 

0 

17365 

286 

17 

30 

30071 

277 

2 

40 

4653 

290 

10 

10 

17651 

286 

17 

40 

30348 

277 

2 

50 

4943 

291 

10 

20 

17937 

286 

17 

50 

30625 

277 

3 

0 

5234 

290 

10 

30 

18223 

286 

18 

0 

30902 

276 

3 

10 

5524 

290 

10 

40 

18509 

286 

18 

10 

31178 

276 

3 

20 

5814 

291 

10 

50 

18795 

286 

18 

20 

31454 

276 

3 

30 

6105 

290 

11 

0 

19081 

285 

18 

30 

31730 

276 

3 

40 

6395 

290 

11 

10 

19366 

286 

18 

40 

32006 

276 

3 

50 

6685 

290 

11 

20 

19652 

285 

18 

50 

32282 

275 

4 

0 

6975 

290 

11 

30 

19937 

285 

19 

0 

32557 

275 

4 

10 

7265 

290 

11 

40 

20222 

285 

19 

10 

32832 

274 

4 

20 

7555 

290 

11 

50 

20507 

284 

19 

20 

33106 

275 

4 

30 

7845 

290 

12 

0 

20791 

285 

19 

30 

33381 

274 

4 

40 

8135 

290 

12 

10 

21076 

284 

19 

40 

33655 

274 

4 

50 

8425 

290 

12 

20 

21360 

284 

19 

50 

33929 

273 

5 

0 

8715 

290 

12 

30 

21644 

284 

20 

0 

34202 

273 

5 

10 

9005 

290 

12 

40 

21928 

284 

20 

10 

34475 

273 

5 

20 

9295 

290 

12 

50 

22212 

283 

20 

20 

34748 

273 

5 

30 

9585 

289 

13 

0 

22495 

283 

20 

30 

35021 

272 

5 

40 

9874 

290 

13 

10 

22778 

284 

20 

40 

35293 

272 

5 

50 

10164 

289 

13 

20 

23062 

282 

20 

50 

35565 

272 

6 

0 

10453 

289 

13 

30 

23344 

283 

21 

0 

35837 

271 

6 

10 

10742 

289 

13 

40 

23627 

283 

21 

10 

36108 

271 

6 

20 

11031 

289 

13 

50 

23910 

282 

21 

20 

36379 

271 

6 

30 

11320 

289 

14 

0 

24192 

282 

21 

30 

36650 

270 

6 

40 

11609 

289 

14 

10 

24474 

282 

21 

40 

36920 

270 

6 

50 

11898 

289 

14 

20 

24756 

282 

21 

50 

37190 

270 

7 

0 

12187 

289 

14 

30 

25038 

281 

22 

0 

37460 

270 

7 

10 

12476 

288 

14 

40 

25319 

282 

22 

10 

37730 

269 

7 

20 

12764 

289  ‘ 

14 

50 

25601 

281 

22 

20 

37999 

269 

7 

30 

13053 

288 

15 

0 

25882 

281 

22 

1  30 

38268 

269 

540  COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Chords  in  a  Circle — {Continued) 


Halves 

Differ- 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

chords 

he- 

chords 

be¬ 

chords 

be¬ 

Arcs 

sub- 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

twice 

half- 

twice 

half¬ 

twice 

half¬ 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

Deg, 

Min, 

Deg, 

Min, 

Deg, 

Min, 

22 

40 

38587 

268 

30 

10 

50252 

251 

37 

40 

61107 

230 

22 

50 

38805 

268 

30 

20 

50503 

251 

37 

50 

61337 

229 

23 

0 

39073 

268 

30 

30 

50754 

250 

38 

0 

61566 

229 

23 

10 

39341 

267 

30 

40 

51004 

250 

38 

10 

61795 

229 

23 

20 

39608 

267 

30 

50 

51254 

250 

38 

20 

62024 

227 

23 

30 

39875 

266 

31 

0 

51504 

249 

38 

30 

62251 

228 

23 

40 

40141 

267 

31 

10 

51753 

249 

38 

40 

62479 

227 

23 

50 

40408 

266 

31 

20 

52002 

248 

38 

50 

62706 

226 

24 

0 

40674 

265 

31 

30 

52250 

248 

39 

0 

62932 

226 

24 

10 

40939 

265 

31 

40 

52498 

247 

39 

10 

63158 

225 

24 

20 

41204 

265 

31 

50 

52745 

247 

39 

20 

63383 

225 

24 

30 

41469 

265 

32 

0 

52992 

246 

39 

30 

63608 

224 

24 

40 

41734 

264 

32 

10 

53238 

246 

39 

40 

63832 

224 

24 

50 

41998 

264 

32 

20 

53484 

246 

39 

50 

64056 

223 

25 

0 

42262 

263 

32 

30 

53730 

245 

40 

0 

64279 

222 

25 

10 

42525 

263 

32 

40 

53975 

245 

40 

10 

64501 

222 

25 

20 

42788 

263 

32 

50 

54220 

244 

40 

20 

64723 

222 

25 

30 

43051 

262 

33 

0 

54464 

244 

40 

30 

64945 

221 

25 

40 

43313 

262 

33 

10 

54708 

243 

40 

40 

65166 

220 

25 

50 

43575 

262 

33 

20 

54951 

243 

40 

50 

65386 

220 

26 

0 

43837 

261 

33 

30 

55194 

242 

41 

0 

65606 

219 

26 

10 

44098 

261 

33 

40 

55436 

242 

41 

10 

65825 

219 

26 

20 

44359 

261 

33 

50 

55678 

241 

41 

20 

66044 

218 

26 

30 

44620 

260 

34 

0 

55919 

241 

41 

30 

66262 

218 

26 

40 

44880 

260 

34 

10 

56160 

240 

41 

40 

66480 

217 

26 

50 

45140 

259 

34 

20 

56400 

241 

41 

50 

66697 

216 

27 

0 

45399 

259 

34 

30 

56641 

239 

42 

0 

66913 

216 

27 

10 

45658 

259 

34 

40 

56880 

239 

42 

10 

67129 

215 

27 

20 

45917 

258 

34 

50 

57119 

239 

42 

20 

67344 

215 

27 

30 

46175 

258 

35 

0 

57358 

238 

42 

30 

67559 

214 

27 

40 

46433 

257 

35 

10 

57596 

237 

42 

40 

67773 

214 

27 

50 

46690 

257 

35 

20 

57833 

237 

42 

50 

67987 

213 

28 

0 

46947 

257 

35 

30 

58070 

237 

43 

0 

68200 

212 

28 

10 

47204 

256 

35 

40 

58307 

236 

43 

10 

68412 

212 

28 

20 

47460 

256 

35 

50 

58543 

236 

43 

20 

68624 

211 

28 

30 

47716 

255 

36 

0 

58779 

235 

43 

30 

68835 

211 

28 

40 

47971 

255 

36 

10 

59014 

234 

43 

40 

69046 

210 

28 

50 

48226 

255 

36 

20 

59248 

234 

43 

50 

69256 

210 

29 

0 

48481 

254 

36 

30 

59482 

234 

44 

0 

69466 

209 

29 

10 

48735 

254 

36 

40 

59716 

233 

44 

10 

69675 

208 

29 

20 

48989 

253 

36 

50 

59949 

232 

44 

20 

69883 

208 

29 

30 

49242 

253 

37 

0 

60181 

232 

44 

30 

70091 

207 

29 

40 

49495 

253 

37 

10 

60413 

232 

44 

40 

70298 

207 

29 

50 

49748 

252 

37 

20 

60645 

231 

44 

50 

70505 

206 

30 

0 

50000 

252 

37 

30 

60876 

231 

45 

0 

70711 

1  205 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  541 


Table  of  the  Chords  in  a  Circle — {Continued) 


Halves 

Differ- 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

chords 

he- 

chords 

be¬ 

chords 

be¬ 

Arcs 

sub- 

tween 

Arcs 

sub- 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

twice 

half- 

twice 

half¬ 

twice 

half¬ 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

Deg, 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

45 

10 

70916 

205 

52 

40 

79512 

176 

60 

10 

86747 

145 

45 

20 

71121 

204 

52 

50 

79688 

176 

60 

20 

86892 

144 

45 

30 

71325 

204 

53 

0 

79864 

174 

60 

30 

87036 

142 

45 

40 

71529 

203 

53 

10 

80038 

174 

60 

40 

87178 

142 

45 

50 

71732 

202 

53 

20 

80212 

174 

60 

50 

87320 

142 

46 

0 

71934 

202 

53 

30 

80386 

172 

61 

0 

87462 

141 

46 

10 

72136 

201 

53 

40 

80558 

172 

61 

10 

87603 

140 

46 

20 

72337 

200 

53 

50 

80730 

172 

61 

20 

87743 

139 

46 

30 

72537 

200 

54 

0 

80902 

170 

61 

30 

87882 

138 

46 

40 

72737 

199 

54 

10 

81072 

170 

61 

40 

88020 

138 

46 

50 

72936 

199 

54 

20 

81242 

169 

61 

50 

88158 

137 

47 

0 

73135 

198 

54 

30 

81411 

169 

62 

0 

88295 

136 

47 

10 

73333 

198 

54 

40 

81580 

168 

62 

10 

88431 

135 

47 

20 

73531 

197 

54 

50 

81748 

167 

62 

20 

88566 

135 

47 

30 

73728 

196 

55 

0 

81915 

167 

62 

30 

88701 

134 

47 

40 

73924 

195 

55 

10 

82082 

166 

62 

40 

88835 

133 

47 

50 

74119 

195 

55 

20 

82248 

165 

62 

50 

88968 

133 

48 

0 

74314 

194 

55 

30 

82413 

164 

63 

0 

89101 

131 

48 

10 

74508 

194 

55 

40 

82577 

164 

63 

10 

89232 

131 

48 

20 

74702 

194 

55 

50 

82741 

163 

63 

20 

89363 

130 

48 

30 

74896 

194 

56 

0 

82904 

162 

63 

30 

89493 

129 

48 

40 

75088 

192 

56 

10 

83066 

162 

63 

40 

89622 

129 

48 

50 

75280 

191 

56 

20 

83228 

161 

63 

50 

89751 

128 

49 

0 

75471 

190 

56 

30 

83389 

160 

64 

0 

89879 

127 

49 

10 

75661 

190 

56 

40 

83549 

159 

64 

10 

90006 

127 

49 

20 

75851 

189 

56 

50 

83708 

159 

64 

20 

90133 

125 

49 

30 

76040 

189 

57 

0 

83867 

158 

64 

30 

90258 

125 

49 

40 

76299 

188 

57 

10 

84025 

157 

64 

40 

90383 

124 

49 

50 

76417 

187 

57 

20 

84182 

157 

64 

50 

90507 

124 

50 

0 

76604 

187 

57 

30 

84339 

156 

65 

0 

90631 

122 

50 

10 

76791 

186 

57 

40 

84495 

155 

65 

10 

90753 

122 

50 

20 

76977 

185 

57 

50 

84650 

155 

65 

20 

90875 

121 

50 

30 

77162 

185 

58 

0 

84805 

154 

65 

30 

90996 

120 

50 

40 

77347 

184 

58 

10 

84959 

153 

65 

40 

91116 

119 

50 

50 

77531 

184 

58 

20 

85112 

152 

65 

50 

91235 

119 

51 

0 

77715 

182 

58 

30 

85264 

151 

66 

0 

91354 

118 

51 

10 

77897 

182 

58 

40 

85415 

151 

66 

10 

91472 

118 

51 

20 

78079 

182 

58 

50 

85566 

151 

66 

20 

91590 

116 

51 

30 

78261 

181 

59 

0 

85717 

149 

66 

30 

91706 

116 

51 

40 

78442 

180 

59 

10 

85866 

149 

66 

40 

91822 

114 

51 

50 

78622 

179 

59 

20 

86015 

148 

66 

50 

91936 

114 

52 

0 

78801 

179 

59 

30 

86163 

147 

67 

0 

92050 

114 

52 

10 

78980 

178 

59 

40 

86310 

147 

67 

10 

92164 

112 

52 

20 

79158 

177 

59 

50 

86457 

145 

67 

20 

92276 

112 

52 

30 

79335 

177 

60 

0 

86602 

145 

67 

30 

92388 

111 

542  COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Chords  in  a  Circle — (Continued) 


Halves 

Differ- 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

Halves 

Differ¬ 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

of  the 

ences 

chords 

be- 

chords 

be¬ 

chords 

be¬ 

Arcs 

sub'- 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

Arcs 

sub¬ 

tween 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

tending 

each 

twice 

half- 

twice 

half¬ 

twice 

half¬ 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

the  arcs 

chord 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

67 

40 

92499 

no 

75 

10 

96667 

75 

82 

40 

99182 

37 

67 

50 

92609 

109 

75 

20 

96742 

73 

82 

50 

99219 

36 

68 

0 

92718 

109 

75 

30 

96815 

72 

83 

0 

99255 

35 

68 

10 

92827 

108 

75 

40 

96887 

72 

83 

10 

99290 

34 

68 

20 

92935 

107 

75 

50 

96959 

71 

83 

20 

99324 

33 

68 

30 

93042 

106 

76 

0 

97030 

69 

83 

30 

99357 

32 

68 

40 

93148 

105 

76 

10 

97099 

70 

83 

40 

99389 

32 

68 

50 

93253 

105 

76 

20 

97169 

68 

83 

50 

99421 

31 

69 

0 

93358 

104 

76 

30 

97237 

67 

84 

0 

99452 

30 

69 

10 

93462 

103 

76 

40 

97304 

67 

84 

10 

99482 

29 

69 

20 

93565 

102 

76 

50 

97371 

66 

84 

20 

99511 

28 

69 

30 

93667 

102 

77 

0 

97437 

65 

84 

30 

99539 

28 

69 

40 

93769 

101 

77 

10 

97502 

64 

84 

40 

99567 

27 

69 

50 

93870 

99 

77 

20 

97566 

64 

84 

50 

99594 

26 

70 

0 

93969 

99 

77 

30 

97630 

62 

85 

0 

99620 

24 

70 

10 

94068 

99 

77 

40 

97692 

62 

85 

10 

99644 

24 

70 

20 

94167 

97 

77 

50 

97754 

61 

85 

20 

99668 

24 

70 

30 

94264 

97 

78 

0 

97815 

60 

85 

30 

99692 

22 

70 

40 

94361 

96 

78 

10 

97875 

59 

85 

40 

99714 

22 

70 

50 

94457 

95 

78 

20 

97934 

58 

85 

50 

99736 

20 

71 

0 

94552 

94 

78 

30 

97992 

58 

86 

0 

99756 

20 

71 

10 

94646 

93 

78 

40 

98050 

57 

86 

10 

99776 

19 

71 

20 

94739 

93 

78 

50 

98107 

56 

86 

20 

99795 

18 

71 

30 

94832 

92 

79 

0 

98163 

55 

86 

30 

99813 

17 

71 

40 

94924 

91 

79 

10 

98218 

54 

86 

40 

99830 

17 

71 

50 

95015 

90 

79 

20 

98272 

53 

86 

50 

99847 

16 

72 

0 

95105 

90 

79 

30 

98325 

53 

87 

0 

99863 

15 

72 

10 

95195 

89 

79 

40 

98378 

52 

87 

10 

99878 

14 

72 

20 

95284 

88 

79 

50 

98430 

51 

87 

20 

99892 

13 

72 

30 

95372 

87 

80 

0 

98481 

50 

87 

30 

99905 

12 

72 

40 

95459 

86 

80 

10 

98531 

49 

87 

40 

99917 

11 

72 

50 

95545 

85 

80 

20 

98580 

49 

87 

50 

99928 

11 

73 

0 

95630 

85 

80 

30 

98629 

47 

88 

0 

99939 

10 

73 

10 

95715 

84 

80 

40 

98676 

47 

88 

10 

99949 

9 

73 

20 

95799 

83 

80 

50 

98723 

46 

88 

20 

99958 

8 

73 

30 

95882 

82 

81 

0 

98769 

45 

88 

30 

99966 

7 

73 

40 

95964 

81 

81 

10 

98814 

44 

88 

40 

99973 

6 

73 

50 

96045 

81 

81 

20 

98858 

44 

88 

50 

99979 

6 

74 

0 

96126 

80 

81 

30 

98902 

42 

89 

0 

99985 

4 

74 

10 

96206 

79 

81 

40 

98944 

42 

89 

10 

99989 

4 

74 

20 

96285 

78 

81 

50 

98986 

41 

89 

20 

99993 

3 

74 

30 

96363 

77 

82 

0 

99027 

40 

89 

30 

99996 

2 

74 

40 

96440 

77 

82 

10 

99067 

39 

89 

40 

99998 

1 

74 

50 

96517 

75 

82 

20 

99106 

38 

89 

50 

99999 

1 

75 

0 

96592 

75 

82 

30 

99144 

38 

90 

0 

100000 

0 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 


543 


13.  On  the  Sides  and  Angles  of  Plane  Rectilinear  Triangles 


[19‘>]  The  sides  of  a  triangle  whose  angles  are  given  are  given, 

I  say  let  there  be  the  triangle  ABC,  around  which  a  circle  is  circumscribed, 
by  Euclid,  iv,  5.  Therefore  arcs  AB,  BC,  and  CA  will  be 
given  in  degrees  whereof  360°  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Now  given  the  arcs,  the  subtending  sides  of  the  triangle 
inscribed  in  the  circle  are  also  given  by  the  table  drawn  up, 
where  the  diameter  is  assumed  to  have  200,000  parts. 

II 

But  if  two  sides  of  the  triangle  are  given  together  with  one  of 
the  angles,  the  remaining  side  and  the  remaining  angles  may 
become  known. 

For  the  given  sides  are  either  equal  or  unequal.  But  the 
given  angle  is  either  right  or  acute  or  obtuse.  Again,  the 
given  sides  either  comprehend  the  angle  or  they  do  not  comprehend  it. 

Therefore  in  triangle  ABC  first  let  the  two  given  sides  AB  and  AC  be  equal, 
and  let  them  comprehend  the  given  angle  A. 

Therefore  the  remaining  angles  at  base  BC  are  also  given — 
since  they  are  equal — as  half  of  the  remainder,  when  A  is  sub¬ 
tracted  from  two  right  angles.  And  if  the  angle  given  first  was  at 
the  base,  then  its  equal  is  soon  given,  and  from  the  two  of  them 
the  remaining  angle  that  goes  to  make  up  two  right  angles.  But 
given  the  angles  of  a  triangle,  the  sides  are  given:  and  moreover 
the  base  BC  is  given  from  the  table  in  the  parts  whereof  AB  or 
AC  as  radius  has  100,000  parts  or  whereof  the  diameter  has 
200,000  parts. 

Ill 

But  if  the  angle  BAC  comprehended  by  the  given  sides  is  right,  the  same  thing  will 
result. 

Since  it  is  obvious  that 


[20^]  sq.  AR+sq.  AC  =  sq.  BC\ 
therefore  BC  is  given  in  length  and  the  sides  in  their  ratio 
to  one  another.  But  the  segment  of  a  circle  which  compre¬ 
hends  a  right  triangle  is  a  semicircle,  and  base  BC  is  the  di¬ 
ameter.  Therefore  AB  and  AC  as  subtending  the  remain¬ 
ing  angles  C  and  B  will  be  given  in  the  parts  whereof  BC 
has  200,000  parts.  And  the  ratio  of  the  table  will  reveal  the 
angles  in  the  degrees  whereof  180°  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

The  same  thing  will  result  if  BC  is  given  together  with  one  of  the  sides  com¬ 
prehending  the  right  angle,  as  I  judge  has  been  clearly  established. 

IV 

But  now  let  the  given  angle  ABC  be  acute,  and  also  let  it  be  comprehended  by  the 
given  sides  AB  and  BC, 

And  from  point  A  drop  a  perpendicular  to  BC  extended,  if  necessary,  accord¬ 
ing  as  it  falls  inside  or  outside  the  triangle,  and  let  it  be  AD,  By  this  perpen¬ 
dicular  the  two  right  triangles  ABD  and  ADC  are  distinguished,  and  since 
the  angles  in  ABD  are  given — for  D  is  a  right  angle,  and  B  is  given  by  hy- 


544 


COPERNICUS 


pothesis;  therefore  AD  and  BD  are  given  by  the  table 
as  subtending  angles  A  and  B  in  the  parts  whereof  AB, 
the  diameter  of  the  circle,  has  200,000  parts.  And  in 
the  same  ratio  wherein  AB  was  given  in  length,  AD 
and  BD  are  given  similarly;  and  CD,  which  is  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  BC  and  BD,  is  given  also. 

Therefore  in  the  right  triangle  ADC,  the  sides  AD 
and  CD  being  given,  AC  the  side  sought  and  angle 
ACD  are  given  according  to  what  has  been  shown  above. 

V 

And  it  will  not  turn  out  differently,  if  angle  B  is  obtuse. 

For  the  perpendicular  AD  dropped  from  point  A  to 
straight  line  BC  extended  makes  the  triangle  ABD  have 
its  angles  given.  For  angle  ABD,  which  is  exterior  to 
angle  ABC,  is  given;  and 

angle  D  =  90"^. 

Therefore  sides  BD  and  AD  are  given  in  the  parts 
whereof  AB  has  200,000.  And  since  BA  and  BC  have  a 
given  ratio  to  one  another,  therefore  AB  too  is  given  in 
the  same  parts,  wherein  BD  and  the  whole  CBD  are 


given. 

Accordingly  in  the  right  triangle  ADC,  since  the  two  sides  AD  and  CD  are 
given,  side  AC  and  angles  BAC  and  ACB,  which  were  sought  for,  are  also  given. 

VI 

But  let  either  of  the  given  sides,  AC  or  AB,  be  the  one  subtending  the  given 
angle  B,  [20^]  Therefore  AC  is  given  by  the  table  in  parts  whereof  the  diameter 
of  the  circle  circumscribing  the  triangle  ABC  has  200,000  and  according  to  the 
given  ratio  of  AC  to  AB.  AB  is  given  in  similar  parts,  and  by  the  table  the  angle 
ACB  is  given  together  with  the  remaining  angle  BAC,  by  which  chord  CB  is 
also  given.  And  by  this  ratio  they  are  given  in  any  magnitude. 

VII 

Given  all  the  sides  of  the  triangle,  the  angles  are  given. 

It  is  too  well  known  to  be  worth  mentioning  that  each  angle  of  an  equilateral 
triangle  is  one  third  of  two  right  angles. 

It  is  also  clear  in  the  case  of  an  isosceles  triangle.  For  each  of  the  equal  sides 
is  to  the  third  side  as  half  of  the  diameter  is  to  the  side  subtending  the  arc  by 
which  the  angle  comprehended  by  the  equal  sides  is  given  according  to  the 
table,  wherein  the  360°  around  the  centre  are  equal  to  four  right  angles.^  Then 
the  two  angles  at  the  base  are  given  as  half  of  the  supplemen¬ 
tary  angle. 

Therefore  it  now  remains  to  show  this  in  the  case  of  scalene 
triangles,  which  we  divide  in  the  same  way  into  right  triangles. 

Therefore  let  there  be  the  scalene  triangle  ABC  of  which  the 
sides  are  given,  and  upon  the  side  which  is  the  longest,  namely 
BC,  drop  the  perpendicular  AD.  Now  Euclid,  ii,  13  tells  us 
that  if  AB  subtends  the  acute  angle,  then 

(sq.  AC+sq.  BC) — sq.  AB  =  2  rect.  BC,  CD. 

Now  it  is  necessary  for  angle  C  to  be  acute;  for  otherwise  AB 


'As  in  the  subjoined  figure: 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 


545 


would  be  the  longest  side  contrary  to  the  hypotheses,  according  to  Euclid,  i,  17- 
19.  Therefore  BD  and  DC  are  given,  and  there  will  be  the  right  triangles  ABC 
and  ADC  with  their  sides  and  angles  given — as  has  so  often  happened  before 
— and  so  the  angles  of  triangle  ABC  which  were  sought  become  established. 

Another  way.  Similarly  Euclid,  iii,  36  will  perhaps  give  us  an  easy  method,  if 

with  BC  the  shorter  side  as  radius  and  with  point 
C  as  centre,  we  describe  a  circle  which  will  cut 
either  one  or  both  of  the  remaining  sides. 

First,  let  it  cut  both:  AB  at  point  E  and  AC  at 
D;  and  let  line  ADC  extended  to  point  F  in  order 
to  complete  the  diameter  DCF.  And  with  this 
construction  it  is  clear  from  that  proposition  of 
Euclid  that 

[21®]  rect.  FA,  AZ)  =  rect.  BA,  AE, 
since  each  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  tangent 
to  the  circle  from  A.  But  the  whole  AF  is  given, 
as  all  its  segments  are  given,  since 

radius  CF  =  radius  CD  —  BC, 

and 

AD  =  CA-CD. 

Wherefore,  as  the  rectangle  BA,  AEis  given,  AE 
also  is  given  in  length;  and  so  is  the  remainder  BE 
subtending  arc  BE.  By  joining  EC  we  shall  have 
the  isosceles  triangle  BCE  with  all  its  sides  given.  Therefore  the  angle  EBC  is 
given.  Hence  in  the  triangle  ABC  the  remaining  angles  at  C  and  at  A  may  be¬ 
come  known  by  means  of  what  has  been  shown  above. 

However,  let  the  circle  not  cut  AB  as  in  the  other  figure,  where  AB  falls  upon 
the  concave  circumference;  nevertheless  BE  will  be  given,  and  in  the  isosceles 
triangle  BCE  angle  CBE  will  be  given  and  also  the  exterior  angle  ABC.  And  by 
the  same  method  as  before  the  remaining  angles  are  given. 

And  we  have  said  enough  concerning  rectilinear  triangles,  in  which  a  great 
part  of  geodesy  consists.  Now  let  us  turn  to  spherical  triangles. 


14.  On  Spherical  Triangles 

In  this  place  we  take  that  triangle  as  spherical  which  is  comprehended  by 
three  arcs  of  great  circles  on  a  spherical  surface.  But  we  take  the  difference  and 
magnitude  of  the  angles  from  the  arc  of  a  great  circle,  i.e.,  a  great  circle  described 
with  the  point  of  section  as  a  pole;  and  this  arc  is  the  arc  intercepted  by  the 
quadrants  of  the  circles  comprehending  the  angle.  For  as  the  arc  thus  inter¬ 
cepted  is  to  the  whole  circumference,  so  is  the  angle  of  section  to  four  right 
angles — which  we  have  said  contain  360  equal  degrees. 

I 

[21^]  If  there  are  three  arcs  of  the  great  circles  of  a  sphere,  and  if  any  two  of  them 
joined  together  are  longer  than  the  third',  it  is  clear  that  a  spherical  triangle  can  he 
constructed  from  them. 

For  Euclid,  xi,  23  shows  in  the  case  of  angles  what  is  here  proposed  in  the 
case  of  arcs.  Since  there  is  the  same  ratio  between  angles  as  between  arcs,  and 
since  the  great  circles  are  those  circles  which  pass  through  the  centre  of  the 
sphere;  it  is  manifest  that  those  three  sectors  of  circles,  i.e.,  the  sectors  to 


546 


COPERNICUS 


which  the  three  arcs  belong,  form  a  solid  angle  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  There¬ 
fore  what  was  proposed  has  been  established. 

•  II 

Any  arc  of  a  [spherical]  triangle  must  he  less  than  a  semicircle. 

For  the  semicircle  makes  no  angle  at  the  centre  but  falls  upon  it  in  a  straight 
line.  But  the  remaining  two  angles  which  intercept  the  arcs  cannot  complete  a 
solid  angle  at  the  centre,  and  so  they  cannot  complete  a  spherical  triangle. 

And  I  think  this  is  the  reason  why  Ptolemy  in  his  exposition  of  triangles  of 
this  genus,  especially  as  regards  the  figure  of  the  spherical  sector,  argues  that 
none  of  the  arcs  taken  together  must  be  greater  than  a  semicircle. 

Ill 

In  spherical  triangles  having  a  right  angle ^  the  chord  subtending  twice  the  side  op¬ 
posite  the  right  angle  is  to  a  chord,  subtending  twice  one  of  the  sides  comprehending 
the  right  angle  as  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  to  the  chord  which  subtends  the  angle 
comprehended  in  the  great  circle  of  the  sphere  by  the  first  side  and  by  the  remaining 
side. 

For  let  there  be  the  spherical  triangle  ABC^  of  which  the  angle  at  C  is  right. 
I  say  that 

ch.  2  AB  :  ch.  2  BC  =  dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  BAC  gr.  circ.  sph. 

With  A  as  a  pole  draw  DE  the  arc  of  a  great  circle,  and  let  ABD  and  ACE  the 
quadrants  of  the  circles  be  completed.  And  from  the 
centre  F  of  the  sphere  draw  the  common  sections  of  the 
circles:  FA  the  common  section  of  circles  ABD  and 
ACE,  [22^]  FE  of  circles  ACE  and  DE,  and  FD  of  cir¬ 
cles  ABD  and  DE;  and  moreover,  FC  of  the  circles  AC 
and  BC,  Then  draw  BG  at  right  angles  to  FA,  BI  at 
right  angles  to  FC,  and  DK  at  right  angles  to  FE;  and 
let  GI  be  joined. 

Since  if  a  circle  cuts  a  circle  described  through  its 
poles,  it  cuts  it  at  right  angles;  therefore  the  angle  AED  will  be  right;  and  angle 
ACB  is  right  by  hypothesis;  and  each  of  the  planes  EDF  and  BCF  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  plane  AEF,  Wherefore  if  a  line  be  erected  in  the  underlying  plane  of 
AFE  at  right  angles  to  point  K  in  the  common  section,  this  line  and  KD  will 
comprehend  a  right  angle,  by  the  definition  of  planes  which  are  perpendicular 
to  one  another.  Wherefore,  by  Euclid,  xi,  4,  line  KD  is  perpendicular  to  circle 
AEF,  But  BI  was  erected  in  the  same  relation  to  the  same  plane;  and  so  by 
Euclid,  XI,  6,  DK  is  parallel  to  BI  and  FD  is  parallel  to  GB,  because 


And  by  Euclid,  xi,  10, 
But 


angle  FGB  =  angle  GFD  —  90°. 
angle  FDA  =  angle  GBI, 


angle  FAD  =  90°, 


and  by  definition 


GI  is  perpendicular  to  7D. 

Accordingly  the  sides  of  similar  triangles  are  proportional;  and 

DF  :BG=DK\BI, 


But 


D/  =  Mch.  2CD, 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  547 

since  it  is  at  right  angles  to  the  radius  from  center  F;  and  for  the  same  reason, 

DK  =  y2  ch.  2  DE,  or  3^  ch.  2  DAE, 

and 

DF  —  y  dmt.  sph., 

Therefore  it  is  clear  that 

ch.  2  AB  :  ch.  2  RC  =  dmt.  :  ch.  2  DAE  (or  ch.  2  DE), 
as  it  was  time  to  show. 

IV 

In  any  triangle  having  a  right  angle,  if  another  angle  and  any  side  are  given,  the 
remaining  angle  and  the  remaining  sides  will  be  given. 

For  let  there  be  the  triangle  ABC  having  the  angle  A  right  and  having  one  of 
the  other  two  angles,  namely  B,  given. 

Let  us  take  three  cases  of  the  given  side.  For  it  is  either  adjacent  to  both  the 

given  angles,  as  AB,  or  only  to  the  right  angle,  as 
AC,  or  is  opposite  the  right  angle,  as  BC, 

Therefore  let  AB  be  the  side  given  first;  and  with 
C  as  a  pole  let  arc  [22^]  DE  of  the  great  circle  be 
described.  Let  the  quadrants  CAD  and  CBE  be 
completed;  and  let  AB  and  DE  be  extended,  until 
they  cut  one  another  at  point  F.  Therefore  con¬ 
versely  the  pole  of  CAD  will  be  at  F,  because 
angle  A  =  angle  D  =  90°. 

And  since,  if  in  a  sphere  the  great  circles  cut  one  another  at  right  angles,  they 
will  bisect  one  another  and  pass  through  the  poles  of  one  another;  therefore  ABF 
and  DEF  are  quadrants  of  circles.  And  since  AB  is  given,  BF  the  remainder  of 
the  quadrant  is  also  given;  and  the  vertical  angle  EBF  is  equal  to  the  given  angle 
ABC,  But  by  what  has  been  shown  above 

ch.  2  BF  :  ch.  2  ^JF  =  dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  EBF, 

But  three  of  the  chords  have  been  given: 

dmt.  sph., 
ch.  2  BF, 
ch.  2  EBF, 

or  the  half-chords;  and  therefore  by  Euclid,  vi,  15,  there  is  also  given 

y  ch.  2  EF] 

and  by  the  table  the  arc  EF  itself  and  DE  the  remainder  of  the  quadrant,  or 
the  angle  at  C,  which  was  sought.  Similarly  and  alternately, 
ch.  2  DE  ;  ch.  2  AB  =  ch,  2  EBC  :  ch.  2  CB, 

But  DE,  AB,  and  CE  on  the  quadrants  of  the  circle  have  already  been  given; 
and  therefore  the  fourth  chord,  subtending  twice  arc  CB,  will  be  given,  and  also 
the  side  CB,  which  was  sought. 

And  since 

ch.  2  CB  :  ch.  2  CA=ch,  2  BF  :  ch.  2  EF, 
because  they  both  have  the  ratio  of 

dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  CBA, 

and  because  things  which  have  the  same  ratio  to  one  and  the  same  thing  have 
the  same  ratio  to  one  another;  therefore  with  the  three  chords  BF,  EF,  and  CB 
given,  the  fourth  chord  CA  is  also  given;  and  arc  CA  is  the  third  side  of  the 
triangle  ABC, 


548  COPERNICUS 

But  now  let  AC  be  the  side  assumed  as  given,  and  let  our  problem  be  to  find 
the  sides  AB  and  BC  together  with  the  remaining  angle  C.  Again  similarly  and 
by  inversion, 

ch.  2  CA  :  ch.  2  CB  =  ch.  2  ABC  :  dmt. 

Hence  the  side  CB  is  given,  and  also  AD  and  BE  the  remainders  of  the  quad¬ 
rants  of  the  circles.  And  so  again, 

ch.  2  AD  :  ch.  2  BE  =  ch.  2  ABF,  i.e,,  dmt.,  :  ch.  2  BF, 

Therefore  arc  BF  is  given,  and  the  side  AB,  which  is  the  remainder. 

And  similarly, 

ch.  2  BC  :  ch.  2  AB  =  2  ch.  CBE  :  ch.  2  DE, 

Hence  arc  DE,  or  twice  the  remaining  angle  at  C,  will  be  given. 

Furthermore,  if  it  was  BC  which  was  assumed,  again  as  before,  AC  and  the 
remainders  AD  and  BE  will  be  given.  Hence  arc  BF  and  the  remaining  side  AB 
are  given  by  means  of  the  diameter  and  the  chords  [23^]  subtending  them,  as  has 
often  been  said.  And  as  in  the  preceding  theorem,  by  means  of  arcs  BC,  AB,  and 
CBE  being  given,  the  arc  ED,  i.e,,  the  remaining  angle  at  C,  which  we  were  seek¬ 
ing,  is  discovered. 

And  so  again  in  the  triangle  ABC  with  two  angles  A  and  B  given,  of  which  A 
is  right,  and  with  one  of  the  three  sides  given,  the  third  angle  and  the  remaining 
sides  are  given,  as  was  to  be  shown. 


V 

The  sides  of  a  right  triangle,  of  which  the  angles  are  given,  are  also  given. 

Let  the  preceding  diagram  be  kept.  On  account  of  the  angle  C  being  given, 
the  arc  DE  and  EF  the  remainder  of  the  quadrant  are  given.  And  since  BEF  is 
a  right  angle,  because  BE  was  let  fall  from  the  pole  of  arc  DEF;  and  since  angle 
EBF  is  equal  to  its  vertical  angle,  which  was  given;  therefore  the  triangle  BEF, 
having  the  right  angle  E  and  the  angle  at  B  given  together  with  the  side  EF,  has 
its  sides  and  angles  given  by  the  preceding  theorem.  Therefore  BF  is  given,  and 
so  is  AB  the  remainder  of  the  quadrant.  And  similarly  in  the  triangle  ABC  the 
remaining  sides  AC  and  BC  are  shovm  as  above. 

VI 

If  in  the  same  sphere  two  triangles  have  right  angles  and  another  angle  equal  to 
another  angle  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side — whether  the  sides  be  adjacent  to  the 
equal  angles  or  lie  opposite  one  of  the  equal  angles — they  will  have  the  remaining 
sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides  and  the  re¬ 
maining  angle  equal  to  the  remaining  angle. 

Let  there  be  the  hemisphere  ABC,  in  which 
the  two  triangles  ABD  and  CEF  are  taken. 

Let  the  angles  at  A  and  C  be  right;  and  fur¬ 
thermore  let  the  angle  ADB  be  equal  to  CEF, 
and  one  side  to  one  side.  And  first  let  the 
equal  sides  be  adjacent  to  the  equal  angles, 
i.e.,  let  AD  be  equal  to  CE.  I  say  moreover 
that  side  AB  is  equal  to  side  CF,  side  BD  to 
EF,  and  the  remaining  angle  ABD  to  the  re¬ 
maining  angle  CFE. 

For  with  B  and  F  as  poles,  draw  GHI  and 
IKL  the  quadrants  of  the  great  circles.  And 


B 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  549 


let  quadrants  ADI  and  CEI  be  completed.  They  necessarily  cut  one  another 
at  the  pole  of  the  hemisphere,  point  I,  [23^]  because 

angle  A  =  angle  C = 90° 

and  quadrants  GHI  and  CEI  have  been  drawn  through  thepolesofthecircleA^C. 
Therefore,  since  it  has  been  assumed  that 

side  AD  =  side  CE 

then  by  subtraction 

arc  Dl  =  8ivc  EL 

And 

angle  IDH  =  angle  lEK; 

for  they  are  placed  at  the  vertices  of  the  angles  assumed  as  equal;  and 

angle  H  =  angle  K  =  90°. 

As  things  which  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  same  are  in  the  same  ratio;  and 
since  by  Theorem  III  in  this  chapter, 

ch.  2  ID  :  ch.  2  /f/=dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  IDHj 

and 

ch.  El :  ch.  2  KI =dmt.  sph. :  ch.  2  lEK; 

therefore 

ch.  2  ID  :  ch.  2  HI=^eh.  2  El :  ch.  2  IK. 

And  by  EucIid^s  Elements,  v,  14,  since 

ch.  2  Z)/  =  ch.  2  IE 


therefore 


ch.  2  HI  =  ch.  2  IK. 

And  as  in  equal  circles  equal  chords  cut  off  equal  arcs,  and  as  the  parts  of  mul¬ 
tiples  are  in  the  same  ratio  [as  the  multiples] ;  therefore  the  plain  arcs  IH  and 
IK  will  be  equal;  and  so  will  GH  and  KL  the  remainders  of  the  quadrants. 
Whence  it  is  clear  that 

angle  jB= angle  F, 

and  since,  by  the  inverse  of  the  third  theorem, 

ch.  2  AD  :  ch.  2  £D  =  ch.  2  ;  ch  2  BDH,  or  dmt., 

and 

ch.  2  EC  :  ch.  2  SF  =  ch.  2  KL  :  ch.  2  FEK,  or  dmt., 

wherefore 

ch.  2  AD  :  ch.  2  RD  =  ch.  2  EC  :  ch.  2  EF 


and 

AD  =  CE. 

Therefore,  by  Euclid’s  Elements,  v,  14, 

arc  BD  =  arc  EF, 

on  account  of  the  chords  subtending  twice  the  arcs  being  equal. 

In  the  same  way  with  BD  and  EF  equal,  we  will  show  that  the  remaining 
sides  and  angles  are  equal. 

And  in  turn,  if  sides  AB  and  CF  are  assumed  to  be  equal,  the  results  will  fol¬ 
low  the  same  identity  of  ratio. 


VII 

Now  also  even  if  there  is  no  right  angle,  hut  provided  that  the  sides  which  are  ad^ 
jacent  to  the  equal  angles  are  equal  to  one  another,  the  same  thing  will  he  shown. 

In  this  way  if  in  the  two  triangles  ABD  and  CEF 

angle  B  =  angle  F 


550 

and 


COPERNICUS 


B 


angle  D  =  angle  E, 

and  if  side  BD  is  adjacent  to  the  equal  [24^] 
angles  and 

side  BD  =  side  EF^ 

I  say  that  again  the  triangles  are  equilateral 
and  equiangular. 

For  once  more  with  B  and  F  as  poles,  de¬ 
scribe  GH  and  KL^  the  arcs  of  the  great  circ¬ 
les.  And  let  AD  and  GH  extended  intersect  at 
N ;  and  let  EC  and  LK  similarly  extended  in¬ 
tersect  at  M. 

Therefore  since  in  the  two  triangles  HDN 
and  EKM 

angle  HDN  =  angle  KEMy 

because  they  are  placed  at  the  vertex  of  the  angles  assumed  equal;  and  since 

angle  H  =  angle  K  =  90° 

on  account  of  the  intersection  of  circles  described  through  the  poles  of  one 
another;  and 

side  !)//'  =  side  EK; 

therefore  the  triangles  are  equiangular  and  equilateral  by  the  preceding  proof. 
And  again  because 

arc  GH  =  arc  KL 

on  account  of  its  being  assumed  that 

angle  =  angle  F; 

therefore  by  addition 

arc  (?FiV  =  arc  MKLy 

by  the  axiom  concerning  the  addition  of  equals.  And  therefore  there  are  these 
two  triangles  AGN  and  MCL  where 

side  GN  =  side  ML, 
angle  =  angle  CML, 

and 

angle  G  =  angle  L  =  90°. 

So  the  triangles  will  have  their  sides  and  angles  equal.  Therefore  when  equals 
have  been  subtracted  from  equals,  the  remainders  will  be  equal: 

arc  AL  =  arc  CL, 
arc  AB  =  arc  CF, 

and 

angle  BAD  =  angle  FCF, 

as  was  to  be  shown. 


VIII  A 

Now  further y  if  two  triangles  have  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides  and  an  angle  equal 
to  an  angUy  whether  the  angle  which  the  equal  sides  comprehendy  or  an  angle  at  the 
basey  they  will  also  have  base  equal  to  base  and  the  remaining  angles  equal  to  the 
remaining  angles. 

As  in  the  preceding  diagram,  let 

side  AL  =  side  CF 


and 


side  AD  =  side  CE, 


651 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 


and 

then 


And  first  let 

angle  A  =  angle  C, 

which  is  comprehended  by  the  equal  sides.  I  say  also  that 
base  BD  =  base  EF, 
angle  5  =  angle  F, 

and 

angle  BDA  =  angle  CEF. 

For  we  shall  have  the  two  triangles  AGN  and  CLM,  where 
angle  G  =  angle  L  =  90®. 

And  since 

angle  GAA^  =  180® — angle  BAD, 
angle  MCL  =  180®— angle  EOF, 


angl.e  =  angle  MCL, 

Therefore  the  triangles  are  equiangular  and  equilateral. 
Wherefore  since 


arc  AW  =  arc  CM 


and  ^ 

arc  AD  —  arc  CEy 

then  by  subtraction 

arc  DN  =  arc  ME. 

But  it  has  already  been  made  clear  that 

angle  DNH  =  angle  EMKy 

and 

angle  H  =  angle  K  =  90®. 

Therefore  the  two  triangles  DHN  and  EMK  will  also  be  equiangular  and  equi¬ 
lateral.  [24^]  Hence  [by  the  subtraction  of  equals] 

arc  BD  =  arc  EF 

and 

arc  GH  =  arc  KL. 

Hence 

angle  B  =  angle  F, 

and 

angle  AZ)5  =  angle  FEC. 

But  if  instead  of  sides  AD  and  CE  it  be  assumed  that 

base  5Z)  =  base  EF, 

which  are  opposite  the  equal  angles;  and  if  the  rest  stays  the  same;  then  the 
proof  will  be  similar.  For  since 

exterior  angle  GAW  =  exterior  angle  MCLy 
angle  G  =  angle  L  — 90®, 

and 

side  AG  =  side  CL; 

in  the  same  way  as  before  we  shall  have  the  two  triangles  AGN  and  MCL  as 
equiangular  and  equilateral.  And  moreover,  as  parts  of  them, 

trgl.  DNH  =  iYg\.  MEKy 

because 

angle  H  =  angle  K  =  90®, 
angle  Z)WW= angle  KMEy 


552  COPERNICUS 

and  by  subtraction  from  the  quadrant 

side  DH  =  side  EK, 

Whence  the  same  things  follow  as  before. 

IX 

Moreover,  in  isosceles  spherical  triangles  the  angles  at  the  base  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  there  be  triangle  ABC,  where 

side  AB —  side  AC. 

I  say  that  on  the  base 

angle  =  angle  ACB. 

From  the  vertex  A  drop  a  great  circle  which  will  cut  the  base  at  right  angles, 
i.e.,  a  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  base;  and  let  this  circle  be  AD.  Therefore, 
since  in  the  two  triangles  ABD  and  ADC 

side  BA  =  side  AC, 

and 

side  AD = side  AD, 

and 

angle  JSD  A  =  angle  CD  A  =  90®, 
it  is  clear  from  what  was  shown  above  that 

angle  ADC  =  angle  ACB, 

as  was  to  be  shown. 

PORISM 

Hence  it  follows  that  the  arc  from  the  vertex  of  an  isosceles  triangle  which 
falls  at  right  angles  upon  the  base  will  at  the  same  time  bisect  the  base  and  the 
angle  comprehended  by  the  equal  sides,  and  vice  versa.  And  that  is  clear  from 
what  has  been  shown  above. 

X 

If  two  triangles  in  the  same  sphere  have  the  sides  of  the  one  severally  equal  to  the 
sides  of  the  other,  they  will  have  the  angles  of  the  one  severally  equal  to  the  angles  of 
the  other. 

For  in  each  triangle  the  three  segments  of  great  circles  form  pyramids  which 
have  as  their  apexes  the  centre  of  the  sphere  and  as  their  bases  the  plane  tri¬ 
angles  which  are  comprehended  by  the  straight  lines  subtending  the  arcs  of  the 
convex  triangles.  And  those  pyramids  are  similar  and  [25^]  equal  by  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  similar  and  equal  solid  figures  [Euclid,  xi,  Def.  10];  now  the  ratio  of 
similarity  is  that  the  angles  taken  in  any  order  will  be  severally  equal  to  one 
another.  Therefore  the  triangles  will  have  their  angles  equal  to  one  another. 

In  particular,  those  who  define  similarity  of  figures  more  generally  say  that 
similar  figures  are  those  which  have  similar  declinations,  and  have  correspond¬ 
ing  angles  equal  to  one  another.  Whence  I  think  it  is  manifest  that  in  a  sphere 
the  triangles  which  are  equilateral  are  similar,  just  as  in  the  case  of  plane  tri¬ 
angles. 

XI 

Every  triangle  which  has  two  sides  and  an  angle  given  will  have  the  remaining  sides 
and  angles  given. 

For  if  the  two  sides  are  given  as  equal,  the  angles  at  the  base  will  be  equal, 
and  by  drawing  an  arc  from  the  vertex  at  right  angles  to  the  base,  what  is  sought 
will  easily  be  found  by  means  of  the  Porism  to  the  ninth  theorem. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I 


553 


But  if  however  the  sides  given  are  unequal,  as  in  triangle  ABC,  where  angle  A 
is  given  together  with  two  sides,  the  sides  either  compre¬ 
hend  the  given  angle  or  do  not  comprehend  it:  First,  let  the 
given  sides  AB  and  AC  comprehend  it.  And  with  C  as  a 
pole  draw  arc  DEF  of  a  great  circle ;  and  let  the  quadrants 
CAD  and  CBE  be  completed;  and  let  AB  extended  cut  DE 
at  point  F.  So  also  in  the  triangle  ADF, 
side  AD  =  90°  —  Sirc  AC] 

and 

angle  J5AZ)  =  180° —angle  CAB. 

For  the  ratios  and  dimensions  of  these  angles  are  the  same 
as  those  of  angles  occurring  at  the  intersection  of  straight 
lines  and  planes.  And 

angle  Z)  =  90°. 

Therefore  by  the  fourth  theorem  of  this  chapter,  triangle  ADF  will  have  its 
sides  and  angles  given.  And  again  in  triangle  BEF  angle  F  has  been  found,  and 

angle  E  =  90° 

on  account  of  the  intersection  of  circles  through  the  poles  of  one  another;  and 
side  BF  =  arc  ABF  — arc  AB. 

Therefore  by  the  same  theorem  triangle  BEF  also  will  have  its  angles  and  sides 
given.  Whence  BC  the  side  sought  is  given,  as 

RC  =  90°-RF, 

and  BC  is  the  side  sought.  And 

arc  Z>F  =  arc  DFF— arc  EF. 

And  so  angle  C  is  given.  Any  by  means  of  angle  EBF,  the  vertical  angle  ABC, 
which  was  sought,  is  given. 

But  if  in  place  of  side  AB,  side  CB  which  is  opposite  to  the  given  angle  is 
assumed,  the  same  thing  will  result.  For  AD  and  BE  the  remainders  of  quad¬ 
rants  are  given;  and  by  the  same  argument  the  two  triangles  ADF  and  BEF 
will  have  their  sides  and  angles  given,  as  before. 

Whence,  as  was  intended,  ABC  the  triangle  set  before  us  will  have  its  sides 
and  angles  given. 

[25^]  XII 

Furthermore,  if  any  two  angles  are  given  together  with  one  side,  there  will 
be  the  same  result. 

For  let  the  construction  in  the  previous  figure  stay;  and  in  triangle  ABC  let 
the  two  angles  ACB  and  BAC  be  given  together  with  side  AC,  which  is  adjacent 
to  both  angles.  Now  if  one  of  the  angles  given  were  right,  then  everything  else 
would  follow  from  the  ratios  by  the  preceding  fourth  theorem.  But  we  wish  to 
keep  the  theorems  different  and  to  have  neither  of  the  angles  right.  Therefore 

Ai)  =  90°-AC. 

And 

angle  BAD  =  180°— angle  BAC. 

And 

angle  Z)  =  90°. 

Therefore  by  the  fourth  theorem  in  this  chapter,  triangle  AFD  will  have  its 
angles  and  sides  given.  But  through  angle  C  being  given,  the  arc  DE  is  given, 
and  so  is  the  remainder 


arc  EF  =  90° — arc  DE. 


554 

And 


COPERNICUS 


and 


angle  BEF=QQ^] 


angle  F  =  angle  F, 

In  the  same  way  by  the  fourth  theorem  BE  and  BF  are  given;  and  through 
them  we  can  discover  sides  AB  and  BC,  which  were  sought. 

Moreover,  if  one  of  the  given  angles  is  opposite  the  given  side,  namely  if  angle 
ABC  is  given  in  place  of  angle  ACB,  and  if  the  rest  stayed  the  same,  then  it  can 
be  shown  in  similar  fashion  that  the  whole  triangle  ADF  will  be  established  as 
having  its  sides  and  angles  given;  and  similarly  the  part  of  it  which  is  triangle 
BEF\  since  on  account  of  angle  F  being  common  to  both,  angle  EBF  being  at 
the  vertex  of  the  given  angle,  and  angle  E  being  right,  it  is  shown  as  above  that 
all  the  sides  are  given.  And  from  that  there  follows  what  I  said.  For  all  these 
things  are  always  tied  together  by  a  mutual  and  perpetual  bond,  as  befits  the 
form  of  a  globe. 


XIII 

Finally j  all  the  sides  of  a  triangle  being  given,  the  angles  are  given. 

Let  all  the  sides  of  triangle  ABC  be  given:  I  say  that  all  the  angles  too  are 
found. 

For  the  triangle  either  will  have  equal  sides  or  it  will  ^ 

not.  First  therefore  let  AB  and  AC  be  equal.  It  is  clear 
that  the  halves  of  chords  subtending  twice  those  sides 
will  be  equal.  And  let  these  halves  be  BE  and  CE,  which 
on  account  of  being  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  centre 
of  the  sphere  will  cut  one  another  at  point  E  in  DE  the 
common  section  of  the  circles,  as  is  clear  from  Euclid,  iii, 

Def.  4,  [26^]  and  its  converse. 

But  by  Euclid,  iii,  3,  in  plane  ABD 
angle  DEB  =  90°; 
and  in  plane  ACD  similarly 

angle  DEC  =  90°. 

Therefore  by  Euclid,  xi,  Def.  3,  BEC  is  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  planes; 
and  we  shall  find  it  as  follows;  for  since  there  is  a  straight  line  subtending  BC, 
we  shall  have  a  rectilinear  triangle  BEC  with  its  sides  given  on  account  of  their 
arcs  being  given;  and  then  since  the  angles  may  be  found,  we  shall  have  the 
angle  BEC,  which  was  sought,  i.e.,  we  shall  have  the  spherical  angle  BAC;  and 
we  shall  have  the  others  as  above. 

But  if  the  triangle  is  scalene,  as  in  the  second  figure,  it  is  clear  that  the  halves 
of  the  chords  subtending  twice  the  sides  will  by  no  means 
touch  one  another.  For  if 

arc  AOarc  AB, 

then,  as 

CF  =Mch.  2  AC, 

CF  will  fall  lower  down.  But  if 

arc  AC<arc  AB, 

then  CF  will  fall  higher  up,  according  as  such  lines  become 
nearer  and  farther  away  from  the  centre,  by  Euclid,  iii, 
15.  Now  however  let  FG  be  drawn  parallel  to  BE;  and  at 


B 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  I  655 


point  G  let  it  cut  BD  the  common  section  of  the  two  circles  [AB  and  BC].  And 
let  GC  be  joined.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that 

angle  EFG  =  angle  A  EB  =  90° 


And  too 


for 


angle  £'FC  =  90°; 


CF  =  14  ch,  2  AC. 

Therefore  angle  CFG  will  be  the  angle  of  section  of  circles  AB  and  AC;  and  we 
shall  find  this  angle  too.  For 

DF:FG  =  DE:EB, 

since  triangles  DFG  and  DEB  are  similar.  Therefore  FG  is  given  in  the  parts 
wherein  FC  is  also  given;  and 

DG:DB  =  DE:EB. 

Hence  DG  will  be  given  in  the  same  parts  whereof  DC  has  100,000.  But  as  the 
angle  GDC  is  given  through  the  arc  BC^  therefore  by  the  second  theorem  on 
plane  triangles  the  side  GC  is  given  in  the  same  parts  wherein  the  remaining 
sides  of  the  plane  triangle  GFC  are  given.  Therefore  by  the  last  theorem  on  plane 
triangles  we  shall  have  the  angle  GFC^  i.e.j  the  spherical  angle  BAC,  which  was 
sought;  and  then  we  shall  find  the  remaining  angles  by  the  eleventh  theorem 
on  spherical  triangles. 


XIV 

If  a  given  arc  of  a  circle  is  cut  anywhere  so  that  both  of  the  segments  together  are  less 
than  a  semicircle y  and  if  the  ratio  of  half  of  the  chord  subtending  twice  one  segment 
to  the  half  of  the  chord  subtending  twice  the  other  segment  is  given j  [26^]  the  arcs 
of  those  segments  will  also  be  given. 

For  let  arc  ABC  be  given,  around  centre  D;  and  let  ABC  be  cut  at  point  B 

anywhere,  but  in  such  a  way  that  the  segments 
are  less  than  a  semicircle;  and  let 

H  ch.  2  : 3/^  ch.  2  BC 

be  somehow  given  in  length:  I  say  that  the  arcs 
AB  and  BC  are  also  given. 

For  let  the  straight  line  AC  be  drawn,  which 
the  diameter  cuts  at  point  E;  and  from  the  ter¬ 
mini  A  and  C  let  the  perpendiculars  AF  and  CG 
fall  upon  the  diameter.  And  of  necessity 
AF=i^ch.  2AR 

and 

CG  =  y2ch.2BC. 

Therefore  in  the  right  triangles  AEF  and  CEG 
angle  AEF  =  angle  CEGj 
because  they  are  vertical  angles.  And  the  tri¬ 
angles  which  are  therefore  equiangular  and  simi¬ 
lar  have  the  sides  opposite  the  equal  angles  proportional : 


AF  :CG  =  AE  :EC. 

Therefore  we  shall  have  AE  and  EC  in  the  parts  wherein  AF  or  GC  has  been 
given.  But  the  chord  subtending  arc  ABC  is  given  in  the  parts  wherein  the 
radius  DEB,  AK  the  half  of  chord  AC,  and  the  remainder  EK  are  given.  Let 
DA  and  DK  be  joined,  and  they  will  be  given  in  the  parts  wherein  BD  is  given: 
DK  will  be  given  as  half  of  the  chord  subtending  the  remaining  segment  which 


556 


COPERNICUS 


is  supplementaiy  to  arc  ABC  and  is  comprehended  by  angle  DAK,  And  there¬ 
fore  angle  ADK  is  given,  which  comprehends  half  of  arc  ABC.  But  in  the  tri¬ 
angle  EDK  having  two  sides  given  and  angle  EKD  right,  angle  EDK  will  also 
be  given.  Hence  the  whole  angle  EDA  comprehending  the  arc  AB  will  be  given. 
Thereby  also  the  remainder  CB  will  be  manifest.  And  it  was  this  that  we  were 
trying  to  show. 


XV 

If  all  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are  given,  even  though  none  is  a  right  angle,  all  the 
sides  are  given. 

Let  there  be  the  triangle  ABC,  all  the  angles  of  which  are  given  but  none 
of  which  is  right.  I  say  that  all  the  sides  are  given  too. 

For  from  some  one  of  the  angles,  say  A,  drop  the  arc  AD  through  the  poles  of 
CB.  AD  will  cut  BC  at  right  angles,  and  it  will  fall  within  the  triangle,  un¬ 
less  one  of  the  angles  at  the  base — angle  B  or  angle  C — is  obtuse  and  the 
other  acute.  If  that  were  the  case,  the  arc  would  have  to  be  drawn  from  the  ob¬ 
tuse  angle  to  the  base.  So  with  the  quadrants  BAF,  g 

CAG,  and  DAE  completed  and  with  B  and  C  as 
poles,  let  the  arcs  EF  and  EG  [27^]  be  drawn. 

Therefore 

angle  F  =  angle  0  =  90"^. 

Therefore  in  the  right  triangle  EAF 
3/^  ch.  2  A jEJ  :  M  ch.  2  EF  =  Y2  dmt.  sph. :  ch.  2  EAF, 

Similarly  in  right  triangle  AEG 

ch.  2  A JE7 :  3^  ch.  2  E'er  =  3^  dmt.  sph. :  ch.  2  EAG, 

Therefore,  ex  aequali, 

3^  ch.  2EF  :  H  ch.  2  EG=y2  ch.  2  EAF  :  3^  ch.  2 
EAG, 

And  because  arcs  FE  and  EG  are  given,  since 

arc  FE  =  90°  -  angle  B 


and 

arc  i7(j  =  90° -angle  C; 

thence  we  shall  have  the  ratio  between  angles  EAF  and  EAG  given,  i.e.,  the 
ratio  between  BAD  and  CAD,  which  are  their  vertical  angles.  Now  the  whole 
angle  BAC  has  been  given;  therefore  by  the  foregoing  theorem,  angles  BAD 
and  CAD  will  also  be  given.  Then  by  the  fifth  theorem  we  shall  determine 
sides  AB,  BD,  AC,  CD,  and  the  whole  of  arc  BC, 

This  much  said  enroute  concerning  triangles,  according  as  they  are  neces¬ 
sary  for  our  undertaking,  will  be  sufficient.  For  if  they  had  to  be  treated  in 
greater  detail,  the  work  would  be  of  unusual  size. 


127»]B00K  two 


Since  we  have  expounded  briefly  the  three  terrestrial  movements,  by 
means  of  which  we  promised  to  demonstrate  all  the  planetary  appearances,  now 
we  shall  fulfil  our  promise  by  proceeding  from  the  whole  to  the  parts  and  exam¬ 
ining  and  investigating  particular  questions  to  the  extent  of  our  powers.  Now 
we  shall  begin  with  the  best-known  movement  of  all,  the  revolution  of  day  and 
night — which  we  said  the  Greeks  called  wxdw^pos  and  which  we  have  taken 
as  belonging  wholly  and  immediately  to  the  terrestrial  globe,  since  from  this 
movement  arise  the  months,  years,  and  other  variously  named  periods  of  time, 
as  number  from  unity.  Therefore  we  shall  say  only  a  few  words  about  the  in¬ 
equality  of  days  and  nights,  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  and  of  the  parts 
of  the  ecliptic  and  the  signs,  and  the  consequences  of  this  type  of  revolution;  for 
many  people  have  written  about  these  subjects  copiously  enough  and  what  they 
say  is  in  harmony  and  agreement  with  our  conceptions.  It  is  of  no  importance 
if  we  take  up  in  an  opposite  fashion  what  others  have  demonstrated  by  means 
of  a  motionless  earth  and  a  giddy  world  and  race  with  them  toward  the  same 
goal,  since  things  related  reciprocally  happen  to  be  inversely  in  harmony  with 
one  another.  Nevertheless  we  shall  omit  nothing  necessary.  But  no  one  should 
be  surprised  if  we  still  speak  of  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  and  stars,  et 
cetera]  but  he  should  realize  that  we  are  speaking  in  the  usual  manner  of  speech 
which  can  be  recognized  by  all  and  that  we  are  nevertheless  always  keeping  in 
mind  that:  ^To  us  who  are  being  carried  by  the  Earth,  the  sun  and  the  moon 
seem  to  pass  over;  and  the  stars  return  to  their  former  positions  and  again 
move  away.” 


1.  On  the  Circles  and  Their  Names 

We  have  said  that  the  equator  is  the  greatest  of  the  parallel  circles  on  the 
terrestrial  globe  described  around  the  axis  of  its  daily  revolution  and  that  the 
ecliptic  is  the  circle  through  the  middle  [28^]  of  the  signs  under  which  the  centre 
of  the  Earth  moves  in  a  circle  in  its  annual  revolution. 

But  since  the  ecliptic  crosses  the  equator  obliquely;  in  proportion  to  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the  axis  of  the  Earth  to  it,  it  describes  in  the  course  of  the  daily 
revolution  two  circles  which  touch  it  on  either  side  of  the  equator,  as  if  the  farth¬ 
est  limits  to  its  obliquity.  These  circles  are  called  the  tropics.  For  on  them  the 
sun  appears  to  make  its  “tropes,”  z.c.,  its  winter  and  summer  changes  of  direc¬ 
tion.  Whence  the  northern  circle  used  to  be  called  the  tropic  of  the  summer 
solstice  and  the  other  the  tropic  of  the  shortest  day,  as  was  set  forth  in  our 
summary  exposition  of  the  circular  movements  of  the  Earth. 

Next  follows  the  so-called  horizon,  which  the  Latins  call  the  boundary  circle; 
for  it  is  the  boundary  between  that  part  of  the  world  which  is  visible  to  us  and 
that  part  which  lies  hidden.  All  stars  which  set  are  seen  to  have  their  rising 
on  it;  and  it  has  its  centre  on  the  surface  of  the  Earth  and  its  pole  at  the  point 

557 


558  COPERNICUS 

directly  overhead.  But  since  it  is  impossible  to  compare  the  Earth  with  the  im¬ 
mensity  of  the  heavens— for  according  to  our  hypothesis  even  the  total  distance 
between  the  sun  and  the  moon  is  indiscernible  beside  the  magnitude  of  the 
heavens — the  circle  of  the  horizon  appears  to  bisect  the  heavens,  as  if  it  went 
through  the  centre  of  the  world,  as  we  demonstrated  in  the  beginning. 

But  when  the  horizon  is  oblique  to  the  equator,  it  too  touches  on  either  side 
of  the  equator  twin  parallel  circles,  z.e.,  the  northern  circle  of  the  always  visible 
stars  and  the  southern  circle  of  the  always  hidden  stars.  The  first  circle  was 
called  the  arctic,  and  the  second  the  antarctic  by  Proclus  and  the  Greeks;  and 
they  become  greater  or  smaller  in  proportion  to  the  obliquity  of  the  horizon  or 
the  elevation  of  the  pole  of  the  equatorh 

There  remains  the  meridian  circle  which  passes  through  the  poles  of  the 
horizon  and  through  the  poles  of  the  equator  too  and  hence  is  perpendicular  to 
both  circles.  The  sun's  reaching  it  gives  us  midday  and  midnight. 

But  these  two  circles  which  have  their  centres  on  the  surface  of  the  Earth, 
i.6.,  the  horizon  and  the  meridian,  are  wholly  consequent  upon  the  movement  of 
the  Earth  and  upon  our  sight  at  some  particular  place.  For  the  eye  everywhere 
becomes  as  it  were  the  centre  of  the  sphere  of  all  things  which  are  visible  to  it  on 
all  sides. 

Furthermore  all  the  circles  assumed  on  the  Earth  produce  circles  in  the  heav¬ 
ens  as  their  likenesses  and  images,  as  will  be  shown  more  clearly  in  cosmography 
and  in  connection  with  the  dimensions  of  the  Earth.  And  these  circles  at  any 
rate  are  the  ones  having  proper  names,  though  there  are  infinite  ways  of  desig¬ 
nating  and  naming  others. 

2.  On  the  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic  and  the  Distance  of  the 
Tropics  and  How  They  Are  Determined 

[28^]  Since  the  ecliptic  lies  between  the  tropics  and  crosses  the  equator  ob¬ 
liquely,  I  therefore  think  that  we  should  now  try  to  observe  what  the  distance 
between  the  tropics  is  and  hence  what  the  angle  of  section  between  the  equator 
and  the  ecliptic  is.  For  in  order  to  perceive  this  by  sense  with  the  help  of  arti¬ 
ficial  instruments,  by  means  of  which  the  job  can  be  done  best,  it  is  necessary  to 
have  a  wooden  square  prepared,  or  preferably  a  square  made  from  some  other 
more  solid  material,  from  stone  or  metal;  for  the  wood  might  not  stay  in  the 
same  condition  on  account  of  some  alteration  in  the  atmosphere  and  might  mis¬ 
lead  the  observer.  Now  one  surface  of  it  should  be  very  carefully  planed,  and  it 
should  be  of  suflEicient  area  to  admit  being  divided  into  sections,  that  is,  a  side 
should  be  about  5  or  6  feet  long.  Now  with  one  of  the  corners  [of  the  square]  as 
centre  and  with  a  side  as  radius,  let  a  quadrant  of  a  circle  be  drawn  and  divided 
into  90  equal  degrees ;  and  let  each  of  the  degrees  be  subdivided  into  60  minutes, 
or  whatever  number  can  be  taken.  Next  let  a  cylindrical  pointer  which  has  been 
well  turned  on  a  lathe  be  set  up  at  the  centre  (of  the  quadrant)  and  fixed  in  such 
a  way  as  to  be  perpendicular  to  the  surface  and  to  extend  out  from  it  a  little,  say 
perhaps  a  finger's  width  or  less. 

When  the  instrument  has  been  prepared  in  this  way,  the  next  thing  to  do  is  to 
exhibit  the  line  of  the  meridian  on  a  piece  of  flooring  which  lies  in  the  plane  of 
the  horizon  and  which  has  been  made  even  as  carefully  as  is  possible  by  means 

^That  is  to  say,  the  magnitude  of  the  circle  of  the  always  visible  stars  varies  inversely  with 
the  obliquity  of  the  horizon  and  directly  with  the  elevation  of  the  poles  of  the  equator. 


559 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 

of  a  hydroscope  or  ground-level,  so  as  not  to  have  a  slope  in  any  part  of  it.  The 
piece  of  flooring  should  have  a  circle  drawn  on  it  and  a  cylinder  erected  at  the 
center  of  the  circle:  we  shall  take  observations  and  mark  the  point  where  at  some 
time  before  midday  the  extremity  of  the  shadow  of  the  cylinder  touches  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  circle.  We  shall  do  the  same  thing  in  the  afternoon,  and  then 
shall  bisect  the  arc  of  the  circle  lying  between  the  two  points  we  have  already 
marked.  In  this  way  a  straight  line  drawn  from  the  centre  through  the  point  of 
section  will  indicate  infallibly  for  us  the  south  and  the  north. 

Accordingly  the  plane  surface  of  the  instrument  should  be  set  up  on  this  piece 
of  flooring  as  a  base  and  fixed  perpendicular  to  it  with  the  centre  [of  the  quad¬ 
rant]  to  the  south,  so  that  a  plumb-line  from  the  centre  would  fall  exactly  at 
right  angles  to  the  meridian  line.  For  it  comes  about  in  this  way  that  the  surface 
of  the  instrument  exhibits  the  meridian  circle.  Hence  on  the  days  of  summer  and 
winter  solstice  the  shadows  of  the  sun  at  noon  [29""]  are  to  be  observed  according 
as  they  are  cast  by  the  pointer,  or  cylinder,  from  the  centre  [of  the  quadrant]; 
and  some  mark  is  to  be  made  on  the  arc  of  the  quadrant,  so  that  the  place  of  the 
shadow  may  be  kept  more  surely.  And  we  shall  note  down  the  centre  of  the 
shadow  in  degrees  and  minutes  as  accurately  as  is  possible.  For  if  we  do  this,  the 
arc  between  the  marked  shadows — the  summer— and  winter — solstitial  shadows 
— will  be  found  and  will  show  us  the  distance  between  the  tropics  and  also  the 
total  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic h  By  taking  half  of  the  arc,  we  shall  have  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  tropics  from  the  equator,  and  it  will  be  clear  what  the  angle  of  in¬ 
clination  is  between  the  equator  and  the  ecliptic. 

Now  Ptolemy  took  the  interval  between  the  aforesaid  limits — the  northern 
and  the  southern — as  47°42'40",  whereof  the  circle  has  360°,  as  he  found  had 
been  observed  by  Hipparchus  and  Eratosthenes  before  his  time;  and  there  are 
Up  whereof  the  whole  circle  has  83p.  Hence  half  the  arc — and  half  the  arc  has 
23°51'20",  whereof  the  circle  has  360° — showed  the  distance  of  the  tropics  from 
the  equator  and  what  the  angle  of  section  with  the  ecliptic  was.  Accordingly 
Ptolemy  believed  that  these  things  were  invariably  such  and  would  always  re¬ 
main  so.  But  these  distances  have  been  found  to  have  decreased  continually 
from  that  time  down  to  ours.  For  it  has  already  been  discovered  by  us  and  some 
of  our  contemporaries  that  the  distance  between  the  tropics  is  not  more  than 
46°58'  approximately  and  that  the  angle  of  section  is  23°29'.  Hence  it  is  clear 
enough  that  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  is  not  fixed.  More  on  this  below,  where 
we  shall  show  by  a  probable  enough  conclusion  that  it  was  never  greater  than 
23°52'  and  will  not  ever  be  less  than  23°28'. 

3.  On  the  Arcs  and  Angles  of  the  Intersections  of  the  Equator, 
Ecliptic,  and  Meridian,  By  Means  of  W'hich  Declinations 
AND  Right  Ascensions  Are  Determined,  and  on  the  Com¬ 
putation  OF  These  Arcs  and  Angles 

Accordingly  as  we  were  saying  in  the  case  of  the  horizon  that  the  parts  of  the 
world  have  their  risings  and  settings  on  it,  we  say  that  the  meridian  circle  [29^] 
halves  the  heavens.  During  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours  this  circle  is  crossed 
by  both  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator  and  divides  both  of  their  circumferences 

^Since  the  distance  between  the  sun  and  the  Earth  is  imperceptible  in  relation  to  the  radius 
of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  the  centre  of  the  quadrant  may  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 


560 


COPERNICUS 


by  cutting  them  at  the  spring  and  at  the  autumnal  intersection  and  in  turn  has 
its  circumference  divided  by  the  arc  intercepted  by  those  two  circles.  Since  they 
are  all  great  circles,  they  form  a  spherical  right  triangle;  for  the  angle  is  right 
where  the  meridian  circle  by  definition  cuts  the  equator  described  through  its 
poles.  Now  the  arc  of  the  meridian  circle,  or  any  arc  of  a  circle  passing  through 
the  poles  [of  the  equator]  and  intercepted  in  this  way  is  called  the  declination  of 
a  segment  of  the  ecliptic;  and  the  corresponding  arc  on  the  equator  is  called  the 
right  ascension  occurring  at  the  same  time  as  the  similar  arc  on  the  ecliptic. 

All  this  is  easily  demonstrated  in  a  convex  triangle.  For  let  the  circle  ABCD 
be  a  circle  passing  simultaneously  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  of 
the  equator — most  people  call  this  circle  the 
^^colure^’ — let  the  semicircle  of  the  ecliptic  be 
AEC,  the  semicircle  of  the  equator  BED;  let 
the  spring  equinox  be  at  point  E',  the  sum¬ 
mer  solstice  at  A,  and  the  winter  solstice  at 
C.  Now  let  F  be  taken  as  the  pole  of  daily 
revolution,  and  on  the  ecliptic  let 
arc  EG  =  30°y 

for  example,  and  let  it  be  cut  off  by  FGH  the 
quadrant  of  a  circle. 

Then  it  is  clear  that  in  triangle  EGH 
side  ^G=30°, 
angle  GEH  is  given, 

since  at  its  least,  in  conformity  with  the  greatest  declination  AB, 
angle  GEH  =  23^28' 

1  where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°; 


angle  GHE  =  90°. 

Therefore  by  the  fourth  theorem  on  sphericals,  triangle  EHG  will  have  its  sides 
and  angles  given.  For  it  was  shown  that 

ch.  2  EG  :  ch.  2  GH^eh,  2  AGE,  or  dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  AB 
and  their  halves  are  in  the  same  ratio.  And  since 

3^  ch.  2  AGE' =  radius  =  100,000, 

,  Mch.2AE  =  39,822, 


3^  ch.  2  EG  =  50,000  ; 

and  since,  if  four  numbers  are  proportional,  the  product  of  the  means  is  equal  to 
the  product  of  the  extremes;  therefore 

and  hence,  by  the  table,  ^  ^ 

arc  GH =n°29', 

which  is  the  declination  of  segment  EG, 

side  EG  =  78°31', 
side  AG  =  60°, 

since  they  are  the  remainders  of  the  quadrants,  and 

j  ,,  angle  EAG=90°. 

In  the  same  way 

[30"]  3^  ch.  2  FG  :  3^  ch.  2  AG  =  3^  ch.  2  FGH  :  3^  ch.  2  BH, 

Now  since  three  of  these  chords  are  given,  the  fourth  will  also  be  given,  that  is 
to  say. 


arc  EE  =  62°6', 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  561 

which  is  the  right  ascension  from  the  summer  solstice,  and 

HE 

from  the  spring  equinox.  Similarly,  since 

side  F(?=78°31', 
side  AF  =  64W, 

and 

then,  since  angles  AGF  and  HGE  are  vertical  angles, 

angle  AGF  =  angle  /fGF  =  63°293^'. 

In  the  rest  we  shall  do  as  in  this  example.  But  we  should  not  be  ignorant  of 
the  fact  that  the  meridian  circle  cuts  the  ecliptic  at  right  angles  in  the  signs 
where  the  ecliptic  touches  the  tropics,  for  then  the  meridian  circle  cuts  it  through 
its  poles,  as  we  said.  But  at  the  equinoctial  points  the  meridian  makes  an  angle 
less  than  a  right  angle  by  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  ecliptic,  so  that  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  least  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  it  makes  an  angle  of  66^32'. 
Moreover  we  should  note  that  equal  sides  and  equal  angles  of  the  triangles 

follow  upon  equal  arcs  of  the  ecliptic  being 
taken  from  the  points  of  solstice  or  equinox. 
In  this  way  if  we  draw  the  equatorial  arc  ABC 
and  the  ecliptic  BDE  as  intersecting  at  point 
By  where  the  equinox  is,  and  if  we  take  as 
equal  the  arcs  FB  and  BG  and  also  arcs  KFL 
and  HGM  two  quadrants  of  circle  described 
through  the  poles  of  daily  revolution;  there 
will  be  the  two  triangles  FLB  and  BMG, 
wherein 

side  BF  =  side  BG 
angle  FLB  =  angle  GBM 

and 

angle  FLB  =  angle  GilfB  =  90°. 
Therefore  by  the  sixth  theorem  on  spherical 
triangles  the  sides  and  angles  are  equal.  Hence 
declination  FL  —  declination  GM 
rt.  ascension  LB  —  rt.  ascension  BM 

and 

angle  LFB  =  angle  MGB. 

This  same  fact  will  be  manifest  upon  the  assumption  of  equal  arcs  described 
from  a  point  of  solstice,  for  example,  when  AB  and  BC  on 
different  sides  of  their  point  of  contact  B,  the  solstice,  are 
equally  distant  from  it.  For  when  the  arcs  DA  and  DB  [and 
DC]  have  been  drawn  from  the  pole  of  the  equator,  there 
will  similarly  be  the  two  triangles  ABD  and  BBC. 

Then 

base  AB  =  base  BC 
side  BB  is  common 

and 

angle  ABB  =  angle  CBB  =  90‘^. 

Accordingly  by  the  eighth  theorem  on  sphericals  the  tri¬ 
angles  will  be  shown  to  have  equal  sides  and  angles.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  such 


562  COPERNICUS 

angles  and  arcs  laid  out  in  one  quadrant  of  the  ecliptic  [30^]  are  in  accord  with 
the  remaining  quadrants  of  the  full  circle. 

We  shall  subjoin  an  example  of  these  things  in  the  tables.  In  the  first  column 
are  placed  the  degrees  of  the  ecliptic;  in  the  following  column,  the  declinations 
answering  to  those  degrees;  and  in  the  third  column  the  minutes,  which  are  the 
differences  between  the  particular  declinations  and  the  declinations  which  occur 
at  the  time  of  greatest  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic:  the  greatest  of  these  differences 
is  24'. 

We  shall  do  the  same  thing  in  the  table  of  ascensions  and  the  table  of  meridian 
angles.  For  it  is  necessary  for  all  things  which  are  consequences  of  the  obliquity 
of  the  ecliptic  to  be  changed  with  a  change  in  it.  Furthermore,  in  the  right  as¬ 
censions  an  extremely  slight  difference  is  found,  one  which  does  not  exceed 
}{o  and  which  in  the  space  of  an  hour  makes  only  ^‘tirne." — The 

ancients  give  the  name  of  “time”  to  the  parts  of  the  equator  which  arise  together 
with  the  parts  of  the  ecliptic.  Each  of  these  circles,  as  we  have  often  said,  has 
360  parts;  but  in  order  to  distinguish  between  them,  most  of  the  ancients  called 
the  parts  of  ecliptic  “degrees”  and  those  of  the  equator  “times”;  and  we  will 


Table  of  Declinations  of  the  Degrees  of  the  Ecliptic 


Eclip¬ 

tic 

Declination 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Declination 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Declination 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min, 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

1 

0 

24 

0 

31 

11 

50 

11 

61 

20 

23 

20 

2 

0 

48 

1 

32 

12 

11 

12 

62 

20 

35 

21 

3 

1 

12 

1 

33 

12 

32 

12 

63 

20 

47 

21 

4 

1 

36 

2 

34 

12 

52 

13 

64 

20 

58 

21 

5 

2 

0 

2 

35 

13 

12 

13 

65 

21 

9 

21 

6 

2 

23 

2 

36 

13 

32 

14 

66 

21 

20 

22 

7 

2 

47 

3 

37 

13 

52 

14 

67 

21 

30 

22 

8 

3 

11 

3 

38 

14 

12 

14 

68 

21 

40 

22 

9 

3 

35 

4 

39 

14 

31 

14 

69 

21 

49 

22 

10 

3 

58 

4 

40 

14 

50 

14 

70 

21 

58 

22 

11 

4 

22 

4 

41 

15 

9 

15 

71 

22 

7 

22 

12 

4 

45 

4 

42 

15 

27 

15 

72 

22 

15 

23 

13 

5 

9 

5 

43 

15 

46 

16 

73 

22 

23 

23 

14 

5 

32 

5 

44 

16 

4 

16 

74 

22 

30 

23 

15 

5 

55 

5 

45 

16 

22 

16 

75 

22 

37 

23 

16 

6 

19 

6 

46 

16 

39 

17 

76 

22 

44 

23 

17 

6 

41 

6 

47 

16 

56 

17 

77 

22 

50 

23 

18 

7 

4 

7 

48 

17 

13 

17 

78 

22 

55 

23 

19 

7 

27 

7 

49 

17 

30 

18 

79 

23 

1 

24 

20 

7 

49 

8 

50 

17 

46 

18 

80 

23 

5 

24 

21 

8 

12 

8 

51 

18 

1 

18 

81 

23 

10 

24 

22 

8 

34 

8 

52 

18 

17 

18 

82 

23 

13 

24 

23 

8 

57 

9 

53 

18 

32 

19 

83 

23 

17 

24 

24 

9 

19 

9 

54 

18 

47 

19 

84 

23 

20 

24 

25 

9 

41 

9 

55 

19 

2 

19 

85 

23 

22 

24 

26 

10 

3 

10 

56 

19 

16 

19 

86 

23 

24 

24 

27 

10 

25 

10 

57 

19 

30 

20 

87 

23 

26 

24 

28 

10 

46 

10 

58 

19 

44 

20 

88 

23 

27 

24 

29 

11 

8 

10 

59 

19 

57 

20 

89 

23 

28 

24 

30 

11 

29 

11 

60 

20 

10 

20 

90 

23 

28 

24 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  563 

copy  them  for  the  remainder  of  the  work. — Therefore  since  the  difference  is  so 
small  that  it  can  be  properly  neglected,  we  are  not  peeved  at  having  to  place  it 
in  a  separate  column. 

Hence  these  tables  can  be  made  to  apply  to  any  other  obliquity  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  if  in  conformity  with  the  ratio  of  difference  between  the  least  and  greatest 
obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  we  make  the  proper  corrections.  For  example,  if  with 
an  obliquity  of  23°34'  we  wdsh  to  know  how  great  a  declination  follows  from 
taking  a  distance  of  30°  from  the  equator  along  the  ecliptic,  we  find  that  in  the 
table  there  are  11°29'  in  the  column  of  declinations  and  11'  in  the  column  of 
differences.  These  11'  would  be  all  added  in  the  case  of  the  greatest  obliquity  of 
the  ecliptic,  which  is,  as  we  said,  an  obliquity  of  23°52'.  But  it  has  already 
been  laid  down  that  the  obliquity  is  23'34'  and  is  accordingly  greater  than  the 
least  obliquity  by  6',  which  are  one  quarter  of  24',  which  is  the  excess  of  the 
greatest  obliquity  over  the  least.  Now 

3':  ll'  =  6':24'. 

When  I  add  3'  to  the  11°29',  I  shall  have  11°32',  which  will  then  measure  the 
declination  of  the  arc  of  the  ecliptic  30°  from  the  equator. 


Table  of  Right  Ascensions 


Eclip¬ 

tic 

Equator 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Equator 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Equator 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Deg. 

Times  Min. 

Min, 

Deg. 

Times 

Min. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Times  Min. 

Min. 

1 

0 

55 

0 

31 

28 

54 

4 

61 

58 

51 

4 

2 

1 

50 

0 

32 

29 

51 

4 

62 

59 

54 

4 

3 

2 

45 

0 

33 

30 

50 

4 

63 

60 

57 

4 

4 

3 

40 

0 

34 

31 

46 

4 

64 

62 

0 

4 

5 

4 

35 

0 

35 

32 

45 

4 

65 

63 

3 

4 

6 

5 

30 

0 

36 

33 

43 

5 

66 

64 

6 

3 

7 

6 

25 

1 

37 

34 

41 

5 

67 

65 

9 

3 

8 

7 

20 

1 

38 

35 

40 

5 

68 

66 

13 

3 

9 

8 

15 

1 

39 

36 

38 

5 

69 

67 

17 

3 

10 

9 

11 

1 

40 

37 

37 

5 

70 

68 

21 

3 

11 

10 

6 

1 

41 

38 

36 

5 

71 

69 

25 

3 

12 

11 

0 

2 

42 

39 

35 

5 

72 

70 

29 

3 

13 

11 

57 

2 

43 

40 

34 

5 

73 

71 

33 

3 

14 

12 

52 

2 

44 

41 

33 

6 

74 

72 

38 

2 

15 

13 

48 

2 

45 

42 

32 

6 

75 

73 

43 

2 

16 

14 

43 

2 

46 

43 

31 

6 

76 

74 

47 

2 

17 

15 

39 

2 

47 

44 

32 

5 

77 

75 

52 

2 

18 

16 

34 

3 

48 

45 

32 

5 

78 

76 

57 

2 

19 

17 

31 

3 

49 

46 

32 

5 

79 

78 

2 

2 

20 

18 

27 

3 

50 

47 

33 

5 

80 

79 

7 

2 

21 

19 

23 

3 

51 

48 

34 

5 

81 

80 

12 

1 

22 

20 

19 

3 

52 

49 

35 

5 

82 

81 

17 

1 

23 

21 

15 

3 

53 

50 

36 

5 

83 

82 

22 

1 

24 

22 

10 

4 

54 

51 

37 

5 

84 

83 

27 

1 

25 

23 

9 

4 

55 

52 

38 

4 

85 

84 

33 

1 

26 

24 

6 

4 

56 

53 

41 

4 

86 

85 

38 

0 

27 

25 

3 

4 

57 

54 

43 

4 

87 

86 

43 

0 

28 

26 

0 

4 

58 

55 

45 

4 

88 

87 

48 

0 

29 

26 

57 

4 

59 

56 

46 

4 

89 

88 

54 

0 

30 

27 

54 

4 

60 

57 

48 

4 

90 

90 

0 

0 

564  COPERNICUS 

The  same  thing  can  be  done  in  the  table  of  meridian  angles  and  right  ascen¬ 
sions,  except  that  we  must  always  add  the  differences  in  the  case  of  right  as¬ 
censions  but  subtract  them  in  the  case  of  the  meridian  angles,  so  that  everything 
may  proceed  correctly  in  conformity  with  the  time. 


Table  of  the  Meridian  Angles 


Eclip- 

tic 

Angle 

Differ- 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Angle 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Eclip¬ 

tic 

Angle 

Differ¬ 

ence 

Deg, 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

I 

66 

32 

24 

31 

69 

35 

21 

61 

78 

7 

12 

2 

66 

33 

24 

32 

69 

48 

21 

62 

78 

29 

12 

3 

66 

34 

24 

33 

70 

0 

20 

63 

78 

51 

11 

4 

66 

35 

24 

34 

70 

13 

20 

64 

79 

14 

11 

5 

66 

37 

24 

35 

70 

26 

20 

65 

79 

36 

11 

6 

66 

39 

24 

36 

70 

39 

20 

66 

79 

59 

10 

7 

66 

42 

24 

37 

70 

53 

20 

67 

80 

22 

10 

8 

66 

44 

24 

38 

71 

7 

19 

68 

80 

45 

10 

9 

66 

47 

24 

39 

71 

22 

19 

69 

81 

9 

9 

10 

66 

51 

24 

40 

71 

36 

19 

70 

81 

33 

9 

11 

66 

55 

24 

41 

71 

52 

19 

71 

81 

58 

8 

12 

66 

59 

24 

42 

72 

8 

18 

72 

82 

22 

8 

13 

67 

4 

23 

43 

72 

24 

18 

73 

82 

46 

7 

14 

67 

10 

23 

44 

72 

39 

18 

74 

83 

11 

7 

15 

67 

15 

23 

45 

72 

55 

17 

75 

83 

35 

6 

16 

67 

21 

23 

46 

73 

11 

17 

76 

84 

0 

6 

17 

67 

27 

23 

47 

73 

28 

17 

77 

84 

25 

6 

18 

67 

34 

23 

48 

73 

47 

17 

78 

84 

50 

5 

19 

67 

41 

23 

49 

74 

6 

16 

79 

85 

15 

5 

20 

67 

49 

23 

50 

74 

24 

16 

80 

85 

40 

4 

21 

67 

56 

23 

51 

74 

42 

16 

81 

86 

5 

4 

22 

68 

4 

22 

52 

75 

1 

15 

82 

86 

30 

3 

23 

68 

13 

22 

53 

75 

21 

15 

83 

86 

55 

3 

24 

68 

22 

22 

54 

75 

40 

15 

84 

87 

19 

3 

25 

68 

32 

22 

55 

76 

1 

14 

85 

87 

53 

2 

26 

68 

41 

22 

56 

76 

21 

14 

86 

88 

17 

2 

27 

68 

51 

22 

57 

76 

42 

14 

87 

88 

41 

1 

28 

69 

2 

21 

58 

77 

3 

13 

88 

89 

6 

1 

29 

69 

13 

21 

59 

77 

24 

13 

89 

89 

33 

0 

30 

69 

24 

21 

60 

77 

45 

13 

90 

90 

0 

0 

4.  How  TO  Determine  the  Declination  and  Right  Ascension  of  any 
Star  Which  Is  Placed  Outside  the  Ecliptic  but  Whose  Longitude 
AND  Latitude  Have  Been  Established;  and  with  What 
Degree  of  the  Ecliptic  It  Halves  the  Heavens 

[32^]  These  things  have  been  set  down  concerning  the  ecliptic  and  the  equa¬ 
tor  and  their  intersections.  But  as  regards  the  daily  revolution,  it  is  of  interest 
not  only  to  know  what  parts  of  the  ecliptic  appear,  by  means  of  which  the 
causes  of  the  sun^s  appearing  where  it  does  are  discovered,  but  also  to  know 
that  there  is  a  similar  demonstration  of  the  declination  from  the  equator  and  of 
the  right  ascension  in  the  case  of  those  fixed  or  wandering  stars  which  are  out¬ 
side  the  ecliptic  but  whose  longitude  and  latitude  have  been  given. 

Therefore  let  the  circle  ABCD  be  described  through  the  poles  of  the  equator 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  565 

and  of  the  ecliptic;  let  AEC  be  the  semicircle 
of  the  equator  above  pole  F]  let  BED  be  the 
semicircle  of  the  ecliptic  about  pole  (?;  and  let 
its  intersection  with  the  equator  be  at  point 
E,  Now  from  the  pole  G  let  the  arc  GHKL  be 
drawn  through  a  star,  and  let  the  position  of 
the  star  be  given  as  point  Hj  and  let  FHMN  a 
quadrant  of  a  circle  fall  through  H  from  the 
pole  of  daily  movement. 

Then  it  is  clear  that  the  star  which  is  at  H 
falls  upon  the  meridian  at  the  same  time  as 
points  M  and  N  do,  and  that  arc  HMN  is  the 
declination  of  the  star  from  the  equator,  and 
EN  is  its  ascension  in  the  right  sphere,  and  those  are  what  we  are  seeking. 
Accordingly  since  in  triangle  KEL 

side  KE  is  given, 
angle  KEL  is  given, 

and 

angle  EKL  =  90°, 

therefore  by  the  fourth  theorem  on  spherical  triangles, 

side  KL  is  given, 
side  EL  is  given, 

and 

angle  KLE  is  given. 

Therefore  by  addition 

arc  HKL  is  given. 

And  on  that  account,  in  triangle  HLNy 

angle  HLN  is  given, 
angle  LNH  =  90^, 

and 

side  HL  is  given. 

Therefore  by  the  same  fourth  theorem  on  sphericals  there  are  also  given  the  re¬ 
maining  sides:  HN  the  declination  of  the  star,  and  LA,  and  the  remaining  dis¬ 
tance  NE,  the  right  ascension,  which  measures  the  distance  the  sphere  turns 
from  the  equinox  to  the  star. 

— Or  in  another  way.  If  in  the  foregoing  you  take  KE  the  arc  of  the  ecliptic 
as  the  right  ascension  of  LE^  conversely  LE  will  be  given  by  the  table  of  right 
ascensions;  and  so  will  LK,  as  the  declination  corresponding  to  LE]  [33^]  and 
the  angle  KLE  will  be  given  by  the  table  of  meridian  angles;  and  hence  the 
remaining  sides  and  angles,  as  we  have  showed,  may  be  learned. — 

Then  by  means  of  .the  right  ascension  EN^  the  number  of  degrees  of  EM  the 
arc  of  the  ecliptic  are  given.  And  in  conformity  with  these  things  the  star  to¬ 
gether  with  point  M  halves  the  heavens. 

5.  On  the  Sections  of  the  Horizon 

Now  the  horizon  of  a  right  sphere  is  different  from  the  horizon  of  an  oblique 
sphere.  For  the  horizon  to  which  the  equator  is  perpendicular,  or  which  passes 
through  the  poles  of  the  equator,  is  called  a  right  horizon. 


566  COPERNICUS 

We  call  the  horizon  which  has  some  inclination  with  the  equator  the  horizon 
of  an  oblique  sphere. 

Therefore  on  a  right  horizon  all  the  stars  rise  and  set,  and  the  days  are  always 
equal  to  the  nights.  For  this  horizon  bisects  all  the  parallel  circles  described  by 
the  diurnal  movement,  and  passes  through  their  poles;  and  there  occurs  there 
what  we  have  already  explained  in  the  case  of  the  meridian  circle.  Here,  how¬ 
ever,  we  are  taking  the  day  as  extending  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  and  not  from 
light  to  darkness,  as  the  crowds  understand  it,  i.e.,  from  early  morning  twilight 
to  the  first  street  lights;  but  we  shall  say  more  on  this  subject  in  connection 
with  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  signs. 

On  the  contrary,  where  the  axis  of  the  Earth  is  perpendicular  to  the  horizon 
there  are  no  risings  or  settings,  but  all  the  stars  turn  in  a  gyre  and  are  always 
visible  or  hidden,  unless  they  are  affected  by  some  other  motion,  such  as  the 
annual  movement  around  the  sun.  Consequently,  there  day  lasts  perpetually 
for  the  space  of  half  a  year  and  night  for  the  rest  of  the  time;  and  there  is 
nothing  else  to  differentiate  summer  and  winter,  since  there  the  horizon  coin¬ 
cides  with  the  equator. 

Furthermore,  in  an  oblique  sphere  certain  stars  rise  and  set;  and  certain  others 
are  always  visible  or  always  hidden;  and  meanwhile  the  days  and  nights  are  un¬ 
equal  there  where  an  oblique  horizon  touches  two  parallel  circles  in  proportion 
to  its  inclination.  And  of  these  circles,  the  one  nearer  the  visible  pole  is  the 
boundary  of  the  always  visible  stars,  and  conversely  the  circle  nearer  the  hidden 
pole  is  the  boundary  for  the  always  hidden  stars.  Therefore  the  horizon,  as  fall¬ 
ing  completely  between  these  boundaries,  cuts  all  the  parallel  circles  in  the 
middle  into  unequal  arcs,  except  the  equator,  which  is  the  greatest  of  the  paral¬ 
lels;  and  great  circles  bisect  one  another.  Therefore  an  oblique  horizon  in  the 
upper  hemisphere  cuts  off  arcs  of  parallels  in  the  direction  of  the  visible  pole 
which  are  greater  than  the  arcs  which  are  toward  the  southern  and  hidden  [33^] 
pole;  and  the  converse  is  the  case  in  the  hidden  hemisphere.  The  sun  becomes 
visible  in  these  horizons  by  reason  of  the  diurnal  movement  and  causes  the 
inequality  of  days  and  nights. 

6.  What  the  Differences  Between  the  Midday  Shadows  Are 

There  are  differences  between  the  midday  shadows  on  account  of  which  some 
people  are  called  periscian,  others  arnphiscian,  and  still  others  heteroscian.  The 
periscian  are  those  whom  we  might  call  ^^circumumbratile,”  that  is  to  say, 
“throwing  the  shadow  of  the  sun  on  every  side.”  And  they  live  where  the  dis¬ 
tance  between  the  vertex,  or  pole,  of  the  horizon  and  the  pole  of  the  Earth  is 
less  or  no  greater  than  that  between  the  tropic  and  the  equator.  For  there  the 
parallels  which  the  horizon  touches  as  the  boundaries  of  the  always  apparent  or 
always  hidden  stars  are  greater  than,  or  equal  to,  the  tropics.  And  so  the  summer 
sun  high  up  among  the  always  apparent  stars  at  that  time  throws  the  shadow  of 
a  pointer  in  every  direction.  But  where  the  horizon  touches  the  tropics,  the  trop¬ 
ics  become  the  boundaries  of  the  always  apparent  and  the  always  hidden  stars. 
Wherefore  instead  of  there  being  midnight  the  sun  at  its  [winter]  solstice  seems 
to  graze  the  Earth,  at  which  time  the  whole  circle  of  the  ecliptic  coincides  with 
the  horizon;  and  straightway  six  signs  rise  at  the  same  time,  and  on  the  opposite 
side  six  signs  set  at  the  same  time,  and  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  coincides  with  the 
pole  of  the  horizon. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  567 

The  amphiscian,  who  cast  midday  shadows  on  both  sides,  are  those  who  live 
between  the  tropics.  This  is  the  space  which  the  ancients  called  the  middle  zone. 
And  since  throughout  that  whole  tract  the  circle  of  the  ecliptic  passes  directly 
over  head  twice,  as  is  shown  in  the  second  theorem  of  the  Phaenomena  of  Euclid, 
the  shadows  of  pointers  are  cast  in  two  directions  there:  for  as  the  sun  moves 
back  and  forth,  the  pointers  throw  their  shadows  sometimes  to  the  south  and 
sometimes  to  the  north. 

The  rest  of  us  who  inhabit  the  region  between  the  two  others  are  heteroscian, 
because  we  cast  our  midday  shadows  in  only  one  direction,  ix,,  towards  the 
north. 

Now  the  ancient  mathematicians  were  accustomed  to  divide  the  world  into 
seven  climates,  through  Meroe,  Siona,  Alexandria,  Rhodes,  the  Hellespont,  the 
middle  of  the  Pontus,  Boristhenes,  Byzantium,  and  so  on  with  the  single  parallel 
circles  taken  according  to  the  differences  between  the  longest  days  and  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  lengths  of  the  shadows,  which  they  observed  by  means  of  pointers 
at  noon  on  the  days  of  equinoxes  and  solstices,  and  [34^]  according  to  the  eleva¬ 
tion  of  the  pole  or  the  latitude  of  some  segment.  Since  these  things  have  partly 
changed  through  time,  they  are  not  exactly  the  same  as  they  once  were,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  variable  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  as  we  said,  of  which  the  ancients 
were  ignorant;  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  on  account  of  the  variable  inclina¬ 
tion  of  the  equator  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  upon  which  these  things  depend. 
But  the  elevations  of  the  pole  or  the  latitudes  of  the  places  and  the  equinoctial 
shadows  agree  with  those  which  antiquity  discovered  and  made  note  of.  That 
would  necessarily  take  place,  since  the  equator  depends  upon  the  pole  of  the 
terrestrial  globe.  Wherefore  those  segments  are  not  accurately  enough  desig¬ 
nated  and  defined  by  shadows  falling  on  special  days,  but  more  correctly  by 
their  distances  from  the  equator,  which  remain  perpetually.  But  although  this 
variability  of  the  tropics,  because  very  slight,  admits  but  slight  diversity  of 
days  and  of  shadows  in  southern  places,  it  becomes  more  apparent  to  those  who 
are  moving  northward.  Therefore  as  regards  the  shadows  of  pointers,  it  is  clear 
that  for  any  given  altitude  of  the  sun  the  length  of  the  shadow  is  derivable  and 
vice  versa. 

In  this  way  if  there  is  the  pointer  AB  which  casts  a  shadow  BC;  since  the 
pointer  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon,  angle  ABC  must  always 
be  right,  by  the  definition  of  lines  perpendicular  to  a  plane.  Wherefore  if  AC  be 
joined,  we  shall  have  a  right  triangle  ABC]  and  for  a  given 
altitude  of  the  sun  we  shall  have  angle  ACB  given.  And 
by  the  first  theorem  on  plane  triangles  the  ratio  of  the 
pointer  AR  to  its  shadow  BC  will  be  given,  and  BC  will  be 
given  in  length.  Conversely,  moreover,  when  AB  and  BC 
are  given,  it  will  be  clear  from  the  third  theorem  on  plane 
triangles  what  angle  ACB  is  and  what  the  elevation  of  the 
sun  making  that  shadow  at  that  time  is.  In  this  way  the 
ancients  in  describing  the  regions  of  the  terrestrial  globe 
gave  the  lengths  of  the  midday  shadows  sometimes  at  the 
equinoxes  and  sometimes  at  the  solstices. 


568 


COPERNICUS 


7.  How  THE  Longest  Day,  the  Distance  of  Rising,  and  the  Inclination 
OF  THE  Sphere  Are  Derived  from  One  Another,  and  on  the 
Differences  Betaveen  Days 

[34^]  In  this  way  too  for  any  obliquity  of  the  sphere  or  inclination  of  the  hori¬ 
zon  we  Avill  demonstrate  simultaneously  the  longest  and  the  shortest  day  to¬ 
gether  Avith  the  distance  of  rising  [of  the  sun]  and  the  difference  of  the  remaining 
days.  Noav  the  distance  of  rising  is  the  arc  of  the  horizon  intercepted  betAveen 
the  summer  solstitial  and  the  winter  solstitial  sunrises,  or  the  sum  of  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  the  solstitial  from  the  equinoctial  sunrise. 

Therefore  let  ABCD  be  the  meridian  circle,  and  let  BED  be  the  semicircle 

of  the  horizon  in  the  eastern  hemisphere,  and 
let  A  EC  be  the  similar  semicircle  of  the  equa¬ 
tor  AAuth  F  as  its  northern  pole.  Let  point  G  be 
taken  as  the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  summer 
solstice,  and  let  FGH  the  arc  of  a  great  circle 
be  draAAm.  Therefore  since  the  motion  of  the 
terrestrial  sphere  takes  place  around  pole  F  of 
the  equator,  then  necessarily  points  G  and  H 
will  fit  onto  the  meridian  ABCD  at  the  same 
time,  since  parallel  circles  are  around  the  same 
poles  through  which  pass  the  great  circles 
Avhich  intercept  similar  arcs  on  the  parallel  cir¬ 
cles.  Wherefore  the  selfsame  time  from  the 
rising  at  G  to  midday  measures  also  the  arc 
AEH;  and  the  time  from  midnight  to  sunrise 
measures  CH  the  remaining  and  subterranean  arc  of  the  semicircle.  Noav  AEC 
is  a  semicircle;  and  AE  and  EC  are  quadrants  of  circles,  since  they  are  draAAm 
through  the  pole  of  ABCD.  On  that  account,  EH  Avill  be  half  the  difference 
betAveen  the  longest  day  and  the  equinox;  and  EG  aauU  be  the  distance  betAveen 
the  equinoctial  and  the  solstitial  sunrise.  Therefore  since  in  triangle  EHG  angle 
GEHj  the  obliquity  of  the  sphere,  is  established  by  means  of  arc  AB,  and  angle 
GHE  is  right,  and  side  GH  is  given  as  the  distance  from  the  summer  tropic  to 
the  equator;  the  remaining  sides  are  also  given  by  the  fourth  theorem  on  spheri- 
cals:  side  EH  as  half  the  difference  between  the  longest  day  and  the  equinox, 
and  side  GE  as  the  distance  of  sunrise.  Moreover,  if  together  Avith  side  GH  side 
EHy  [half]  the  difference  betAveen  the  longest  day  and  the  equinox,  or  else  EGy 
is  given;  angle  E  of  the  inclination  of  the  sphere  is  given,  and  hence  FD  the 
elevation  of  the  pole  above  the  horizon. 

But  even  if  it  is  not  the  tropic  but  some  other  point  G  in  the  ecliptic  AA^'hich  is 
taken,  nevertheless  arcs  EG  and  EH  Avill  become  manifest:  since  by  the  table 
of  declinations  set  out  above  GH  the  arc  of  declination  for  that  degree  of  the 
ecliptic  becomes  knoAvn,  and  the  rest  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  same  Avay. 

Hence  it  also  folloAvs  that  the  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  Avhich  are  equally  distant 
from  the  tropic  cut  off  equal  arcs  of  the  horizon  [35^]  betAveen  the  equinoctial 
sunrise  and  the  same  degrees  and  make  the  lengths  of  days  and  nights  inversely 
equal.  And  that  is  so  because  the  parallels  Avhich  pass  through  each  of  those 
degrees  of  the  ecliptic  are  equal,  since  each  of  the  degrees  has  the  same  decli¬ 
nation. 


569 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 


But  when  equal  arcs  are  taken  between  the  equinoctial  intersection  and  the 
two  degrees  [on  the  ecliptic],  again  the  distances  of  rising  are  equal  but  in  differ¬ 
ent  directions;  and  the  duration  of  days  and  nights  are  inversely  equal,  be¬ 
cause  on  each  side  of  the  equinox  the  durations  describe  equal  arcs  of  parallels, 
according  as  the  signs  themselves  which  are  equally  distant  from  the  equinox 
have  equal  declinations  from  the  equator. 

For  in  the  same  figure  let  GM  and  KN  the  arcs  of  parallels  be  described  cut¬ 
ting  the  horizon  BED  at  points  G  and  and 
let  LKO  a  quadrant  of  a  great  circle  be  drawn 
from  the  south  pole  L.  Therefore  since 
declination  //G  =  declination  KO, 
there  will  be  two  triangles  DFG  and  BLK, 
wherein  two  sides  of  the  one  are  equal  to  two 
sides  of  the  other: 

FG=LK 

and  the  elevations  of  the  poles  are  equal, 

FD  =  LB, 

and 

angle  D  =  angle  B  =  90°. 

Therefore 

base  Z)G  =  base  BK; 

and  hence,  as  the  distances  of  sunrise  are  the 
remainders  of  the  quadrants 

GE  =  EK. 

^Vherefore  since  here  too, 

side  EG  =  side  EK, 
side  GH  =  side  KO, 

and 

vertical  angle  iCjE/O  =  vertical  angle  GEH  ; 
side  EH  =  side  EO. 


And 

£'i/+90°  =  0£^+90°. 

Hence 

arc  AEH  =  sltc  OEC. 

But  since  great  circles  described  through  the  poles  of  parallel  circles  cut  off 
similar  arcs,  GM  and  KN  will  be  similar  and  equal,  as  was  to  be  shown. 

But  all  this  can  be  shown  differently.  In  the  same  way  let  the  meridian  circle 
A  BCD  be  described  with  centre  E,  Let  the  diameter  of  the  equator  and  the 
common  section  of  the  two  circles  be  AEC;  let  BED  be 
the  diameter  of  the  horizon  and  the  meridian  line,  let 
LEM  be  the  axis  of  the  sphere;  and  let  L  be  the  apparent 
pole  and  M  the  hidden.  Let  AF  be  taken  as  the  distance 
of  the  summer  solstice  or  as  some  other  declination ;  and 
to  AF  let  GF  be  drawm  as  the  diameter  of  a  parallel  and 
its  common  section  with  the  meridian;  FG  will  cut  the 
axis  at  K  and  the  meridian  line  at  N. 

Therefore,  [35^]  since  by  the  definition  of  Posidonius 
those  lines  are  parallel  which  neither  move  toward  nor 


570  COPERNICUS 

move  away  from  one  another  but  which  everywhere  make  the  perpindicular 
lines  between  them  equal, 

Hi'  KE  =  y2c\i,2AF, 

Similarly  KN  will  be  half  of  the  chord  subtending  twice  the  arc  of  the  parallel 
circle  whose  radius  is  FK,  And  twice  this  arc  is  the  difference  between  the  equi¬ 
noctial  day  and  the  other  day.  And  this  is  true  because  all  the  semicircles  of 
which  these  lines  are  the  common  sections  and  diameters — namely,  BED  of  the 
oblique  horizon,  LEM  of  the  right  horizon,  AEC  of  the  equator,  and  FKG  of 
the  parallel — are  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  circle  ABCD.  And  by  Euclid's 
Elements,  xi,  19,  the  common  sections  which  they  make  with  one  another  are 
perpendicular  to  the  same  plane  at  points  E,  K,  and  N :  and  by  xi,  6,  these  com¬ 
mon  sections  are  parallel  to  one  another. 

And  K  is  the  centre  of  the  parallel  circle;  and  E  is  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 
Wherefore  EN  is  half  the  chord  subtending  twice  the  arc  of  the  horizon  which  is 
the  difference  between  sunrise  on  the  parallel  and  the  equinoctial  sunrise.  There¬ 
fore,  since  the  declination  AF  was  given  together  with  FL  the  remainder  of  the 
quadrant,  KE  half  of  the  chord  subtending  twice  arc  AF  and  FK  half  the  chord 
subtending  twice  arc  FL  will  be  established  in  terms  of  the  parts  whereof  AE 
has  100,000.  But  in  the  right  triangle  EKN  angle  KEN  is  given  by  DL  the  ele¬ 
vation  of  the  pole,  and  the  remaining  angle  KNE  is  equal  to  AEB,  because  in 
the  oblique  sphere  the  parallels  are  equally  inclined  to  the  horizon;  and  the 
sides  are  given  in  the  same  parts  whereof  the  radius  has  100,000.  Therefore  KN 
will  be  given  in  the  parts  whereof  FK  the  radius  of  the  parallel  has  100,000;  for 
KN  is  equal  to  half  the  chord  subtending  the  arc  which  measures  the  distance 
between  the  equinoctial  day  and  a  day  on  the  parallel;  and  this  arc  is  similarly 
given  in  the  degrees  whereof  the  parallel  circle  has  360°. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that 

FK  :  KN  =  y  ch.  2  FL  :  Y2  ch.  2  AF  comp.  Y  ch.  2  AB  :  3^  ch.  2  DL 

and 

Yi  ch.  2  FL  :  3^  ch.  2  AF  comp.  Y2  ch.  2  AB  :  3^  ch.  2  DL  — 

FK  :  KE  comp.  EK  :  KN. 

That  is  to  say,  EK  is  taken  as  a  mean  between  FK  and  KN.  Similarly  too 
BE  :  EN  =  BE  :  EK  comp.  KE  :  EN, 

as  Ptolemy  shows  in  greater  detail  by  means  of  spherical  segments.  So  I  think 
that  not  only  the  inequality  of  days  and  nights  can  be  determined;  but  also  that 
in  the  case  of  the  moon  and  the  stars  whose  declination  on  the  parallels  described 
through  them  by  the  daily  movement  has  been  given,  the  segments  [of  the  paral¬ 
lels]  which  are  above  the  horizon  can  be  distinguished  from  those  which  are  be¬ 
low;  and  hence  the  risings  and  settings  [of  the  moon  or  stars]  can  be  easily  un¬ 
derstood. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  571 

Table  of  Difference  of  the  Ascensions  in  an  Oblique  Sphere 


Decli¬ 

nation 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


Elevation  of  the  Pole 


SI 

o 

32 

3 

33' 

3 

34' 

0 

35' 

0 

36' 

0 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

0 

36 

0 

37 

0 

39 

0 

40 

0 

42 

0 

44 

1 

12 

1 

15 

1 

18 

1 

21 

1 

24 

1 

27 

1 

48 

1 

53 

1 

57 

2 

2 

2 

6 

2 

11 

2 

24 

2 

30 

2 

36 

2 

42 

2 

48 

2 

55 

3 

1 

3 

8 

3 

15 

3 

23 

3 

31 

3 

39 

3 

37 

3 

46 

3 

55 

4 

4 

4 

13 

4 

23 

4 

14 

4 

24 

4 

34 

4 

45 

4 

56 

5 

7 

4 

51 

5 

2 

5 

14 

5 

26 

5 

39 

5 

52 

5 

28 

5 

41 

5 

54 

6 

8 

6 

22 

6 

36 

6 

5 

6 

20 

6 

35 

6 

50 

7 

6 

7 

22 

6 

42 

6 

59 

7 

15 

7 

32 

7 

49 

8 

7 

7 

20 

7 

38 

7 

56 

8 

15 

8 

34 

8 

53 

7 

58 

8 

18 

8 

37 

8 

58 

9 

18 

9 

39 

8 

37 

8 

58 

9 

19 

9 

41 

10 

3 

10 

26 

9 

16 

9 

38 

10 

1 

10 

25 

10 

49 

11 

14 

9 

55 

10 

19 

10 

44 

11 

9 

11 

25 

12 

2 

10 

35 

11 

1 

11 

27 

11 

54 

12 

22 

12 

50 

11 

16 

11 

43 

12 

11 

12 

40 

13 

9 

13 

39 

11 

56 

12 

25 

12 

55 

13 

26 

13 

57 

14 

29 

12 

38 

13 

9 

13 

40 

14 

13 

14 

46 

15 

20 

13 

20 

13 

53 

14 

26 

15 

0 

15 

36 

16 

12 

14 

3 

14 

37 

15 

13 

15 

49 

16 

27 

17 

5 

14 

47 

15 

23 

16 

0 

16 

38 

17 

17 

17 

58 

15 

31 

16 

9 

16 

48 

17 

29 

18 

10 

18 

52 

16 

16 

16 

56 

17 

38 

18 

20 

19 

3 

19 

48 

17 

2 

17 

45 

18 

28 

19 

12 

19 

58 

20 

45 

17 

50 

18 

34 

19 

19 

20 

6 

20 

54 

21 

44 

18 

38 

19 

24 

20 

12 

21 

1 

21 

51 

22 

43 

19 

27 

20 

16 

21 

6 

21 

57 

22 

50 

23 

45 

20 

18 

21 

9 

22 

1 

22 

55 

23 

51 

24 

48 

21 

10 

22 

3 

22 

58 

23 

55 

24 

53 

25 

53 

22 

3 

22 

59 

23 

56 

24 

56 

25 

57 

27 

0 

22 

57 

23 

54 

24 

19 

25 

59 

27 

3 

28 

9 

23 

55 

24 

56 

25 

59 

27 

4 

28 

10 

29 

21 

24 

53 

25 

57 

27 

3 

28 

10 

29 

21 

30 

35 

25 

53 

27 

0 

28 

9 

29 

21 

30  - 

35 

31 

52 

eclU 

ition 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


)0 

Min. 

54, 

48 

42 

37 

31 

26 

21 

16 

12 

8 

5 

2 

0 

58 

58 

58 

59 

1 

4 

8 

13 

20 

28 

38 

50 

3 

18 

36 

57 

19 

45 

14 

47 

24 

5 

51 


COPERNICUS 


BLE  OF  Difference  of  the  Ascensions  in  an  Oblique  Sp 


Elevation  of  the  Pole 


57‘ 

38 

3 

39' 

3 

40 

0 

4i 

o 

Hmes  Min, 

Times  Min, 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min, 

0 

45 

0 

47 

0 

49 

0 

50 

0 

52 

1 

31 

1 

34 

1 

37 

1 

41 

1 

44 

2 

16 

2 

21 

2 

26 

2 

31 

2 

37 

3 

1 

3 

8 

3 

15 

3 

22 

3 

29 

3 

47 

3 

55 

4 

4 

4 

13 

4 

22 

4 

33 

4 

43 

4 

53 

5 

4 

5 

15 

5 

19 

5 

30 

5 

42 

5 

55 

6 

8 

6 

5 

6 

18 

6 

32 

6 

46 

7 

1 

6 

51 

7 

6 

7 

22 

7 

38 

7 

55 

7 

38 

7 

55 

8 

13 

8 

30 

8 

49 

8 

25 

8 

44 

9 

3 

9 

23 

9 

44 

9 

13 

9 

34 

9 

55 

10 

16 

10 

39 

10 

1 

10 

24 

10 

46 

11 

10 

11 

35 

10 

50 

11 

14 

11 

39 

12 

5 

12 

31 

11 

39 

12 

5 

12 

32 

13 

0 

13 

28 

12 

29 

12 

57 

13 

26 

13 

55 

14 

26 

13 

19 

13 

49 

14 

20 

14 

52 

15 

25 

14 

10 

14 

42 

15 

15 

15 

49 

16 

24 

15 

2 

15 

36 

16 

11 

16 

48 

17 

25 

15 

55 

16 

31 

17 

8 

17 

47 

18 

27 

16 

49 

17 

27 

18 

7 

18 

47 

19 

30 

17 

44 

18 

24 

19 

6 

19 

49 

20 

34 

18 

39 

19 

22 

20 

6 

20 

52 

21 

39 

19 

36 

20 

21 

21 

8 

21 

56 

22 

46 

20 

34 

21 

21 

22 

11 

23 

2 

23 

55 

21 

34 

22 

24 

23 

16 

24 

10 

25 

5 

22 

35 

23 

28 

24 

22 

25 

19 

26 

17 

23 

37 

24 

33 

25 

30 

26 

30 

27 

31 

24 

41 

25 

40 

26 

40 

27 

43 

28 

48 

25 

47 

26 

49 

27 

52 

28 

59 

30 

7 

26 

55 

28 

0 

29 

7 

30 

17 

31 

29 

28 

5 

29 

13 

30 

54 

31 

31 

32 

54 

29 

18 

30 

29 

31 

44 

33 

1 

34 

22 

30 

32 

31 

48 

33 

6 

34 

27 

35 

54 

31 

51 

33 

10 

34 

33 

35 

59 

37 

30 

33 

12 

34 

35 

36 

2 

37 

34 

39 

10 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  573 

Table  of  Difference  of  the  Ascensions  in  an  Oblique  Sphere 


Elevation  of  the  Pole 


jytcu- 

nation 

43° 

Times  Min. 

44° 

Times  Min. 

45° 

Times  Min. 

46° 

Times  Min. 

47°  j 

Times  Min.  i 

48° 

Times  Min. 

1 

0 

56 

0 

58 

1 

0 

1 

2 

1 

1 

4  1 

1 

7 

2 

1 

52 

1 

56 

2 

0 

2 

4 

2 

9 

2 

13 

3 

2 

48 

2 

54 

3 

0 

3 

7 

3 

13 

3 

20 

4 

3 

44 

3 

52 

4 

1 

4 

9 

4 

18 

4 

27 

5 

4 

41 

4 

51 

5 

1 

5 

12 

5 

23 

5 

35 

6 

5 

37 

5 

50 

6 

2 

6 

15 

6 

28 

6 

42 

7 

6 

34 

6 

49 

7 

3 

7 

18 

7 

34 

7 

50 

8 

7 

32 

7 

48 

8 

5 

8 

22 

8 

40 

8 

59 

9 

8 

30 

8 

48 

9 

7 

9 

26 

9 

47 

10 

8 

10 

9 

28 

9 

48 

10 

9 

10 

31 

10 

54 

11 

18 

11 

10 

27 

10 

49 

11 

13 

11 

37 

12 

2 

12 

28 

12 

11 

26 

11 

51 

12 

16 

12 

43 

13 

11 

13 

39 

13 

12 

26 

12 

53 

13 

21 

13 

50 

14 

20 

14 

51 

14 

13 

27 

13 

56 

14 

26 

14 

58 

15 

30 

16 

5 

15 

14 

28 

15 

0 

15 

32 

16 

7 

16 

42 

17 

19 

16 

15 

31 

16 

5 

16 

40 

17 

16 

17 

54 

18 

34 

17 

16 

34 

17 

10 

17 

48 

18 

27 

19 

8 

19 

51 

18 

17 

38 

18 

17 

18 

58 

19 

40 

20 

23 

21 

9 

19 

18 

44 

19 

25 

20 

9 

20 

53 

21 

40 

22 

29 

20 

19 

50 

20 

35 

21 

21 

22 

8 

22 

58 

23 

51 

21 

20 

59 

21 

46 

22 

34 

23 

25 

24 

18 

25 

14 

22 

22 

8 

22 

58 

23 

50 

24 

44 

25 

40 

26 

40 

23 

23 

19 

24 

12 

25 

7 

26 

5 

27 

5 

28 

8 

24 

24 

32 

25 

28 

26 

26 

27 

27 

28 

31 

29 

38 

25 

25 

47 

26 

46 

27 

48 

28 

52 

30 

0 

31 

12 

26 

27 

3 

28 

6 

29 

11 

30 

20 

31 

32 

32 

48 

27 

28 

22 

29 

29 

30 

38 

31 

51 

33 

7 

34 

28 

28 

29 

44 

30 

54 

32 

7 

33 

25 

34 

46 

36 

12 

29 

31 

8 

32 

22 

33 

40 

35 

2 

36 

28 

38 

0 

30 

32 

35 

33 

53 

35 

16 

36 

43 

38 

15 

39 

53 

31 

34 

5 

35 

28 

36 

56 

38 

29 

40 

7 

41 

52 

32 

35 

38 

37 

7 

38 

40 

40 

19 

42 

4 

43 

57 

33 

37 

16 

38 

50 

40 

30 

42 

15 

44 

8 

46 

9 

34 

38 

58 

40 

39 

42 

25 

44 

18 

46 

20 

48 

31 

35 

40 

46 

42 

33 

44  • 

‘27 

46 

23 

48 

36 

51 

3 

36 

42 

39 

44 

33 

46 

36 

48 

47 

51 

11 

53 

47 

atio 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


rO 

Min. 

23 

45 

8 

31 

55 

19 

44 

9 

35 

3 

31 

0 

32 

4 

38 

15 

53 

34 

17 

4 

54 

47 

45 

48 

59 

10 

32 

2 

44 

37 

48 

19 

21 

11 

32 

0 


COPERNICUS 


BLE  OF  Difference  of  the  Ascensions  in  an  Oblique  S; 


Elevation  of  the  Pole 


49 

0 

50 

a 

51 

o 

52' 

o 

53^ 

3 

^imes  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min 

1 

9 

1 

12 

1 

14 

1 

17 

1 

20 

2 

18 

2 

23 

2 

28 

2 

34 

2 

39 

3 

27 

3 

35 

3 

43 

3 

51 

3 

59 

4 

37 

4 

47 

4 

57 

5 

8 

5 

19 

5 

47 

5 

50 

6 

12 

6 

26 

6 

40 

6 

57 

7 

12 

7 

27 

7 

44 

8 

1 

8 

7 

8 

25 

8 

43 

9 

2 

9 

23 

9 

18 

9 

38 

10 

0 

10 

22 

10 

45 

10 

30 

10 

53 

11 

17 

11 

42 

12 

8 

11 

42 

12 

8 

12 

35 

13 

3 

13 

32 

12 

55 

13 

24 

13 

53 

14 

24 

14 

57 

14 

9 

14 

40 

15 

13 

15 

47 

16 

23 

15 

24 

15 

58 

.  16 

34 

17 

11 

17 

50 

16 

40 

17 

17 

17 

56 

18 

37 

19 

19 

17 

57 

18 

39 

19 

19 

20 

4 

20 

50 

19 

16 

19 

59 

20 

44 

21 

32 

22 

22 

20 

36 

21 

22 

22 

11 

23 

2 

23 

56 

21 

57 

22 

47 

23 

39 

24 

34 

25 

33 

23 

20 

24 

14 

25 

10 

26 

9 

27 

11 

24 

45 

25 

42 

26 

43 

27 

46 

28 

53 

26 

12 

27 

14 

28 

18 

29 

26 

30 

37 

27 

42 

28 

47 

29 

56 

31 

8 

32 

25 

29 

14 

30 

23 

31 

37 

32 

54 

34 

17 

31 

4 

32 

3 

33 

21 

34 

44 

36 

13 

32 

26 

33 

46 

35 

10 

36 

39 

38 

14 

34 

8 

35 

32 

37 

2 

38 

38 

40 

20 

35 

53 

37 

23 

39 

0 

40 

42 

42 

33 

37 

43 

39 

19 

41 

2 

42 

53 

44 

53 

39 

37 

41 

21 

43 

12 

45 

12 

47 

21 

41 

37 

43 

29 

45 

29 

47 

39 

50 

1 

43 

44 

45 

44 

47 

54 

50 

16 

52 

53 

45 

57 

48 

8 

50 

30 

53 

7 

56 

1 

48 

19 

50 

44 

53 

20 

56 

13 

59 

28 

50 

54 

53 

30 

56 

20 

59 

42 

63 

31 

53 

40 

56 

34 

59 

58 

63 

40 

68 

18 

56 

42 

59 

59 

63 

47 

68 

26 

74 

36 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  575 

Table  of  Difference  of  the  Ascensions  in  an  Oblique  Sphere 


Elevation  of  the  Pole 


nation 

65 

3 

66 

3 

67' 

3 

68' 

3 

69^ 

60 

0 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

1 

1 

26 

1 

29 

1 

32 

1 

36 

1 

40 

1 

44 

2 

2 

52 

2 

58 

3 

5 

3 

12 

3 

20 

3 

28 

3 

4 

17 

4 

27 

4 

38 

4 

49 

5 

0 

5 

12 

4 

5 

44 

5 

57 

6 

11 

6 

25 

6 

41 

6 

57 

5 

7 

11 

7 

27 

7 

44 

8 

3 

8 

22 

8 

43 

6 

8 

38 

8 

58 

9 

19 

9 

41 

10 

4 

10 

29 

7 

10 

6 

10 

29 

10 

54 

11 

20 

11 

47 

12 

17 

8 

11 

35 

12 

1 

12 

30 

13 

0 

13 

32 

14 

5 

9 

13 

4 

13 

35 

14 

7 

14 

41 

15 

17 

15 

55 

10 

14 

35 

15 

9 

15 

45 

16 

23 

17 

4 

17 

47 

11 

16 

7 

16 

45 

17 

25 

18 

8 

18 

53 

19 

41 

12 

17 

40 

18 

22 

19 

6 

19 

53 

20 

43 

21 

36 

13 

19 

15 

20 

1 

20 

50 

21 

41 

22 

36 

23 

34 

14 

20 

52 

21 

42 

22 

35 

23 

31 

24 

31 

25 

35 

15 

22 

30 

23 

24 

24 

22 

25 

23 

26 

29 

27 

39 

16 

24 

10 

25 

9 

26 

12 

27 

19 

28 

30 

29 

47 

17 

25 

53 

26 

57 

28 

5 

29 

18 

30 

35 

31 

59 

18 

27 

39 

28 

48 

30 

1 

31 

20 

32 

44 

34 

19 

19 

29 

27 

30 

41 

32 

1 

33 

26 

34 

58 

36 

37 

20 

31 

19 

32 

39 

34 

5 

35 

37 

37 

17 

39 

5 

21 

33 

15 

34 

41 

36 

14 

37 

54 

39 

42 

41 

40 

22 

35 

14 

36 

48 

38 

28 

40 

17 

42 

15 

44 

25 

23 

37 

19 

39 

0 

40 

49 

42 

47 

44 

57 

47 

20 

24 

39 

29 

41 

18 

43 

17 

45 

26 

47 

49 

50 

27 

25 

41 

45 

43 

44 

45 

54 

48 

16 

50 

54 

53 

52 

26 

44 

9 

46 

18 

48 

41 

51 

19 

54 

16 

57 

39 

27 

46 

41 

49 

4 

51 

41 

54 

38 

58 

0 

61 

57 

28 

49 

24 

52 

1 

54 

58 

58 

19 

62 

14 

67 

4 

29 

52 

20 

55 

16 

58 

36 

62 

31 

67 

18 

73 

46 

30 

55 

32 

58 

52 

62 

45 

67 

31 

73 

55 

90 

0 

31 

59 

6 

62 

58 

67 

42 

74 

4 

90 

0 

32 

63 

10 

67 

53 

74 

12 

90 

0 

33 

68 

1 

74 

19 

90 

0 

34 

74 

33 

90 

0 

The  vacant 

spaces 

go  to 

35 

90 

0 

the 

stars  which  neither 

36 

rise  nor  set 

576 


COPERNICUS 


8.  On  the  Hours  and  Parts  of  the  Day  and  Night 
[38^]  Accordingly  it  is  clear  from  this  that  if  from  the  table  we  take  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  days  which  correspond  to  the  declination  of  the  sun  and  is  found  under 
the  given  elevation  of  the  pole  and  add  it  to  a  quadrant  of  a  circle  in  the  case  of  a 
northern  declination  and  subtract  it  in  the  case  of  a  southern  declination,  and 
then  double  the  result,  we  shall  have  the  length  of  that  day  and  the  span  of 
night,  which  is  the  remainder  of  the  circle. 

Any  of  these  segments  divided  by  15  *  ^times''  will  show  how  many  equal  hours 
there  are  [in  that  day].  But  by  taking  a  twelfth  part  of  the  segment  we  shall  have 
the  duration  of  one  seasonal  hour.  Now  the  hours  get  their  name  from  their  day, 
whereof  each  hour  is  always  the  twelfth  part.  Hence  the  hours  are  found  to  have 
been  called  summer-solstitial,  equinoctial,  and  winter-solstitial  by  the  ancients. 

But  there  were  not  any  others  in  use  at  first  except  the  twelve  hours  from 
sunrise  to  sunset;  and  they  divided  the  night  into  four  vigils  or  watches.  This 
set-up  of  the  hours  lasted  a  long  time  by  the  tacit  consent  of  mankind.  And  for 
its  sake  were  water-clocks  invented:  by  the  addition  and  subtraction  of  dripping 
water  people  adjusted  the  hours  to  the  different  lengths  of  days,  so  as  not  to 
have  distinctions  in  time  obscured  by  a  cloud.  But  afterwards  when  equal  hours 
common  to  day  and  night  came  into  general  use,  as  making  it  easier  to  tell  the 
time,  then  the  seasonal  hours  became  obsolete,  so  that  if  you  asked  any  ordinary 
person  whether  it  was  the  first,  third  or  sixth,  ninth,  or  eleventh  hour  of  the  day, 
he  would  not  have  any  answer  to  make  or  would  make  one  which  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  matter.  Furthermore,  at  present  some  measure  the  number  of 
equal  hours  from  noon,  some  from  sunset,  some  from  midnight,  and  others  from 
sunrise,  according  as  it  is  instituted  by  the  state. 

9.  On  the  Oblique  Ascension  of  the  Parts  of  the  Ecliptic  and  How  the 
Degree  Which  Is  in  the  Middle  of  the  Heavens  Is  Determined 
WITH  Respect  to  the  Degree  Which  Is  Rising 
[39^]  Now  that  the  lengths  and  differences  of  days  and  nights  have  been  ex¬ 
pounded,  there  follows  in  proper  order  an  exposition  of  oblique  ascensions,  that 
is  to  say,  together  with  what  ^Times^^  [of  the  equator]  the  dodekatemoria,  z.e., 
the  twelve  parts  of  the  ecliptic,  or  some  other  arcs  of  it,  cross  the  horizon.  For 
the  differences  between  right  and  oblique  ascensions  are  the  same  as  the  differ¬ 
ences  between  the  equinox  and  a  different 
day,  as  we  set  forth.  Furthermore,  the 
ancients  borrowed  the  names  of  animals  for 
twelve  constellations  of  unmoving  stars,  and, 
beginning  at  the  spring  equinox,  called  them 
Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  and  so  on  in 
order. 

Therefore  for  the  sake  of  greater  clearness 
let  the  meridian  circle  ABCD  be  repeated; 
and  the  equatorial  semicircle  A  EC  and  the 
horizon  BED,  which  cut  one  another  at  point 
E.  Now  let  point  H  be  taken  as  the  equinox. 

Let  the  ecliptic  FHI  pass  through  this  point 
and  cut  the  horizon  at  L;  and  through  this 


577 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 

intersection  let  KLM  the  quadrant  of  a  great  circle  fall  from  K  the  pole  of  the 
equator.  Thus  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  arc  HL  of  the  ecliptic  and  arc  HE  of  the 
equator  cross  the  horizon  together,  but  that  in  the  right  sphere  [arc  HL]  was 
rising  together  with  arc  HEM.  Arc  EM  is  the  difference  between  these  ascen¬ 
sions;  and  we  have  already  shown  that  it  is  half  the  difference  between  the 
equinox  and  the  different  day.  But  in  a  northern  declination  what  was  there 
added  [to  the  quadrant  of  a  circle]  is  here  subtracted  [from  the  right  ascension]; 
but  in  a  southern  declination  it  is  added  to  the  right  ascension,  so  that  the  as¬ 
cension  may  become  oblique.  And  hence  the  extent  that  the  whole  sign  or 
some  other  arc  of  the  ecliptic  has  emerged  may  become  manifest  by  means  of 
the  numbered  ascensions  from  beginning  to  end. 

From  this  it  follows  that  when  some  degree  of  the  ecliptic  is  given,  the  rising 
of  which  has  been  measured  from  the  equinox,  the  degree  which  is  in  the  middle 
of  the  heavens  is  also  given.  For  when  the  declination  of  a  degree  rising  at  L  has 
been  given  as  corresponding  to  arc  HL  the  distance  from  the  equinox,  and  arc 
HEM  is  the  right  ascension,  and  the  whole  AHEM  is  the  arc  of  half  a  day:  then 
the  remainder  AH  is  given.  And  AH  is  the  right  ascension  of  arc  FH,  which  is 
also  given  by  the  table,  or  because  angle  AHF  the  angle  of  section  is  given  to¬ 
gether  with  side  AH^  and  angle  FAH  is  right.  And  so  FHL  the  whole  arc  be¬ 
tween  the  degree  rising  and  the  degree  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  is  given. 

Conversely,  if  the  degree  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  namely  arc 
FHj  is  given  first,  we  shall  also  know  the  sign  which  [39^]  is  rising.  For  arc  AF 
the  declination  will  be  known;  and  by  means  of  the  angle  of  obliquity  of  the 
sphere,  arc  AFB  and  arc  FB  the  remainder  will  become  known.  Now  in  triangle 
BFL  angle  BFL  and  side  FB  are  given  by  the  above,  and  angle  FBL  is  right. 
Therefore  side  FHL^  which  was  sought,  is  given;  or  by  a  different  method,  as 
below. 

10.  On  the  Angle  of  Section  of  the  Ecliptic  with  the  Horizon 

Moreover,  as  the  ecliptic  is  oblique  to  the  axis  of  the  sphere,  it  makes  various 
angles  with  the  horizon.  For  we  have  already  said  in  the  case  of  the  differences 
of  the  shadows  that  two  opposite  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  pass  through  the  axis  of 
the  horizon  of  those  who  live  between  the  tropics.  But  I  think  it  will  be  sufficient 
for  our  purpose  if  we  demonstrate  the  angles  which  we  the  heteroscian  inhabi¬ 
tants  find.  By  means  of  these  angles  the  universal  ratio  of  them  may  easily  be 
understood.  Accordingly  I  think  it  is  clear  enough  that  in  the  oblique  sphere 
when  the  equinox  or  the  beginning  of  Aries  is  rising,  the  more  the  greatest  south¬ 
ward  declination  increases — and  this  declination  is  measured  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  Capricorn  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  at  this  time — the  more 
the  ecliptic  is  inclined  and  verges  towards  the  horizon;  and  conversely,  when 
the  ecliptic  has  a  greater  elevation  [above  the  horizon],  it  makes  a  greater  east¬ 
ern  angle,  when  the  beginning  of  Libra  is  emerging  and  the  beginning  of  Cancer 
is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens;  since  these  three  circles,  the  equator,  the  ecliptic, 
and  the  horizon,  coincide  in  one  common  section  at  the  poles  of  the  meridian 
circle,  and  the  arcs  of  the  meridian  circle  intercepted  by  them  show  how  great 
the  angle  of  rising  should  be  judged  to  be. 

But  in  order  that  the  way  of  taking  the  measurements  of  the  other  parts  of 
the  ecliptic  may  be  clear,  again  let  ABC  be  the  meridian  circle,  let  BED  be  the 
semicircle  of  the  horizon,  let  AEC  be  the  semi-circle  of  the  ecliptic,  and  let  any 


578 


COPERNICUS 


degree  of  the  ecliptic  be  rising  at  E, 

Our  problem  is  to  find  how  great  angle  AEB 
is,  according  as  four  right  angles  are  equal  to 
360°.  Therefore  since  E  is  given  as  the  rising 
degree,  there  are  given  by  the  foregoing  the 
degree  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens 
and  the  arc  AE. 

And  since 

angle  = 

ch.  2  AE  :  ch.  2  AB  — Amt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  AEB. 

[40^]  Therefore  too 

angle  AEB  is  given. 

But  if  the  degree  given  is  not  rising  but  the 
degree  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens — and  let 
it  be  A — ^nevertheless  angle  AEB  will  be  the 

measure  of  the  eastern  angle  or  angle  of  rising.  For  with  E  as  pole,  let  FGH 
the  quadrant  of  a  great  circle  be  described,  and  let  the  quadrants  EAG  and 
EBH  be  completed. 

Therefore  since 

meridian  altitude  A  5  is  given, 

and 

AF  =  90°— AB, 

and  by  the  foregoing 

angle  FAG  is  given, 

and 

angle  FGA=90°; 

therefore 


and 


arc  FG  is  given. 


90°— F(?  =  Gi7, 

which  measures  the  sought  angle  of  rising.  Similarly,  it  is  also  made  evident 
here  how  for  the  degree  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  the  degree  which 
is  rising  is  given,  because 

ch.  2  GH  :  2  AB  =  dmt.  sph.  :  ch.  2  AE, 
as  in  spherical  triangles. 

We  are  subjoining  three  sets  of  tables  of  these  things.  The  first  will  be  the 
table  of  ascensions  in  the  right  sphere,  beginning  with  Aries  and  increasing  by 
by  sixtieth  parts  of  the  ecliptic.  The  second  will  be  that  of  ascensions  in  the 
oblique  sphere,  proceeding  by  steps  of  6°  in  the  ecliptic,  from  the  parallel  for 
which  there  is  a  polar  elevation  of  39°  to  the  parallel  which  has  a  polar  elevation 
of  57° — increasing  the  elevation  by  3°^s  each  time.  The  remaining  table  contains 
the  angles  made  with  the  horizon  and  proceeds  through  the  ecliptic  by  steps  of 
6°  beneath  the  same  seven  segments.  These  tables  have  been  set  up  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  least  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  namely  23°28',  which  is  approxi¬ 
mately  right  for  our  age. 


6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 


579 

gree 

I  in, 

55 

55 

56 

56 

57 

58 

59 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

59 

58 

57 

56 

56 

55 

55 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 


DF  THE  Ascensions  of  the  Signs  in  the  Revolutk 
OF  the  Right  Sphere 


Ascensions 

One  Degree 

Ecliptic 

Ascensions 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Signs  Deg. 

Times  M  in. 

5 

30 

0 

55 

Libra 

6 

185 

30 

11 

0 

0 

55 

12 

191 

0 

16 

34 

0 

56 

18 

196 

34 

22 

10 

0 

56 

24 

202 

10 

27 

54 

0 

57 

30 

207 

54 

33 

43 

0 

58 

Scorpio 

6 

213 

43 

39 

35 

0 

59 

m 

12 

219 

35 

45 

32 

1 

0 

18 

225 

32 

51 

37 

1 

1 

24 

231 

37 

57 

48 

1 

2 

30 

237 

48 

64 

6 

1 

3 

Sagittarius 

6 

244 

6 

70 

29 

1 

4 

12 

250 

29 

76 

57 

1 

5 

18 

256 

57 

83 

27 

1 

5 

24 

263 

27 

90 

0 

1 

5 

30 

270 

0 

96 

33 

1 

5 

Capricornus 

6 

276 

33 

103 

3 

1 

5 

12 

283 

3 

109 

31 

1 

5 

18 

289 

31 

115 

54 

1 

4 

24 

295 

54 

122 

12 

1 

3 

30 

302 

12 

128 

23 

1 

2 

Aquarius 

6 

308 

23 

134 

28 

1 

1 

«z 

12 

314 

28 

140 

25 

1 

0 

18 

320 

25 

146 

17 

0 

59 

24 

326 

17 

152 

6 

0 

58 

30 

332 

6 

157 

50 

0 

57 

Pisces 

6 

337 

50 

163 

26 

0 

56 

K 

12 

343 

26 

169 

0 

0 

56 

18 

349 

0 

174 

30 

0 

55 

24 

354 

30 

180 

0 

0 

55 

30 

360 

0 

580 


COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Ascensions  in  the  Oblique  Sphere 


Elevation  of  the  Pole  of  the  Equator 


39° 

Ascension 

Ascension 

Ascension 

48° 

Ascension 

51° 

Ascension 

54^ 

Ascension 

57° 

Ascension 

Signs 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

T  6 

3 

34 

3 

20 

3 

6 

2 

50 

2 

32 

2 

12 

1 

49 

12 

7 

10 

6 

44 

6 

15 

5 

44 

5 

8 

4 

27 

3 

40 

18 

10 

50 

10 

10 

9 

27 

8 

39  j 

7 

47 

6 

44 

5 

34 

24 

14 

32 

13 

39 

12 

43 

11 

40 

10 

28 

9 

7 

7 

32 

30 

18 

26 

17 

21 

16 

11 

14 

51 

13 

26 

11 

40 

9 

40 

y  6 

22 

30 

21 

12 

19 

46 

18 

14 

16 

25 

14 

22 

11 

57 

12 

26 

39 

25 

10 

23 

32 

21 

42 

19 

38 

17 

13 

14 

23 

18 

31 

0 

29 

20 

27 

29 

25 

24 

23 

2 

20 

17 

17 

2 

24 

35 

38 

33 

47 

31 

43 

29 

25 

26 

47 

23 

42 

20 

2 

30 

40 

30 

38 

30 

36 

15 

33 

41 

30 

49 

27 

26 

23 

22 

K  6 

45 

39 

43 

31 

41 

7 

38 

23 

35 

15 

31 

34 

27 

7 

12 

51 

8 

48 

52 

46 

20 

43 

27 

40 

8 

36 

13 

31 

26 

18 

56 

56 

i  54 

35 

51 

56 

48 

56 

45 

28 

41 

22 

36 

20 

24 

63 

0 

j  60 

36 

57 

54 

54 

49 

51 

15 

47 

1 

41 

49 

30 

69 

25 

{  66 

59 

64 

16 

61 

10 

57 

34 

53 

28 

48 

2 

@  6 

76 

6 

I  73 

42 

71 

0 

67 

55 

64 

21 

60 

7 

54 

55 

12 

83 

2 

'  80 

41 

78 

2 

75 

2 

71 

34 

67 

28 

62 

26 

18 

90 

10 

1  87 

54 

85 

22 

82 

29 

79 

10 

75 

15 

70 

28 

24 

97 

27 

95 

19 

92 

55 

90 

11 

87 

3 

83 

22 

78 

55 

30 

104 

54 

102 

54 

100 

39 

98 

5 

95 

13 

91 

50 

87 

46 

Q  6 

112 

24 

no 

33 

108 

30 

106 

11 

103 

33 

100 

28 

96 

48 

12 

119 

56 

118 

16 

116 

25 

114 

20 

111 

58 

109 

13 

105 

58 

18 

127 

29 

126 

0 

124 

23 

122 

32 

120 

28 

118 

3 

115 

13 

24 

135 

4 

133 

46 

132 

21 

130 

48 

128 

59 

126 

56 

124 

31 

30 

142 

38 

141 

33 

140 

23 

139 

3 

137 

38 

135 

52 

133 

52 

W  6 

150 

11 

149 

19 

148 

23 

147 

20 

146 

8 

144 

47 

143 

12 

12 

157 

41 

157 

1 

156 

19 

1  155 

29 

154 

38 

153 

36 

153 

24 

18 

!  165 

7 

164 

40 

164 

12 

1  163 

41 

163 

5 

162 

24 

162 

47 

241  172 

34 

172 

21 

172 

6 

171 

51 

171 

33 

171 

12 

170 

49 

30l  180 

0 

180 

0 

180 

0 

1  180 

0 

180 

0 

180 

0 

180 

0 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Table  of  the  Ascensions  in  the  Oblique  Sphere 


581 


Elevation  of  the  Pole  of  the  Equator 


39° 

Ascension 

42° 

Ascension 

45° 

Ascension 

48° 

Ascension 

51° 

Ascension 

5J,\ 

Ascension 

57° 

Ascension 

Signs 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

Times  Min. 

^  6 

187 

26 

187 

39 

187 

54 

188 

9 

188 

27 

188 

48 

189 

11 

12 

194 

53 

195 

19 

195 

48 

196 

19 

196 

55 

197 

36 

198 

23 

18 

202 

21 

203 

0 

203 

41 

204 

30 

205 

24 

206 

25 

207 

36 

24 

209 

49 

210 

41 

211 

37 

212 

40 

213 

52 

215 

13 

216 

48 

30 

217 

22 

218 

27 

219 

37 

220 

57 

222 

22 

224 

8 

226 

8 

m  6 

224 

56 

226 

14 

227 

38 

229 

12 

231 

1 

233  ' 

’  4 

235 

29 

12 

232 

56 

234 

0 

235 

37 

237 

28 

239 

32 

241 

57 

244 

47 

18 

240 

31 

241 

44 

243 

35 

245 

40 

248 

2 

250 

47 

254 

2 

24 

247 

36 

249 

27 

251 

30 

253 

49 

256 

27 

259 

32 

263 

12 

30 

255 

36 

257 

6 

259 

21 

261 

52 

264 

47 

268 

10 

272 

14 

7?^  6 

262 

8 

264 

41 

267 

5 

269 

49 

272 

57 

276 

38 

281 

5 

12 

269 

50 

272 

6 

274 

38 

277 

31 

280 

50 

284 

45 

289 

32 

18 

276 

58 

279 

19 

281 

58 

248 

58 

288 

26 

292 

32 

297 

34 

24 

283 

54 

286 

18 

289 

0 

292 

5 

295 

39 

299 

53 

305 

5 

30 

290 

75 

293 

1 

295 

45 

298 

50 

302 

26 

306 

42 

311 

58 

^  6 

297 

0 

299 

24 

302 

6 

305 

11 

308 

45 

312 

59 

318 

11 

12 

303 

4 

305 

25 

308 

4 

311 

4 

314 

32 

318 

38 

323 

40 

18 

308 

52 

311 

8 

313 

40 

316 

33 

319 

52 

323 

17 

328 

34 

24 

314 

21 

316 

29 

318 

53 

321 

37 

324 

45 

328 

26 

332 

53 

30 

319 

30 

321 

30 

323 

45 

326 

19 

329 

11 

332 

34 

336 

38 

««  6 

324 

21 

326 

13 

328 

16 

330 

35 

333 

13 

336 

18 

339 

58 

12 

330 

0 

330 

40 

332 

31 

334 

36 

336 

58 

339 

43 

342 

58 

18 

333 

21 

334 

50 

336 

27 

338 

18 

340 

22 

342 

47 

345 

37 

24 

337 

30 

338 

48 

340 

3 

341 

46 

343 

35 

345 

38 

348 

3 

30 

341 

34 

342 

39 

343 

49 

345 

9 

346 

34 

348 

20 

350 

20 

K  6 

345 

29 

346 

21 

347 

17 

348 

20 

349 

32 

350 

53 

352 

28 

12 

349 

11 

349 

51 

350 

33 

351 

21 

352 

14 

353 

16 

354 

26 

18 

352 

50 

353 

16 

353 

45 

354 

16 

354 

52 

355 

33 

356 

20 

24 

356 

26 

356 

40 

356 

23 

357 

10 

357 

53 

357 

48 

358 

11 

30 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

360 

0 

582 


COPERNICUS 


K> 


<1 


O  cn  O^00<MOO  ’^00<NCOO  Tt<00(McDO  '^00<NOO  '^OOCNOO  '^OOC^OO 

^  COC<|i-li-H  cO(Nr-li-H  C0(Ni-«i-l  COCQrHrH  CCCSli-Hi-l 


liOrHCOCOi-H  C^OCOOO  OOCCOCO(M  0'«^0500  t^OO'^t^OO  COCOtJ^OOO 
>COTtHiOrHCO  TtH(M(N(M  Tt^CS|i-i(NiO  COCOCOiOJO  ‘O'^C^Tt^CQ 


•iS  ss 

S? 


>05050500  ii-hC^CO'^  iL0t^05i— ICO  CDO5(MiO00  i— iTtiIs.05<N  CO'^iOOO 

T— lT-^  T— iT-HT-HrHt—i  rHt-Hi-HC^(N  (NC^COCOCO  iOiOiOlO^O 


12; 

o 

N3 

>-i 

o 

a 

H 

W 

H 

W 

H 

hH 

o 

HH 

H 

3 

W 

H 

W 

JH 

« 

K 

O 

0} 

o 

C 

o 

H 

m 

Eh 


•S  w 

^  C3> 

C3S 


lOCOOOOiO  OC0005TJ1  C^iOiCl>»CO  OCOOCOCO  t»>05J>-t>0  I>-OiOt^OO 
CO'^lOr-l'^(M  lOiOrHr^lMC^CO  lO'<:^^'^'^T^^COrH'^  lO(NlOT*Hr~((M 


CSl<N<MCOCO  '^ICIOOOO  O5i-(COOOO  OC0005CSI  kOCOOCO^  01^000505 
t-H  t— I  1— I  1— I  rH  t-H  1— I  rH  i-H  »-H  r- 1  CO  CO  CO  CO  ^  Th  >>0  *0  lO  *0  >0  *0 


^  (M>i0^05C0O  '^COt-hi-i(N  ^lOOO^iO  tJhiOt-hCOt-i  05001:^05  I>COOOOOO 
.5cOCO’^^CS|JLOCO(M(M'^iOi-Hi-i»-iCO  TjiiOCOCOlM  rH  COiOt^Hi-hcn 

O  ^ 

lOOlOlOCOO  I>.00050rH  C0lOt^O5(M  ’^t^OCOO  (OrHTfOOO  050rHCq<M 
i-HrHi— It-Hi— It— I  t— It— It— ICQC^  CQC^CNOQCO  COCO'^''^'^  TtllOOVO»0  lOOOCDO 


§s 

CO 


Oo  C3i 

. 

^  00 
rH 


01>.C00510  OOrHCOCNO  IOOCO(NCO  lOOOCOO'^  ’^I>COOI>*  OCD00  0500 
CO^tl  (M  IlO  C^UOCO  rH  lOCO  C^COrHr^<lOTt^T-l<M 


000005050  OOlM'^llC  r^OOrHCO^  00rHT^H|>.O5  C^l0l>»05rH  C^COt^IJOiO 
^ht-Ht-Ht-hC^  IM<N(N(N<N  (NCMCOCOCO  CO'^^^'^  iOwOlOuOO  CDOCOCDCD 


5S  £? 

•S  CO 


eo  Jz 

O 


Q  ?3 


OOOO'^rH  05OC0C0C^  t^<NrHC<ICO  WOOOOOOC<I  OOOC^OO  1-H0505000 
CO'^  COrHlClO  C^iOCOCO'^  COrH  Tt<CO<N  (N(M'^rHlClO'^!M(N 


rHT-i(M<NCO  CO'^Ot^OO  OC^'^t^OS  (MiOt>.OCO  OOOOIM'^  lOOl^OOOO 
(M<N(N(M(N  COCOCOCOCO  iC^CDOO  COOOCOO 


•S  CO 


eo 

05  3 

o  ^ 

& 


^  Tt- 

Q  CM 


005050^  05050COt^  t-H'^'^C^tH  T-iTt^OiO<N  COCSJOOOO 

COCO  rH  <M  ^  r-H  CO  rH  lO  CO  (M  <M  VO  uO  (M  lO  O  (M  (N 


-^Tt^iOvCO  1^0005001  '^OOOOCO  lOOO^Tt^O  O5i-iC0iOt^  OOOOrHr-l 
(NC^(N(NC^  C^(M(MCOCO  COCOCO'^'^  Tt^Tt^iOiO^O  vOOOOcO 


•  S  W 
o  4^ 

05  ^ 

©0 

C55 

Q  (M 


t^05CO^l^  05T-HIOVOO  O5(M'^00rH  OOCO'^O'^  005t^0500  O'^rHOOO 
CO'^rHT^l(MT-l<NCO  '^(NCO'^  '^rH  TfCO  lOCO  lOrH(N 


t>l>.000005  OrHC^T^iO  I>05t-i^cD  05(N'^1^0  (N'^t^OOO  (NCOCO'^'^ 
(M(N(M(N(N  COCOCOCOCO  COCO'^'^'^  ^vO^^O  CDOOOl^ 


_  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  O(N00^C_ 

O  ^  rH  t-H  CO  rH  rH  CO  rH  rH  CO  rH  rH  CO 

;:§* 

^  to 


© 


& 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 


583 


11.  On  the  Use  of  These  Tables 

[42^]  Now  the  use  of  these  tables  is  clear  from  the  demonstrations,  since  if 
we  take  the  right  ascension  corresponding  to  the  known  degree  of  the  sun  and  if 
for  every  equal  hour  measured  from  noon  we  add  15  “times”  to  it — not  count¬ 
ing  the  360°  of  the  whole  circle,  if  there  is  more  than  that — the  sum  of  the  right 
ascensions  will  show  the  degree  of  the  ecliptic  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  at 
the  proposed  hour. 

Similarly  if  you  do  the  same  thing  in  the  case  of  the  oblique  ascension  of  your 
region,  you  will  have  the  rising  degree  of  the  ecliptic  for  the  hour  measured 
from  sunrise. 

Moreover,  in  the  case  of  certain  stars  which  are  outside  the  ecliptic  but  of 
which  the  right  ascension  has  been  established — as  we  taught  above — by  their 
right  ascension  from  the  beginning  of  Aries  the  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  which  are 
in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  together  with  them  are  given  according  to  the 
table;  and  by  their  oblique  ascension  the  degree  of  the  ecliptic  which  arises 
with  them,  according  as  the  ascensions  and  parts  of  the  ecliptic  are  placed  in 
corresponding  regions  of  the  tables.  It  is  possible  to  operate  with  the  setting 
similarly  but  by  means  of  the  position  opposite. 

Moreover,  if  to  the  right  ascension  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  a  quadrant 
of  a  circle  is  added,  the  sum  is  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  rising  degree.  Where¬ 
fore  the  rising  degree  is  given  by  means  of  the  degree  in  the  middle  of  the  heav¬ 
ens,  and  vice  versa. 

There  follows  the  table  of  the  angles  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon,  which 
are  measured  at  the  rising  degree  of  the  ecliptic.  Hence  it  is  understood  how 
great  the  elevation  of  the  90th  degree  of  the  ecliptic  is  above  the  horizon;  and 
it  is  particularly  necessary  to  know  that  in  the  case  of  solar  eclipses. 

12.  On  the  Angles  and  Arcs  of  the  Circles  Which  Pass  Through 
THE  Poles  of  the  Horizon  and  Intersect  the  Same  Circle 
OF  THE  Ecliptic 

In  what  follows  we  shall  expound  the  ratio  of  the  angles  and  arcs  made  by 
the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  with  the  circles  through  the  vertex  of  the  horizon, 
in  the  cases  wherein  the  intersections  have  some  altitude  above  the  horizon. 
But  we  spoke  above  concerning  the  meridian  altitude  of  the  sun  or  of  any  degree 
of  the  ecliptic  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  and  concerning  the  angle 
of  section  with  the  meridian,  since  [43^]  the  meridian  circle  is  also  one  of  those 
circles  which  pass  through  the  vertex  of  the  horizon.  Moreover  we  have  already 
talked  about  the  angle  of  the  rising  sign,  the  complementary  angle  to  which  is 
the  angle  which  is  comprehended  by  a  great  circle  passing  through  the  vertex 
of  the  horizon  and  by  the  rising  ecliptic.  Therefore  there  remain  to  be  considered 
the  mean  sections,  that  is,  the  mean  sections  of  the  meridian  circle  with  the 
semicircles  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  horizon. 

Let  the  above  figure  be  repeated.  Let  G  be  taken  as  any  point  on  the  ecliptic 
between  midday  and  the  point  of  rising  or  setting.  Through  G  from  F  the  pole 
of  the  horizon  let  fall  FGH  a  quadrant  of  a  circle. 

“Hour”  AGE  is  given 

as  the  whole  arc  of  the  ecliptic  between  the  meridian  and  the  horizon,  and 
by  hypothesis 


584 


COPERNICUS 


-4(?  is  given. 

Similarly,  because 

meridian  altitude  AB  is  given, 

and 

meridian  angle  FAG  is  given; 
therefore 

AF  is  given. 

And  by  what  has  been  shown  concerning 
spherical  triangles, 

arc  FG  is  given. 

And  hence 

altitude  of  G  is  given, 

because 

90^-FG  =  GH, 

And 


meridian  angle  FAG  is  given. 

And  those  are  what  we  were  looking  for. 

En  route,  we  have  taken  from  Ptolemy  these  truths  about  the  angles  and  in¬ 
tersections  of  the  ecliptic,  and  have  referred  ourselves  to  the  geometiy  of 
spherical  triangles.  If  anyone  wishes  to  pursue  this  study  at  length,  he  can  find 
by  himself  more  utilities  than  we  have  given  examples  of. 


13.  On  the  Rising  and  Setting  of  the  Stars 

The  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars  also  seems  to  depend  upon  the  daily  revo¬ 
lution,  not  only  the  simple  risings  and  settings  of  which  we  have  just  spoken 
but  also  those  which  occur  in  the  morning  or  evening;  because  although  their 
occurrence  is  affected  by  the  course  of  the  annual  revolution,  it  will  be  better  to 
speak  of  them  here. 

The  ancient  mathematicians  distinguish  the  true  risings  and  settings  from  the 
apparent.  The  morning  rising  of  the  star  is  true  when  the  star  rises  at  the  same 
time  as  the  sun;  and  the  morning  setting  is  true,  when  the  star  sets  at  sunrise; 
for  morning  is  said  to  occur  at  the  midpoint  of  this  time.  But  the  evening  rising 
is  true  when  the  star  rises  at  sunset;  and  the  evening  setting  is  true  when  the 
star  sets  at  the  same  time  as  the  sun;  for  evening  is  said  to  occur  at  the  midpoint 
of  this  time,  namely  the  time  [43^]  between  the  time  which  is  beginning  and  the 
time  which  ceases  with  night. 

But  the  morning  rising  of  a  star  is  apparent  when  it  rises  first  in  the  twilight 
before  sunrise  and  begins  to  be  apparent;  and  the  morning  setting  is  apparent 
when  the  star  is  seen  to  set  very  early  before  the  sun  rises.  The  evening  rising  is 
apparent  when  the  star  is  seen  to  rise  first  in  the  evening;  and  the  evening  set¬ 
ting  is  apparent,  when  the  star  ceases  to  be  apparent  some  time  after  sunset,  and 
the  star  is  occulted  by  the  approach  of  the  sun,  until  they  come  forth  in  their 
previous  order  at  the  morning  rising. 

This  is  true  of  the  fixed  stars  and  of  the  planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars. 
But  Venus  and  Mercury  rise  and  set  in  a  different  fashion.  For  they  are  not 
occulted  by  the  approach  of  the  sun,  as  the  higher  planets  are;  and  they  are  not 
uncovered  again  by  its  departure.  But,  coming  in  front,  they  mingle  with  the 
radiance  of  the  sun  and  free  themselves.  But  when  the  higher  planets  have  an 
evening  rising  and  a  morning  setting,  they  are  not  obscured  at  any  time,  so  as 


REVOLUTlOxNS  OF  HExWENLY  SPHERES,  II  585 

not  to  traverse  the  night  with  their  illumination.  But  the  lower  planets  remain 
hidden  indifferently  from  sunset  to  sunrise,  and  cannot  be  seen  anywhere.  There 
is  still  another  difference,  namely  that  in  higher  planets  the  true  morning  risings 
and  settings  are  prior  to  the  apparent  ones;  and  the  evening  risings  and  settings 
are  posterior  to  the  apparent,  according  as  in  the  morning  they  precede  the  ris¬ 
ing  of  the  sun  and  in  the  evening  follow  its  setting.  But  in  the  lower  planets  the 
apparent  morning  and  evening  risings  are  posterior  to  the  true,  while  the  ap¬ 
parent  settings  are  prior  to  the  true. 

Now  it  can  be  understood  from  the  above,  where  we  expounded  the  oblique 
ascension  of  any  star  having  a  known  position,  how  [the  risings  and  settings]  may 
be  discerned,  and  together  with  what  degree  of  the  ecliptic  the  star  rises  or  sets 
and  at  what  position,  or  degree  opposite — if  the  sun  has  become  apparent  by 
that  time — the  star  has  its  true  morning  or  evening  rising  or  setting.  The  ap¬ 
parent  risings  and  settings  differ  from  the  true  according  to  the  clarity  and  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  star,  so  that  the  stars  which  give  a  more  powerful  light  are  less 
dimmed  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  than  those  which  are  less  luminous.  And  the 
boundaries  of  occultation  and  apparition  are  determined  in  the  lower  hemi¬ 
sphere,  between  the  horizon  and  the  sun,  on  the  arcs  of  circles  which  pass 
through  the  poles  of  the  horizon.  And  the  limits  are  12°  for  the  primary  stars, 
11°  for  Saturn,  10°  for  Jupiter,  113^"^  for  Mars,  5°  for  Venus,  and  10°  for  Mer¬ 
cury.  But  in  this  whole  period  during  which  what  is  left  of  daylight  yields  to 
night — this  period  embraces  twilight,  or  dusk — there  are  18°  of  the  aforesaid 
circle.  When  the  sun  has  traversed  these  degrees,  the  smaller  stars  too  begin  ro 
be  apparent.  By  this  distance  the  mathematicians  determine  [44^]  a  parallel 
below  the  horizon  in  the  lower  hemisphere,  and  they  say  that  when  the  sun  has 
reached  this  parallel,  day  has  ended  and  night  has  begun.  Therefore  when  we 
have  learned  with  what  degree  of  the  ecliptic  the  star  rises  or  sets  and  what  the 
angle  of  section  of  the  ecliptic  with  the  horizon  at  that  point  is,  and  if  then  too 
we  find  as  many  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  between  the  rising  degree  and  the  sun  as 
are  sufficient  to  give  the  sun  an  altitude  below  the  horizon  in  accord  with  the 
prescribed  limits  of  the  star  in  question;  we  shall  pronounce  that  the  first 
emergence  or  occultation  of  the  star  has  taken  place. 

But  what  we  have  expounded,  in  the  foregoing  explanation,  in  the  case  of  the 
altitude  of  the  sun  above  the  Earth  agrees  in  all  respects  with  its  descent  below 
the  Earth.  For  there  is  no  difference  in  the  corresponding  positions;  and  conse¬ 
quently  those  stars  which  are  setting  in  the  visible  hemisphere  are  rising  in  the 
hidden  hemisphere;  and  everything  is  the  converse,  and  is  easy  to  understand. 
What  has  been  said  concerning  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars  and  the  daily 
revolution  of  the  terrestrial  globe  shall  be  sufficient. 

14.  On  Investigating  the  Positions  of  the  Stars  and  the 
Catalogue  of  the  Fixed  Stars 

After  the  daily  revolution  of  the  terrestrial  globe  and  its  consequences  have 
been  expounded  by  us,  the  demonstrations  relating  to  the  annual  circuit  ought 
to  follow  now.  But  since  some  of  the  ancient  mathematicians  thought  the  phe¬ 
nomena  of  the  fixed  stars  ought  to  come  first  as  being  the  first  beginnings  of  this 
art,  accordingly  we  decided  to  act  in  accordance  with  this  opinion,  as  among  our 
principles  and  hypotheses  we  had  assumed  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  to 
which  the  wanderings  of  all  the  planets  are  equally  referred,  is  wholly  immobile. 


586  COPERNICUS 

But  no  one  should  be  surprised  at  our  following  this  order,  although  Ptolemy  in 
his  Almagest  held  that  an  explanation  of  the  fixed  stars  could  not  be  given,  un¬ 
less  knowledge  of  the  positions  of  the  sun  and  moon  had  preceded  it,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  he  judged  that  whatever  had  to  do  with  the  fixed  stars  should  be  put 
off  till  then.  We  think  that  this  opinion  must  be  opposed.  But  if  you  understand 
it  of  the  numbers  with  which  the  apparent  motion  of  the  sun  and  moon  is  com¬ 
puted  perhaps  the  opinion  will  stand.  For  Menelaus  the  geometer  discovered  the 
positions  of  many  stars  by  means  of  the  numbers  relating  to  their  conjunctions 
with  the  moon.  [44^]  But  we  shall  do  a  much  better  job  if  we  determine  a  star  by 
the  aid  of  instruments  after  examining  carefully  the  positions  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  as  we  will  show  how  in  a  little  while.  We  are  even  admonished  by  the 
wasted  attempt  of  those  who  thought  that  the  magnitude  of  the  solar  year  could 
be  defined  simply  by  the  equinoxes  or  solstices  without  the  fixed  stars.  We  shall 
never  agree  with  them  on  that,  so  much  so  that  there  will  nowhere  be  greater 
discord.  Ptolemy  called  our  attention  to  this:  when  he  had  evaluated  the  solar 
year  in  his  time  not  without  suspicion  of  an  error  which  might  emerge  with  the 
passage  of  time,  he  admonished  posterity  to  examine  the  further  certainty  of 
the  thing  later  on.  Therefore  it  seemed  to  us  to  be  worth  the  trouble  to  show 
how  by  means  of  artificial  instruments  the  positions  of  the  sun  and  moon  may 
be  determined,  that  is,  how  far  distant  they  are  from  the  spring  equinox  or  some 
other  cardinal  points  of  the  world.  The  knowledge  of  these  positions  will  afford 
us  some  facilities  for  investigating  the  other  stars,  and  thus  we  shall  be  able  to 
set  forth  before  your  eyes  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and  an  image  of  it  em¬ 
broidered  with  constellations. 

Now  we  have  set  forth  above  with  what  instruments  the  distance  of  the 
tropics,  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  inclination  of  the  sphere,  or  the  al¬ 
titude  of  the  pole  of  the  equator,  may  be  determined.  In  the  same  way  we  can 
determine  any  other  altitude  of  the  sun  at  midday.  This  altitude  will  exhibit  to 
us  through  its  difference  from  the  inclination  of  the  sphere  how  great  the  dec¬ 
lination  of  the  sun  from  the  equator  is.  Then  by  means  of  this  declination  the 
position  of  the  sun  at  midday  will  become  clear  as  measured  from  the  solstice 
or  the  equinox.  Now  the  sun  seems  to  traverse  approximately  1°  during  the 
space  of  24  hours;  2)^'  come  as  the  hourly  allotment.  Hence  its  position  at  any 
other  definite  hour  will  easily  be  determined. 

But  for  observing  the  positions  of  the  moon  and  stars  another  instrument  is 
constructed,  which  Ptolemy  calls  the  astrolabe.  For  let  two  circles,  or  rather 
four-sided  rims  of  circles,  be  constructed  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  have  then- 
concave  and  convex  surfaces  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  sides.  These  rims  are  to 
be  equal  and  similar  in  every  respect  and  of  a  suitable  size,  in  order  not  to  be¬ 
come  hard  to  handle  through  being  too  large,  though  they  must  be  of  suflScient 
amplitude  to  be  divided  into  degrees  and  minutes.  Their  width  and  thickness 
[45^]  should  be  at  least  one  thirtieth  of  the  diameter.  Therefore  they  are  to  be 
fitted  together  and  joined  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  having  their  convex 
sides  as  it  were  on  the  surface  of  the  same  sphere,  and  their  concave  sides  on  the 
surface  of  another  single  sphere.  Now  one  of  the  circles  should  have  the  relative 
position  of  the  ecliptic;  and  the  other,  that  of  the  circle  which  passes  through 
both  poles,  2.e.,  the  poles  of  the  equator  and  of  the  ecliptic.  Therefore  the  circle 
of  the  ecliptic  is  to  be  divided  along  its  sides  into  the  conventional  number  of 
360°,  which  are  again  to  be  subdivided  according  to  the  capacity  of  the  instru- 


587 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 

ment.  Moreover,  when  quadrants  on  the  other  circle  have  been  measured  from 
the  ecliptic,  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  should  be  marked  on  it;  and  when  a  distance 
proportionate  to  the  obliquity  has  been  measured  from  those  points,  the  poles  of 
the  equator  are  also  to  be  marked  down.  When  these  circles  are  finished,  two 
other  circles  should  be  prepared  and  constructed  around  the  same  poles  of  the 
ecliptic:  they  will  move  about  these  poles,  one  circle  inside  and  one  circle  out¬ 
side.  They  should  be  of  equal  thicknesses  between  their  plane  surfaces,  and  the 
wddth  of  their  plane  surfaces  should  be  equal  to  that  of  the  others;  and  they 
should  be  so  constructed  that  at  all  points  the  concave  surface  of  the  larger  will 
touch  the  convex  surface  of  the  ecliptic ;  and  the  convex  surface  of  the  smaller, 
the  concave  surface  of  the  ecliptic.  Nevertheless  do  not  let  their  revolutions  be 
impeded,  but  have  them  able  to  traverse  freely  and  easily  both  the  ecliptic  to¬ 
gether  with  its  meridian  circle  and  one  another.  Therefore  we  shall  make  holes 
in  these  circles  diametrically  opposite  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  and  pass  axles 
through  these  holes,  so  that  by  means  of  these  axles  the  circles  will  be  bound  to¬ 
gether  and  carried  along.  Moreover,  the  inside  circle  should  be  divided  into  360° 
in  such  fashion  that  the  single  quadrant  of  90°  will  be  at  the  poles.  Furthermore, 
within  the  concavity  of  the  inside  circle  a  fifth  circle  should  be  placed  which  can 
be  turned  in  the  same  plane  and  which  has  an  apparatus  fixed  to  its  plane  sur¬ 
faces  which  has  openings  diametrically  opposite  and  reflectors  or  eyepieces, 
through  which  the  light  of  the  sun,  as  in  a  dioptra,  can  break  through  and  go 
out  along  the  diameter  of  the  circle.  And  certain  appliances  or  pointers  for  num¬ 
bers  are  fitted  on  to  this  fifth  circle  at  opposite  points  for  the  sake  of  observing 
the  latitudes  on  the  container  circle.  Finally,  a  sixth  circle  is  to  be  applied  which 
will  embrace  and  support  the  whole  astrolabe,  which  is  hung  on  to  it  by  means 
of  fastenings  at  the  poles  of  the  equator;  this  last  circle  is  to  be  placed  upon 
some  sort  of  column,  or  stand,  and  made  to  rest  upon  it  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  horizon.  Moreover,  the  poles  [of  the  equator]  should  be  adjusted 
to  the  inclination  of  the  sphere,  so  that  the  outmost  circle  will  have  a  position 
similar  to  that  of  a  natural  meridian  and  will  by  no  means  weaver  from  it. 

Therefore  after  the  instrument  has  been  prepared  in  this  way,  when  we  wish 
to  determine  the  position  of  some  star,  then  in  the  evening  or  at  the  approach  of 
sunset  and  at  a  time  when  the  moon  too  is  visible,  we  shall  adjust  the  outer  circle 
to  the  degree  of  the  ecliptic,  in  which  [45^]  we  have  determined — by  the  methods 
spoken  of — that  the  sun  is  at  that  time.  And  we  shall  turn  the  intersection  of  the 
[ecliptic  and  the  outer]  circle  towards  the  sun  itself,  until  both  of  them — I  mean 
the  ecliptic  and  the  outer  circle  which  passes  through  its  poles — cast  shadows  on 
themselves  evenly.^  Then  we  shall  turn  the  inner  circle  towards  the  moon;  and 
with  the  eye  placed  in  its  plane  we  shall  mark  its  position  on  the  ecliptic  part  of 
the  instrument  there  where  we  shall  view  the  moon  as  opposite,  or  as  it  were 
bisected  by  the  same  plane.  That  will  be  the  position  of  the  moon  as  seen  in 
longitude.  For  without  the  moon  there  is  no  way  of  discovering  the  positions  of 
the  stars,  as  the  moon  alone  among  all  is  a  partaker  of  both  day  and  night. 
Then  after  nightfall,  when  the  star  whose  position  we  are  seeking  is  visible,  we 
shall  adjust  the  outer  circle  to  the  position  of  the  moon;  and  thus,  as  we  did  in 
the  case  of  the  sun,  we  shall  bring  the  position  of  the  astrolabe  into  relation 
with  the  moon.  Then  also  we  shall  turn  the  inner  circle  towards  the  star,  until 
the  star  seems  to  be  in  contact  with  the  plane  surfaces  of  the  circle  and  is  viewed 

H’.c.,  until  the  shadows  intersect  as  two  straight  lines  at  right  angles  to  one  another. 


588 


COPERNICUS 


through  the  eyepieces  which  are  on  the  little  circle  contained  [by  the  inner  circle]. 
For  in  this  way  we  shall  have  discovered  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  the  star. 
When  this  is  being  done,  the  degree  of  the  ecliptic  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the 
heavens  will  be  before  the  eyes;  and  accordingly  it  will  be  obvious  at  what  hour 
the  thing  itself  was  done.^ 

For  example,  in  the  2nd  year  of  the  Emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  on  the  9th 
day  of  Pharmuthi,  the  8th  month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar,  Ptolemy,  who  was 
then  at  Alexandria  and  wished  to  observe  at  the  time  of  sunset  the  position  of 
the  star  which  is  in  the  breast  of  Leo  and  is  called  Basiliscus  or  Regulus,  ad¬ 
justed  his  astrolabe  to  the  setting  sun  at  5  equatorial  hours  after  midday.  At 
this  time  the  sun  was  at  33-^4°  of  Pisces,  and  by  moving  the  inner  circle  he 
found  that  the  moon  was  923^°  east  of  the  sun:  hence  it  was  seen  that  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  moon  was  then  at  53^^^  of  Gemini.  After  half  an  hour — which  made 
six  hours  since  noon — when  the  star  had  already  begun  to  be  apparent  and  4° 


COPERNICUS*  ASTROLABE 


^Legend: 

1.  Circle  through  poles  of  ecliptic 

2.  Ecliptic 

3.  Outer  circle 

4.  Inner  circle 

5.  Little  circle 

6.  Meridian  circle 

A  and  Ai.  Poles  of  equator 

BCCiBi.  Axis  of  ecliptic 

D.  Zenith,  or  pole  of  horizon 

The  astrolabe  is  constructed  as  an  im¬ 
age  of  the  Ptolemaic  heavens,  or  as  a 
“smaller  world.”  Accordingly  the  astro¬ 
labe  in  operation  is  an  imitation  of  the 
revolving  heavens  on  a  reduced  scale. 

The  astrolabe  is  set  up  with  the  meridi¬ 
an  circle  (6)  fixed  in  the  meridian  hne  and 
with  the  northern  and  southern  poles  of 
the  equator  (A  and  Ai)  pointing  towards 
the  celestial  poles  above  and  below  the 
horizon,  as  the  meridian  does  not  change 
during  the  course  of  the  daily  revolution. 

The  degrees  of  the  celestial  ecliptic  are 
marked  off  on  the  ecliptic  circle  (2),  with 
the  solstices  or  equinoxes  at  the  inter¬ 
sections  of  the  ecliptic  (2)  and  the 
circle  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic 
(1).  The  outer  circle  (3)  is  turned  to 
that  point  on  the  ecliptic  where  the 
position  of  the  sun  is  computed  to  be, 

and  then  this  intersection  of  the  outer  circle  and  the  ecliptic  is  turned  towards  the  sun  itself, 
until  each  circle  casts  its  shadow  in  the  form  of  a  straight  hne  intersecting  the  other  shadow 
at  right  angles.  Now  as  the  revolution  of  the  outer  circle  around  the  axis  of  the  equator  makes 
the  axis  of  the  ecliptic,  the  circle  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  the  inner  ciicle,  and  the 
httle  circle  swing  round  the  axis  of  the  equator,  and  as  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  revolves  around 
the  pole  of  the  equator  during  the  daily  revolution;  the  turning  towards  the  sun  of  the  inter¬ 
section  of  the  two  circles  seves  to  bring  the  yearly  and  daily  movements  of  the  sun  into  proper 
ratio  with  one  another;  and  the  cruciform  shadow  is  a  sign  that  the  wooden  ecliptic  occupies 
the  relative  position  in  the  astrolabe  that  the  celestial  ecliptic  occupies  at  this  moment  of  the 
daily  revolution.  The  inner  circle  (4)  can  now  be  turned  towards  the  moon  in  order  to  mark 
on  the  ecliptic  the  lunar  longitude,  and  the  little  circle  (5)  can  be  wheeled  around  in  the  plane 
of  the  inner  circle,  in  order  to  mark  the  lunar  latitude  on  the  graduated  inner  circle. 


589 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 

of  Gemini  was  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  he  turned  the  outer  circle  of  the 
instrument  to  the  already  determined  position  of  the  moon.  Proceeding  with  the 
inner  circle,  he  took  the  distance  of  the  star  from  the  moon  as  57)^o°  to  the  east. 
Accordingly  the  moon  had  been  found  at  923/^°  from  the  setting  sun,  as  was 
said — which  placed  the  moon  at  of  Gemini;  but  it  was  correct  for  the  moon 

to  have  moved  in  the  space  of  half  an  hour;  since  the  hourly  allotment  in  the 
movement  of  the  moon  is  more  or  less  3^°;  but  on  account  of  the  then  sub¬ 
tractive  parallax  of  the  moon  it  must  have  been  slightly  less  than  34°;  [46®]  that 
is  to  say,  about  hence  the  moon  was  at  534°  of  Gemini.  But  when  we  have 
discussed  the  parallaxes  of  the  moon,  the  difference  will  not  appear  to  have  been 
so  great;  and  hence  it  will  be  evident  enough  that  the  position  of  the  moon 
viewed  was  more  than  534°  but  a  little  less  than  5%°.  The  addition  of  5734o° 
to  this  locates  the  position  of  the  star  at  2°30'  of  Leo  at  a  distance  of  about  3234° 
from  the  summer  solstice  of  the  sun  and  with  a  northern  latitude  of  34°-  This 
was  the  position  of  Basiliscus;  and  consequently  the  way  was  laid  open  to  the 
other  fixed  stars.  This  observation  of  Ptolemy's  was  made  in  the  year  of  Our 
Lord  139  by  the  Roman  calendar,  on  the  24th  day  of  February,  in  the  1st  year 
of  the  229th  Olympiad. 

That  most  outstanding  of  mathematicians  took  note  of  what  position  at  that 
time  each  of  the  stars  had  in  relation  to  the  spring  equinox,  and  catalogued  the 
constellations  of  the  celestial  animals.  Thus  he  helps  us  not  a  little  in  this  our 
enterprise  and  relieves  us  of  some  difficult  enough  labour,  so  that  we,  who  think 
that  the  positions  of  the  stars  should  not  be  referred  to  the  equinoxes  which 
change  with  time  but  that  the  equinoxes  should  be  referred  to  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars,  can  easily  draw  up  a  description  of  the  stars  from  any  other  un¬ 
changing  starting-point.  We  decided  to  begin  this  description  with  the  Ram 
as  being  the  first  sign,  and  with  its  first  star,  which  is  in  its  head — so  that  in  this 
way  a  configuration  which  is  absolute  and  always  the  same  will  be  possessed  by 
those  stars  which  shine  together  as  if  fixed  and  clinging  perpetually  and  at  the 
same  time  to  the  throne  which  they  have  seized.  But  by  the  marvellous  care  and 
industry  of  the  ancients  the  stars  were  distributed  into  forty-eight  constellations 
with  the  exception  of  those  which  the  circle  of  the  always  hidden  stars  removed 
from  the  fourth  climate,  which  passes  approximately  through  Rhodes;  and  in 
this  way  the  unconstellated  stars  remained  unknown  to  them.  According  to  the 
opinion  of  Theo  the  Younger  in  the  Aratean  Treatise  the  stars  were  not  ar¬ 
ranged  in  the  form  of  images  for  any  other  reason  except  that  their  great  multi¬ 
tude  might  be  divided  into  parts  and  that  they  might  be  designated  separately 
by  certain  names  in  accordance  with  an  ancient  enough  custom,  since  even  in 
Hesiod  and  Homer  we  read  the  names  of  the  Pleiades,  Hyas,  Arcturus,  and 
Orion.  Accordingly  in  the  description  of  the  stars  according  to  longitude  we 
shall  not  employ  the  “twelve  divisions,"  or  dodekatemoria,  which  are  measured 
from  the  equinoxes  or  solstices,  but  the  simple  and  conventional  number  of  de¬ 
grees.  We  shall  follow  Ptolemy  as  to  the  rest  with  the  exception  of  a  few  cases, 
where  we  have  either  found  some  corruption  or  a  different  state  of  affairs.  We 
shall  however  teach  you  in  the  following  book  how  to  find  out  what  their  dis¬ 
tances  are  from  those  cardinal  points  [i.e.,  the  equinoxes]. 


590 


COPERNICUS 


CATALOGUE  OF  THE  SIGNS  AND  OF  THE  STARS 

And  First  Those  of  the  Northern  Region 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg,  Min. 

Deg,  Min, 

Magnitude 

Ursa  Minor,  or  the  Little  Bear, 

OR  Cynosura 

The  [star]  at  the  tip  of  the  tail 

53 

30 

N 

66 

0 

3 

The  [star]  to  the  east  in  the  tail 

55 

50 

N 

70 

0 

4 

The  [star]  at  the  base  of  the  tail 

The  more  southern  [star]  on  the  western 

69 

20 

N 

74 

0 

4 

side  of  the  quadrilateral 

83 

0 

N 

75 

20 

4 

The  northern  [star]  on  the  same  side 

The  more  southern  of  the  stars  on  the  east- 

87 

0 

N 

77 

40 

4 

ern  side 

100 

30 

N 

72 

40 

2 

The  more  northern  on  the  same  side 

7  stars:  2  of  second  magnitude,  1  of  third, 

109 

30 

N 

74 

50 

2 

4  of  fourth 

The  most  southern  unconstellated  star  near 

the  Cynosure,  in  a  straight  line  with  the 
eastern  side 

103 

20 

N 

71 

10 

4 

Ursa  Major,  or  the  Great  Bear 

The  star  in  the  muzzle 

78 

40 

N 

39 

50 

4 

The  western  star  in  the  two  eyes 

79 

10 

N 

43 

0 

5 

The  star  to  the  east  of  that 

The  more  western  star  of  the  two  in  the 

79 

40 

N 

43 

0 

5 

forehead 

79 

30 

N 

47 

10 

5 

The  star  to  the  east  in  the  forehead 

81 

0 

N 

47 

0 

5 

The  western  star  in  the  right  ear 

81 

30 

N 

50 

30 

5 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  neck 

85 

50 

N 

43 

50 

4 

The  eastern 

92 

50 

N 

44 

20 

4 

Northern  Signs 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  in  the  breast 

94 

20 

N 

44 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

93 

20 

N 

42 

0 

4 

The  star  at  the  knee  of  the  left  foreleg 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  in  the  left 

89 

0 

N 

35 

0 

3 

forefoot 

89 

50 

N 

29 

0 

3 

The  more  southern 

88 

40 

N 

28 

30 

3 

At  the  knee  of  the  right  foreleg 

89 

0 

N 

36 

0 

4 

The  star  below  the  knee 

101 

10 

N 

33 

30 

4 

The  star  on  the  shoulder 

104 

0 

N 

49 

0 

2 

The  star  on  the  flanks 

105 

30 

N 

44 

30 

2 

The  star  at  the  base  of  the  tail 

116 

30 

N 

51 

0 

3 

The  star  in  the  left  hind  leg 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  left 

117 

20 

N 

46 

30 

2 

hind  foot 

106 

0 

N 

29 

38 

3 

The  star  to  the  east  of  that 

107 

30 

N 

28 

15 

3 

[47^]  The  star  in  the  hollow  of  the  left  leg 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  which  are  in 

115 

0 

N 

35 

15 

4 

the  right  hind  foot 

123 

10 

N 

25 

50 

3 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Northern  Signs 


591 


Constellations 
The  more  southern 

The  first  of  the  three  in  the  tail  after  the 
base 

The  middle  star 

The  star  which  is  last  and  at  the  tip  of  the 
tail 

27  stars:  6  of  second  magnitude,  8  of  third, 
8  of  fourth,  and  5  of  fifth 

Unconstellated  Stars  near  the  Great 
Bear 

The  star  to  the  south  of  the  tail 
The  more  obscure  star  to  the  west 
The  star  between  the  forefeet  of  the  Bear 
and  the  head  of  the  Lion 
The  star  more  to  the  north  than  that  one 
The  last  of  the  three  obscure  stars 
The  one  to  the  west  of  that 
The  one  more  to  the  west 
The  star  between  the  forefeet  and  the  Twins 
8  unconstellated  stars:  1  of  third  magnitude, 
2  of  fourth,  1  of  fifth,  4  obscure 

Draco,  or  the  Dragon 
The  star  in  the  tongue 
On  the  jaws 
Above  the  eye 
In  the  cheek 
Above  the  head 

The  most  northern  star  in  the  first  curve  of 
the  neck 

The  most  southern 
The  star  in  between 

The  star  to  the  east  of  them  at  the  second 
curve 

The  more  southern  star  on  the  western  side 
of  the  quadrilateral 

The  more  northern  star  on  the  same  side 
The  more  northern  star  on  the  eastern  side 
The  more  southern  on  the  same  side 
The  more  southern  star  in  the  triangle  at 
the  third  curve 

The  more  western  of  the  other  two  in  the 
triangle 

The  star  to  the  east 

<The  star  to  the  east>  in  the  triangle  to 
the  west 

The  more  southern  of  the  remaining  two  in 
the  same  triangle 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
123  40 

N 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
25  0 

Magnitude 

3 

125 

30 

N 

53 

30 

2 

131 

20 

N 

55 

40 

2 

143 

10 

N 

54 

0 

2 

141 

10 

N 

39 

45 

a 

3 

133 

30 

N 

41 

20 

5 

98 

20 

N 

17 

15 

4 

96 

40 

N 

19 

10 

4 

99 

30 

N 

20 

0 

obscure 

95 

30 

N 

22 

45 

obscure 

94 

30 

N 

23 

15 

obscure 

100 

20 

N 

22 

15 

obscure 

200 

0 

N 

76 

30 

4 

215 

10 

N 

78 

30 

4  greater 

216 

30 

N 

75 

40 

3 

229 

40 

N 

75 

20 

4 

233 

30 

N 

75 

30 

3 

258 

40 

N 

82 

20 

4 

295 

50 

N 

78 

15 

4 

262 

10 

N 

80 

20 

4 

282 

50 

N 

81 

10 

4 

331 

20 

N 

81 

40 

4 

343 

50 

N 

83 

0 

4 

1 

0 

N 

78 

50 

4 

346 

10 

N 

77 

50 

4 

4 

0 

N 

80 

30 

4 

15 

0 

N 

81 

40 

5 

19 

30 

N 

80 

15 

5 

66 

20 

N 

83 

30 

4 

43 

40 

N 

83 

30 

4 

592 


COPERNICUS 
Northern  Signs 


Constellations 

[47b]  is  more  northern  than 

the  two  above 

Of  the  small  stars  west  of  the  triangle,  the 
more  eastern 
The  more  western 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  which  are 
in  a  straight  line  towards  the  east 
The  one  in  the  middle 
The  most  northern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  which  follow 
towards  the  west 
The  more  southern 

The  star  to  the  w’^est  of  them,  in  the  coil  of 
the  tail 

The  more  western  of  the  two  rather  distant 
from  that  one 
The  star  to  the  east  of  it 
The  star  to  the  east  in  the  tail 
At  the  tip  of  the  tail 

Therefore  31  stars:  8  of  third  magnitude, 
16  of  fourth,  5  of  fifth,  2  of  sixth 

Cepheus 
In  the  right  foot 
In  the  left  foot 

On  the  right  side  beneath  the  belt 
The  star  which  touches  the  top  of  the  right 
shoulder 

The  star  which  touches  the  right  joint  of 
the  elbow 

The  star  to  the  east  which  touches  the  same 
elbow 

The  star  on  the  chest 
On  the  right  arm 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  on  the  tiara 
The  one  in  the  middle 
The  most  northern 

11  stars:  1  of  third  magnitude,  7  of  fourth, 
3  of  fifth 

Of  the  two  unconstellated  stars,  the  one  to 
the  west  of  the  tiara 
The  one  to  the  east  of  the  tiara 

Bootes,  or  Arcturus 
The  more  western  of  the  three  in  the  left 
hand 

The  middle  one  of  the  three,  the  more 
southern 

The  more  eastern  of  the  three 
The  star  in  the  left  joint  of  the  elbow 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

35 

10 

N 

84 

50 

4 

200 

0 

N 

87 

30 

6 

195 

0 

N 

86 

50 

6 

152 

30 

N 

81 

15 

5 

152 

50 

N 

83 

0 

5 

151 

0 

N 

84 

50 

3 

153 

20 

N 

78 

0 

3 

156 

30 

N 

74 

40 

4  greater 

156 

0 

N 

70 

0 

3 

120 

40 

N 

64 

40 

4 

124 

30 

N 

65 

30 

3 

192 

30 

N 

61 

15 

3 

186 

30 

N 

56 

15 

3 

28 

40 

N 

75 

40 

4 

26 

20 

N 

64 

15 

4 

0 

40 

N 

71 

10 

4 

340 

0 

N 

69 

0 

3 

332 

40 

N 

72 

0 

4 

333 

20 

N 

74 

0 

4 

352 

0 

N 

65 

30 

5 

1 

0 

N 

62 

30 

4  greater 

339 

40 

N 

60 

15 

5 

340 

40 

N 

61 

15 

4 

342 

20 

N 

61 

30 

5 

337 

0 

N 

64 

0 

5 

344 

40 

N 

59 

30 

4 

145 

40 

N 

58 

40 

5 

147 

30 

N 

58 

20 

5 

149 

0 

N 

60 

10 

5 

143 

0 

N 

54 

40 

1  5 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II  593 


Northern  Signs 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

On  the  left  shoulder 

163 

0 

N 

49 

0 

3 

On  the  head 

170 

0 

N 

53 

50 

4  greater 

On  the  right  shoulder 

[48^]  The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the 

179 

0 

N 

48 

40 

4 

crook 

The  star  more  to  the  north,  at  the  tip  of  the 

179 

0 

N 

53 

15 

4 

crook 

178 

20 

N 

57 

30 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  under  the 

m 

shoulder  and  on  the  spear 

181 

0 

N 

46 

10 

4  greater 

The  more  southern 

181 

50 

N 

45 

30 

5 

At  the  extremity  of  the  right  hand 

181 

35 

N 

41 

20 

5 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  palm 

180 

0 

N 

41 

40 

5 

The  one  to  the  east 

180 

20 

N 

42 

30 

5 

At  the  extremity  of  the  handle  of  the  crook 

181 

0 

N 

40 

20 

5 

On  the  right  leg 

183 

20 

N 

40 

15 

3 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  in  the  belt 

169 

0 

N 

41 

40 

4 

The  more  western 

168 

20 

N 

42 

10 

4  greater 

At  the  right  heel 

The  more  northern  of  the  three  on  the  left 

178 

40 

N 

28 

0 

3 

ham 

164 

40 

N 

28 

0 

3 

The  middle  one  of  the  three 

163 

50 

N 

26 

30 

4 

The  more  southern  of  them 

22  stars :  4  of  third  magnitude,  9  of  fourth. 

164 

50 

N 

25 

0 

4 

9  of  fifth 

The  unconstellated  star  between  the  thighs. 

which  they  call  Arcturus 

170 

20 

N 

31 

30 

1 

COKONA  BoBEALIS,  OK  THE  NORTHERN 

Crown 

The  brilliant  star  in  the  crown 

188 

0 

N 

44 

30 

2  greater 

The  most  western  of  all 

185 

0 

N 

46 

10 

4  greater 

The  eastern  star  towards  the  north 

185 

10 

N 

48 

0 

5 

The  eastern  star  more  to  the  north 

The  star  to  the  south-east  of  the  brilliant 

193 

0 

N 

50 

30 

6 

one 

191 

30 

N 

44 

45 

4 

The  next  star  to  the  east 

190 

30 

N 

44 

50 

4 

The  star  farther  to  the  east 

194 

40 

N 

46 

10 

4 

The  most  eastern  of  all  in  the  crown 

8  stars :  1  of  second  magnitude,  5  of  fourth. 

195 

0 

N 

49 

20 

4 

1  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 

Engonasi,  or  the  Kneeling  Man 

On  the  head 

221 

0 

N 

37 

30 

3 

At  the  right  arm-pit 

207 

0 

N 

43 

0 

3 

On  the  right  arm 

205 

0 

N 

40 

10 

3 

In  the  right  flank 

201 

20 

N 

37 

10 

4 

On  the  left  shoulder 

220 

20 

N 

49 

30 

4  greater 

[48^]  In  the  left  flank 

231 

0 

N 

42 

0 

4 

594 


COPERNICUS 
Northern  Signs 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg.  Min. 

<The  more  eastern  >  of  the  three  in  the 

left  palm 

238 

50 

N 

52 

50 

The  more  northern  of  the  remaining  two 

235 

0 

N 

54 

0 

The  more  southern 

234 

50 

N 

53 

0 

On  the  right  side 

207 

10 

N 

56 

10 

On  the  left  side 

213 

30 

N 

53 

30 

On  the  <  lower  part  of  the>  left  buttock 

213 

20 

N 

56 

10 

At  the  beginning  of  the  left  leg  n 

The  most  western  of  the  three  in  the  left 

214 

30 

N 

58 

30 

ham 

217 

20 

N 

59 

50 

The  more  eastern 

218 

40 

N 

60 

20 

The  most  eastern 

219 

40 

N 

61 

15 

At  the  left  knee 

237 

10 

N 

61 

0 

On  the  <  upper  part  of  the  >  left  buttock 
The  most  western  of  the  three  in  the  left 

225 

30 

N 

69 

20 

foot 

188 

40 

N 

70 

15 

The  middle  star 

220 

10 

N 

71 

15 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three 

223 

0 

N 

72 

0 

At  the  beginning  of  the  right  leg 

207 

0 

N 

60 

15 

The  more  northern  on  the  right  ham 

198 

50 

N 

63 

0 

At  the  right  knee 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  under  the 

189 

0 

N 

65 

30 

right  knee 

186 

40 

N 

63 

40 

The  more  northern 

183 

30 

N 

64 

15 

On  the  right  shin 

At  the  extremity  of  the  right  foot,  the  same 

184 

30 

N 

60 

0 

as  the  tip  of  Bootes’  crook 

Besides  that  last  one,  28  stars:  6  of  third 

178 

20 

N 

57 

30 

magnitude,  17  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth,  3  of 
sixth 

The  unconstellated  star  to  the  south  of  the 

right  arm 

26 

0 

N 

38 

10 

Lyra,  or  the  Lyre 

The  brilliant  star  which  is  called  Lyra  or 

Fidicula 

250 

40 

N 

62 

0 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  adjacent  stars 

253 

40 

N 

62 

40 

The  more  southern 

The  star  which  is  at  the  centre  of  the  begin¬ 

253 

40 

N 

61 

0 

ning  of  the  horns 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  which  are 

262 

0 

N 

60 

0 

next  and  to  the  east 

265 

20 

N 

61 

20 

The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  westerly  stars 

265 

0 

N 

60 

20 

on  the  cross-piece 

254 

20 

N 

56 

10 

The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  easterly  stars 

254 

10 

N 

55 

0 

on  the  cross-piece 

257 

30 

N 

55 

20 

The  more  southern 

258 

20 

N 

54 

45 

Magnitude 

4  greater 
4  greater 
4 

3 

4 

5 

5 

3 

4 
4 
4 
4 

6 
6 
6 

4  greater 
4 

4  greater 

4 

4 

4 

4 


5 


1 

4  greater 
4  greater 

4 

4 

4 

3 

4  smaller 


3 

4  smaller 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Northern  Signs 


595 


Constellations 

10  stars;  1  of  first  magnitude,  2  of  third 
magnitude,  7  of  fourth 

[49*^]  Cygnus,  or  the  Swan 
At  the  mouth 
On  the  head 

In  the  middle  of  the  neck 
In  the  breast 

The  brilliant  star  in  the  tail 
In  the  elbow  of  the  right  wing 
The  most  southern  of  the  three  in  the  flat 
of  the  wing 
The  middle  star 

The  last  of  the  three,  and  at  the  tip  of  the 
wing 

At  the  elbow  of  the  left  wing 
In  the  middle  of  the  left  wing 
At  the  tip  of  the  same 
In  the  left  foot 
At  the  left  knee 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  right 
foot 

The  more  eastern 

The  nebulous  star  at  the  right  knee 
17  stars:  1  of  second  magnitude,  5  of  third, 
9  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth 

And  Two  Unconstellated  Stars  near 
THE  Swan 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  under  the  left 
wing 

The  more  northern 

Cassiopeia 
On  the  head 
On  the  breast 
On  the  girdle 

Above  the  seat,  at  the  hips 
At  the  knees 
On  the  leg 

At  the  extremity  of  the  foot 
On  the  left  arm 
On  the  left  forearm 
On  the  right  forearm 
At  the  foot  of  the  chair 
At  the  middle  of  the  settle 
At  the  extremity 

13  stars :  4  of  third  magnitude,  6  of  fourth, 
1  of  fifth,  2  of  sixth 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

267  50 

N 

49  20 

3 

272  20 

N 

50  30 

5 

279  20 

N 

54  30 

4  greater 

291  50 

N 

56  20 

3 

302  30 

N 

60  0 

2 

282  40 

N 

64  40 

3 

285  50 

N 

69  40 

4 

284  30 

N 

71  30 

4  greater 

310  0 

N 

74  0 

4  greater 

294  10 

N 

49  30 

3 

298  10 

N 

52  10 

4  greater 

300  0 

N 

74  0 

3 

303  20 

N 

55  10 

4  greater 

307  50 

N 

57  0 

4 

294  30 

N 

64  0 

4 

296  0 

N 

64  30 

4 

305  30 

N 

63  45 

5 

306  0 

N 

49  40 

4 

307  10 

N 

51  40 

4 

1  10 

N 

45  20 

4 

4  10 

N 

46  45 

3  greater 

6  20 

N 

47  50 

4 

10  0 

N 

49  0 

3  greater 

13  40 

N 

45  30 

3 

20  20 

N 

47  45 

4 

355  0 

N 

48  20 

4 

8  0 

N 

44  20 

4 

7  40 

N 

45  0 

5 

357  40 

N 

50  0 

6 

8  20 

N 

52  40 

4 

1  10 

N 

51  40 

3  smaller 

27  10 

N 

51  40 

6 

596 


COPERNICUS 

Northern  Signs 


Constellations 

[49^]  Perseus 

The  nebulous  star  at  the  extremity  of  the 
right  hand 
On  the  right  forearm 
On  the  right  shoulder 
On  the  left  shoulder 
On  the  head,  or  a  nebula 
On  the  shoulder-blades 
The  brilliant  star  on  the  right  side 
The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  same 
side 

The  middle  one 

The  remaining  one  of  the  three 
On  the  left  forearm 

The  brilliant  star  in  the  left  hand  and  in  the 
head  of  Medusa 

The  easterly  star  on  the  head  of  the  same 
The  more  western  on  the  head  of  the  same 
The  most  western 
On  the  right  knee 

The  one  to  the  west  of  this  one  at  the  knee 
The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  belly 
The  more  eastern 
On  the  right  hip 
On  the  right  calf 
On  the  left  hip 
On  the  left  knee 
On  the  left  calf 
On  the  left  heel 
On  the  top  part  of  the  left  foot 
26  stars:  2  of  second  magnitude,  5  of  third, 
16  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth,  1  nebulous 

Unconstellated  Stars  Around  Perseus 
To  the  east  of  the  left  hand 
To  the  north  of  the  right  hand 
To  the  west  of  Medusa’s  head  ^ 

3  stars:  2  of  fifth  magnitude,  1  obscure 

[50^]  Auriga,  or  the  Charioteer 
The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  head 
The  more  northern 

The  brilliant  star  on  the  left  shoulder, 
which  is  called  Capella 
On  the  right  shoulder 
On  the  right  forearm 
On  the  palm  of  the  right  hand 
On  the  left  forearm 
The  star  to  the  west  of  the  Haedi 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

1 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

21 

0 

N 

40 

30 

nebulous 

24 

30 

N 

37 

30 

4 

26 

0 

N 

34 

30 

4  smaller 

20 

50 

N 

32 

20 

4 

24 

0 

N 

34 

30 

4 

24 

50 

N 

31 

10 

4 

28 

10 

N 

30 

0 

2 

28 

40 

N 

27 

30 

4 

30 

20 

N 

27 

40 

4 

31 

0 

N 

27 

30 

3 

24 

0 

N 

27 

0 

4 

23 

0 

N 

23 

0 

2 

22 

30 

N 

21 

0 

4 

21 

0 

N 

21 

0 

4 

20 

10 

N 

22 

15 

4 

38 

10 

N 

28 

15 

4 

37 

10 

N 

28 

10 

4 

35 

40 

N 

25 

10 

4 

37 

20 

N 

26 

15 

4 

37 

30 

N 

24 

30 

5 

39 

40 

N 

28 

45 

5 

30 

10 

N 

21 

40 

4  greater 

32 

0 

N 

19 

50 

3 

31 

40 

N 

14 

45 

3  greater 

24 

30 

N 

12 

0 

3  smaller 

29 

40 

N 

11 

0 

3  greater 

34 

10 

N 

31 

0 

5 

38 

20 

N 

31 

0 

5 

18 

0 

N 

20 

40 

obscure 

55 

50 

N 

30 

0 

4 

55 

40 

N 

30 

50 

4 

48 

20 

N 

22 

30 

1 

56 

10 

N 

20 

0 

2 

54 

30 

N 

15 

15 

4 

56 

10 

N 

13 

30 

4  greater 

45 

20 

N 

20 

40 

4  greater 

45 

30 

N 

18 

0 

4  smaller 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Northern  Signs 


597 


Constellations 

The  star  on  the  palm  of  the  left  hand  which 
is  to  the  east  of  the  Haedi 
On  the  left  calf 

On  the  right  calf  and  at  the  tip  of  the  north¬ 
ern  horn  of  Taurus 
At  the  ankle 
On  the  buttocks 
The  small  star  on  the  left  foot 
14  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  1  of  second,  2 
of  third,  7  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 

Ophiuchus,  or  the  Serpent-Holder 
On  the  head 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  right 
shoulder 

The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  left 
shoulder 

The  more  eastern 
At  the  left  elbow 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  left  hand 

The  more  eastern 

At  the  right  elbow 

The  more  western  in  the  right  hand 

The  more  eastern 

At  the  right  knee 

On  the  right  shin 

The  most  western  of  the  four  on  the  right 
foot 

The  more  easterly 

The  next  to  the  east 

The  most  easterly 

The  star  which  touches  the  heel 

[50^]  At  the  left  knee 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  in  a  straight 
line  on  the  lower  part  of  the  left  leg 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
The  star  on  the  left  heel 
The  star  touching  the  hollow  of  the  left  foot 
24  stars:  5  of  third  magnitude,  13  of  fourth, 
6  of  fifth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around 
Ophiuchus 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  to  the  east 
of  the  right  shoulder 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
Another  one,  farther  to  the  east  of  the  three 


Longitude 
Deg,  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

46 

0 

N 

18 

0 

4  greater 

53 

10 

N 

10 

10 

3  smaller 

49 

0 

N 

5 

0 

3  greater 

49 

20 

N 

8 

30 

5 

49 

40 

N 

12 

20 

5 

24 

0 

N 

10 

20 

6 

228 

10 

N 

36 

0 

3 

231 

20 

N 

27 

15 

4  greater 

232 

20 

N 

26 

45 

4 

216 

40 

N 

33 

0 

4 

218 

0 

N 

31 

50 

4 

211 

40 

N 

34 

30 

4 

208 

20 

N 

17 

0 

4 

209 

20 

N 

12 

30 

3 

220 

0 

N 

15 

0 

4 

205 

40 

N 

18 

40 

4  smaller 

207 

40 

N 

14 

20 

4 

224 

30 

N 

4 

30 

3 

227 

0 

N 

2 

15 

3  greater 

226 

20 

S 

2 

15 

4  greater 

227 

40 

S 

1 

30 

4  greater 

228 

20 

s 

0 

20 

4  greater 

229 

10 

s 

1 

45 

5  greater 

229 

30 

s 

1 

0 

5 

215 

30 

N 

11 

50 

3 

215 

0 

N 

5 

20 

5  greater 

214 

0 

N 

3 

10 

5 

213 

10 

N 

1 

40 

5  greater 

215 

40 

N 

0 

40 

5 

214 

0 

S 

0 

45 

4 

235 

20 

N 

28 

10 

4 

236 

0 

N 

26 

20 

4 

233 

40 

N 

25 

0 

4 

237 

0 

N 

27 

0 

4 

598 


COPERNICUS 

Northern  Signs 


Constellations 

A  star  separate  from  the  four,  to  the  north 
Therefore  5  unconstellated  stars:  all  of 
fourth  magnitude 

Serpens  Ophiuchi,  or  the  Serpent 
On  the  quadrilateral,  the  star  in  the  cheeks 
The  star  touching  the  nostrils 
On  the  temples 
At  the  beginning  of  the  neck 
At  the  middle  of  the  quadrilateral,  and  on 
the  jaws 

To  the  north  of  the  head 
At  the  first  curve  of  the  neck 
The  most  northern  of  the  three  to  the  east 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
The  star  to  the  west  of  the  left  hand  of 
Ophiuchus 

The  star  to  the  east  of  the  same  hand 
The  star  to  the  east  of  the  right  hip 
The  more  southern  of  the  two  to  the  east  of 
that 

The  more  northern 

To  the  east  of  the  right  hand,  in  the  coil  of 
the  tail 

Farther  east  in  the  tail 
At  the  tip  of  the  tail 

18  stars:  5  of  third  magnitude,  12  of  fourth, 
1  of  fifth 

[51^]  Sagitta,  or  the  Arrow 
At  the  head 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  on  the  shaft 

The  middle  one 

The  most  western  of  the  three 

At  the  notch 

5  stars:  1  of  fourth  magnitude,  3  of  fifth,  1 
of  sixth 

Aquila,  or  the  Eagle 
In  the  middle  of  the  head 
On  the  neck 

The  brilliant  star  on  the  shoulder-blades, 
which  is  called  Aquila 
The  star  to  the  north  which  is  very  near 
The  more  western  on  the  left  shoulder 
The  more  eastern 

The  star  to  the  west  in  the  right  shoulder 
The  star  to  the  east 


Longitude 
Deg,  Min, 
238  0 

N 

Latitude 
Deg,  Min, 
33  0 

Magnitude 

4 

192  10 

N 

38 

0 

4 

201 

0 

N 

40 

0 

4 

197  40 

N 

35 

0 

3 

195  20 

N 

34 

15 

3 

194  40 

N 

37 

15 

4 

201  30 

N 

42 

30 

4 

195 

0 

N 

29 

15 

3 

198  10 

N 

26 

30 

4 

197  40 

N 

25 

20 

3 

199  40 

N 

24 

0 

3 

202 

0 

N 

16 

30 

4 

211  30 

N 

16 

15 

5 

227 

0 

N 

10 

30 

4 

230  20 

N 

8 

30 

4  greater 

231  10 

N 

10 

30 

4 

237 

0 

N 

20 

0 

4 

242 

0 

N 

21 

10 

4 

251  40 

N 

27 

0 

4  greater 

273  30 

N 

39 

20 

4 

270 

0 

N 

39 

10 

6 

269  10 

N 

39 

50 

5 

268 

0 

N 

39 

0 

5 

266  40 

N 

38 

45 

5 

270  30 

N 

26 

50 

4 

268  10 

N 

27 

10 

3 

267  10 

N 

29 

10 

2  greater 

268 

0 

N 

30 

0 

3  smaller 

266  30 

N 

31 

30 

3 

269  20 

N 

31 

30 

5 

263 

0 

N 

28 

40 

5 

264  30 

N 

26 

40 

5  greater 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Northern  Signs 


599 


Constellations 

The  star  in  the  tail,  which  touches  the  milky 
circle 

9  stars:  1  of  second  magnitude,  4  of  third, 
1  of  fourth,  3  of  fifth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Aquila 
The  more  western  star  south  of  the  head 
The  more  eastern 

Away  from  the  right  shoulder  and  to  the 
south-west 
To  the  south 
Farther  south 
West  of  all 

6  unconstellated  stars:  4  of  third  magnitude, 
1  of  fourth,  and  1  of  fifth 

Delphinus,  or  the  Dolphin 
The  most  western  of  the  three  in  the  tail 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  remaining 
The  more  southern 

The  more  southern  on  the  western  side  of 
the  rhomboid 

The  more  northern  on  the  same  side 
The  more  southern  on  the  eastern  side 
The  more  northern  on  the  same  side 
The  most  southern  of  the  three  between  the 
tail  and  the  rhombus 

The  more  western  of  the  other  two  to  the 
north 

The  more  eastern 

10  stars:  5  of  third  magnitude,  2  of  fourth, 
3  of  sixth 

[51^]  Equi  Sectio,  or  the  Section  of  the 
Horse 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  head 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  mouth 
The  more  eastern 
4  stars:  all  obscure 

Pegasus,  or  the  Winged  Horse 
Within  the  open  mouth 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  close  to¬ 
gether  on  the  head 
The  more  southern 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  mane 
The  more  northern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  neck 
The  more  eastern 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

265  30 

N 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

26  30 

Magnitude 

3 

272 

0 

N 

21 

40 

3 

272  20 

N 

29 

10 

3 

259  20 

N 

25 

0 

4  greater 

261  30 

N 

20 

0 

3 

263 

0 

N 

15 

30 

5 

254  30 

N 

18 

10 

3 

281 

0 

N 

29 

10 

3  smaller 

282 

0 

N 

29 

0 

4  smaller 

282 

0 

N 

26 

40 

4 

281  50 

N 

32 

0 

3  smaller 

283  30 

N 

33 

50 

3  smaller 

284  40 

N 

32 

0 

3  smaller 

286  50 

N 

33 

10 

3  smaller 

280  50 

N 

34 

15 

6 

280  50 

N 

31 

50 

6 

282  20 

N 

31 

30 

6 

289  40 

N 

20 

30 

obscure 

292  20 

N 

20 

40 

obscure 

289  40 

N 

25 

30 

obscure 

291  21 

N 

25 

0 

obscure 

298  40 

N 

21 

30 

3  greater 

302  40 

N 

16 

50 

3 

301  20 

N 

16 

0 

4 

314  40 

N 

15 

0 

5 

313  50 

N 

16 

0 

5 

312  10 

N 

18 

0 

3 

313  50 

N 

19 

0 

4 

600 


COPERNICUS 


Northern  Signs 


Constellations 

Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

On  the  left  pastern 

305 

40 

N 

36 

30 

4  greater 

On  the  left  knee 

311 

0 

N 

34 

15 

4  greater 

On  the  right  pastern 

317 

0 

N 

41 

10 

4  greater 

The  more  western  of  the  two  close  together 
on  the  breast 

319 

30 

N 

29 

0 

4 

The  more  eastern 

320 

20 

N 

29 

30 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  right 
knee 

322 

20 

N 

35 

0 

3 

The  more  southern 

321 

50 

N 

24 

30 

5 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  beneath  the 
wing,  on  the  body 

327 

50 

N 

25 

40 

4 

The  more  southern 

328 

20 

N 

25 

0 

4 

At  the  shoulder-blades  and  juncture  of  the 
wing 

350 

0 

N 

19 

40 

2  smaller 

On  the  right  shoulder  and  at  the  beginning 
of  the  leg 

325 

30 

N 

31 

0 

2  smaller 

At  the  tip  of  the  wing 

335 

30 

N 

12 

30 

2  smaller 

At  the  navel,  and  on  the  head  of  Andromeda 
too 

341 

10 

N 

26 

0 

2  smaller 

20  stars :  4  of  second  magnitude,  4  of  third, 

9  of  fourth,  3  of  fifth 

Andromeda 

On  the  shoulder-blades 

348 

40 

N 

24 

30 

3 

On  the  right  shoulder 

349 

40 

N 

27 

0 

4 

On  the  left  shoulder 

347 

40 

N 

23 

0 

4 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  on  the  right 
arm 

347 

0 

N 

32 

0 

4 

The  most  northern 

348 

0 

N 

33 

30 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  three 

348 

20 

N 

32 

20 

5 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  on  the  top 
of  the  right  hand 

343 

0 

N 

41 

0 

4 

The  middle  star 

344 

0 

N 

42 

0 

4 

[52^]  The  most  northern  of  the  three 

345 

30 

N 

44 

0 

4 

On  the  left  arm 

347 

30 

N 

17 

30 

4 

At  the  left  elbow 

349 

0 

N 

15 

50 

3 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  on  the  girdle 

357 

10 

N 

25 

20 

3 

The  middle  one 

355 

10 

N 

30 

0 

3 

The  most  northern 

355 

20 

N 

32 

30 

3 

On  the  left  foot 

10 

10 

N 

23 

0 

3 

On  the  right  foot 

10 

30 

N 

37 

10 

4  greater 

To  the  south  of  those  tw’o 

8 

30 

N 

35 

20 

4  greater 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  under  the 
hamstrings 

5 

40 

N 

29 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

5 

20 

N 

28 

0 

4 

At  the  right  knee 

5 

30 

N 

35 

30 

5 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  flow¬ 
ing  robe 

6 

0 

N 

34 

30 

5 

The  more  southern 

7 

30 

N 

32 

30 

5 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEA\T:NLY  SPHERES,  II  601 


Northern  Signs 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

The  unconstellated  star  west  of  the  right 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Magnitude 

hand 

23  stars:  7  of  third  magnitude,  12  of  fourth, 

4  of  fifth 

5 

0 

N 

44 

0 

3 

Triangulum,  or  the  Triangle 

At  the  vertex  of  the  triangle 

4 

20 

N 

16 

30 

3 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  base 

9 

20 

N 

20 

40 

3 

The  middle  one 

9 

30 

N 

20 

20 

4 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three 

4  stars:  3  of  third  magnitude,  1  of  fourth 

10 

10 

N 

19 

0 

3 

Therefore  in  the  northern  region  there  are  360  stars,  all  in  all :  3  of  first  magnitude,  18 
of  second,  81  of  third,  177  of  fourth,  58  of  fifth,  13  of  sixth,  1  nebulous,  and  9  obscure. 

The  Signs  and  Stars  Which  Are  in  the  Middle  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Aries,  or  the  Ram 

The  star  which  is  first  of  all  and  the  more 

western  of  the  two  on  the  horn 

0 

0 

N 

7 

20 

3  smaller 

The  more  eastern  on  the  horn 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  in  the  open¬ 

1 

0 

N 

8 

20 

3 

ing  of  the  jaws 

4 

20 

N 

7 

40 

5 

The  more  southern 

4 

50 

N 

6 

0 

5 

On  the  neck 

9 

50 

N 

5 

30 

5 

On  the  kidneys 

10 

50 

N 

6 

0 

6 

At  the  beginning  of  the  tail 

14 

40 

N 

4 

50 

5 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  tail 

17 

10 

N 

1 

40 

4 

The  middle  one 

18 

40 

N 

2 

30 

4 

[52^]  The  most  eastern 

20 

20 

N 

1 

50 

4 

On  the  hips 

13 

0 

N 

1 

10 

5 

On  the  ham 

11 

20 

S 

1 

30 

5 

At  the  tip  of  the  hind  foot 

13  stars:  2  of  third  magnitude,  4  of  fourth, 

8 

10 

S 

5 

15 

4  greater 

6  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Aries 

The  brilliant  star  over  the  head 

3 

50 

N 

10 

0 

3  greater 

The  very  northerly  star  above  the  back 

The  most  northern  of  the  remaining  three 

15 

0 

N 

10 

10 

4 

small  stars 

14 

40 

N 

12 

40 

5 

The  middle  one 

13 

0 

N 

10 

40 

5 

The  most  southern 

5  stars :  1  of  third  magnitude,  1  of  fourth,  3 

12 

30 

N 

10 

40 

5 

of  fifth 

Taurus,  or  the  Bull 

The  most  northern  of  the  four  in  the  section 

19 

40 

S 

6 

0 

4 

The  next  after  that 

19 

20 

S 

7 

15 

4 

The  third 

18 

0 

s 

8 

30 

4 

602 


COPERNICUS 

In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Constellations 
The  fourth  and  most  southern 
On  the  right  shoulder 
In  the  breast 
At  the  right  knee 
On  the  right  pastern 
At  the  left  knee 
On  the  left  pastern 

Of  the  five  called  Hyades  and  on  the  face, 
the  one  at  the  nostrils 
Between  that  star  and  the  northern  eye 
Between  that  same  star  and  the  southern 
eye 

The  brilliant  star,  in  the  very  eye,  called 
Palilicius  by  the  Romans 
On  the  northern  eye 

The  star  south  of  the  horn  between  the  base 
and  the  ear 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  same 
horn 

The  more  northern 
At  the  extremity  of  the  same 
To  the  north  of  the  base  of  the  horn 
At  the  extremity  of  the  horn  and  on  the 
right  foot  of  Auriga 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  in  the  north 
ear 

The  more  southern 

[53^]  The  more  western  of  the  two  small 
stars  on  the  neck 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  southern  on  the  western  side  of 
the  quadrilateral  on  the  neck 
The  more  northern  on  the  same 
The  more  southern  on  the  eastern  side 
The  more  northern  on  the  same  side 
The  northern  limit  of  the  western  side  of  the 
Pleiades 

The  southern  limit  of  the  same  side 
The  very  narrow  limit  of  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Pleiades 

A  small  star  of  the  Pleiades,  separated  from 
the  limits 

32  stars,  apart  from  that  which  is  at  the  tip 
of  the  northern  horn:  1  of  first  magni¬ 
tude,  6  of  third,  11  of  fourth,  13  of  fifth, 
1  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Taurus 
Between  the  foot  and  below  the  shoulder 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
17  50 

s 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
9  15 

Magnitude 

4 

23 

0 

s 

9 

30 

5 

27 

0 

s 

8 

0 

3 

30 

0 

s 

12 

40 

4 

26  20 

s 

14 

50 

4 

35  30 

s 

10 

0 

4 

36  20 

s 

13 

30 

4 

32 

0 

s 

5 

45 

3  smaller 

33  40 

s 

4 

15 

3  smaller 

34  10 

s 

8 

50 

3  smaller 

36 

0 

s 

5 

10 

1 

35  10 

s 

3 

0 

3  smaller 

40  30 

s 

4 

0 

4 

43  40 

s 

5 

0 

4 

43  20 

s 

3 

30 

5 

50  30 

s 

2 

30 

3 

49 

0 

s 

4 

0 

4 

49 

0 

N 

5 

0 

3 

35  20 

N 

4 

30 

5 

35 

0 

N 

4 

30 

5  Apogee  of 

30  20 

N 

0 

40 

Venus:  48°20' 

5 

32  20 

N 

1 

0 

6 

31  20 

N 

5 

0 

5 

32  10 

N 

7 

10 

5 

35  20 

N 

3 

0 

5 

35 

0 

N 

5 

0 

5 

25  30 

N 

4 

30 

5 

25  50 

N 

4 

40 

5 

27 

0 

N 

5 

20 

5 

26 

0 

N 

3 

0 

5 

18  20 

S 

17 

30 

4 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


603 


Constellations 

The  most  western  of  the  three  to  the  south 
of  the  horn 
The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern  of  the  three 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  under  the  tip 
of  the  same  horn 
The  more  southern 

The  most  western  of  the  five  under  the 
northern  horn 
The  next  to  the  east 
The  third  and  to  the  east 
The  more  northern  of  the  remaining  two 
The  more  southern 

11  unconstellated  stars:  1  of  fourth  magni¬ 
tude,  10  of  fifth 

Gemini,  or  the  Twins 
On  the  head  of  the  w’estern  Twin,  Castor 
The  reddish  star  on  the  head  of  the  eastern 
Twin,  Pollux 

At  the  left  elbow  of  the  western  Tvdn 
On  the  left  arm 

At  the  shoulder-blades  of  the  same  Twin 
On  the  right  shoulder  of  the  same 
On  the  left  shoulder  of  the  eastern  Twin 
On  the  right  side  of  the  western  Twin 
On  the  left  side  of  the  eastern  Twin 
[53^]  At  the  left  knee  of  the  western  Twin 
At  the  left  knee  of  the  eastern 
On  the  left  groin  of  the  same 
At  the  hollow  of  the  right  knee  of  the  same 
The  more  w^estern  star  in  the  foot  of  the 
western  Twin 

The  more  eastern  star  in  the  same  foot 
At  the  extremity  of  the  foot  of  the  western 
Twin 

On  the  top  of  the  foot  of  the  eastern  Twdn 
On  the  bottom  of  the  foot  of  the  same 
18  stars :  2  of  second  magnitude,  5  of  third, 
9  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Gemini 
The  star  west  of  the  top  of  the  foot  of  the 
western  Twin 

The  brilliant  star  to  the  west  of  the  knee  of 
the  same 

To  the  w^est  of  the  left  knee  of  the  eastern 
Twin 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  east  of  the 
right  hand  of  the  eastern  Twin 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

43  20 

S 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

2  0 

Magnitude 

5 

47 

20 

s 

1 

45 

5 

49 

20 

s 

2 

0 

5 

52 

20 

s 

6 

20 

5 

52 

20 

s 

7 

40 

5 

50 

20 

N 

2 

40 

5 

52 

20 

N 

1 

0 

'5 

54 

20 

N 

1 

20 

5 

55 

40 

N 

3 

20 

5 

56 

40 

N 

1 

15 

5 

76 

40 

N 

9 

30 

2 

79 

50 

N 

6 

15 

2 

70 

0 

N 

10 

0 

4 

72 

0 

N 

7 

20 

4 

75 

20 

N 

5 

30 

4 

77 

20 

N 

4 

50 

4 

80 

0 

N 

2 

40 

4 

75 

0 

N 

2 

40 

5 

76 

30 

N 

3 

0 

5 

66 

30 

N 

1 

30 

3 

71 

35 

S 

2 

30 

3 

75 

0 

S 

0 

30 

3 

74 

40 

s 

0 

40 

3 

60 

0 

s 

1 

30 

4  greater 

61 

30 

s 

1 

15 

4 

63 

30 

s 

3 

30 

4 

65 

20 

s 

7 

30 

3 

68 

0 

s 

10 

30 

4 

57 

30 

s 

0 

40 

4 

59 

50 

N 

5 

50 

4  greater 

68 

30 

s 

2 

15 

5 

81 

40 

s 

1 

20 

5 

604 


COPERNICUS 

In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Magnitude 

The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three,  and  in  the 

79 

40 

S 

3 

20 

5 

neighbourhootl  of  the  right  arm 

79 

20 

s 

4 

30 

5 

The  brilliant  star  to  the  east  of  the  three 

7  iinconstcllated  stars:  3  of  fourth  magni- 

84 

0 

s 

2 

40 

4 

nitude,  4  of  fifth 

Cancer,  or  the  Crab 

The  nebulous  star  in  the  breast,  which  is 
called  Praeses 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  west  of  the 

93 

40 

N 

0 

40 

nebulous 

quadrilateral 

91 

0 

N 

1 

15 

4  smaller 

The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  to  the  east, 

91 

20 

S 

1 

10 

4  smaller 

which  are  called  the  Asses 

93 

40 

N 

2 

40 

4  greater 

The  southern  Ass 

94 

40 

S 

0 

10 

4  greater 

On  the  claws  or  the  southern  arm 

99 

50 

S 

5 

30 

4 

On  the  northern  arm 

91 

40 

N 

11 

50 

4 

At  the  extremity  of  the  northern  foot 

86 

0 

N 

1 

0 

5 

At  the  extremity  of  the  southern  foot 

9  stars:  7  of  fourth  magnitude,  1  of  fifth, 

90 

30 

S 

7 

30 

4  greater 

1  nebulous 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Cancer 
Above  the  elbow  of  the  southern  claw 

103 

0 

S 

2 

40 

4  smaller 

East  of  the  extremity  of  the  same  claw 
[54“]  The  more  western  of  the  two  above  the 

105 

0 

s 

5 

40 

4  smaller 

little  cloud 

97 

20 

N 

4 

50 

5 

The  more  eastern 

4  unconstellated  stars:  2  of  fourth  magni¬ 

100 

20 

N 

7 

15 

5 

tude,  2  of  fifth 

Leo,  or  the  Lion 

At  the  nostrils 

101 

40 

N 

10 

0 

4 

At  the  opening  of  the  jaws 

104 

30 

N 

7 

30 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  head 

107 

40 

N 

12 

0 

3 

The  more  southern 

107 

30 

N 

9 

30 

3  greater 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  on  the  neck 

113 

30 

N 

11 

0 

3  Apogee  of 

Mars:  109^50' 

The  middle  one 

115 

30 

N 

8 

30 

2 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 

At  the  heart,  the  star  called  Basil iscus  or 

114 

0 

N 

4 

30 

3 

Regulus 

115 

50 

N 

0 

10 

1 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  breast 

116 

50 

S 

1 

50 

4 

A  little  to  the  west  of  the  star  at  the  heart 

113 

20 

S 

0 

15 

5 

At  the  knee  of  the  right  foreleg 

110 

40 

0 

0 

5 

On  the  right  pad 

117 

30 

s 

3 

40 

6 

At  the  knee  of  the  left  foreleg 

122 

30 

s 

4 

10 

4 

On  the  left  pad 

115 

50 

s 

4 

15 

4 

IIF.VOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


G05 


Constellations 
At  the  left  arm-pit 

The  most  Nvestern  of  the  three  on  the  belly 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  to  the  east 
The  more  southern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  loins 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  rump 
The  more  southern 
At  the  hips 

At  the  hollow  of  the  knee 
On  the  lower  part  of  the  leg 
On  the  hind  foot 
At  the  tip  of  the  tail 

27  stars:  2  of  first  magnitude,  2  of  second, 
6  of  third,  8  of  fourth,  5  of  fifth,  4  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Leo 
The  more  western  of  the  two  above  the  back 
The  more  eastern 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  below  the 
belly 

[54^]  The  middle  one 
The  most  southern  of  the  three 
The  star  farthest  north  between  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  Leo  and  the  nebulous  com¬ 
plex  called  Coma  Berenices 
The  more  western  of  the  two  to  the  south 
The  star  to  the  east,  in  the  shape  of  an  ivy 
leaf 

8  unconstellated  stars:  1  of  fourth  magni¬ 
tude,  4  of  fifth,  1  luminous,  2  obscure 

Virgo,  or  the  Virgin 
The  more  southwestern  of  the  two  on  the 
top  of  the  head 
The  more  northeastern 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  face 
The  more  southern 

At  the  tip  of  the  left  and  southern  wing 
The  most  western  of  the  four  on  the  left 
wing 

The  next  to  the  east 
The  third 

The  last  and  most  eastward  of  the  four 
On  the  right  side  beneath  the  girdle 
The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  right 
and  northern  wing 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  remaining 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Mm. 

Magnitude 

122  30 

S 

0 

10 

4 

120  20 

N 

4 

0 

6 

120  20 

N 

5 

20 

6 

125  40 

N 

2  20 

6 

124  40 

N 

12 

15 

5 

127  30 

N 

13 

40 

2 

127  40 

N 

11 

30 

5 

129  40 

N 

9 

40 

3 

133  40 

N 

5  50 

3 

135 

0 

N 

1 

15 

4 

135 

0 

S 

0 

50 

4 

134 

0 

S 

3 

0 

5 

137  50 

N 

11 

50 

1  smaller 

119  20 

N 

13 

20 

5 

121  30 

N 

15 

30 

5 

129  50 

N 

1 

10 

4  smaller 

130  30 

S 

0 

30 

5 

132  20 

s 

2 

40 

5 

138  10 

N 

30 

0 

luminous 

133  50 

N 

25 

0 

obscure 

141  50 

N 

25 

30 

obscure 

139  40 

N 

4 

15 

5 

140  20 

N 

5 

40 

5 

144 

0 

N 

8 

0 

5 

143  30 

N 

5 

30 

5 

142  20 

N 

6 

0 

3 

151  35 

N 

1 

10 

3 

156  30 

N 

2 

50 

3 

160  30 

N 

2 

50 

5 

164  20 

N 

1 

40 

4 

157  40 

N 

8 

30 

3 

151  30 

N 

13 

50 

5 

153  30 

N 

11 

40 

6  Apogee  of  Ju¬ 
piter:  154®20' 

606 


COPERNICUS 

In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Constellations 

The  more  northern  of  them,  called  Vinde- 
miator 

On  the  left  hand,  called  Spica 
Beneath  the  girdle  and  on  the  right  buttock 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  west¬ 
ern  side  of  the  quadrilateral  on  the  left 
hip 

The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  east¬ 
ern  side 

The  more  southern 
At  the  left  knee 

On  the  posterior  side  of  the  right  hip 
On  the  flowing  robe,  in  the  middle 
More  to  the  south 
More  to  the  north 

On  the  left  and  southern  foot 
On  the  right  and  southern  foot 
26  stars:  I  of  first  magnitude,  7  of  third,  6 
of  fourth,  10  of  fifth,  2  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Virgo 
[55^]  The  most  western  of  the  three  in  a 
straight  line  under  the  left  arm 
The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern 

The  most  western  of  the  three  in  a  straight 
line  under  Spica 

The  middle  one,  which  is  also  a  double  star 
The  most  eastern  of  the  three 
6  unconstellated  stars:  4  of  fifth  magnitude, 
2  of  sixth 

Chelae,  or  the  Claws 
The  bright  one  of  the  two  at  the  extremity 
of  the  southern  claw 
The  more  obscure  star  to  the  north 
The  bright  one  of  the  two  at  the  extremity 
of  the  northern  claw 

The  more  obscure  star  to  the  west  of  that 
In  the  middle  of  the  southern  claw 
In  the  same  claw,  but  to  the  west 
At  the  middle  of  the  northern  claw 
In  the  same  claw,  but  to  the  east 
8  stars :  2  of  second  magnitude,  4  of  fourth, 
2  of  fifth 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

155  30 

N 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

15  10 

Magnitude 

3  greater 

170 

0 

S 

2 

0 

1 

168  10 

N 

8 

40 

3 

169  40 

N 

2 

20 

5 

170  20 

N 

0 

10 

6 

173  20 

N 

1 

30 

4 

171  20 

N 

0 

20 

5 

175 

0 

N 

1 

30 

5 

171  20 

N 

8 

30 

5 

180 

0 

N 

7 

30 

4 

180  40 

N 

2 

40 

4 

181  40 

N 

11 

40 

4  Apogee  of  Mer¬ 

183  20 

N 

0 

30 

cury:  183^20' 
4 

186 

0 

N 

9 

50 

3 

158 

0 

S 

3 

30 

5 

162  20 

S 

3 

30 

5 

165  35 

s 

3 

20 

5 

170  30 

s 

7 

20 

6 

171  30 

s 

8 

20 

5 

173  20 

s 

7 

50 

6 

191  20 

N 

0 

40 

2  greater 

190  20 

N 

2 

30 

5 

195  30 

N 

8 

30 

2 

191 

0 

N 

8 

30 

5 

197  20 

N 

1 

40 

4 

194  40 

N 

1 

15 

4 

200  50 

N 

3 

45 

4 

206  20 

N 

4 

30 

4 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVExNLY  SPHERES,  II 
In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


607 


Constellations 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  the 
Chelu^e 

The  most  western  of  the  three  north  of  the 
northern  claw 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  to  the  east 
The  more  northern 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  between  the 
claws 

The  more  northern  of  the  remaining  two  to 
the  west 

The  more  southern 

The  most  western  of  the  three  beneath  the 
southern  claw 

The  more  northern  of  the  remaining  two  to 
the  east 

The  more  southern 

9  unconsteUated  stars:  1  of  third  magni¬ 
tude,  5  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 

Scorpio,  or  the  Scorpion 
The  most  northern  of  the  three  bright  stars 
on  the  forehead 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
More  to  the  south  and  in  the  foot 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  adjacent 
bright  stars 
The  more  southern 

The  most  western  of  the  three  bright  stars 
on  the  body 

The  reddish  star  in  the  middle,  called  An- 
tares 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three 
[55^]  The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  foot 
The  more  eastern 
At  the  first  vertebra  of  the  body 
At  the  second  vertebra 
The  more  northern  of  the  double  at  the 
third 

The  more  southern  of  the  double 
At  the  fourth  vertebra 

At  the  fifth 

At  the  sixth  vertebra 

At  the  seventh,  and  next  to  the  sting 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  on  the  sting 

The  more  western 

21  stars:  1  of  second  magnitude,  13  of  third, 
5  of  fourth,  2  of  fifth 


Longitude 
Deg,  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Ma^iitude 

199 

30 

N 

9 

0 

5 

207 

0 

N 

6 

40 

4 

207 

40 

N 

9 

15 

4 

205 

50 

X 

5 

30 

6 

203 

40 

N 

2 

0 

4 

204 

30 

N 

1 

30 

5 

196 

20 

S 

7 

30 

3 

204 

30 

S 

8 

10 

4 

205 

20 

s 

9 

40 

4 

209 

40 

N 

1 

20 

3  greater 

209 

0 

S 

1 

40 

3 

209 

0 

S 

5 

0 

3 

209 

20 

S 

7 

50 

3 

210 

20 

N 

1 

40 

4 

210 

40 

N 

0 

30 

4 

214 

0 

S 

3 

45 

3 

216 

0 

S 

4 

0 

2  greater 

217 

50 

s 

5 

30 

3 

212 

40 

s 

6 

10 

5 

213 

50 

s 

6 

40 

5 

221 

50 

s 

11 

0 

3 

222 

10 

s 

15 

0 

4 

223 

20 

s 

18 

40 

4 

223 

30 

s 

18 

0 

3 

226 

30 

s 

19 

30 

3  Apogee  of  Sat¬ 

231 

30 

s 

18 

50 

urn:  226°30' 

3 

233 

50 

s 

16 

40 

3 

232 

20 

s 

15 

10 

3 

230 

50 

s 

13 

20 

3 

230 

20 

s 

13 

30 

4 

608 


COPERNICUS 


In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Scorpio 

Deg,  Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Magnitude 

The  nebulous  star  to  the  east  of  the  sting 
The  more  western  of  the  two  north  of  the 

234 

30 

s 

12 

15 

nebulous 

sting 

228 

50 

s 

6 

10 

5 

The  more  eastern 

3  unconstellated  stars:  2  of  fifth  magnitude, 

1  nebulous 

Sagittarius,  or  the  Archer 

232 

50 

s 

4 

10 

5 

At  the  head  of  the  arrow 

237 

50 

s 

6 

30 

3 

In  the  palm  of  the  left  hand 

241 

0 

s 

6 

30 

3 

On  the  southern  part  of  the  bow 

241 

20 

s 

10 

50 

3 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  to  the  north 
More  northward,  at  the  extremity  of  the 

242 

20 

s 

1 

30 

3 

bow 

240 

0 

N 

2 

50 

4 

On  the  left  shoulder 

248 

40 

S 

3 

10 

3 

To  the  west  and  on  the  dart 

246 

20 

S 

3 

50 

4 

The  nebulous  double  star  in  the  eye 

248 

30 

N 

0 

45 

nebulous 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  head 

249 

0 

N 

2 

10 

4 

The  middle  one 

251 

0 

N 

1 

30 

4  greater 

The  most  eastward 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  on  the 

252 

30 

N 

2 

0 

4 

northern  garment 

254 

40 

N 

2 

50 

4 

The  middle  one 

255 

40 

N 

4 

30 

4 

The  most  northern 

256 

10 

N 

6 

30 

4 

The  obscure  star  east  of  the  three 

The  most  northern  of  the  two  on  the  south¬ 

259 

0 

N 

5 

30 

6 

ern  garment 

262 

50 

N 

5 

0 

5 

The  more  southern 

261 

0 

N 

2 

0 

6 

On  the  right  shoulder 

255 

40 

S 

1 

50 

5 

[56^]  At  the  right  elbow 

258 

10 

S 

2 

50 

5 

At  the  shoulder-blades 

253 

20 

s 

2 

30 

5 

At  the  foreshoulder 

251 

0 

s 

4 

30 

4  greater 

Beneath  the  arm-pit 

249 

40 

s 

6 

45 

3 

On  the  pastern  of  the  left  foreleg 

251 

0 

s 

23 

0 

2 

At  the  knee  of  the  same  leg 

250 

20 

s 

18 

0 

2 

On  the  pastern  of  the  right  foreleg 

240 

0 

s 

13 

0 

3 

At  the  left  shoulder  blade 

260 

40 

s 

13 

30 

3 

At  the  knee  of  the  right  foreleg 

The  more  western  on  the  northern  side  of 
the  quadrilateral  at  the  beginning  of  the 

260 

0 

s 

20 

10 

3 

tail 

261 

0 

s 

4 

50 

5 

The  more  eastern  on  the  same  side 

261 

10 

s 

4 

50 

5 

The  more  western  on  the  southern  side 

261 

50 

s 

5 

50 

5 

The  more  eastern  on  the  same  side 

31  stars:  2  of  second  magnitude,  9  of  third, 

9  of  fourth,  8  of  fifth,  2  of  sixth,  1  nebu¬ 
lous 

263 

0 

s 

6 

50 

5 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


609 


Constellations 
Capricornus,  or  the  Goat 
The  most  northern  of  the  three  on  the  west¬ 
ern  horn 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
At  the  extremity  of  the  eastern  horn 
The  most  southern  of  the  three  at  the  open¬ 
ing  of  the  jaws 

The  more  western  of  the  two  remaining 
The  more  eastern 
Under  the  right  eye 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  neck 

The  more  southern 

At  the  right  knee 

At  the  left  knee,  which  is  bent 

On  the  left  shoulder 

The  more  western  of  the  two  contiguous 
stars  below  the  belly 
The  more  eastern 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  in  the  middle 
of  the  body 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  remaining  to 
the  west 

The  more  northern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  back 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  south¬ 
ern  part  of  the  spine 
[56^]  The  more  eastern 
The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  base  of 
the  tail 

The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  four  in  the  north¬ 
ern  part  of  the  tail 

The  most  northern  of  the  remaining  three 
The  middle  one 

The  most  northern,  at  the  extremity  of  the 
tail 

28  stars:  4  of  third  magnitude,  9  of  fourth, 
9  of  fifth,  6  of  sixth 

Aquarius,  or  the  Water-Boy 
On  the  head 

The  brighter  of  the  two  on  the  right  shoulder 
The  more  obscure 
On  the  left  shoulder 
Under  the  arm-pit 

The  most  eastern  of  the  tliree  under  the  left 
hand  and  on  the  coat 
The  middle  one 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Deg,  Min. 

Deg, 

Min. 

Magnitude 

270 

40 

N 

7 

30 

3 

271 

0 

N 

6 

40 

:  6 

270 

40 

N 

5 

0 

3 

272 

20 

N 

8 

0 

6 

272 

20 

N 

0 

45 

6 

272 

0 

N 

1 

45 

6 

272 

10 

N 

1 

30 

6 

270 

30 

N 

0 

40 

5 

275 

0 

N 

4 

50 

6 

275 

10 

S 

0 

50 

5 

274 

10 

S 

6 

30 

4 

275 

0 

s 

8 

40 

4 

280 

0 

s 

7 

40 

4 

283 

30 

s 

6 

50 

4 

283 

40 

s 

6 

0 

5 

282 

0 

s 

4 

15 

5 

280 

0 

s 

7 

0 

5 

280 

0 

s 

2 

50 

5 

280 

0 

0 

0 

4 

284 

20 

s 

0 

50 

4 

286 

40 

s 

4 

45 

4 

288 

20 

s 

4 

30 

4 

288 

40 

s 

2 

10 

3 

289 

40 

s 

2 

0 

3 

290 

10 

s 

2 

20 

4 

292 

0 

s 

5 

0 

5 

291 

0 

s 

2 

50 

5 

292 

0 

N 

4 

20 

5 

293 

40 

N 

15 

45 

5 

299 

40 

N 

11 

0 

3 

298 

30 

N 

9 

40 

5 

290 

0 

N 

8 

50 

3 

290 

40 

N 

6 

15 

5 

280 

0 

N 

5 

30 

3 

279 

30 

N 

8 

0 

4 

610 


COPERNICUS 

In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Constellations 
The  most  western  of  the  three 
At  the  right  elbow 

The  farthest  north  on  the  right  hand 
The  more  western  of  the  two  remaining  to 
the  south 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  adjacent  stars 
on  the  right  hip 
The  more  eastern 
On  the  right  buttock 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  left 
buttock 

The  more  northern 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  right 
shin 

The  more  northern 
On  the  left  hip 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  left 
shin 

The  northern  star  beneath  the  knee 
The  first  star  in  the  fall  of  water  from  the 
hand 

More  to  the  south-east 
To  the  east  at  the  first  bend  in  the  water 
To  the  east  of  that 
In  the  second  and  southern  bend 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  to  the  east 
The  more  southern 
Farther  off  to  the  south 
[57^]  Eastward,  the  more  western  of  the  two 
adjacent 

The  more  eastern 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  at  the  third 
bend  in  the  water 
The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern  of  the  three 
The  most  northern  of  three  in  a  similar  fig¬ 
ure  to  the  east 
The  middle  one 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 
The  most  western  of  the  three  at  the  last 
bend  in  the  water 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  to  the  east 
The  more  northern 

The  last  in  the  water,  and  in  the  mouth  of 
the  southern  Fish 

42  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  9  of  third,  18 
of  fourth,  13  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
278  0 

N 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
8  30 

Magnitude 

3 

302 

50 

N 

8 

45 

3 

303 

0 

N 

10 

45 

3 

305 

20 

N 

9 

0 

3 

306 

40 

N 

8 

30 

3 

299 

30 

N 

3 

0 

4 

300 

20 

N 

2 

10 

5 

302 

0 

S 

0 

50 

4 

295 

0 

S 

1 

40 

4 

295 

30 

N 

4 

0 

6 

305 

0 

S 

6 

30 

3 

304 

40 

s 

5 

0 

4 

301 

0 

s 

5 

40 

5 

300 

40 

s 

10 

0 

5 

302 

10 

s 

9 

0 

5 

303 

20 

N 

2 

0 

4 

308 

10 

N 

0 

10 

4 

311 

0 

s 

1 

10 

4 

313 

20 

s 

0 

30 

4 

313 

50 

s 

1 

40 

4 

312 

30 

s 

3 

30 

4 

312 

50 

s 

4 

10 

4 

314 

10 

s 

8 

15 

5 

316 

0 

s 

11 

0 

5 

316 

30 

s 

10 

50 

5 

315 

0 

s 

14 

0 

5 

316 

0 

s 

14 

45 

5 

316 

30 

s 

15 

40 

5 

310 

20 

s 

14 

10 

4 

310 

50 

s 

15 

0 

4 

311 

40 

s 

15 

45 

4 

305 

10 

s 

14 

50 

4 

306 

0 

s 

15 

20 

4 

306 

30 

s 

14 

0 

4 

300 

20 

s 

23 

0 

1 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 


In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Constellations 

Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Aquarius 
The  most  western  of  the  three  east  of  the 
bend  in  the  water 

320 

0 

S 

15 

30 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  remaining 

323 

0 

s 

14 

20 

4 

The  more  southern 

322 

20 

s 

18 

15 

4 

3  stars:  greater  than  fourth  magnitude 

Pisces,  or  the  Fish 

In  the  mouth  of  the  western  Fish 

315 

0 

N 

9 

15 

4 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  occiput 

317 

30 

N 

7 

30 

4  greater 

The  more  northern 

321 

30 

N 

9 

30 

4 

The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  back 

319 

20 

N 

9 

20 

4 

The  more  eastern 

324 

0 

N 

7 

30 

4 

The  more  western  one  on  the  belly 

319 

20 

N 

4 

30 

4 

The  more  eastern 

323 

0 

N 

2 

30 

4 

On  the  tail  of  the  same  Fish 

329 

20 

N 

6 

20 

4 

On  the  fishing-line,  the  first  star  from  the 
tail 

334 

20 

N 

5 

45 

6 

To  the  east  of  that 

336 

20 

N 

2 

45 

6 

The  most  western  of  the  three  bright  stars 
to  the  east 

340 

30 

N 

2 

15 

4 

The  middle  one 

343 

50 

N 

1 

10 

4 

The  most  eastern 

346 

20 

S 

1 

20 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  small  stars  on 
the  curvature 

345 

40 

S 

2 

0 

6 

The  more  southern 

346 

20 

s 

5 

0 

6 

The  most  western  of  the  three  after  the 
curvature 

350 

20 

s 

2 

20 

4 

The  middle  one 

352 

0 

s 

4 

40 

4 

The  most  eastern  one 

354 

0 

s 

7 

45 

4 

[57*^]  At  the  knot  of  the  two  fishing-lines 

356 

0 

s 

8 

30 

3 

In  the  northern  line,  west  of  the  knot 

354 

0 

s 

4 

20 

4 

The  most  southern  of  the  three  to  the  east 

353 

30 

N 

1 

30 

5 

The  middle  one 

353 

40 

N 

5 

20 

3 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  and  the  last 
in  the  line 

353 

50 

N 

9 

0 

4 

The  Eastern  Fish 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  in  the  mouth 

355 

20 

N 

21 

45 

5 

The  more  southern 

355 

0 

N 

21 

30 

5 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  small  stars  on 
the  head 

352 

0 

N 

20 

0 

6 

The  middle  one 

351 

0 

N 

19 

50 

6 

The  most  western  of  the  three 

350 

20 

N 

23 

0 

6 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  south¬ 
ern  fin,  near  the  left  elbow  of  Andromeda 

349 

0 

N 

14 

20 

4 

The  middle  one 

349 

40 

N 

13 

0 

4 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three 

351 

0 

N 

12 

0 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  belly 

355 

30 

N 

17 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

352 

40 

N 

15 

20 

4 

611 


612  COPERNICUS 


In  the  Middle,  and  Around  the  Ecliptic 


Constellations 

Longitude 

Latitude 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg.  Min. 

Magnitude 

On  the  eastern  fin,  near  the  tail 

34  stars:  2  of  third  magnitude,  22  of  fourth. 

353  20 

N 

11  45 

4 

3  of  fifth,  7  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Pisces 
The  more  western  on  the  northern  side  of 

the  quadrilateral  under  the  western  Fish 

324  30 

S 

2  40 

4 

The  more  eastern 

325  35 

S 

2  30 

4 

The  more  western  on  the  southern  side 

324  0 

s 

5  50 

4 

The  more  eastern 

4  unconstellated  stars:  of  fourth  magnitude 

325  40 

s 

5  30 

4 

Therefore,  all  in  all,  there  are  348  stars  in  the  zodiac :  5  of  first  magnitude,  9  of  second, 
65  of  third,  132  of  fourth,  105  of  fifth,  27  of  sixth,  3  nebulous,  2  obscure;  and,  over  and 
above  the  count,  the  Coma,  which  we  said  above  was  called  Coma  Berenices  by  Conon 
the  mathematician. 


The  Stars  of  the  Southern  Region 


Cetus,  or  the  Whale 

At  the  extremity  of  the  nose 

11 

0 

s 

7 

45 

4 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  in  the  jaws 

11 

0 

s 

11 

20 

3 

The  middle  one,  in  the  middle  of  the  mouth 

6 

0 

s 

11 

30 

3 

The  most  western  of  the  three,  on  the  cheek 

3 

50 

s 

14 

0 

3 

In  the  eye 

4 

0 

s 

8 

10 

4 

Northward,  in  the  hair 

5 

30 

s 

6 

20 

4 

[58^]  Westward,  in  the  mane 

The  more  northern  on  the  western  side  of 

1 

0 

s 

4 

10 

4 

the  quadrilateral  in  the  breast 

355 

20 

s 

24 

30 

4 

The  more  southern 

356 

40 

s 

28 

0 

4 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  to  the  east 

0 

0 

s 

25 

10 

4 

The  more  southern 

0 

0 

s 

27 

30 

3 

The  middle  one  of  the  three  on  the  body 

345 

20 

s 

25 

20 

3 

The  most  southern 

346 

20 

s 

30 

30 

4 

The  most  northern  of  the  three 

348 

20 

s 

20 

0 

3 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  at  the  tail 

343 

0 

s 

15 

20 

3 

The  more  western 

The  more  northern  on  the  eastern  side  of 

338 

20 

s 

15 

40 

3 

the  quadrilateral  in  the  tail 

335 

0 

s 

11 

40 

5 

The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  remaining  to 

334 

0 

s 

13 

40 

5 

the  west 

332 

40 

s 

13 

0 

5 

The  more  southern 

332 

20 

s 

14 

0 

5 

At  the  northern  extremity  of  the  tail 

327 

40 

s 

9 

30 

3 

At  the  southern  extremity  of  the  tail 

22  stars:  10  of  third  magnitude,  8  of  fourth, 

4  of  fifth 

329 

0 

s 

20 

20 

3 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Southern  Signs 


613 


Constellations 

Orion 

The  nebulous  star  on  the  head 
The  bright,  reddish  star  on  the  right 
shoulder 

On  the  left  shoulder 
East  of  that  star 
At  the  right  elbow 
On  the  right  forearm 

The  more  eastern  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
quadrilateral  in  the  right  hand 
The  more  western 

The  more  eastern  on  the  northern  side 
The  more  western  on  the  same  side 
The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  club 
The  more  eastern 

The  most  eastern  of  the  four  in  a  straight 
line  on  the  back 
More  western 
Still  more  western 
Most  western 

The  most  northern  of  the  nine  on  the  shield 

The  second 

The  third 

The  fourth 

The  fifth 

The  sixth 

[58^]  The  seventh 

The  eighth 

The  last  and  most  southern 
The  most  western  of  the  three  bright  stars 
on  the  sword-belt 
The  middle  one 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  in  a  straight 
line 

On  the  hilt  of  the  sword 
The  most  northern  of  the  three  on  the  sword 
The  middle  one 
The  most  southern  one 
The  more  eastern  of  the  two  at  the  tip  of  the 
sword 

The  more  western 

On  the  left  foot,  the  bright  star  which  be¬ 
longs  to  Fluvius  too 
On  the  left  shin 
At  the  right  heel 
At  the  right  knee 

38  stars:  2  of  first  magnitude,  4  of  second, 
8  of  third,  15  of  fourth,  3  of  fifth,  5  of 
sixth,  and  1  nebulous 


Longiticde 

Latitude 

Deg.  Alin. 

Deg. 

Alin. 

Alagnitvde 

50 

20 

S 

16 

30 

nebulous 

55 

20 

s 

17 

0 

1 

43 

40 

s 

17 

30 

2  greater 

48 

20 

s 

18 

0 

4  smaller 

57 

40 

s 

14 

30 

4 

59 

40 

s 

11 

50 

6 

59 

50 

s 

10 

40 

4 

59 

20 

s 

9 

45 

4 

60 

40 

s 

8 

15 

6 

59 

0 

s 

8 

15 

6 

55 

0 

s 

3 

45 

5 

57 

40 

s 

3 

15 

5 

50 

50 

s 

19 

40 

4 

49 

40 

s 

20 

0 

6 

48 

40 

s 

20 

20 

6 

47 

30 

s 

20 

30 

5 

43 

50 

s 

8 

0 

4 

42 

40 

s 

8 

10 

4 

41 

20 

s 

10 

15 

4 

39 

40 

s 

12 

50 

4 

38 

30 

s 

14 

15 

4 

37 

50 

s 

15 

50 

3 

38 

10 

s 

17 

10 

3 

38 

40 

s 

20 

20 

3 

39 

40 

s 

21 

30 

3 

48 

40 

s 

24 

10 

2 

50 

40 

s 

24 

50 

2 

52 

40 

s 

25 

30 

2 

47 

10 

s 

25 

50 

3 

50 

10 

s 

28 

40 

4 

50 

0 

s 

29 

30 

3 

50 

20 

s 

29 

50 

3  smaller 

51 

0 

s 

30 

30 

4 

49 

30 

s 

30 

50 

4 

42 

30 

s 

31 

30 

1 

44 

20 

s 

30 

15 

4  greater 

46 

40 

s 

31 

10 

4 

53 

30 

s 

33 

30 

3 

614 


COPERNICUS 
Southern  Signs 


Constellations 
Fluvius,  or  the  River 
After  the  left  foot  of  Orion,  and  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Fluvius 

The  most  northern  star  within  the  bend  of 
Orion's  leg 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  after  that 
The  more  western 
The  more  eastern  of  the  next  two 
The  more  western 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  after  them 
The  middle  one 
The  most  western  of  the  three 
The  most  eastern  of  the  four  after  the  interval 
More  western 
Still  more  western 
The  most  western  of  all  four 
Again  similarly,  the  most  eastward  of  the 
four 

More  westward 
Still  more  westward 
The  most  westward  of  the  four 
The  star  in  the  bend  of  Fluvius  which 
touches  the  breast  of  Cetus 
East  of  that 

The  most  westward  of  the  three  to  the  east 
[59^]  The  middle  one 
The  most  eastward  of  the  three 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  west¬ 
ern  side  of  the  quadrilateral 
The  more  southern 
The  more  western  on  the  eastern  side 
The  most  eastward  of  those  four 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  contiguous 
stars  towards  the  east 
The  more  southern 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  at  the  bend 
The  more  western 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  in  the  remain¬ 
ing  space 
The  middle  one 
The  most  western  of  the  three 
The  bright  star  at  the  extremity  of  the  river 
34  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  5  of  third,  27 
of  fourth,  1  of  fifth 

Lepus,  or  the  Rabbit 
The  more  northern  one  on  the  western  side 
of  the  quadrilateral  at  the  ears 
The  more  southern 

The  more  northern  one  on  the  eastern  side 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Magnitude 

41 

40 

s 

31 

50 

4 

42 

10 

s 

28 

15 

4 

41 

20 

s 

29 

50 

4 

38 

0 

s 

28 

15 

4 

36 

30 

s 

25 

15 

4 

33 

30 

s 

25 

20 

4 

29 

40 

s 

26 

0 

4 

29 

0 

s 

27 

0 

4 

26 

18 

s 

27 

50 

4 

20 

20 

s 

32 

50 

3 

18 

0 

s 

31 

0 

4 

17 

30 

s 

28 

50 

3 

15 

30 

s 

28 

0 

3 

10 

30 

s 

25 

30 

3 

8 

10 

s 

23 

50 

4 

5 

30 

s 

23 

10 

3 

3 

50 

s 

23 

15 

4 

358 

30 

s 

32 

10 

4 

359 

10 

s 

34 

50 

4 

2 

10 

s 

38 

30 

4 

7 

10 

s 

38 

10 

4 

10 

50 

s 

39 

0 

5 

14 

40 

s 

41 

30 

4 

14 

50 

s 

42 

30 

4 

15 

30 

s 

43 

20 

4 

18 

0 

s 

43 

20 

4 

27 

30 

s 

50 

20 

4 

28 

20 

s 

51 

45 

4 

21 

30 

s 

53 

50 

4 

19 

10 

s 

53 

10 

4 

11 

10 

s 

53 

0 

4 

8 

10 

s 

53 

30 

4 

5 

10 

s 

52 

0 

4 

353 

30 

s 

53 

30 

1 

43 

0 

s 

35 

0 

5 

43 

10 

s 

36 

30 

5 

44 

40 

s 

35 

30 

5 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Southern  Signs 


615 


Constellations 
The  more  southern 
At  the  chin  ^ 

At  the  extremity  of  the  left  forefoot 
In  the  middle  of  the  body 
Beneath  the  belly 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  hind 
feet 

The  more  southern 
On  the  loins 
At  the  tip  of  the  tail 

12  stars:  2  of  third  magnitude,  6  of  fourth, 
4  of  fifth 

Canis,  or  the  Dog 

The  very  bright  star  called  Canis,  in  the 
mouth 
On  the  ears 
On  the  head 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  neck 
The  more  southern 
On  the  breast 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  at  the  right 
knee 

The  more  southern 
At  the  extremity  of  the  forefoot 
[59^]  The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the 
left  knee 

The  more  eastern 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  on  the  left 
shoulder 

The  more  western 
On  the  left  hip 

Beneath  the  belly  between  the  thighs 
In  the  hollow  of  the  right  foot 
At  the  extremity  of  the  same  foot 
At  the  tip  of  the  tail 

18  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  5  of  third,  5 
of  fourth,  7  of  fifth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Canis 
North  of  the  head  of  the  Dog 
The  most  southern  in  a  straight  line  under 
the  hind  feet 
The  more  northern 
StiU  more  northern 

The  last  and  farthest  north  of  the  four 
The  most  western  of  the  three  westward  as 
it  were  in  a  straight  line 
The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern  of  the  three 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
44  40 

S 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
36  40 

Magnitude 

5 

42 

30 

s 

39 

40 

4  greater 

39 

30 

s 

45 

15 

4  greater 

48 

50 

s 

41 

30 

3 

48 

10 

s 

44 

20 

3 

54 

20 

s 

44 

0 

4 

52 

20 

s 

45 

50 

4 

53 

20 

s 

38 

20 

4 

56 

0 

s 

38 

10 

4 

71 

0 

s 

39 

10 

1  very  great 

73 

0 

s 

35 

0 

4 

74 

40 

s 

36 

30 

5 

76 

40 

s 

37 

45 

4 

78 

40 

s 

40 

0 

4 

73 

50 

s 

42 

30 

5 

69 

30 

s 

41 

15 

5 

69 

20 

s 

42 

30 

5 

64 

20 

s 

41 

20 

3 

68 

0 

s 

46 

30 

5 

69 

30 

s 

45 

50 

5 

78 

0 

s 

46 

0 

4 

75 

0 

s 

47 

0 

5 

80 

0 

s 

48 

45 

3  smaller 

77 

0 

s 

51 

30 

3 

76 

20 

s 

55 

10 

4 

77 

0 

s 

55 

40 

3 

85 

30 

s 

50 

30 

3  smaller 

72 

50 

s 

25 

15 

4 

63 

20 

s 

60 

30 

4 

64 

40 

s 

58 

45 

4 

66 

20 

s 

57 

0 

4 

67 

30 

s 

56 

0 

4 

50 

20 

s 

55 

30 

4 

53 

40 

s 

57 

40 

4 

55 

40 

s 

59 

30 

4 

616 


COPERNICUS 
Southern  Signs 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg.  Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Magnitude 

The  more  western  of  the  two  bright  stars 

beneath  them 

52 

20 

s 

59 

40 

2 

The  more  western 

49 

20 

s 

57 

40 

2 

The  remaining  star,  more  southern 

11  stars:  2  of  second  magnitude,  9  of  fourth 

45 

30 

s 

59 

30 

4 

Canicula,  or  Procyon,  or  the  Little 
Bitch 

On  the  neck 

The  bright  star  on  the  thigh,  that  is, 

78 

20 

s 

14 

0 

4 

UpoKvo^v  or  Canicula,  the  Dog-star 

2  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  1  of  fourth 

82 

30 

s 

16 

10 

1 

Argo,  or  the  Ship 

The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  extrem- 

ity  of  the  Ship 

93 

40 

s 

42 

40 

5 

The  more  eastern 

97 

40 

s 

43 

20 

3 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  stern 

92 

10 

s 

45 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

92 

10 

s 

46 

0 

4 

West  of  the  two 

88 

40 

s 

45 

30 

4 

The  bright  star  in  the  middle  of  the  shield 
The  most  western  of  the  three  beneath  the 

89 

40 

s 

47 

15 

4 

shield 

88 

40 

s 

49 

45 

4 

The  most  eastern 

92 

40 

s 

49 

50 

4 

The  middle  one  of  the  three 

91 

40 

s 

49 

15 

4 

At  the  extremity  of  the  rudder 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  stern 

97 

20 

s 

49 

50 

4 

keel 

87 

20 

s 

53 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

[60^]  The  most  northern  on  the  cross-bank 

87 

20 

s 

58 

30 

3 

of  the  stern 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  same 

93 

30 

s 

55 

30 

5 

cross-bank 

95 

30 

s 

58 

30 

5 

The  middle  one 

96 

40 

s 

57 

15 

4 

The  most  eastern 

The  bright  star  to  the  east  on  the  cross¬ 

99 

50 

s 

57 

45 

4 

bank 

The  more  ’western  of  the  two  obscure  stars 

104 

30 

s 

58 

20 

2 

beneath  that 

101 

30 

s 

60 

0 

5 

The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  east  of  the 

104 

20 

s 

59 

20 

5 

aforesaid  bright  star 

106 

30 

s 

56 

40 

5 

The  more  eastern 

The  most  northern  of  the  three  on  the  small 

107 

40 

s 

57 

0 

5 

shields  and  at  the  foot  of  the  mast 

119 

0 

s 

51 

30 

4  greater 

The  middle  one 

119 

30 

s 

55 

30 

4  greater 

The  most  southern  of  the  three 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  contiguous 

117 

20 

s 

57 

10 

4 

stars  beneath  them 

122 

30 

s 

60 

0 

4 

The  more  southern 

122 

20 

s 

61 

15 

4 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Southern  Signs 


617 


Constellations 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  in  the  middle 
of  the  mast 
The  more  northern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  top  part 
of  the  sail 
The  more  eastern 

Below  the  third  star  east  of  the  shield 
In  the  section  of  the  bridge 
Between  the  oars  in  the  keel 
The  obscure  star  east  of  that 
The  bright  star,  east  of  that  and  below  the 
cross-bank 

The  bright  star  to  the  south,  more  within 
the  keel 

The  most  western  of  the  three  to  the  east  of 
that 

The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  section 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  in  the  northwestern  oar 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  western  one  in  the  remaining  oar, 
Canopus 

The  remaining  star  east  of  that 
45  stars:  1  of  first  magnitude,  6  of  second, 
8  of  third,  22  of  fourth,  7  of  fifth,  1  of 
sixth 

Hydra 

Of  the  two  more  western  of  the  five  on  the 
head,  the  more  southern,  at  the  nostrils 
The  more  northern  of  the  two,  and  in  the 
eye 

On  the  occiput,  the  more  northern  of  the 
two  to  the  east 

[60^]  The  more  southern,  and  at  the  jaws 
East  of  all  those  and  on  the  cheeks 
The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  neck 
The  more  eastern 

The  middle  one  of  the  three  at  the  curve  of 
the  neck 
East  of  that 
The  most  southern 

The  obscure  and  northern  star  of  the  two 
contiguous  to  the  south 
The  bright  one  and  to  the  south-east 
The  most  western  of  the  three  after  the 
curve  in  the  neck 


Longitude 
Deg,  Min, 

113  30 

S 

Latitude 
Deg,  Min, 

51  30 

Magnitude 

4 

112  40 

s 

49 

0 

4 

111  20 

s 

43 

20 

4 

112  20 

s 

43 

30 

4 

98  30 

s 

54 

30 

2  smaller 

100  50 

s 

51 

15 

2 

95 

0 

s 

63 

0 

4 

102  20 

s 

64 

30 

6 

113  20 

s 

63 

50 

2 

121  50 

s 

69 

40 

2 

128  30 

s 

65 

40 

3 

134  40 

s 

65 

50 

3 

139  20 

s 

65 

50 

2 

144  20 

s 

62 

50 

3 

151  20 

s 

62 

15 

3 

57  20 

s 

65 

50 

4  greater 

73  30 

s 

65 

40 

3  greater 

70  30 

s 

75 

0 

1 

82  20 

s 

71 

50 

3  greater 

97  20 

s 

15 

0 

4 

98  40 

s 

13 

40 

4 

99 

0 

s 

11 

30 

4 

98  50 

s 

14 

45 

4 

100  50 

s 

12 

15 

4 

103  40 

s 

11 

50 

5 

106  40 

s 

13 

30 

4 

111  40 

s 

15 

20 

4 

114 

0 

s 

14 

50 

4 

111  40 

s 

17 

10 

4 

112  30 

s 

19 

45 

6 

113  20 

s 

20 

30 

2 

119  20 

s 

26 

30 

4 

618 


COPERNICUS 
Southern  Signs 


Constellations 
The  most  eastern 
The  middle  one 

The  most  western  of  the  three  in  a  straight 
line 

The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern  one 
The  more  northern  of  the  two  beneath  the 
base  of  the  Cup 
The  more  southern 

East  of  them,  the  most  western  of  the  three 
on  the  triangle 
The  most  southern 
The  most  eastern  of  the  same  three 
East  of  the  Crow,  near  the  tail 
At  the  extremity  of  the  tail 
25  stars :  1  of  second  magnitude,  3  of  third, 
19  of  fourth,  1  of  fifth,  1  of  sixth 

Unconstellated  Stars  around  Hydra 
South  of  the  head 
East  of  those  on  the  neck 
2  unconstellated  stars:  of  third  magnitude 

Crater,  or  the  Cup 
On  the  base  of  the  Cup  and  in  Hydra  too 
The  more  southern  of  the  two  in  the  middle 
of  the  Cup 

The  more  northern  of  them 
On  the  southern  rim  of  the  Cup 
On  the  northern  part  of  the  rim 
On  the  southern  part  of  the  stem 
On  the  northern  part 
7  stars:  of  fourth  magnitude 

[6U]  CoRVUS,  OR  THE  CrOW 
On  the  beak,  and  in  Hydra  too 
On  the  neck 
In  the  breast 

On  the  right  wing,  the  western  wing 
The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  eastern 
wing 

The  more  eastern 

At  the  extremity  of  the  foot,  and  in  Hydra 
too 

7  stars:  5  of  third  magnitude,  1  of  fourth, 
1  of  fifth 

Centaurus,  or  the  Centaur 

The  most  southern  of  the  four  on  the  head 

The  more  northern 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
124  30 

s 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
23  15 

Magnitude 

4 

122 

0 

s 

24 

0 

4 

131 

20 

s 

24 

30 

3 

133 

20 

s 

23 

0 

4 

136 

20 

s 

23 

10 

3 

144 

50 

s 

25 

45 

4 

145 

40 

s 

30 

10 

4 

155 

30 

s 

31 

20 

4 

157 

50 

s 

34 

10 

4 

159 

30 

s 

31 

40 

3 

173 

20 

s 

13 

30 

4 

186 

50 

s 

17 

30 

4 

96 

0 

s 

23 

15 

3 

124 

20 

s 

26 

0 

3 

139 

40 

s 

23 

0 

4 

146 

0 

s 

19 

30 

4 

143 

30 

s 

18 

0 

4 

150 

20 

s 

18 

30 

4  greater 

142 

40 

s 

13 

40 

4 

152 

30 

s 

16 

30 

4  smaller 

145 

0 

s 

11 

50 

4 

158 

40 

s 

21 

30 

5 

157 

40 

s 

19 

40 

5 

160 

0 

s 

18 

10 

5 

160 

50 

s 

14 

50 

3 

160 

0 

s 

12 

30 

3 

161 

20 

s 

11 

45 

4 

163 

50 

s 

18 

10 

3 

183 

50 

s 

21 

20 

5 

183 

20 

s 

13 

50 

5 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Southern  Signs 


619 


Constellations 

The  more  western  of  the  two  in  the  middle 
The  more  eastern  and  last  of  the  four 
On  the  left  and  western  shoulder 
On  the  right  shoulder 
On  the  left  forearm 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  on  the  west¬ 
ern  side  of  the  quadrilateral  on  the  shield 
The  more  southern 

Of  the  remaining  two,  the  one  at  the  top  of 
the  shield 
The  more  southern 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  right 
side 

The  middle  one 
The  most  eastern 
On  the  right  arm 
On  the  right  elbow 
At  the  extremity  of  the  right  hand 
The  bright  star  at  the  junction  of  the 
human  body 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  obscure  stars 
The  more  western 
At  the  beginning  of  the  back 
West  of  that,  on  the  horse’s  back 
The  most  eastern  of  the  three  on  the  loins 
The  middle  one 
The  most  western  of  the  three 
The  more  western  of  the  two  contiguous 
stars  on  the  right  hip 
The  more  eastern 

On  the  breast,  beneath  the  horse’s  wing 
[61^]  The  more  western  of  the  two  under  the 
belly 

The  more  eastern 

In  the  hollow  of  the  right  hind  foot 
On  the  pastern  of  the  same 
In  the  hollow  of  the  left  <hind>  foot 
Under  the  muscle  of  the  same  foot 
On  top  of  the  right  forefoot 
At  the  left  knee 

The  unconstellated  star  below  the  right 
thigh 

37  stars :  1  of  first  magnitude,  5  of  second, 
7  of  third,  15  of  fourth,  9  of  fifth 

Bestia  Quam  Tenet  Centaurus,  or  the 
Beast  Held  by  the  Centaur — the 
Wolf 

At  the  top  of  the  hind  foot  and  in  the  hand 
of  the  Centaur 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
182  30 

s 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
20  30 

Magnitude 

5 

182 

20 

s 

20 

0 

5 

179 

30 

s 

25 

30 

3 

189 

0 

s 

22 

30 

3 

182 

30 

s 

17 

30 

4 

191 

30 

s 

22 

30 

4 

192 

30 

s 

23 

45 

4 

195 

20 

s 

18 

15 

4 

196 

50 

s 

20 

50 

4 

186 

40 

s 

28 

20 

4 

187 

20 

s 

29 

20 

4 

188 

30 

s 

28 

0 

4 

189 

40 

s 

26 

30 

4 

196 

10 

s 

25 

15 

3 

200 

50 

s 

24 

0 

4 

191 

20 

s 

33 

30 

3 

191 

0 

s 

31 

0 

5 

189 

50 

s 

30 

20 

5 

185 

30 

s 

33 

50 

5 

182 

20 

s 

37 

30 

5 

179 

10 

s 

40 

0 

3 

178 

20 

s 

40 

20 

4 

176 

0 

s 

41 

0 

5 

176 

0 

s 

46 

10 

2 

176 

40 

s 

46 

45 

4 

191 

40 

s 

40 

45 

4 

179 

50 

s 

43 

0 

2 

181 

0 

s 

43 

45 

3 

183 

20 

s 

51 

10 

2 

188 

40 

s 

51 

40 

2 

188 

40 

s 

55 

10 

4 

184 

30 

s 

55 

40 

4 

181 

40 

s 

41 

10 

1 

197 

30 

s 

45 

20 

2 

188 

0 

s 

49 

10 

3 

201 

20 

s 

24 

50 

3 

620 


COPERNICUS 
Southern  Signs 


Constellations 

On  the  hollow  of  the  same  foot 
The  more  western  of  the  two  on  the  fore 
shoulder 

The  more  eastern 
In  the  middle  of  the  body 
On  the  belly 
On  the  hip 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  hip 
The  more  southern 
The  upmost  part  of  the  loins 
The  most  southern  of  the  three  at  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  tail 
The  middle  one 

The  most  northern  of  the  three 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  at  the  throat 

The  more  northern 

The  more  western  of  the  two  at  the  opening 
of  the  jaws 
The  more  eastern 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  on  the  fore¬ 
foot 

The  more  northern 

19  stars:  2  of  third  magnitude,  11  of  fourth, 
6  of  fifth 

Ara  or  Thuribulum,  the  Altar  or  the 
Censer 

The  more  northern  of  the  two  at  the  base 
The  more  southern 
At  the  center  of  the  altar 
[62^]  The  most  northern  of  the  three  on  the 
hearth 

The  more  southern  of  the  remaining  two 
contiguous  stars 
The  more  northern 
In  the  midst  of  the  flames 
7  stars:  5  of  fourth  magnitude,  2  of  fifth 

Corona  Austrina,  or  Southern  Crown 
The  more  western  star  on  the  outer  periph¬ 
ery 

East  of  that  on  the  crown 
East  of  that  too 
Farther  east  of  that  also 
East  of  that  and  west  of  the  knee  of  Sagit¬ 
tarius 

The  bright  star  to  the  north  on  the  knee 
The  more  northern 
Still  more  northern 


Longitude 
Deg.  Min. 
199  10 

s 

Latitude 
Deg.  Min. 
20  10 

Magnitude 

3 

204 

20 

s 

21 

15 

4 

207 

30 

s 

21 

0 

4 

206 

20 

s 

25 

10 

4 

203 

30 

s 

27 

0 

5 

204 

10 

s 

29 

0 

5 

208 

0 

s 

28 

30 

5 

207 

0 

s 

30 

0 

5 

208 

40 

s 

33 

10 

5 

195 

20 

s 

31 

20 

5 

195 

10 

s 

30 

0 

4 

196 

20 

s 

29 

20 

4 

212 

10 

s 

17 

0 

4 

212 

40 

s 

15 

20 

4 

209 

0 

s 

13 

30 

4 

210 

0 

s 

12 

50 

4 

240 

40 

s 

11 

30 

4 

239 

50 

s 

10 

0 

4 

231 

0 

s 

22 

40 

5 

233 

40 

s 

25 

45 

4 

229 

30 

s 

26 

30 

4 

224 

0 

s 

30 

20 

5 

228 

30 

s 

34 

10 

4 

228 

20 

s 

33 

20 

4 

224 

10 

s 

34 

10 

4 

242 

30 

s 

21 

30 

4 

245 

0 

s 

21 

0 

5 

246 

30 

s 

20 

20 

5 

248 

10 

s 

20 

0 

4 

249 

30 

s 

18 

30 

5 

250 

40 

s 

17 

10 

4 

250 

10 

s 

16 

0 

4 

249 

50 

s 

15 

20 

4 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  II 
Southern  Signs 


621 


Longitude 

Latitude 

Constellations 

Deg, 

Min, 

Deg,  Min, 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  on  the  north¬ 

ern  part  of  the  periphery 

248 

30 

s 

15 

50 

The  more  western 

248 

0 

s 

14 

50 

Some  distance  west  of  those 

245 

10 

s 

14 

40 

Still  west  of  that 

243 

0 

s 

15 

50 

The  last  star,  more  towards  the  south 

13  stars:  5  of  fourth  magnitude,  6  of  fifth. 

242 

30 

s 

18 

30 

2  of  sixth 

Piscis  Austrinus,  or  the  Southern  Fish 
In  the  mouth,  and  the  same  as  at  the  ex¬ 

tremity  of  Aqua 

300 

20 

s 

23 

0 

The  most  western  of  the  three  on  the  head 

294 

0 

s 

21 

20 

The  middle  one 

297 

30 

s 

22 

15 

The  most  eastern 

299 

0 

s 

22 

30 

At  the  gills 

297 

40 

s 

16 

15 

On  the  southern  and  dorsal  fin 

288 

30 

s 

19 

30 

The  more  eastern  of  the  two  in  the  belly 

294 

30 

s 

15 

10 

The  more  western 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three  on  the  north¬ 

292 

10 

s 

14 

30 

ern  fin 

288 

30 

s 

15 

15 

The  middle  one 

285 

10 

s 

16 

30 

The  most  western  of  the  three 

284 

20 

s 

18 

10 

At  the  extremity  of  the  tail 

11  stars  beside  the  first:  9  of  fourth  magni¬ 

289 

20 

s 

22 

15 

tude,  2  of  fifth 

[62^]  Unconstellated  Stars  around 
Piscis  Austrinus 

The  most  western  of  the  bright  stars  west 

of  Piscis 

271 

20 

s 

22 

20 

The  middle  one 

274 

30 

s 

22 

10 

The  most  eastern  of  the  three 

277 

20 

s 

21 

0 

The  obscure  star  west  of  that 

The  more  southern  of  the  two  remaining  to 

275 

20 

s 

20 

50 

the  north 

277 

10 

s 

16 

0 

The  more  northern 

6  stars:  3  of  third  magnitude,  2  of  fourth. 

277 

10 

s 

14 

50 

1  of  fifth 

6 

6 

5 

5 

5 


1 

4 

4 

4 

4 

5 
5 
4 

4 

4 

4 

4 


3 

3 

3 
5 

4 
4 


Magnitude 


In  the  southern  region  316  stars:  7  of  first  magnitude,  18  of  second,  60  of  third,  167  of 
fourth,  54  of  fifth,  9  of  sixth,  and  1  nebulous.  And  so  there  are  altogether  1024  stars:  15  of 
first  magnitude,  45  of  second,  206  of  third,  476  of  fourth,  217  of  fifth,  49  of  sixth,  11 
obscure,  and  5  nebulous. 


BOOK  THREE 


1.  On  the  Precessions  of  the  Solstices  and  Equinoxes 

[63^]  Having  depicted  the  appearance  of  the  fixed  stars  in  relation  to  the  an¬ 
nual  revolution,  we  must  pass  on;  and  we  shall  treat  first  of  the  change  of  the 
equinoxes,  by  reason  of  which  even  the  fixed  stars  are  believed  to  move.  Now 
we  find  that  the  ancient  mathematicians  made  no  distinction  between  the 
^  ^turning”  or  natural  year,  which  begins  at  an  equinox  or  solstice,  and  the  year 
which  is  determined  by  means  of  some  one  of  the  fixed  stars.  That  is  why  they 
thought  the  Olympic  years,  which  they  measured  from  the  rising  of  Canicula, 
were  the  same  as  the  years  measured  from  the  summer  solstice,  since  they  did 
not  yet  know  the  distinction  between  the  two. 

But  Hipparchus  of  Rhodes,  a  man  of  wonderful  acumen,  was  the  first  to  call 
attention  to  the  fact  that  there  was  a  difference  in  the  length  of  these  two  kinds 
of  year.  While  making  careful  observations  of  the  magnitude  of  the  year,  he 
found  that  it  was  longer  as  measured  from  the  fixed  stars  than  as  measured  from 
the  equinoxes  or  solstices.  Hence  he  believed  that  the  fixed  stars  too  possessed 
a  movement  eastward,  but  one  so  slow  as  not  to  be  immediately  perceptible. 
But  now  through  the  passage  of  time,  the  movement  has  become  very  evident. 
By  it  we  discern  a  rising  and  setting  of  the  signs  and  stars  which  are  already  far 
different  from  those  risings  and  settings  described  by  the  ancients;  and  we  see 
that  the  twelve  parts  of  the  ecliptic  have  receded  from  the  signs  of  the  fixed 
stars  by  a  rather  great  interval,  although  in  the  beginning  they  agreed  in  name 
and  in  position. 

Moreover,  an  irregular  movement  has  been  found;  and  wishing  to  assign  the 
caus^i,  for  its  irregularity,  astronomers  have  brought  forward  different  theories. 
Some  maintained  that  there  was  a  sort  of  swinging  movement  of  the  suspended 
world — like  the  movement  in  latitude  which  we  find  in  the  case  of  the  planets — 
and  that  back  and  forth  within  fixed  limits  as  far  out  as  the  world  has  gone  for¬ 
ward  in  one  direction  it  will  come  back  again  in  the  other  at  some  time,^  and 
that  the  extent  of  its  digression  from  the  middle  on  either  side  was  not  more 
than  8°.  But  this  already  outdated  theory  can  no  longer  hold,  especially  because 
[63^]  it  is  already  clear  enough  that  the  head  of  the  constellation  of  Aries  has 
become  more  than  three  times  8°  distant  from  the  spring  equinox — and  similarly 
for  other  stars — and  no  trace  of  a  regression  has  been  perceived  during  so  many 
ages.  Others  indeed  have  opined  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  moves  for¬ 
ward  but  does  so  by  irregular  steps;  and  nevertheless  they  have  failed  to  define 
any  fixed  mode  of  movement. 

Moreover,  there  is  an  additional  surprise  of  nature,  in  that  the  obliquity  of 
the  ecliptic  does  not  appear  so  great  to  us  as  before  Ptolemy — as  we  said  above. 

For  the  sake  of  a  cause  for  these  facts  some  have  thought  up  a  ninth  sphere 

the  sphere  of  the  world  has  rotated  westward  and  will  at  some  time  rotate  eastward 
the  same  distance. 


622 


623 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

and  others  a  tenth:  they  thought  these  facts  could  be  explained  through  those 
spheres;  but  they  were  unable  to  produce  what  they  had  promised.  Already  an 
eleventh  sphere  has  begun  to  see  the  light  of  day;  and  in  talking  of  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  Earth  we  shall  easily  prove  that  this  number  of  circles  is  superfluous. 

For,  as  we  have  already  set  out  separately  in  Book  I,  the  two  revolutions, 
that  is,  of  the  annual  declination  and  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  are  not  alto¬ 
gether  equal,  namely  because  the  restoration  of  the  declination  slightly  antici¬ 
pates  the  period  of  the  centre,  whence  it  necessarily  follows  that  the  equinoxes 
seem  to  arrive  before  their  time — not  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  moved 
eastward,  but  rather  that  the  equator  is  moved  westward,  as  it  is  inclined  ob¬ 
liquely  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  deflexion  of  the 
axis  of  the  terrestrial  globe.  For  it  seems  more  accurate  to  say  that  the  equator 
is  inclined  obliquely  to  the  ecliptic  than  that  the  ecliptic,  a  greater  circle,  is  in¬ 
clined  to  the  equator,  a  smaller.  For  the  ecliptic,  which  is  described  by  the 
distance  between  the  sun  and  the  Earth  during  the  annual  circuit,  is  much 
greater  than  the  equator,  which  is  described  by  the  daily  movement  of  the 
Earth  around  its  axis.  And  in  this  way  the  common  sections  of  the  equator  and 
the  oblique  ecliptic  are  perceived,  with  the  passage  of  time,  to  get  ahead,  while 
the  stars  are  perceived  to  lag  behind.  But  the  measure  of  this  movement  and 
the  ratio  of  its  irregularity  were  hidden  from  our  predecessors,  because  the  period 
of  revolution  was  not  yet  known  on  account  of  its  surprising  slo^raess — I  mean 
that  during  the  many  ages  after  it  was  first  noticed  by  men,  it  has  advanced 
through  hardly  a  fifteenth  part  of  a  circle,  or  24°.  Nevertheless,  we  shall  state 
things  with  as  much  certitude  as  possible,  with  the  aid  of  'what  we  have  learned 
concerning  these  facts  from  the  history  of  observations  down,  to  our  own  time. 

2.  History  of  the  Observations  Confirming  the  Irregular 
Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  and  Solstices 

[64^]  Accordingly  in  the  36th  year  of  the  first  of  the  seventy-six-year  periods 
of  Callippus,  which  was  the  30th  year  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great, 
Timochares  the  Alexandrian,  who  was  the  first  to  investigate  the  positions  of 
the  fixed  stars,  recorded  that  Spica,  which  is  in  the  constellation  of  Virgo,  had  an 
angular  elongation  of  823^°  from  the  point  of  summer  solstice  with  a  southern 
latitude  of  2°;  and  that  the  star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  which  is  the  most 
northward  of  the  three  and  is  first  in  the  order  of  formation  of  the  sign  had  a 
latitude  of  13^°  and  a  longitude  of  32°  from  the  autumn  equinox. 

And  again  in  the  48th  year  of  the  same  period  he  found  that  Spica  in  Virgo 
had  a  longitude  of  823^°  from  the  summer  solstice  but  had  kept  the  same  lati¬ 
tude. 

Now  Hipparchus  in  the  50th  year  of  the  third  period  of  Callippus,  in  the 
196th  year  since  the  death  of  Alexander,  found  that  the  star  called  Regulus, 
which  is  in  the  breast  of  Leo,  was  29^^°  to  the  east  of  the  summer  solstice. 

Next  Menelaus,  the  Roman  geometer,  in  the  first  year  of  Trajan^s  reign,  i.e.j 
in  the  99th  year  since  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  in  the  422nd  year  since  the  death 
of  Alexander,  recorded  that  Spica  in  Virgo  had  a  longitude  of  8634°  from  the 
[summer]  solstice  and  that  the  star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  had  a  longitude 
of  35^342°  from  the  autumn  equinox. 

Following  them,  Ptolemy,  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Antoninus  Pius, 
in  the  462nd  year  since  the  death  of  Alexander,  discovered  that  Regulus  in  Leo 


624  COPERNICUS 

had  a  longitude  of  32)^°  from  the  [summer]  solstice;  Spica,  863^°;  and  that  the 
star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  had  a  longitude  of  363^^^  from  the  autumn  equi¬ 
nox,  with  no  change  in  latitude — as  was  set  forth  above  in  drawing  up  the  tables. 
And  we  have  passed  these  things  in  review,  just  as  they  were  recorded  by  our 
predecessors. 

After  a  great  lapse  of  time,  however,  in  the  1202nd  year  after  the  death  of 
Alexander,  came  the  observations  of  al-Battani  the  Harranite;  and  we  may 
place  the  utmost  confidence  in  them.  In  that  year  Regulus,  or  Basiliscus,  was 
seen  to  have  attained  a  longitude  of  44°5'  from  the  [summer]  solstice;  and  the 
star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio,  one  of  47°50'  [64^]  from  the  autumn  equinox. 
The  latitude  of  these  stars  stayed  completely  the  same,  so  that  there  is  no  longer 
any  doubt  on  that  score. 

Wherefore  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1525,  in  the  year  after  leap-year  by  the 
Roman  calendar  and  1849  Egyptian  years  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  we  were 
taking  observations  of  the  often  mentioned  Spica,  at  Frauenburg,  in  Prussia. 
And  the  greatest  altitude  of  the  star  on  the  meridian  circle  was  seen  to  be  ap¬ 
proximately  27°.  We  found  that  the  latitude  of  Frauenburg  was  54°193^'. 
Wherefore  its  declination  from  the  equator  stood  to  be  8°40'.  Hence  its  position 
became  known  as  follows: 

For  we  have  described  the  meridian  circle  ABCD  through  the  poles  of  the 
ecliptic  and  the  equator.  Let  AEC  be  the  di¬ 
ameter  and  common  section  with  the  equa¬ 
tor;  and  BED  is  the  diameter  and  common 
section  with  the  ecliptic.  Let  F  be  the  north 
pole  of  the  ecliptic  and  FEG  its  axis;  and  let 
B  be  the  beginning  of  Capricorn  and  D  of 
Cancer.  Now  let 

arc  RH  =  2°, 

which  is  the  southern  latitude  of  the  star. 

And  from  point  H  let  HL  be  drawn  parallel 
to  BD]  and  let  HL  cut  the  axis  of  the  ecliptic 
at  I  and  the  equator  at  A.  Moreover,  let 
arc  ilfA-8°40', 

in  proportion  to  the  southern  declination  of 
the  star;  and  from  point  M  let  MN  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC. 

MN  will  cut  HIL  the  parallel  to  the  ecliptic;  therefore  let  MN  cut  HIL 
at  point  0;  and  if  the  straight  line  OP  is  drawn  at  right  angles  to  MN  and  AC, 
then 

OP  =  3^ch.  2  Ail/. 

But  the  circles  having  the  diameters  FG,  HL,  and  MN  are  perpendicular  to 
plane  ABCD]  and  by  Euclid's  Elements,  xi,  19,  their  common  sections  are  at 
right  angles  to  the  same  plane  in  points  0  and  I.  Hence  by  xi,  6,  they  [the  com¬ 
mon  sections]  are  parallel  to  one  another.  And  since  /  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
whose  diameter  is  HL,  therefore  line  01  will  be  equal  to  half  the  chord  subtend¬ 
ing  twice  an  arc  in  a  circle  of  diameter  HL — an  arc  similar  to  the  arc  which  meas¬ 
ures  the  longitude  of  the  star  from  the  beginning  of  Libra,  and  this  arc  is  what 
we  are  looking  for.  It  is  found  in  this  way: 

Since  the  exterior  angle  is  equal  to  its  interior  and  opposite, 
angle  APR  =  angle  OKP 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  625 

and 

angle  OPK  =  ^0\ 

Accordingly 

[651  OP  :  OK  =  y2  ch.  2  AB  :  BE  =  y2  ch.  2  AH  :  HIK. 

For  the  lines  comprehend  triangles  similar  to  OPK, 

But 

arc  AB  =  2S^2Sy', 

and 

Kch.  2  A^  =  39,832, 

where  100,000. 

And 

arc  AR^  =  25°28i^', 

Hch.  2  A^^  =  43,010, 
arc  A/A=8°40', 

which  is  the  declination, 
and 

H  ch.  2  MA  - 15,069. 

It  follows  from  this  that 

^/A:=  107,978, 

OK=  37,831, 

and  by  subtraction 

770  =  70,147. 

But 

HOI  =  y2ch.  HGL 

and 

arc  HGL  =  m°. 

Then 

7707  =  99,939, 

where  BE=  100,000. 

And  therefore  by  subtraction, 

07  =  ^07-770  =  29,792. 

But  in  so  far  as  7707  =  radius  =  100,000, 

07  =  29,810 

=.}/2  ch.  2  arc  17^21'. 

This  was  the  distance  of  Spica  in  [the  constellation]  Virgo  from  the  beginning 
of  Libra;  and  the  position  of  the  star  was  here.  Moreover,  ten  years  before,  in 
1515,  we  found  that  it  had  a  declination  of  8®36';  and  its  position  was  17°14' 
distant  from  the  beginning  of  the  Balances. 

Now  Ptolemy  recorded  that  it  had  a  declination  of  only  3^®.  Therefore  its 
position  was  at  26°40'  of  the  [zodiacal  sign]  Virgo,  which  seems  to  be  more  or 
less  true  in  comparison  with  the  previous  observations. 

Hence  it  appears  clearly  enough  that  during  nearly  the  whole  period  of  432 
years  from  Timochares  to  Ptolemy  the  equinoxes  and  solstices  were  moved  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  precession  of  1°  per  100  years — if  a  constant  ratio  is  set  up  between 
the  time  and  the  amount  of  precession,  which  added  up  to  43^°.  For  in  the 
266  years  between  Hipparchus  and  Ptolemy  the  longitude  of  Basiliscus  in  Leo 
from  the  summer  solstice  moved  2^®,  so  that  here  too,  by  taking  the  time  into 
comparison,  there  is  found  a  precession  of  1°  per  100  years. 

Moreover,  because  during  the  782  mean  years  between  the  observation  of 


626  COPERNICUS 

Menelaus  and  that  of  al-Battani  the  first  star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  had  a 
change  in  longitude  of  11°55',  it  will  certainly  seem  that  1°  should  be  assigned 
not  to  100  years  but  rather  to  66  years;  but  for  the  741  years  after  Ptolemy,  1° 
to  only  65  years. 

If  finally  the  remaining  space  of  645  years  is  compared  with  the  difference  of 
9°11'  given  by  our  observation,  there  will  be  71  years  allotted  to  1°. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  was  slower  [65'"]  dur¬ 
ing  the  400  years  before  Ptolemy  than  during  the  time  between  Ptolemy  and 
al-Battani,  and  that  the  precession  in  this  middle  period  was  speedier  than  in 
the  time  from  al-Battani  to  us. 

Moreover,  there  is  found  a  difference  in  the  movement  of  obliquity,  since 
Aristarchus  of  Samos  found  that  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator 
was  23°51'20",  just  as  Ptolemy  did;  al-Battani,  23°35';  190  years  later  Arzachel 
the  Spaniard,  23°34'.  And  similarly  after  230  years  Prophatius  the  Jew  found 
that  the  obliquity  was  approximately  2'  smaller.  And  in  our  time  it  has  not 
been  found  greater  than  23°283^'.  Hence  it  is  also  clear  that  the  movement  was 
least  from  the  time  of  Aristarchus  to  that  of  Ptolemy  and  greatest  from  that  of 
Ptolemy  to  that  of  al-Battani. 

3.  The  Hypotheses  by  Means  of  Which  the  Mutation  of  the 
Equinoxes  and  of  the  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic  and  the 
Equator  are  Shown 

Accordingly  it  seems  clear  from  this  that  the  solstices  and  equinoxes  change 
around  in  an  irregular  movement.  No  one  perhaps  will  bring  forward  a  better 
reason  for  this  than  that  there  is  a  certain  deflexion  of  the  axis  of  the  Earth  and 
the  poles  of  the  equator.  For  that  seems  to  follow  upon  the  hypothesis  of  the 
movement  of  the  Earth,  since  it  is  clear  that  the  ecliptic  remains  perpetually 
unchangeable — the  constant  latitudes  of  the  fixed  stars  bear  witness  to  that — 
while  the  equator  moves.  For  if  the  movement  of  the  axis  of  the  Earth  were 
simply  and  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  movement  of  the  centre,  there  would 
not  appear  at  all  any  precession  of  the  equinoxes  and  solstices,  as  we  said;  but 
as  these  movements  differ  from  one  another  by  a  variable  difference,  it  was 
necessary  for  the  solstices  and  equinoxes  to  precede  the  positions  of  the  stars 
in  an  irregular  movement. 

The  same  thing  happens  in  the  case  of  the  movement  of  declination,  which 
changes  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  irregularly — although  this  obliquity  should 
be  assigned  more  rightly  to  the  equator. 

For  this  reason  you  should  understand  two  reciprocal  movements  belonging 
wholly  to  the  poles,  like  hanging  balances,  since  the  poles  and  circles  in  a  sphere 
imply  one  another  mutually  and  are  in  agreement.  Therefore  there  will  be  one 
movement  which  changes  the  inclination  of  those  circles  [66^]  by  moving  the 
poles  up  and  down  in  proportion  to  the  angle  of  section.  There  is  another  which 
alternately  increases  and  decreases  the  solstitial  and  equinoctial  precessions  by 
a  movement  taking  place  crosswise.  Now  we  call  these  movements  “librations,'' 
or  ^‘swinging  movements,’^  because  like  hanging  bodies  swinging  over  the  same 
course  between  two  limits,  they  become  faster  in  the  middle  and  very  slow  at 
the  extremes.  And  such  movements  occur  very  often  in  connection  with  the 
latitudes  of  the  planets,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  proper  place. 

They  differ  moreover  in  their  periods,  because  the  irregular  movement  of  the 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  627 

equinoxes  is  restored  twice  during  one  restoration  of  obliquity.  But  as  in  every 
apparent  irregular  movement,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  a  certain  mean, 
though  which  the  ratio  of  irregularity  can  be  determined ;  so  in  this  case  too  it 
was  quite  necessary  to  consider  the  mean  poles  and  the  mean  equator  and  also 
the  mean  equinoxes  and  points  of  solstice.  The  poles  and  the  terrestrial  equator, 
by  being  deflected  in  opposite  directions  away  from  these  mean  poles,  though 
within  fixed  limits,  make  those  regular  movements  appear  to  be  irregular.  And 
so  these  two  librations  competing  with  one  another  make  the  poles  of  the  earth 
in  the  passage  of  time  describe  certain  lines  similar  to  a  twisted  garland. 

But  since  it  is  not  easy  to  explain  these  things  adequately  with  words,  and 

still  less — I  fear — to  have  them 
grasped  by  the  hearing,  unless  they 
are  also  viewed  by  the  eyes,  therefore 
let  us  describe  on  a  sphere  circle 
ABCD  which  is  the  ecliptic.  Let  the 
north  pole  [of  the  ecliptic]  be  the 
beginning  of  Capricornus  A,  that  of 
Cancer  C,  that  of  Aries  B,  and  that  of 
Libra  D.  And  through  points  A  and  C 
and  pole  E  let  circle  A  EC  be  drawn. 
And  let  the  greatest  distance  between 
the  north  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  of 
the  equator  be  EF^  and  the  least  EG. 
Similarly  let  I  be  the  pole  in  the 
middle  position,  and  around  /  let  the 
equator  BHD  be  described,  and  let 
that  be  called  the  mean  equator;  and 
let  B  and  D  be  called  the  mean  equi¬ 
noxes. 

Let  the  poles  of  the  equator,  the  equinoxes,  and  the  equator  be  all  carried 
around  E  by  an  always  regular  movement  westward,  i.e.,  counter  to  the  order 
of  the  signs  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  with  a  slow  movement,  as  I  said. 
Now  let  there  be  understood  two  reciprocal  movements  of  the  terrestrial  poles 
like  hanging  bodies — one  of  them  between  the  limits  F  and  G,  which  will  be 
called  the  movement  of  anomaly,^ — f.e.,  irregularity — of  declination;  the  other 
from  westward  to  eastward ,  and  from  eastward  to  westward.  This  second  move¬ 
ment,  which  has  twice  the  velocity  of  the  first,  we  shall  call  the  anomaly  of  the 
equinoxes.  As  both  of  these  movements  belong  to  the  poles  of  the  earth,  they 
deflect  the  poles  in  a  surprising  way. 

For  first  with  F  as  the  north  pole  of  the  earth,  [66^]  the  equator  des¬ 
cribed  around  the  pole  will  pass  through  the  same  sections  B  and  D,  i.e., 
through  the  poles  of  circle  AFEC.  But  it  will  make  greater  angles  of  obli¬ 
quity  in  proportion  to  arc  FI.  Now  the  second  movement  supervening  does  not 
allow  the  terrestrial  pole,  which  was  about  to  cross  from  the  assumed  starting 
point  F  to  the  mean  obliquity  at  /,  to  proceed  in  a  straight  line  along  FI,  but 
draws  it  aside  in  a  circular  movement  towards  its  farthest  eastward  latitude, 

^The  term  anomaly  will  be  used  to  designate  a  regular  movement  the  compounding  of  which 
with  the  principal  regular  movement  being  considered  makes  that  principal  movement  ap¬ 
pear  irregular. 


A 


628 


COPERNICUS 

which  is  at  K,  The  intersection  of  the  apparent  equator  OQP  described  around 
this  position  will  not  be  in  B  but  to  the  east  of  it  in  0,  and  the  precession  of  the 
equinoxes  will  be  decreased  in  proportion  to  arc  BO.  Changing  its  direction  and 
moving  westwards,  the  pole  is  carried  by  the  two  simultaneously  competing 
movements  to  the  mean  position  I.  And  the  apparent  equator  is  in  all  respects 
identical  with  the  regular  or  mean  equator.  Crossing  there,  the  pole  of  the  earth 
moves  westward  and  separates  the  apparent  equator  from  the  mean  equator 
and  increases  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  up  to  the  other  limit  L.  There 
changing  its  direction  again,  it  subtracts  what  it  had  just  added  to  the  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  equinoxes,  until,  when  situated  at  point  G,  it  causes  the  least  ob¬ 
liquity  at  the  same  common  section  B^  where  one  .3  more  the  movement  of  the 
equinoxes  and  solstices  will  appear  ver}^  slow,  in  approximately  the  same  way  as 
at  F.  At  this  time  the  irregularity  of  the  equinoxes  stands  to  have  completed  its 
revolution,  since  it  has  passed  rom  the  mean  through  both  extremes  and  back 
to  the  mean;  while  the  movement  of  obliquity  in  going  from  greatest  declina¬ 
tion  to  least  has  completed  only  half  its  circuit.  Moving  on  from  there,  the  pole 
advances  eastward  to  the  farthest  limit  M ;  and,  after  reversing  its  direction  there 
becomes  one  with  the  mean  pole  I ;  and  once  more  it  proceeds  westward  and  after 
reaching  the  limit  N  finally  [67^]  completes  what  we  called  the  twisted  line 
FKILGMINF.  And  so  it  is  clear  that  in  one  cycle  of  obliquity  the  pole  of  the 
Earth  reaches  the  westward  limit  twice  and  the  eastward  limit  twice. 

4.  How  THE  Reciprocal  Movement  or  Movement  of  Libration 
Is  Composed  of  Circular  Movements 

Accordingly  we  shall  make  clear  exactly  how  this  movement  agrees  with  the 
appearances.  In  the  meantime  someone  will  ask  how  the  regularity  of  these 
librations  is  to  be  understood,  since  it  was  said  in  the  beginning  that  the  celestial 
movement  was  regular,  or  composed  of  regular  and  circular  movements.  But 
here  in  either  case  of  libration  two  movements  are  apparent  as  one  movement 
between  two  limits,  and  the  two  limits  necessarily  make  a  cessation  of  move¬ 
ment  intervene.  For  we  acknowledge  that  there  are  twin  movements,  which  are 
demonstrated  from  regular  movements  in  this  way. 

Let  there  be  the  straight  line  AB,  and  let  it  be  cut  into  four  equal  parts  at 
points  C,  Z),  and  E.  Let  the  homocentric  circles 
ADB  and  CDE  be  described  around  D  in  the 
same  plane.  And  in  the  selfsame  plane  ADB 
and  CDEj  let  any  point  F  be  taken  on  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  inner  circle;  and  with  F  as 
centre  and  radius  equal  to  FD  let  circle  GHD  be 
described.  And  let  it  cut  the  straight  line  AB  2A 
point  H]  and  let  the  diameter  DFG  be  drawn. 

We  have  to  show  that  when  the  twin  movements 
of  circles  GHD  and  CFE  compete  with  one 
another,  the  movable  point  H  proceeds  back  and 
forth  along  the  same  straight  line  AR  by  a  re¬ 
ciprocal  motion. 

This  will  take  place  if  we  understand  that  H 
is  moved  in  a  different  direction  from  F  and  through  twice  the  distance, 
since  the  angle  same  CDF  which  is  situated  at  the  centre  of  circle  CFE  and  on 


A 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  629 

the  circumference  of  circle  GHD  comprehends  both  arcs  of  the  equal  circles: 
arc  FC  and  arc  GH  which  is  twice  arc  FC, 

It  is  laid  down  that  at  some  time  upon  the  coincidence  of  the  straight  lines 
ACD  and  DFG  the  moving  point  H  will  be  at  (?,  which  will  then  coincide  with 
A ;  and  F  will  be  at  C.  Now,  however,  the  centre  F  has  moved  towards  the  right 
along  CF,  and  H  has  moved  along  the  circumference  to  the  left  twice  the  distance 
CF  [67^]  or  vice  versa;  accordingly  H  will  be  deflected  along  line  AB)  otherwise 
the  part  would  be  greater  than  the  whole,  as  it  is  easy  to  see.  But  H  has  moved 
away  from  its  first  position  along  the  length  AH  made  by  the  bent  line  DFHy 
which  is  equal  to  AD\  and  H  has  moved  for  a  distance  by  which  the  diameter 
DFG  exceeds  chord  DH.  And  in  this  way  H  will  be  made  to  arrive  at  centre  D, 
which  will  be  the  point  of  tangency  of  circle  DHG  with  straight  line  AB,  namely 
when  GD  is  at  right  angles  to  AB]  and  then  H  will  reach  the  other  limit  at  B, 
and  from  that  position  it  will  move  back  again  according  to  the  same  ratio. 

Therefore  it  is  clear  that  movement  along  a  straight  line  is  compounded  of 
two  circular  movements  which  compete  with  one  another  in  this  way;  and  that 
a  reciprocal  and  irregular  movement  is  composed  of  regular  movements;  as  was 
to  be  shown.  Moreover  it  follows  from  this  that  the  straight  line  GH  will  always 
be  at  right  angles  to  A5;  for  lines  DH  and  HGy  being  in  a  semicircle,  will  always 
comprehend  a  right  angle.  And  accordingly 

GH=  Hch.  2AG; 

and 

DH  =  y2  ch.  2  (90°— AG), 

because  circle  AGB  has  twice  the  diameter  of  circle  HGD. 

5.  A  Demonstration  of  the  Irregularity  of  the  Equinoctial 
Precession  and  the  Obliquity 

For  this  reason  some  call  this  movement  of  the  circle  a  movement  in  width, 
i.e.y  along  the  diameter.  But  they  determine  its  periodicity  and  its  regularity  by 
means  of  the  circumference,  and  its  magnitude  by  means  of  the  chords  sub¬ 
tending.  On  that  account  it  is  easily  shown  that  the  movement  appears  irregular 
and  faster  at  the  centre  and  slower  [68^]  at  the  circumference. 

For  let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABC  with  centre  D  and  diameter  ADCy  and 
let  it  be  bisected  at  point  B.  Now  let  equal  arcs  AE  and  BF  be  taken,  and 
from  points  F  and  E  let  EG  and  FK  be  drawn  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  ADC,  Therefore,  since 

2DK  =  2ch.  BFy 

and 

2EG  =  2ch.  AEy 

then 

DK^EG, 

But  by  Euclid^s  ElementSy  iii,  7, 

AG<GE; 

hence 

AG<DK, 

But  GA  and  KD  will  take  up  equal  time  because 
arc  AE  =  SiTc  BF; 

therefore  the  movement  in  the  neighbourhood  of 


630  COPERNICUS 

arc  A  will  [appear  to]  be  slower  than  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  centre  D. 

Having  shown  this,  let  us  take  L  as  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  so  that  the 
straight  line  DL  is  perpendicular  to  plane  ABC  of  the  semicircle;  and  with  L 
as  centre  and  through  points  A  and  C  let  arc  AMC  of  a  circle  be  described;  and 
let  LDM  be  drawn  in  a  straight  line.  Accordingly  the  pole  of  the  semicircle 
ABC  will  be  at  ilf ,  and  ADC  will  be  the  common  section  of  the  circles.  Let  LA 
and  LC  be  joined;  and  similarly  LK  and  LG  too.  And  let  LK  and  LG  extended 
in  straight  lines  cut  arc  AMC  at  N  and  0.  Therefore,  since  angle  LDK  is  right, 
angle  LKD  is  acute.  Wherefore  too  the  line  LK  is  longer  than  LD,  and  all  the 
more  is  side  LG  greater  than  side  LK,  and  LA  than  LG  in  the  obtuse  triangles. 
Therefore  the  circle  described  with  L  as  centre  and  LK  as  radius  will  fall  be¬ 
yond  LD,  but  will  cut  LG  and  LA ;  let  it  be  described,  and  let  it  be  PKRS. 
And  since 

trgl.  LDK <isect.  LPK, 

while 

trgl.  LGA>  sect.  LjBaS,  \ 

on  that  account 

trgl.  LDK  :  sect.  LPif  <trgl.  LG  A  :  sect.  LRS. 

Hence,  alternately  also,  ^ 

trgl.  LDK  :  trgl.  LGA  <sect.  LPK  :  sect.  LRS, 

And  by  Euclid^s  Elements,  vi,  1,  ;  . 

trgl.  LDK  :  trgl.  LGA  =base  DK  :  base  AG, 

But  ; 

sect.  LPK  :  sect.  LP5  =  angle  DLK  :  angle  RLS=SiYc  MN  :  arc  OA, 
Therefore 

base  DK  :  base  GA  <arc  MN  :  arc  OA, 

But  we  have  already  shown  that 

DK>GA, 

All  the  more  then 

m^]MN>0A, 

And  arcs  MN  and  OA  are  understood  as  having  been  described  during  equal 
intervals  of  time  by  the  po'es  of  the  earth  in  accordance  with  the  equal  arcs  of 
anomaly  AE  and  BE — as  was  to  be  shown.  But  since  the  difference  between 
greatest  and  least  obliquity  is  so  slight  as  not  to  exceed  there  will  be 
no  sensible  difference  between  the  curved  line  AMC  and  the  straight  line 
ADC]  and  so  no  error  will  arise  if  we  work  simply  with  line  ADC  and  semi¬ 
circle  ABC. 

Practically  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  case  of  the  other  movement  of  the 
poles,  which  has  to  do  with  the  equinoxes,  since  this  movement  does  not  ascend 
to  the  mean  degree,  as  will  be  apparent  below.  Once  more  let  there  be  the  circle 
ABCD  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  mean  equator.  We  may  call  it 
the  mean  colure  of  Cancer.  Let  the  semicircle  of  the  ecliptic  be  DEB  and  the 
mean  equator  AEC ;  and  let  them  cut  one  another  at  point  E,  where  the  mean 
equinox  will  be.  Now  let  the  pole  of  the  equator  be  F,  and  let  the  great  circle 
FEI  be  described  through  it.  On  that  account  it  will  be  the  colure  of  the  mean 
or  regular  equinoxes. 

Therefore  for  the  sake  of  an  easier  demonstration  let  us  separate  the  libration 


631 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

of  the  equinoxes  from  the  obliquity  of  the  ec¬ 
liptic.  On  the  colure  EF  let  arc  FG  be  taken,  and 
through  that  distance  let  G  the  apparent  pole 
of  the  equator  be  understood  as  removed  from 
F  the  mean  pole.  And  with  G  as  a  pole  let  ALKC 
the  semicircle  of  the  apparent  equator  be  de¬ 
scribed.  It  will  cut  the  ecliptic  at  L.  Therefore 
point  L  will  be  the  apparent  equinox;  and  its 
distance  from  the  mean  equinox  will  be  meas¬ 
ured  by  arc  LEj  which  is  produced  by  arc  EK 
the  equal  of  FG. 

But  with  K  as  a  pole  we  shall  describe  circle 
AGO;  and  let  it  be  understood  that  the  equa¬ 
torial  pole  during  the  time  in  which  the  libra- 
tion  FG  takes  place  does  not  remain  the  ^^true^’ 
pole  at  point  G,  but,  driven  by  another  libration  or  swinging  movement,  moves 
aw^ay  in  the  direction  of  the  oblique  ecliptic  through  arc  GO.  Therefore  while 
ecliptic  BED  abides,  the  ^True’^  equator  will  be  changed  to  the  “apparent^^  in 
accordance  with  the  transposition  of  the  pole  to  0.  And  similarly  the  move¬ 
ment  of  intersection  L  the  apparent  equinox  will  be  faster  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  mean  [equinox]  E  and  very  slow  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  extreme 
equinoxes,  more  or  less  in  proportion  to  the  swinging  movement  of  the  poles 
which  we  have  already  demonstrated — aswas worth  the  trouble  of  our  attention. 

6.  On  the  Regular  Movements  of  the  Precession  of  the 
Equinoxes  and  of  the  Inclination  of  the  Ecliptic 

[69^]  Now  every  apparent  irregular  ci  cular  movement  passes  through  four 
termini:  there  is  the  terminus  where  it  appears  slow  and  the  terminus  where  it 
appears  fast,  as  if  at  the  extremes,  and  the  terminus  where  it  appears  to  have  a 
mean  velocity,  as  if  at  the  means,  since  from  the  point  which  is  the  end  of  de¬ 
crease  in  velocity  and  the  beginning  of  increase  it  passes  on  to  a  mean  velocity; 
and  from  the  mean  velocity  it  increases  till  it  becomes  fast;  again  after  being 
fast  it  approaches  a  mean  velocity,  whence  for  the  remainder  of  the  cycle  it 
changes  to  its  former  slowness. 

By  means  of  that  it  is  possible  to  know  in  what  part  of  the  circle  the  position 
of  the  non-uniform  movement,  or  irregularity,  is  at  a  given  time;  and  too  by 
means  of  these  indications  the  restitution  of  the  irregularity  is  perceptible^  Ac¬ 
cordingly  in  a  quadrisected  circle  let  A  be  the  position  of  greatest  slowness,  B 
the  mean  of  increasing  velocity,  C  the  end  of  the  increase  and  the  beginning  of 
the  decrease,  and  D  the  mean  of  decreasing  velocity.  Therefore,  since,  as  was 
reported  above,  the  apparent  movement  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  was 
found  to  be  rather  slow  in  the  time  between  Timochares  and  Ptolemy  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  other  times,  and  because  for  a  while  it  appeared  regular  and 
uniform,  as  is  shown  by  the  observations  of  Aristyllus,  Hipparchus,  Agrippa, 
and  Menelaus  which  were  made  at  the  middle  of  that  time;  it  argues  that  the 
apparent  movement  of  the  equinoxes  had  been  simply  at  its  slowest  and  at  the 

^This  circle  is  not  the  circle  of  libration,  of  course,  but  a  circle  which  typifies  the  cycle  in 
velocity  which  results  from  compounding  the  libration  with  the  regular  movement  of  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  equinoxes. 


A 


632  COPERNICUS 

middle  of  this  time  was  at  the  beginning  of  increase  in  velocity,  when  the  cessa¬ 
tion  of  the  decrease  conjoined  to  the  beginning  of  the  increase  by  reason  of 
mutual  compensation  made  the  movement  seem  uni¬ 
form  for  the  time  being.  Accordingly  Timochares^  ob¬ 
servation  must  be  placed  in  the  fourth  quadrant  of  the 
circle  along  DA]  but  Ptolemy^s  falls  in  the  first  quad¬ 
rant  along  AB,  Again,  because  in  the  second  interval, 
the  one  between  Ptolemy  and  al-Battani  the  Harranite 
the  movement  is  found  to  have  been  faster  than  in  the 
third,  it  is  clear  that  the  point  of  highest  velocity  was 
passed  during  the  second  interval  of  time,  and  the  ir¬ 
regularity  had  already  reached  the  third  quadrant  of 
the  circle  along  CD,  and  that  from  the  third  interval 
down  to  us  the  restoration  of  the  irregularity  was  nearly 
completed  and  has  nearly  returned  to  its  starting-point  with  Timochares.  For 
if  we  divide  the  cycle  of  1819  years  between  Timochares  and  us  into  the  cus¬ 
tomary  360  parts,  we  shall  have  proportionately  an  arc  of  853^°  for  432  years; 
146°51'  for  742  years;  and  the  remaining  arc  of  127^39'  for  the  remaining  645 
years. 

We  have  made  these  determinations  by  an  obvious  and  simple  inference; 
[69^]  but  upon  working  them  over  with  stricter  calculations,  to  see  how  exactly 
they  agree  with  observations,  we  find  that  the  movement  of  irregularity  during 
the  1819  Egyptian  years  has  already  exceeded  its  complete  revolution  by  21°24', 
and  that  the  time  of  the  period  comprehends  only  1717  Egyptian  years.  In 
accordance  with  this  ratio  it  is  discovered  that  the  first  segment  of  the  circle  has 
90*^35';  the  second,  155^34';  while  the  third  period  of  543  years  will  comprehend 
the  remaining  113°51'  of  the  circle.  Now  that  these  things  have  been  set  up  in 
this  way,  the  mean  movement  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  is  also  dis¬ 
closed;  and  it  is  23°57'  for  these  same  1717  years,  at  the  end  of  which  the  whole 
movement  of  irregularity  was  restored  to  its  pristine  status,  since  for  the  1819 
years  we  have  an  apparent  movement  of  approximately  25"^  1'. 

But  in  102  years  after  Timochares — the  difference  between  the  1717  years 
and  the  1819  years — the  apparent  movement  must  have  been  about  1°4',  be¬ 
cause  it  is  probable  that  the  apparent  movement  was  then  a  little  greater  than 
to  need  only  1®  per  100  years,  since  it  was  decreasing  without  yet  having  reach¬ 
ed  the  end  of  the  decrease.  Hence,  if  we  subtract  1®4'  from  25°!'  there  will  re¬ 
main,  as  we  said,  for  the  1717  Egyptian  years  a  mean  and  regular  movement  of 
23°57',  now  corrected  according  to  the  apparent  and  irregular  movement:  hence 
the  complete  and  regular  revolution  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  arises  in 
25,816  years,  during  which  time  15  cycles  of  irregularity  are  traversed  and  ap¬ 
proximately  3^8  cycle  over  and  above. 

Moreover,  the  movement  of  obliquity,  whose  restoration  we  said  was  twice 
as  slow  as  the  irregular  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  accords  with  this  ratio.  For 
the  fact  that  Ptolemy  reports  that  during  the  400  years  between  the  time  of 
Aristarchus  of  Samos  and  his  own  the  obliquity  of  23°51'20"  had  hardly  changed 
at  all  indicates  that  the  obliquity  was  then  close  to  the  limit  of  greatest  obliquity, 
namely  when  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  was  in  its  slowest  motion. 
But  now  also  when  the  same  restoration  of  slowness  is  approaching,  the  incli¬ 
nation  of  the  axis  is  not  at  its  greatest  but  is  near  its  least.  In  the  middle  of 


633 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

the  time  in  between,  al-Battani  the  Harranite,  as  was  said,  found  that  the  in¬ 
clination  was  23^35';  190  years  after  him  Arzachel  the  Spaniard,  23°34';  and 
similarly  230  years  later  Prophatius  the  Jew  found  it  approximately  2'  less. 
Finally  as  regards  our  own  times,  we  in  30  years  of  frequent  observation  found 
it  approximately  23°28  %' — from  which  George  Peurbach  and  John  of  Mon- 
teregium,  [70^]  our  nearest  predecessors,  differ  slightly.  Here  again  it  is  per¬ 
fectly  obvious  that  for  the  900  years  after  Ptolemy  the  change  in  obliquity  was 
greater  than  for  any  other  interval  of  time. 

Therefore  since  we  already  have  the  cycle  of  irregularity  of  precession  in  1717 
years,  we  shall  also  have  half  the  period  of  obliquity  in  that  time,  and  in  3434 
years  its  complete  restoration.  Wherefore  if  we  divide  the  360°  by  the  number 
of  the  3434  years  or  180°  by  1717,  the  quotient  will  be  the  annual  movement 
of  simple  anomaly  of  6'17"24"'9"".  These  in  turn  distributed  through  the  365 
days  give  a  daily  movement  of  1"2'"2"". 

Similarly,  when  the  mean  precession  of  equinoxes  has  been  distributed 
through  the  1717  years — and  there  was  23°57' — an  annual  movement  of  50" 
12"'5""  will  be  the  result;  and  this  distributed  through  the  365  days  will  give 
a  daily  movement  of  8"T5"". 

But  in  order  that  the  movements  may  be  more  in  the  open  and  may  be  found 
right  at  hand  when  there  is  need  of  them,  we  shall  draw  up  their  tables  or  canons 
by  the  continuous  and  equal  addition  of  annual  movement — 60  parts  always 
being  carried  over  into  the  minutes  or  degrees,  if  the  sum  exceeds  that — and  for 
the  sake  of  convenience  we  shall  keep  on  adding  until  we  reach  the  60th  year, 
since  the  same  configuration  of  numbers  returns  every  sixty  years,  only  with  the 
denominations  of  degrees  and  minutes  moved  up,  so  that  what  were  formerly 
seconds  become  minutes  and  so  on.^  By  this  abridgement  in  the  form  of  brief 
tables,  it  will  be  possible  merely  by  a  double  entry  to  determine  and  infer  the 
regular  movements  for  the  years  in  question  among  the  3600  years.  This  is  also 
the  case  with  the  number  of  days. 

Moreover,  in  our  computations  of  the  celestial  movements  we  shall  employ 
the  Egyptian  years,  which  alone  among  the  legal  years  are  found  equal.  For  it  is 
necessary  for  the  measure  to  agree  with  the  measured;  but  that  is  not  the  case 
with  the  years  of  the  Romans,  Greeks,  and  Persians,  for  intercalations  are  made 
not  in  any  single  way,  but  according  to  the  will  of  the  people.  But  the  Egyptian 
year  contains  no  ambiguity  as  regards  the  fixed  number  of  365  days,  in  which 
throughout  twelve  equal  months — which  they  name  in  order  by  these  names: 
Thoth,  Phaophi,  Athyr,  Chiach,  Tybi,  Mechyr,  Phamenoth,  Pharmuthi, 
Pachon,  Pauni,  Epiphi,  and  Mesori — in  which,  I  say,  six  periods  of  60  days  are 
comprehended  evenly  together  with  the  five  remaining  days,  which  they  call 
the  intercalary  days.  For  that  reason  Egyptian  years  are  most  convenient  for 
calculating  regular  movements.  Any  other  years  are  easily  reducible  to  them  by 
resolving  the  days. 

^That  is  to  say,  the  same  configurations  of  numbers  return  in  multiples  of  sixty  years,  be¬ 
cause  the  cycle  of  movement  is  divided  according  to  the  sexagesimal  system — just  as  it  would 
return  in  multiples  of  ten  years  if  the  circle  were  divided  according  to  the  decimal  system. 


634 


COPERNICUS 


Regular  Movement  of  the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes 
■  IN  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Longitude 

/ 

n 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Longitude 

/ 

n 

/// 

1 

0 

0 

0 

50 

12 

31 

0 

0 

25 

56 

14 

2 

0 

0 

1 

40 

24 

32 

0 

0 

26 

46 

26 

3 

0 

0 

2 

30 

36 

33 

0 

0 

27 

36 

38 

4 

0 

0 

3 

20 

48 

34 

0 

0 

28 

26 

50 

5 

0 

0 

4 

11 

0 

35 

0 

0 

29 

17 

2 

6 

0 

0 

5 

1 

12 

36 

0 

0 

30 

7 

15 

7 

0 

0 

5 

51 

24 

00 

37 

0 

0 

30 

57 

27 

8 

0 

0 

6 

41 

36 

38 

0 

0 

31 

47 

38 

9 

0 

0 

7 

31 

48 

39 

0 

0 

32 

37 

51 

10 

0 

0 

8 

22 

0 

40 

0 

0 

33 

28 

3 

11 

0  - 

0 

9 

12 

12 

1 

41 

0 

0 

34 

18 

15 

12 

0 

0 

10 

2 

25 

O 

42 

0 

0 

35 

8 

27 

13 

0 

0 

10 

52 

37 

43 

0 

0 

35 

58 

39 

14 

0 

0 

11 

42 

49 

44 

0 

0 

36 

48 

51 

15 

0 

0 

12 

33 

1 

45 

0 

0 

37 

39 

3 

16 

0 

0 

13 

23 

13 

•<s> 

46 

0 

0 

38 

29 

15 

17 

0 

0 

14 

13 

25 

47 

0 

0 

39 

19 

27 

18 

0 

0 

15 

3 

37 

48 

0 

0 

40 

9 

40 

19 

0 

0 

15 

53 

49 

49 

0 

0 

40 

59 

52 

20 

0 

0 

16 

44 

1 

50 

0 

0 

41 

50 

4 

21 

0 

0 

17 

34 

13 

51 

0 

0 

42 

40 

16 

22 

0 

0 

18 

24 

25 

52 

0 

0 

43 

30 

28 

23 

0 

0 

19 

14 

37 

53 

0 

0 

44 

20 

40 

24 

0 

0 

20 

4 

50 

54 

0 

0 

45 

10 

52 

25 

0 

0 

20 

55 

2 

55 

0 

0 

46 

1 

4 

26 

0 

0 

21 

45 

14 

56 

0 

0 

46 

51 

16 

27 

0 

0 

22 

35 

26 

57 

0 

0 

47 

41 

28 

28 

0 

0 

23 

25 

38 

58 

0 

0 

48 

31 

40 

29 

0 

0 

24 

15 

50 

59 

0 

0 

49 

21 

52 

30 

0 

0 

25 

6 

2 

60 

0 

0 

50 

12 

5 

Regular  Movement  of  the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes 
IN  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

1 

60° 

0 

Longitude 

O  f 

0  0 

ft 

0 

rn 

8 

Days 

31 

60° 

0 

o 

0 

Longitude 

/ 

0 

ff 

4 

fff 

15 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

16 

32 

0 

0 

0 

4 

24 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

24 

33 

0 

0 

0 

4 

32 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

33 

34 

0 

0 

0 

4 

40 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

41 

35 

0 

0 

0 

4 

48 

6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

49 

36 

0 

0 

0 

4 

57 

7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

57 

00 

37 

0 

0 

0 

5 

5 

8 

0 

0 

0 

1 

6 

38 

0 

0 

0 

5 

13 

9 

0 

0 

0 

1 

14 

39 

0 

0 

0 

5 

21 

10 

0 

0 

0 

1 

22 

40 

0 

0 

0 

5 

30 

11 

0 

0 

0 

1 

30 

41 

0 

0 

0 

5 

38 

12 

0 

0 

0 

1 

39 

g 

42 

0 

0 

0 

5 

46 

13 

0 

0 

0 

1 

47 

43 

0 

0 

0 

5 

54 

14 

0 

0 

0 

1 

55 

44 

0 

0 

0 

6 

3 

15 

0 

0 

0 

2 

3 

45 

0 

0 

0 

6 

11 

16 

0 

0 

0 

2 

12 

46 

0 

0 

0 

6 

11 

17 

0 

0 

0 

2 

20 

47 

0 

0 

0 

6 

27 

18 

0 

0 

0 

2 

28 

48 

0 

0 

0 

6 

36 

19 

0 

0 

0 

2 

36 

49 

0 

0 

0 

6 

44 

20 

0 

0 

0 

2 

45 

50 

0 

0 

0 

6 

52 

21 

0 

0 

0 

2 

53 

51 

0 

0 

0 

7 

0 

22 

0 

0 

0 

3 

1 

52 

0 

0 

0 

7 

9 

23 

0  - 

0 

0 

3 

9 

53 

0 

0 

0 

7 

17 

24 

0 

0 

0 

3 

18 

54 

0 

0 

0 

7 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0 

3 

26 

55 

0 

0 

0 

7 

33 

26 

0 

0 

0 

3 

34 

56 

0 

0 

0 

7 

42 

27 

0 

0 

0 

3 

42 

57 

0 

0 

0 

7 

50 

28 

0 

0 

0 

3 

51 

58 

0 

0 

0 

7 

58 

29 

0 

0 

0 

3 

59 

59 

0 

0 

0 

8 

6 

30 

0 

0 

0 

4 

7 

60 

0 

0 

0 

8 

15 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


635 


Movement  of  the  Simple  Anomaly  of  Equinoxes 
IN  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Eqyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Longitude 

f 

m 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Longitude 

/ 

ft 

f/t 

1 

0 

0 

6 

17 

24 

31 

0 

3 

14 

59 

28 

2 

0 

0 

12 

34 

48 

32 

0 

3 

21 

16 

52 

3 

0 

0 

18 

52 

12 

33 

0 

3 

27 

34 

16 

4 

0 

0 

25 

9 

36 

,  34 

0 

3 

33 

51 

41 

6 

0 

0 

31 

27 

0 

35 

0 

3 

40 

9 

5 

6 

0 

0 

37 

44 

24 

36 

0 

3 

46 

26 

29 

7 

0 

0 

44 

1 

49 

37 

0 

3 

52 

43 

53 

8 

0 

0 

50 

19 

13 

38 

0 

3 

59 

1 

17 

9 

0 

0 

56 

36 

36 

39 

0 

4 

5 

18 

42 

10 

0 

1 

2 

54 

1 

40 

0 

4 

11 

36 

6 

11 

0 

1 

9 

11 

25 

41 

0 

4 

17 

53 

30 

12 

0 

1 

15 

28 

49 

g 

42 

0 

4 

.  24 

10 

54 

13 

0 

1 

21 

46 

13 

> 

43 

0 

4 

30 

28 

18 

14 

0 

1 

28 

3 

38 

44 

0 

4 

36 

45 

42 

15 

0 

1 

34 

21 

2 

45 

0 

4 

43 

3 

0 

16 

0 

1 

40 

38 

26 

•e* 

46 

0 

4 

49 

20 

31 

17 

0 

1 

46 

55 

50 

47 

0 

4 

55 

37 

55 

18 

0 

1 

53 

13 

14 

48 

0 

5 

1 

55 

19 

19 

0 

1 

59 

30 

38 

e 

49 

0 

5 

8 

12 

43 

20 

0 

2 

5 

48 

3 

e 

50 

0 

5 

14 

30 

7 

21 

0 

2 

12 

5 

27 

51 

0 

5 

20 

47 

31 

22 

0 

2 

18 

22 

51 

52 

0 

5 

27 

4 

55 

23 

0 

2 

24 

40 

15 

53 

0 

5 

33 

22 

20 

24 

0 

2 

30 

57 

39 

Os 

54 

0 

5 

39 

39 

44 

25 

0 

2 

37 

15 

3 

55 

0 

5 

45 

57 

8 

26 

0 

2 

43 

32 

27 

56 

0 

5 

52 

14 

32 

27 

0 

2 

49 

49 

52 

57 

0 

5 

58 

31 

56 

28 

0 

2 

56 

7 

16 

58 

0 

6 

4 

49 

20 

29 

0 

3 

2 

24 

40 

59 

0 

6 

11 

6 

45 

30 

0 

3 

8 

42 

4 

60 

0 

6 

17 

24 

9 

Movement  of  the  Simple  Anomaly  of  Equinoxes 
IN  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Longitude 

Days 

Longitude 

60® 

o 

/ 

n 

nt 

60® 

o 

/ 

ff 

tn 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

2 

31 

0 

0 

0 

32 

3 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 

4 

32 

0 

0 

0 

33 

5 

3 

0 

0 

0 

3 

6 

33 

0 

0 

0 

34 

7 

4 

0 

0 

0 

4 

8 

34 

0 

0 

0 

35 

9 

5 

0 

0 

0 

5 

10 

35 

0 

0 

0 

36 

11 

6 

0 

0 

0 

6 

12 

36 

0 

0 

0 

37 

13 

7 

0 

0 

0 

7 

14 

37 

0 

0 

0 

38 

15 

8 

0 

0 

0 

8 

16 

38 

0 

0 

0 

39 

17 

9 

0 

0 

0 

9 

18 

i 

39 

0 

0 

0 

40 

19 

10 

0 

0 

0 

10 

20 

yo 

40 

0 

0 

0 

41 

21 

11 

0 

0 

0 

11 

22 

s 

41 

0 

0 

0 

42 

23 

12 

0 

0 

0 

12 

24 

g 

42 

0 

0 

0 

43 

25 

13 

0 

0 

0 

13 

26 

43 

0 

0 

0 

44 

27 

14 

0 

0 

0 

14 

28 

44 

0 

0 

0 

45 

29 

15 

0 

0 

0 

15 

30 

•45 

0 

0 

0 

46 

31 

16 

0 

0 

0 

16 

32 

46 

0 

0 

0 

47 

33 

17 

0 

0 

0 

17 

34 

47 

0 

0 

0 

48 

35 

18 

0 

0 

0 

18 

36 

48 

0 

0 

0 

49 

37 

19 

0 

0 

0 

19 

38 

49 

0 

0 

0 

50 

39 

20 

0 

0 

0 

20 

40 

50 

0 

0 

0 

51 

41 

21 

0 

0 

0 

21 

42 

•3 

51 

0 

0 

0 

52 

43 

22 

0 

0 

0 

22 

44 

52 

0 

0 

0 

53 

45 

23 

0 

0 

0 

23 

46 

53 

0 

0 

0 

54 

47 

24 

0 

0 

0 

24 

48 

Os 

54 

0 

0 

0 

55 

49 

25 

0 

0 

0 

25 

50 

55 

0 

0 

0 

56 

51 

26 

0 

0 

0 

26 

52 

56 

0 

0 

0 

57 

53 

27 

0 

0 

0 

27 

54 

57 

0 

0 

0 

58 

56 

28 

0 

0 

0 

28 

56 

58 

0 

0 

0 

59 

57 

29 

0 

0 

0 

29 

58 

59 

0 

0 

1 

0 

59 

30 

0 

0 

0 

31 

1 

60 

0 

0 

1 

2 

2 

636 


COPERNICUS 


7.  What  the  Greatest  Difference  Is  Between  the  Regular 
AND  THE  Apparent  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes 

[72^]  Now  that  the  mean  movements  have  been  set  out  in  this  way,  we  must 
inquire  what  the  greatest  difference  is  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent 
movement  of  the  equinoxes,  or  what  the  diameter  of  the  small  circle  is,  through 
which  the  movement  of  anomaly  turns.  ^  For  when  this  is  known,  it  will  be  easy 
to  discern  various  other  differences  in  the  movements.  As  was  written  above, 
between  the  observation  of  Timochares,  which  came  first,  and  that  of  Ptolemy 
in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Antoninus  Pius,  there  were  432  years ;  and  dur¬ 
ing  that  time  the  mean  movement  was  6°  and  the  apparent  4°20'.  So  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  them  is  1^40'.  And  the  movement  of  double^  anomaly  was  90°35'. 
Moreover,  it  seems  that  at  the  middle  of  this  period  of  time  or  around  there  the 
apparent  movement  reached  its  peak  of  greatest  slowness.  At  that  time  the 
[position  of  the]  apparent  movement  necessarily  agreed  with  the  mean  move¬ 
ment,  and  the  true  equinox  and  the  mean  equinox  occurred  at  the  same  section 
of  the  circles.®  Wherefore  if  we  make  a  distribution  of  the  movement  and  the 
time  into  two  equal  parts,  there  will  be  in  each  part  as  differences  between  the 
irregular  and  the  regular  movement  which  the  circle  of  anomaly  compre¬ 

hends  on  either  side  beneath  an  arc  of  45°173^'.  But  since  all  these  differences 
are  very  small  and  do  not  amount  to  on  the  ecliptic,  and  the  straight  lines 
are  almost  equal  to  the  arcs  subtended  by  them,  and  there  is  scarcely  any  di¬ 
versity  found  in  the  third-minutes:  we  who  are  staying  within  the  minutes  will 
make  no  error  if  we  employ  straight  lines  instead  of  arcs. 

[73^]  Let  ABC  be  a  part  of  the  ecliptic  and  on  it  let  the  mean  equinox  be  B, 
And  with  B  as  pole  let  there  be  described  the  semicircle 
ADC,  and  let  it  cut  the  ecliptic  at  points  A  and  C.  More¬ 
over  let  DB  be  drawn  from  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  it  will 
bisect  the  semicircle  at  D;  and  let  D  be  understood  to  be 
limit  of  greatest  slowness  and  beginning  of  the  in¬ 
crease.'*  In  the  quadrant  AD  let 

arc  Z)i;  =  45^173^'; 

and  through  point  E  from  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  let 
fall  EF]  and  let 

BF  =  50'. 

Our  problem  is  to  find  out  from  this  what  the  whole 
BFA  is. 

Accordingly  it  is  clear  that 

2BF  =  (Ai.2DE, 

'/.e.,  what  the  diameter  of  the  small  circle  is,  along  which  the  libration  takes  place  back 
and  forth. 

*The  anomaly  of  precession  is  called  the  “double”  anomaly  because  it  completes  two  cycles 
for  one  cycle  of  the  anomaly  of  obliquity. 

*As  Copernicus  showed  in  Chapter  4,  the  movement  of  the  libration,  considered  above, 
appears  fastest  around  the  centre  of  the  circle.  Hence  the  apparent  movement  itself  will  ap¬ 
pear  slowest  when  the  fastest  movement  of  libration  is  in  opposition  to  the  mean  movement 
with  which  it  is  compounded.  And  the  fastest  libration  is  in  opposition  to  the  mean  movement 
when  the  apparent  equinox  is  swinging  eastward  and  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  centre  of 
the  circle  or  the  mean  equinox. 

^Thus,  circle  ADC  is  the  circle  of  libration  transferred  from  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  to  around 
the  equinox — as  in  the  last  diagram  in  Chapter  5. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


637 


But 

FB  :  AFB  =  7107  :  10,000  =  50'  :  70'. 

Hence 

AB  =  1°10', 

and  that  is  the  greatest  difference  between  the  mean  and  the  apparent  move¬ 
ment  of  the  equinoxes,  which  we  were  seeking;  and  the  greatest  polar  deflexion 
of  28'  follows  upon  it. 

[72^]  For  with  this  set-up  let  ABC  be  the  arc  of  the  ecliptic,  BDE  the  mean 
equatorial  arc,  and  B  the  mean  section  of  the  appar¬ 
ent  equinoxes,  either  Aries  or  Libra,  and  through  the 
poles  of  DBE  let  fall  BF.  Now  along  arc  ABC  on 
both  sides  let 

arc  B/  =  arc  BZ=1°10'; 
hence,  by  addition, 

arc  /BK  =  2°20'. 

Moreover,  let  there  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to 
FB  extended  to  FBH  the  two  arcs  IG  and  HK  of  the 
apparent  equators.  Now  I  say  “at  right  angles,”  [73^] 
though  the  poles  of  IG  and  IK  are  usually  outside  of 
circle  BF,  since  the  movement  of  obliquity  gets  mixed  in,  as  was  seen  in  the  hy¬ 
pothesis,  but  on  account  of  the  distance  being  very  slight — for  at  its  greatest  it 
does  not  exceed  90°/350 — we  employ  these  angles  as  angles  which  are  right  to 
sense-perception.  For  no  great  error  will  appear  on  that  account.  Therefore  in 
triangle  IBG 

angle  /5(?  =  66^20', 

since  its  complement,  as  being  the  angle  of  mean  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic, 

angle  jDBA=  23^40'. 

And 

angle  BGI  =  90°. 

Moreover, 

angle  B/G  =  angle  IBD, 
because  they  are  alternate  angles.  And 

side  /R  =  70'. 

Therefore  too 

arc  BG  =  28', 

and  that  is  the  distance  between  the  poles  of  the  mean  and  the  apparent  equator. 
Similarly  in  triangle  BHK, 

angle  =  angle  IGB 

and 

angle  HBK  =  angle  IBG, 

and 

side  BK  =  side  BL 

Moreover, 

BH  =  BG  =  2S\ 

For 

GB  :  IB  =  BH  :BK; 

and  the  movements  will  be  of  the  same  ratio  in  the  poles  as  in  the  intersections. 


638 


COPERNICUS 


8.  On  the  Particular  Differences  in  the  Movements 
AND  THE  Table  of  Them 


[73b]  Therefore  since 

arc  ^R  =  70', 

and  since  arc  AB  does  not  appear  to  differ  from  the  chord  subtending  it  length¬ 
wise,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  exhibit  certain  other  differences  between  the  mean 
and  the  apparent  movements.  The  Greeks  call  the  differences  7rpoaQa<j)aLpkaeLSy 
or  ^^additosubtractions,^^  and  later  writers  ‘^aequationes,^^  by  the  subtraction  or 
addition  of  which  the  apparent  movements  are  made  to  harmonize  [with  the 
mean  movements].  We  shall  employ  the  Greek  word  as  being  more  fitting. 
Therefore  if 

arc  £'Z)  =  3°, 

then  in  accordance  with  the  ratio  of  ^45  to  the  chord  BF, 
arc  BF  =  ^\ 

which  is  the  additosubtraction.  And  if 
then 

arc  BF  =  7'; 


and  if 
then 


BF  =  IV, 

and  so  on. 

We  think  we  should  use  a  similar  ratio  in  the  case  of  the  change  of  obliquity 
also,  where,  as  we  said,  a  difference  of  24'  has  been  found  between  the  greatest 
and  the  least  obliquity.  These  24'  subtend  a  semicircle  of  simple  anomaly  every 
1717  years,  and  the  mean  differences  subtending  a  quadrant  of  a  circle  will  be 
12',  where  the  pole  of  the  small  circle  of  this  anomaly  will  be  at  an  obliquity  of 
23^40'. 


And  in  this  way,  as  we  said,  we  shall  extract  the  remaining  parts  of  difference 
approximately  in  proportion  to  the  aforesaid  as  in  the  subjoined  table.  And  if 
through  these  demonstrations  the  apparent  movements  can  be  compounded 
by  various  modes,  nevertheless  that  mode  is  better  whereby  all  the  particular 
additosubtractions  may  be  taken  separately,  that  the  calculus  of  their  move¬ 
ments  may  be  easier  to  understand  and  may  agree  better  with  the  explanations 
of  what  has  been  demonstrated. 

Accordingly  we  have  drawn  up  a  table  of  sixty  rows,  increasing  by  3®'s.  For 
in  this  way  it  will  not  be  spread  over  too  much  space,  and  it  will  not  seem  to  be 
compressed  into  too  little — as  we  shall  do  in  the  case  of  the  similar  remaining 
tables.  The  table  will  have  only  four  main  columns,  the  first  two  of  which  will 
contain  the  degrees  of  both  semicircles;  and  we  call  them  the  common  numbers, 
because  the  obliquity  of  the  circle  of  signs  is  taken  from  the  simple  number,  and 
twice  the  number  applies  to  the  additosubtractions  of  the  movement  of  the 
equinoxes;  and  the  numbers  have  their  commencement  at  the  beginning  of  the 
increase  [74^]  [in  velocity].^  In  the  third  column  will  be  placed  the  additosub¬ 
tractions  of  the  equinoxes  corresponding  to  the  single  3°’s;  and  they  are  to  be 
added  to,  or  subtracted  from,  the  mean  movement — ^which  Ave  measure  from  the 


H.e.,  in  the  foregoing  diagram,  the  first  quadrant  comprises  the  arc  DA]  and  the  fourth 
quadrant  the  arc  CD, 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  639 

head  of  Aries  at  the  spring  equinox.  The  subtractive  additosubtractions  corre¬ 
spond  to  the  numbers  in  the  first  semicircle  of  the  anomaly  or  the  first  column; 
and  the  additive,  to  those  in  the  second  column  and  the  second  semicircle. 
Finally,  in  the  last  column  are  the  minutes,  which  are  called  the  differences  in 
the  proportions  of  obliquity  and  which  go  up  to  60',  since  in  place  of  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  24'  between  greatest  and  least  obliquity  we  are  putting  60',  and  we  ad¬ 
just  the  proportional  minutes  to  them  in  the  same  ratio  in  proportion  to  the 
other  differences  of  obliquity.  On  that  account  we  place  60'  as  corresponding  to 
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  anomaly;  but  where  the  difference  of  obliquity  is 
22',  as  in  the  anomaly  of  33°,  we  put  55'  instead.  In  this  way  we  put  50'  in  place 
of  20',  as  in  the  anomaly  of  48°;  and  so  on  for  the  rest,  as  in  the  subjoined  table.^ 


Additions-and-Subtractions  of  Equinoxes,  Obliquity  of  the  Ecliptic 


A  ddiiions-  and- 

A  dditions-and- 

Common 

Subtractions 

Proportional 

Common 

Subtractions 

Proportional 

Numbers 

of  Movement 

Minutes  of 

Numbers 

of  Movement 

Minutes  of 

of  Equinoxes 

Obliquity 

of  Equinoxes 

Obliquity 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min. 

3 

357 

0 

4 

60 

93 

267 

1 

10 

28 

6 

354 

0 

7 

60 

96 

264 

1 

10 

27 

9 

351 

0 

11 

60 

99 

261 

1 

9 

25 

12 

348 

0 

14 

59 

102 

258 

1 

9 

24 

15 

345 

0 

18 

59 

105 

255 

1 

8 

22 

18 

342 

0 

21 

59 

108 

252 

1 

7 

21 

21 

339 

0 

25 

58 

111 

249 

1 

5 

19 

24 

336 

0 

28 

57 

114 

246 

1 

4 

18 

27 

333 

0 

32 

56 

117 

243 

1 

2 

16 

30 

330 

0 

35 

56 

120 

240 

1 

1 

15 

33 

327 

0 

38 

55 

123 

237 

0 

59 

14 

36 

324 

0 

41 

54 

126 

234 

0 

56 

12 

39 

321 

0 

44 

53 

129 

231 

0 

54 

11 

42 

318 

0 

47 

52 

132 

228 

0 

52 

10 

45 

315 

0 

49 

51 

135 

225 

0 

49 

9 

48 

312 

0 

52 

50 

138 

222 

0 

47 

8 

51 

309 

0 

54 

49 

141 

219 

0 

44 

7 

54 

306 

0 

56 

48 

144 

216 

0 

41 

6 

57 

303 

0 

9 

46 

147 

213 

0 

38 

5 

60 

300 

1 

1 

45 

150 

210 

0 

35 

4 

63 

297 

1 

2 

44 

153 

207 

0 

32 

3 

66 

294 

1 

4 

42 

156 

204 

0 

28 

3 

69 

291 

1 

5 

41 

159 

•  201 

0 

25 

2 

72 

288 

1 

7 

39 

162 

198 

0 

21 

1 

75 

285 

1 

8 

38 

165 

195 

0 

18 

1 

78 

282 

1 

9 

36 

168 

192 

0 

14 

1 

81 

279 

1 

9 

35 

171 

189 

0 

11 

0 

84 

276 

1 

10 

33 

174 

186 

0 

7 

0 

87 

273 

1 

10 

32 

177 

183 

0 

4 

0 

90 

270 

1 

10 

30  1 

180 

180 

0 

0 

0 

^Thus,  let  line  F7G,  as  in  Chapter  3,  represent  the  colure  of  the  solstices.  Point  F  is  the  limit 
of  greatest  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  point  G  that  of  the  least;  and  thus  the  distance  FG  is  28'. 
The  distance  KN  of  the  libration  of  the  equinoxes  is  2°20'.  In  the  foregoing  table  the  anomalies 
of  precession  and  of  obliquity  are  taken  as  starting  at  point  I  and  proceeding  along  the  route 
INFKILGM. 


640 


COPERNICUS 


9.  On  the  Examination  and  Correction  of  That  Which  Was  Set 
Forth  Concerning  the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes 

[75^]  But  since  by  an  inference  we  took  the  beginning  of  increase  in  the  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly  as  occurring  in  the  middle  of  the  time  from  the  36th  year  of 
the  first  period  of  Callippus  to  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus,  and  we  take  the  order 
of  the  movement  of  anomaly  from  that  beginning;  it  is  still  necessary  for  us  to 
test  whether  we  did  that  correctly  and  whether  it  agrees  with  the  observations. 

Let  us  consider  again  the  three  observations  of  the  stars  made  by  Timochares, 
Ptolemy,  and  al-Battani  the  Harranite:  And  it  is  clear  that  there  were  432 
Egyptian  years  in  the  first  interval  and  742  years  in  the  second.  The  regular 
movement  in  the  first  span  of  time  was  6°;  the  irregular  movement  4°20';  and 
the  movement  of  double  anomaly  90°35',  subtracting  1®40'  from  the  regular 
movement.  During  the  second  interval  the  regular  movement  was  10°21',  the 
irregular  113^°;  and  the  movement  of  double  anomaly  was  155°34',  adding  1°9' 
to  the  regular  movement. 

Now  as  before  let  the  arc  of  the  ecliptic  be  ABC,  and  let  B — which  is  to  be  the 
mean  spring  equinox — be  taken  as  a  pole;  let 
arc  A5  =  l°10', 

and  let  the  small  circle  ADCE  be  described.  But  let  the 
regular  movement  of  B  be  understood  as  in  the  direction 
of  A,  i.e.,  westward;  and  let  A  be  the  westward  limit, 
where  the  irregular  equinox  is  westernmost;  and  C  the 
eastern  limit,  where  the  irregular  equinox  is  eastern¬ 
most.  Furthermore,  from  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  drop 
DBE  through  point  B,  DBE  together  with  the  ecliptic 
will  cut  the  small  circle  ADCE  into  four  equal  parts, 
since  circles  described  through  the  poles  of  one  another 
cut  one  another  at  right  angles.  However  since  the  movement  in  the  semicircle 
ADC  is  eastward,  and  the  movement  remaining  in  CEA  is  westward,  the  ex¬ 
treme  slowness  of  the  apparent  equinox  will  be  at  D  on  account  of  its  resistance 
to  the  forward  movement  of  B]  but  there  will  be  at  E  the  greatest  velocity  for 
the  movements  moving  forwards  in  the  same  direction. 

Moreover  on  either  side  of  D  let 

arc  FD  =  arc  Z)6  =  45°17J^'. 

Let  F  be  the  first  terminus  of  the  anomaly — the  one  observed  by  Timochares; 
G  the  second — the  one  observed  by  Ptolemy;  and  P  the  third — the  one  observed 
by  al-Battani.  And  through  these  points  let  fall  great  circles  FN,  GM,  and  OP 
through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic;  and  they  all  ]75^]  appear  in  this  very  small 
circle  rather  much  like  straight  lines.  Therefore 
arc  FZ)G  =  99°35', 

where  circle  ADCE  =  3(50°, 

wherefrom 


And 


-add.  MN  =  V^0', 

where  ABC  =  2°20'. 


wherefrom 


arc  G(7EP  =  155°34', 
+add.  ilfPO  =  109'. 


641 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


Accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

arc  PAF=113°51' 


wherefrom 


But  since  by  addition 


+add.  ON  =  Zl' 

where  AB  =  70' , 

arc  DGCEP  =  200%V 


and 

EP  =  DGCEP-  180®  =  20^51'; 

therefore  by  the  table  of  chords  in  a  circle,  as  if  a  straight  line, 

BO  =  350, 

where  AB  =  1,000. 

But 

£0  =  24', 

where  AB  =  70'; 

and 

M£  =  50'. 

Hence,  by  addition, 

M£0  =  74', 

and, 

NO=MN-MBO  =  20', 

But,  in  the  foregoing, 

Af£0  =  69', 

and 

iVO  =  31'. 


Hence  NO  has  a  deficiency  of  5';  and  MO  has  an  excess  of  5'.  Accordingly  the 
circle  ADCE  must  be  revolved,  until  there  is  compensation  on  both  sides. 

But  this  will  take  place  if 

arc  £0  =  423^®, 


so  that  by  subtraction, 

arc  Z)£  =  48®5'. 

For  by  this  both  errors  will  seem  to  be  corrected  and  everything  else  will  be  all 
right,  since — with  the  beginning  at  D  the  limit  of  greatest  slowness — 

arc  DGCEPAF  =  3ir55', 

which  is  the  movement  of  anomaly  at  the  first  terminus;  at  the  second  terminus 

arc  OG  =  42H®; 


and  at  the  third  terminus 


arc  DGCEP  =  m%', 


Now  since 

at  the  first  terminus 


AB  =  70'; 


+add.  BN  =  52', 

by  what  has  been  shown;  at  the  second  terminus 

-add.  MB  =  47}4'; 

and  at  the  third  terminus  again 

+add.  £0  =  21'. 

Therefore  during  the  first  interval 

arc  A/iV=l®40', 

and  during  the  second  interval 

arcM£0  =  l®9'; 


t)42  COPERNICUS 

and  they  agree  exactly  with  the  observations.  Moreover,  by  those  naeans  a 
simple  anomaly  of  155°57}/^'  is  made  evident  at  the  first  terminus;  at  the  second 
terminus,  one  of  21°15';  and  at  the  third  terminus,  a  simple  anomaly  of  99°2' — 
as  was  to  be  shown. 


10.  What  the  Greatest  Difference  Is  Between  the  Intersections 
OF  THE  Equator  and  the  Ecliptic 


[76^]  In  the  same  way  we  shall  confirm  what  we  expounded  concerning  the 
change  in  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator  and  shall  find  it  to  be  correct. 
For  we  have  in  Ptolemy  for  the  second  year  of  Antoninus  Pius  a  corrected 
simple  anomaly  of  2134°;  arid  a  greatest  obliquity  of  23°51'20"  was  found  to  go 
with  it.  From  this  position  down  to  the  observation  made  by  us  there  have  been 
1387  years,  during  which  the  movement  of  simple  anomaly  is  reckoned  to  be 
144°4';  and  at  this  time  an  obliquity  of  approximately  23°28%'  is  found. 

In  connection  with  this  let  there  be  drawn  again  arc  ABC  of  the  ecliptic,  or 
instead  of  it  a  straight  line  on  account  of  the 
shortness  of  the  arc;  and  above  it  the  semicircle 
of  simple  anomaly  around  pole  B,  as  before. 

And  let  A  be  the  limit  of  greatest  declination 
and  C  the  limit  of  least  declination;  and  it  is  the 
difference  between  them  which  we  are  examin¬ 
ing.  Therefore  in  the  small  circle  let 
arc  AE  =  21^15\ 

and, 

arc  ED  =  AD -AE  =  68^45'; 
while,  by  calculation, 

arc  EDF=  144%' 

and, 

arc  DF  =  EDF  -  ED  =  75°19'. 

Drop  perpendiculars  EG  and  EK  upon  the  diameter  ABC. 

Now  on  the  great  circle 

arc  GA  =  22'56", 

on  account  of  the  difference  in  obliquities  from  Ptolemy  to  us. 

But  on  account  of  being  like  a  straight  line, 

(?B  =  34ch.  2ED  =  9S2, 

where  AC  the  diameter ^s  image  =  2,000. 


D 


And  also 


KB  =  y^  ch.  2  DF  =  967. 


And 

But  according  as 


GA:=1899, 

where  AC  =  2,000. 
GK  =  22'56", 


AC  =  24', 

the  difference  between  greatest  and  least  obliquity  which  we  have  been  examin¬ 
ing.  So  it  is  established  that  the  greatest  obliquity  which  occurred  during  the 
time  between  Timochares  and  Ptolemy  was  23°52'  and  a  least  obliquity  of 
23°28'  is  now  approaching.  [76^]  Hence  also  whatever  mean  inclinations  of  these 
circles  there  happen  to  be  are  discovered  by  the  same  mathematical  reasoning 
we  expounded  in  connection  with  the  precession. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


643 


11.  On  Determining  the  Positions  of  the  Regular  Movements 
OF  the  Equinoxes  and  of  the  Anomaly 

With  all  that  unfolded,  it  remains  for  us  to  determine  the  positions  of  the 
movements  of  the  spring  equinox.  Some  people  call  these  positions  ^‘roots/^  be¬ 
cause  computations  may  be  drawn  from  them  for  any  given  time.  Ptolemy  con¬ 
sidered  that  the  farthest  point  in  history  to  which  our  knowledge  of  this  question 
extends  was  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Nabonassar  of  the  Chaldees,  whom 
many  people — taken  in  by  the  similarity  of  the  names — have  thought  to  be 
Nabuchodonoso,  and  whom  the  ratio  of  time  and  the  computation  of  Ptolemy — 
which  according  to  the  historians  falls  in  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  of  the  Chaldees 
— declare  to  have  been  much  later.  But  we,  seeking  better  kno^vn  times,  have 
judged  it  sufficient  if  we  start  with  the  first  Olympiad,  which — ^measured  from 
the  summer  solstice — is  found  to  have  preceded  Nabonassar  by  28  years.  At  this 
time  Canicula  was  beginning  to  rise  for  the  Greeks,  and  the  Olympic  games  were 
being  held,  as  Censorinus  and  other  trustworthy  authors  report.  Whence,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  more  exact  reckoning  of  the  times  which  is  necessary  in  calculat¬ 
ing  the  heavenly  movements,  there  are  27  years  and  247  days  from  the  first 
Olympiad  at  noon  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  Hekatombaion  by  the  Greek 
calendar  to  Nabonassar  and  noon  of  the  first  day  of  the  month  of  Thoth  by  the 
Egyptian  calendar. 

From  this  to  the  death  of  Alexander  there  are  424  Egyptian  years. 

But  from  the  decease  of  Alexander  to  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Julius 
Caesar,  there  are  278  Egyptian  years  1183^  days  up  to  the  midnight  before  the 
Kalends  of  January,  which  Julius  Caesar  took  as  the  beginning  of  the  year  in¬ 
stituted  by  him;  it  was  in  his  third  year  as  Pontifex  Maximus  and  during  the 
consulship  of  Marcus  Aemilius  Lepidus  that  he  instituted  this  year.  And  so  the 
later  years  have  been  called  Julian  from  the  year  as  established  by  Julius  Caesar. 

And  from  the  fourth  consulship  of  Caesar  to  Octavius  Augustus  there  are  by 
the  Roman  calendar  18  years  up  to  the  Kalends  of  January,  although  it  was  on 
the  16th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  February  that  Augustus  was  proclaimed 
Emperor  and  son  of  the  deified  Julius  Caesar  by  the  senate  and  the  other  citi¬ 
zens  according  to  the  decree  of  Numatius  Plancus,  in  the  seventh  year  of  the 
consulship  of  Marcus  Vipsanus  and  himself.  But  inasmuch  as  two  years  before 
this  the  Egyptians  came  into  the  power  of  the  Romans  after  the  fall  of  Antony 
[77®]  and  Cleopatra,  the  Egyptians  reckon  15  years  2463^  days  up  to  noon  of 
the  first  day  of  the  month  Thoth,  which  by  the  Roman  calendar  was  the  3rd 
day  before  the  Kalends  of  September. 

Accordingly  from  Augustus  to  the  years  of  Christ,  which  begin  similarly  in 
January,  there  are  27  years  by  the  Roman  calendar  but  29  years  130}/2  days  by 
the  Egyptian. 

From  this  to  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus,  when,  as  Claud  Ptolemy  says,  the 
positions  of  the  stars  were  observed  by  him,  there  are  138  Roman  years  55  days. 
And  these  years  add  34  days  to  the  Egyptian  reckoning. 

Between  the  first  Olympiad  and  that  moment  of  time  there  have  been  alto¬ 
gether  913  years  101  days,  for  which  time  the  regular  precession  of  the  equinoxes 
was  12°44',  and  the  simple  anomaly  was  95°44'. 

But  in  the  second  year  of  Antoninus,  as  has  been  narrated,  the  spring  equinox 
was  6®40'  to  the  west  of  the  first  of  the  stars  which  are  in  the  head  of  Aries;  and 


644 


COPERNICUS 

since  there  was  a  double  anomaly  of  423^®,  there  was  a  subtractive  difference  of 
48'  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent  movement.  And  when  this  difference 
was  restored  to  the  6°40'  of  the  apparent  movement,  it  made  the  mean  position 
of  the  spring  equinox  to  be  at  7°28'.  If  to  this  we  add  the  360°  of  a  circle,  and 
from  the  sum  subtract  12°44',  we  shall  have  the  mean  position  of  the  spring 
equinox  at  354°44' — that  is  to  say,  the  one  Avhich  was  then  5°16'  east  of  the 
first  star  of  Aries — for  the  first  Ol^^piad  which  began  on  noon  of  the  first  day 
of  the  month  Hekatombaion  among  the  Athenians. 

In  the  same  way  if  from  the  21°15'  of  simple  anomaly  95°45'  are  subtracted, 
there  will  remain  a  position  of  simple  anomaly  of  285°30'  for  the  same  beginning 
of  the  Olympiads. 

And  again  by  a  series  of  additions  of  movement  made  in  accordance  with  the 
lengths  of  time — the  360°  are  not  counted  where  there  is  an  excess  above  that — 
we  shall  have  the  position  or  root  of  the  regular  movement  at  the  death  of 
Alexander  as  1°2',  and  the  position  of  the  movement  of  simple  anomaly  as 
332°52';  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Caesar  a  mean  movement  of  4°55'  and 
an  anomaly  of  2°2';  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Christ  a  position  of 
the  mean  movement  at  5°32'  and  an  anomaly  of  6°45';  and  in  this  way  we  shall 
determine  the  roots  of  movements  for  whatever  beginnings  of  time  are  chosen. 

12.  On  the  Computation  of  the  Precession  of  the 
Spring  Equinox  and  the  Obliquity 

[77b]  Therefore,  whenever  we  wish  to  determine  the  position  of  the  spring 
equinox,  if  the  years  from  the  assumed  beginning  to  the  given  time  are  unequal, 
such  as  those  of  the  Roman  calendar,  which  we  use  commonly,  we  shall  reduce 
them  to  equal  or  FJgyptian  years.  For  we  do  not  use  any  other  years  than  the 
Egyptian  in  calculating  the  regular  movements,  on  account  of  the  reason  which 
we  mentioned.  In  so  far  as  the  number  of  years  is  greater  than  a  period  of  60 
years,  we  shall  divide  it  into  periods  of  60  years;  and  when  we  enter  the  tables 
of  movement  through  these  60-year  periods,  we  shall  pass  over  as  supernumer¬ 
ary  the  first  column  appearing  in  the  movements;  and  beginning  with  the  second 
column,  we  shall  determine  the  60°'s,  if  there  are  any,  together  with  the  other 
degrees  and  minutes,  which  follow.^  Next  as  the  second  entry  and  from  the 
first  column,  as  they  are  found,  Ave  shall  take  the  60°'s,  degrees  and  minutes 
corresponding  to  the  remaining  years.  We  shall  do  the  same  thing  in  the  case  of 
days  and  the  periods  of  60  days,  since  Ave  AAush  to  connect  the  days  A\dth  their 
regular  movements  according  to  the  table  of  days  and  minutes,  although  in  this 
case  the  minutes  of  days  or  even  the  days  themselves  are  not  AATongly  neglected 
on  account  of  the  slowness  of  their  movements,  as  Avithin  the  daily  movement 
there  is  a  question  only  of  seconds  or  third  minutes.  Therefore  Avhen  AA^e  have 
made  a  sum  of  all  these  together  Avith  their  root,  by  adding  single  numbers  to 
single  numbers  Avithin  the  same  species — not  counting  six  60°'s,  if  they  occur — 
Ave  shall  have  the  mean  position  of  the  spring  equinox,  its  distance  to  the  Avest 
of  the  first  star  of  the  Ram,  or  the  distance  of  that  star  east  of  the  equinox. 

In  the  same  Avay  we  shall  determine  the  anomaly  too. 

But  Ave  shall  find  placed  in  the  last  column  of  the  table  of  additosubtractions 
and  corresponding  to  the  simple  anomaly  the  proportional  minutes:  Ave  shall  set 
them  aside  and  save  them.  Then,  in  the  third  column  of  the  same  table  and  cor- 

That  is  to  say,  reading  the  column  of  degrees  as  60®^s,  the  minutes  as  degrees,  and  so  on. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  645 

responding  to  the  double  anomaly  we  shall  find  the  additosubtraction,  Le.,  the 
degrees  and  minutes  by  which  the  true  movement  differs  from  the  mean.  And 
if  the  double  anomaly  is  less  than  a  semicircle,  we  shall  subtract  the  additosub¬ 
traction  from  the  mean  movement.  But  if,  by  having  more  than  180°,  the  double 
anomaly  exceeds  a  semicircle,  we  shall  add  [78^]  the  additosubtraction  to  the 
mean  movement.  And  that  which  is  thus  the  sum  or  remainder  will  comprehend 
the  true  and  apparent  precession  of  the  spring  equinox,  or  in  turn  the  then  angu¬ 
lar  elongation  of  the  first  star  of  Aries  from  the  spring  equinox.  But  if  you  seek 
the  position  of  any  other  star,  add  its  number  as  assigned  in  the  catalogue  of 
the  stars. 

But  since  things  which  have  to  do  with  the  laboratory  usually  become  clearer 
by  means  of  some  examples,  let  our  problem  be  to  find  the  true  position  of  the 
spring  equinox  together  with  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  for  the  16th  day  before 
the  Kalends  of  May  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1525,  and  how  great  the  angular 
distance  of  Spica  in  Virgo  from  the  same  equinox  is.  Therefore,  it  is  clear  that 
in  the  1524  Roman  years  106  days  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord 
up  to  this  time,  there  has  been  an  intercalation  of  381  days,  Le.,  1  year  16  days, 
which  in  terms  of  equal  years  make  1525  yesirs  122  days:  there  are  twenty-five 
periods  of  60  years  and  25  years  over,  and  two  periods  of  60  days  and  2  days 
over.  But  to  the  twenty-five  periods  of  60  years  there  correspond  in  the  table 
of  mean  movement  20°55'2" ;  to  the  25  years,  20'55" ;  to  the  two  periods  of  60 
days,  16";  the  remaining  2  days  are  in  third  minutes.  All  these  together  with 
their  root — which  was  5°32' — add  up  to  26°48',  the  mean  precession  of  the 
spring  equinox.  Similarly,  the  movement  of  simple  anomaly  in  the  twenty-five 
periods  of  60  years  has  been  two  60°^s  and  37°15'3";  in  the  25  years,  2°37'15";  in 
the  two  periods  of  60  days,  2'4";  and  in  the  2  days,  2".  There  also,  together  with 
the  root — which  is  6°45' — add  up  to  166°40',  the  simple  anomaly.  I  shall  save 
as  corresponding  to  this  anomaly  the  proportional  minutes  found  in  the  last 
column  of  the  table  of  the  additosub tractions ;  for  they  will  come  into  use  in  in¬ 
vestigating  the  obliquity;  and  only  1'  is  found  in  this  case.  Next,  as  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  double  anomaly  of  333°20',  I  find  32'  as  the  additosubtraction,  which 
is  additive  because  the  double  anomaly  is  greater  than  a  semicircle.  And  when 
it  is  added  to  the  mean  movement,  there  comes  about  a  true  and  apparent  pre¬ 
cession  of  the  spring  equinox  of  27°21'.  And  lastly  if  to  that  we  add  the  170° 
which  is  the  angular  distance  of  Spica  in  Virgo  from  the  first  star  in  Aries,  I 
shall  have  its  position  [78^]  to  the  east  of  the  spring  equinox  at  17°21'  of  Libra, 
where  it  was  found  at  approximately  the  time  of  our  observation. 

Now  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  and  its  declination  have  the  ratio  that  when 
there  are  60  proportional  minutes,  the  differences  located  in  the  table  of  declina¬ 
tions — I  mean  the  differences  at  greatest  and  least  obliquity — are  added  in  their 
entirety  to  the  degrees  of  the  declinations.  But  in  this  case,  1'  adds  only  24"  to 
the  obliquity.  Wherefore  the  declinations  of  the  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  placed 
in  the  table  remain  as  they  are  throughout  this  time  on  account  of  the  least  ob¬ 
liquity  already  approaching  us,  though  at  some  other  time  they  would  be  more 
obviously  changeable.  In  this  way,  for  example,  if  the  simple  anomaly  were  99°, 
as  it  was  in  the  1380th  Egyptian  year  of  Our  Lord,  there  are  given  by  it  25  pro¬ 
portional  minutes.  But  24'  is  the  difference  between  greatest  and  least  obliquity 
and 


60':24'  =  25':10'. 


646  COPERNICUS 

And  the  addition  of  10'  to  28'  gives  an  obliquity  of  23°38'  for  that  time.  If  then 
I  should  wish  to  know  the  declination  of  any  degree  on  the  ecliptic,  for  example, 
3°  of  Taurus,  which  is  33®  distant  from  the  equinox,  I  find  in  the  table  12®32', 
with  a  difference  of  12'.  But 

60'  :25'  =  12'  :5'; 

and  the  addition  of  5'  to  32'  gives  12°37'  for  33®  of  the  ecliptic.  We  can  do  the 
same  thing  in  the  case  of  the  angles  of  section  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator 
and  the  right  ascensions — if  it  is  not  better  to  make  use  of  the  ratios  of  spherical 
triangles — except  that  it  is  always  necessary  to  add  in  the  case  of  the  angles  of 
section  and  to  subtract  in  the  case  of  the  right  ascensions,  so  that  all  things  may 
be  corrected  to  accord  with  their  time. 

13.  On  the  Magnitude  and  Difference  of  the  Solar  Year 

But  that  this  is  the  way  it  is  with  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  and  solstices 
— the  precession  being  due  to  the  inclination  of  the  Earth's  axis,  as  we  said — 
will  also  be  confirmed  by  the  annual  movement  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  as  it 
affects  the  appearance  of  the  sun,  which  we  must  now  discuss.  It  follows  of  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  that  the  magnitude  of  the  year,  when  referred  to  one  of  the 
equinoxes  or  solstices,  is  found  unequal  on  account  of  the  irregular  change  of 
the  termini.  For  these  things  imply  one  another  mutually. 

Wherefore  we  must  separate  and  distinguish  [79^]  the  seasonal  year  from  the 
sidereal  year.  For  we  call  that  the  natural  year  which  times  the  four  seasonal 
changes  of  the  year  for  us;  and  that  the  sidereal,  the  revolutions  of  which  are 
referred  to  some  one  of  the  fixed  stars.  Now  the  observations  of  the  ancients 
make  clear  in  many  ways  that  the  natural  year,  which  is  also  called  the  revolv¬ 
ing  year,  is  unequal.  For  Callippus,  Aristarchus  of  Samos,  and  Archimedes  of 
Syracuse  determined  the  year  as  containing  a  quarter  of  a  day  in  addition  to  the 
365  whole  days — taking  the  beginning  of  the  year  at  the  summer  solstice,  after 
the  Athenian  manner. 

But  Claud  Ptolemy,  realizing  that  the  apprehension  of  the  solstices  was  de¬ 
tailed  and  difficult,  did  not  rely  upon  their  observations  very  much  and  went 
over  rather  to  Hipparchus,  who  left  after  him  records  not  so  much  of  the  solar 
solstices  as  of  the  equinoxes  in  Rhodes  and  reported  that  there  was  some  small 
deficiency  in  the  quarter-day;  and  afterwards  Ptolemy  decided  that  the  de¬ 
ficiency  was  }iooth.  part  of  a  day — as  follows.  For  he  took  the  autumn  equinox 
observed  as  accurately  as  possible  by  Hipparchus  at  Alexandria  in  the  177th 
year  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  at  midnight  of  the  third  intercalary 
day  by  the  Egyptian  calendar — ^which  the  fourth  intercalary  day  follows.  Then 
Ptolemy  compared  it  with  the  equinox  as  observed  by  himself  at  Alexandria  in 
the  third  year  of  Antoninus,  which  was  the  463rd  year  since  the  death  of  Alex¬ 
ander,  on  the  9th  day  of  Athyr,  the  third  month  of  the  Egyptians,  at  approxi¬ 
mately  one  hour  after  the  rising  of  the  sun.  Accordingly  between  this  observa¬ 
tion  and  that  of  Hipparchus  there  were  285  Egyptian  years  70  days  7J^  hours, 
though  there  should  have  been  71  days  6  hours,  if  the  revolving  year  had  a 
full  quarter-day  in  addition  to  the  whole  days.  Accordingly  the  285  years  were 
deficient  by  ^^20^^  of  a  day,  whence  it  follows  that  a  whole  day  fell  out  in  300 
years.  Moreover,  he  made  a  similar  inference  from  the  spring  equinox.  For  what 
he  recorded  as  reported  by  Hipparcchus  in  the  178th  year  of  Alexander  on  the 
27th  day  of  Mechir,  the  6th  month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar,  at  sunrise,  he 


647 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

himself  found  in  the  463rd  year  of  Alexander  on  the  7th  day  of  Pachon  the  9th 
month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  at  a  little  more  than  one  hour  after  midday; 
and  in  the  same  way  the  285  years  were  deficient  by  of  a  day.  By  the  aid 

of  these  indications  Ptolemy  determined  the  revolving  year  as  having  365  days 
14  min.  [of  a  day]  48  sec.  [or  5  hours  55  min.  12  sec.]^. 

Afterwards  al-Battani  in  Arata,  Syria,  [79^]  in  the  1206th  year  after  the  death 
of  Alexander  observed  the  autumn  equinox  with  no  less  diligence  and  found 
that  it  occurred  after  the  7th  day  of  the  month  Pachon,  approximately  7% 
hours  later  in  the  night,  z.e.,  4^  hours  before  the  light  of  the  8th  day.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  comparing  his  own  observation  with  that  of  Ptolemy  made  in  the  third 
year  of  Antoninus  one  hour  after  sunrise  at  Alexandria — which  is  10®  to  the 
west  of  Arata — he  corrected  Ptolemy^s  observation  for  the  meridian  at  Arata 
and  found  the  equinox  must  have  occurred  at  1^  hours  after  sunrise.  Accord¬ 
ingly  in  the  period  of  743  equal  years  the  sum  of  the  quarter-days  amounted  to 
178  extra  days  and  17%  hours  instead  of  185%  days.  Accordingly  since  there 
was  deficiency  of  7  days  %  hours,  it  was  seen  that  the  quarter-day  was  deficient 
by  Koefh  of  a  day.  Therefore  in  accordance  with  the  number  of  years  he  sub¬ 
tracted  one  743rd  part  of  the  7  days  %  hours  [which  is  13  min.  of  an  hour  36  sec.] 
from  the  quarter-day  and  recorded  the  natural  year  as  containing  365  days  5 
hours  46  min.  24  sec. 

We  too  made  observations  of  the  autumn  equinox  at  Frauenburg  in  the  year 
of  Our  Lord  1515  on  the  18th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  October:  but  according 
to  the  Egyptian  calendar  it  was  the  1840th  year  after  the  death  of  Alexander  on 
the  6th  day  of  the  month  Phaophi,  half  an  hour  after  sunrise.  But  since  Arata 
is  about  25®  to  the  east  of  this  spot — which  makes  1%  hours — therefore  during 
the  time  between  our  equinox  and  that  of  al-Battani  there  were  633  Egyptian 
years  and  153  days  6%  hours  in  place  of  158  days  6  hours.  But  between  the  ob¬ 
servation  made  by  Ptolemy  at  Alexandria  and  the  place  and  date  of  our  ob¬ 
servation,  there  were  1376  Egyptian  years  332  days  %  hour.  For  there  is  about 
an  hour’s  difference  between  us  and  Alexandria.  Therefore  during  the  633  years 
between  al-Battani  and  us  there  have  fallen  out  4  days  23%  hours,  or  1  day 
per  128  years;  but  during  the  1376  years  after  Ptolemy  approximately  12  days, 
t.e.,  1  day  per  115  years,  and  again  the  year  has  become  unequal  on  both  sides. 

[80^]  Moreover,  we  determined  the  spring  equinox,  which  occurred  in  the 
year  of  Our  Lord  1516,  4%  hours  after  midnight  on  the  5th  day  before  the  Ides 
of  March ;  and  since  the  spring  equinox  of  Ptolemy — the  meridian  of  Alexandria 
being  corrected  for  ours — there  have  been  1376  Egyptian  years  332  days  16% 
hours,  in  which  it  is  apparent  that  the  distances  between  the  spring  and  autumn 
equinoxes  are  unequal.  And  so  it  is  of  much  importance  that  the  solar  year  as 
determined  in  this  way  should  be  equal.  For  the  fact  that  at  the  autumnal  equi¬ 
noxes  between  Ptolemy  and  us,  as  was  shown,  in  accordance  with  the  equal 
distribution  of  years,  the  quarter-day  should  be  deficient  in  the  115th  part  of  a 
day  makes  the  equinox  come  half  a  day  later  than  al-Battani’s.  And  the  period 
from  al-Battani  to  us,  where  the  quarter-day  must  have  been  deficient  in  the 
128th  part  of  a  day,  is  not  consonant  with  Ptolemy,  but  the  date  precedes  by  a 
full  day  the  equinox  observed  by  him,  and  the  equinox  of  Hipparchus  by  two 
days.  Similarly  the  time  of  al-Battani’s  equinox  as  measured  from  Ptolemy’s 
precedes  the  equinox  of  Hipparchus  by  2  days. 

H.e.,  Ptolemy  found  1 /300th  part  of  a  day  lacking  to  a  full  quarter-day. 


648  COPERNICUS 

Therefore  the  equality  of  the  solar  year  is  more  correctly  measured  from  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  as  Thebites  ben  Chora  was  the  first  to  find;  and  its 
magnitude  is  365  days  15  minutes  [of  a  day]  23  seconds  (which  are  approximate¬ 
ly  6  hours  9  min.  12  sec.)  according  to  a  probable  argument  taken  from  the  fact 
that  the  year  appears  longer  in  the  slower  passage  of  the  equinoxes  and  solstices 
than  in  the  faster  and  in  accordance  with  a  fixed  proportion;  and  that  could  not 
be  the  case,  if  there  were  no  equality  with  reference  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars.  Wherefore  Ptolemy  is  not  to  be  listened  to  in  that  part  where  he  thinks 
that  it  is  absurd  and  irrelevant  to  measure  the  annual  regularity  of  the  sun 
through  its  restitutions  with  reference  to  some  one  of  the  fixed  stars  and  that 
this  is  no  more  fitting  than  if  someone  were  to  take  Jupiter  or  Saturn  as  the 
measure  of  that  regularity.  And  so  there  is  a  ready  reason  why  the  seasonal  year 
was  longer  before  Ptolemy  and  after  him  became  shorter,  by  a  variable  differ¬ 
ence. 

But  also  in  the  case  of  the  astral  or  sidereal  year  an  error  can  come  about, 
but  nevertheless  a  very  slight  one  and  far  less  than  the  one  which  we  have  al¬ 
ready  described;  and  it  occurs  because  this  same  movement  of  the  centre  of  the 
Earth  around  the  sun  appears  irregular  by  reason  of  a  twofold  irregularity. 
[80^]  The  first  and  simple  irregularity  relates  to  the  annual  restoration;  the 
other,  which  varies  the  first  by  changing  it  around,  is  perceptible  not  imme¬ 
diately  but  after  a  long  stretch  of  time;  and  accordingly  it  is  not  simple  or  easy 
to  know  the  ratio  of  the  equality  of  the  year.  For  if  anyone  wishes  to  determine 
it  simply  in  relation  to  the  fixed  distance  of  some  star  having  a  known  position — 
which  can  be  done  by  using  an  astrolabe  and  with  the  help  of  the  moon,  in  the 
way  WT  described  in  the  case  of  Basiliscus  in  Leo — he  will  not  avoid  error  com¬ 
pletely,  unless  at  that  time  the  sun  on  account  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth 
either  has  no  additosubtraction  or  else  obtains  similar  and  equal  additosub- 
tractions  at  both  termini.  But  unless  this  happens  and  unless  there  is  some  dif¬ 
ference  made  manifest  in  accordance  with  the  irregularity,  an  equal  circuit  will 
certainly  not  seem  to  have  taken  place  in  equal  times.  But  if  in  both  termini  the 
total  difference  is  subtracted  or  added  proportionally,  the  job  will  be  perfect. 
Furthermore,  the  apprehension  of  the  difference  requires  a  prior  knowledge  of 
the  mean  movement,  which  we  are  seeking  for  that  reason;  and  we  are  versed 
in  this  business  as  in  the  Archimedean  quadrature  of  the  circle. 

Nevertheless  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  resolution  of  this  knotty  problem  some 
time — we  find  four  causes  altogether  for  the  appearance  of  irregularity.  The 
first  is  the  irregular  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  which  we  have  expounded;  the 
second  is  that  whereby  the  sun  seems  to  traverse  unequal  arcs  on  the  ecliptic, 
which  occurs  approximately  annually;  the  third  is  the  one  which  varies  this  ir¬ 
regularity  which  we  call  the  second.  There  remains  the  fourth,  which  changes 
the  highest  and  lowest  apsides^  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  as  will  appear  below. 
Of  all  these  only  the  second  was  marked  by  Ptolemy;  and  it  by  itself  could  not 
produce  the  inequality  of  the  year  but  contributes  to  it  through  being  involved 
in  the  others. 

But  for  demonstrating  the  difference  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent 
movement  of  the  sun  the  most  accurate  ratio  of  the  year  does  not  seem  neces¬ 
sary;  and  it  seems  to  be  enough  if  in  the  demonstration  we  take  as  the  magnitude 

^The  apsides  are  the  positions  of  greatest  and  least  altitudinal  distance  of  a  planet  from  the 
sun. 


649 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

of  the  year  the  36534  days,  in  which  that  movement  of  the  first  irregularity  is 
completed,  since  that  which  stands  out  so  little,'  when  taken  on  the  total  circle, 
vanishes  utterly  when  taken  on  a  lesser  magnitude.  But  on  account  of  the  ex¬ 
cellence  of  the  order  and  the  facility  in  teaching  we  are  here  expounding  first  the 
regular  movements  of  the  annual  revolution  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  by  means 
of  necessary  demonstrations.  And  then  we  shall  build  up  the  regular  movements 
together  with  the  difference  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent  movement. 

14.  Ox  THE  Regular  and  Mean  Movements  of  the  Revolutions 
OF  THE  Centre  of  the  Earth 

[8R]  We  find  that  the  magnitude  of  the  year  and  its  equality  is  only  1  second 
10  thirds  greater  than  Thebith  ben  Chora  recorded  it  to  be,  so  that  it  contains 
365  days  15  minutes  24  seconds  10  third-minutes — which  amounts  to  6  hours  9 
minutes  40  seconds,  and  its  fixed  equality  with  reference  to  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  is  disclosed. 

Therefore,  when  we  have  multiplied  the  360°  of  a  circle  by  365  days  and  have 
divided  the  sum  by  365  days  15  minutes  24  seconds  10  third-minutes,  we  shall 
have  the  movement  of  an  Egyptian  year  as  359°44'49"7"'4""  and  the  movement 
during  60  similar  years — not  counting  the  total  circles— will  be  344°49'7"4"'. 
Again,  if  we  divide  the  annual  movement  by  365  days,  we  shall  have  a  daily 
movement  of  59'8"11'"22"". 

But  if  we  add  to  these  the  mean  and  regular  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  we 
shall  compose  another  regular  annual  movement  in  seasonal  years  of  359°45' 
39"19"'9"",  and  a  daily  movement  59'8"19"'37"".  And  for  this  reason  we  can 
call  the  former  movement  of  the  sun — to  use  the  common  expression — the  regu¬ 
lar  and  simple  movement;  and  the  latter,  the  regular  and  composite  movement. 
And  we  shall  set  them  out  in  tables,  as  we  did  with  the  precession  of  the  equi¬ 
noxes.  The  regular  movement  of  the  anomaly  of  the  sun  is  added  to  them;  but 
we  shall  speak  of  that  later. 


650 


COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Mean  and  Simple  Movement  of  the  Sun 
IN  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

t 

n 

tn 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

/ 

tt 

/// 

I 

5 

59 

44 

49 

7 

31 

5 

52 

9 

22 

39 

2 

5 

59 

29 

38 

14 

32 

5 

51 

54 

11 

46 

3 

5 

59 

14 

27 

21 

33 

5 

51 

39 

0 

53 

4 

5 

58 

59 

16 

28 

34 

5 

51 

23 

50 

0 

5 

5 

58 

44 

5 

35 

35 

5 

51 

8 

39 

7 

6 

5 

58 

28 

54 

42 

36 

5 

50 

53 

28 

14 

7 

5 

58 

13 

43 

49 

37 

5 

50 

38 

17 

21 

8 

5 

57 

58 

32 

56 

fe 

38 

5 

50 

23 

6 

28 

9 

5 

57 

43 

22 

3 

39 

5 

50 

7 

55 

35 

10 

5 

57 

28 

11 

10 

40 

5 

49 

52 

44 

42 

11 

5 

57 

13 

0 

17 

41 

5 

49 

37 

33 

49 

12 

5 

56 

57 

49 

24 

s 

42 

5 

49 

22 

22 

56 

13 

5 

56 

42 

38 

31 

43 

5 

49 

7 

12 

3 

14 

5 

56 

27 

27 

38 

44 

5 

48 

52 

1 

10 

15 

5 

56 

12 

16 

46 

45 

5 

48 

36 

50 

18 

16 

5 

55 

57 

5 

53 

46 

5 

48 

21 

39 

25 

17 

5 

55 

41 

55 

0 

47 

5 

48 

6 

28 

32 

18 

5 

55 

26 

44 

7 

48 

5 

47 

51 

17 

39 

19 

5 

55 

11 

33 

14 

•§ 

49 

5 

47 

36 

6 

46 

20 

5 

54 

56 

22 

21 

50 

5 

47 

20 

55 

53 

21 

5 

54 

41 

11 

28 

.o 

51 

5 

47 

5 

45 

0 

22 

5 

54 

26 

0 

35 

52 

5 

46 

50 

34 

7 

23 

5 

54 

10 

49 

42 

53 

5 

46 

35 

23 

14 

24 

5 

53 

55 

38 

49 

54 

5 

46 

20 

12 

21 

25 

5 

53 

40 

27 

56 

55 

5 

46 

5 

1 

28 

26 

5 

53 

25 

17 

3 

56 

5 

45 

49 

50 

35 

27 

5 

53 

10 

6 

10 

57 

5 

45 

34 

39 

42 

28 

5 

52 

54 

55 

17 

58 

5 

45 

19 

28 

49 

29 

5 

52 

39 

44 

24 

59 

5 

45 

4 

17 

56 

30 

5 

52 

24 

33 

32 

60 

6 

44 

49 

7 

4 

Table  of  the  Regular  and  Simple  Movement  of  the  Sun 
IN  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60° 

o 

f 

n 

/// 

60° 

0 

/ 

n 

/// 

1 

0 

0 

59 

8 

11 

31 

0 

30 

33 

13 

52 

2 

0 

1 

58 

16 

22 

32 

0 

31 

32 

22 

3 

3 

0 

2 

57 

24 

34 

33 

0 

32 

31 

30 

15 

4 

0 

3 

56 

32 

45 

34 

0 

33 

30 

38 

26 

5 

0 

4 

55 

40 

56 

35 

0 

34 

29 

46 

37 

6 

0 

5 

54 

49 

8 

S3 

36 

0 

35 

28 

54 

49 

7 

0 

6 

53 

57 

19 

37 

0 

36 

28 

3 

0 

8 

0 

7 

53 

5 

30 

s 

38 

0 

37 

27 

11 

11 

9 

0 

8 

52 

13 

42 

T 

39 

0 

38 

26 

19 

23 

10 

0 

9 

51 

21 

53 

40 

0 

39 

25 

27 

34 

11 

0 

10 

50 

30 

5 

3 

41 

0 

40 

24 

35 

45 

12 

0 

11 

49 

38 

16 

42 

0 

41 

23 

43 

57 

13 

0 

12 

48 

46 

27 

43 

0 

42 

22 

52 

8 

14 

0 

13 

47 

54 

39 

44 

0 

43 

22 

0 

20 

15 

0 

14 

47 

2 

50 

45 

0 

44 

21 

8 

31 

16 

0 

15 

46 

11 

1 

3 

46 

0 

45 

20 

16 

42 

17 

0 

16 

45 

19 

13 

cq 

47 

0 

46 

19 

24 

54 

18 

0 

17 

44 

27 

24 

48 

0 

47 

18 

33 

5 

19 

0 

18 

43 

35 

35 

49 

0 

48 

17 

41 

16 

20 

0 

19 

42 

43 

47 

50 

0 

49 

16 

49 

28 

21 

0 

20 

41 

51 

58 

o 

51 

0 

50 

15 

57 

39 

22 

0 

21 

41 

0 

9 

52 

0 

51 

15 

5 

50 

23 

0 

22 

40 

8 

21 

09 

<5 

53 

0 

52 

14 

14 

2 

24 

0 

23 

39 

16 

32 

54 

0 

53 

13 

22 

13 

25 

0 

24 

38 

24 

44 

55 

0 

54 

12 

30 

25 

26 

0 

25 

37 

32 

55 

56 

0 

55 

11 

38 

36 

27 

0 

26 

36 

41 

6 

57 

0 

56 

10 

46 

47 

28 

0 

27 

35 

49 

18 

58 

0 

57 

9 

54 

59 

29 

0 

28 

34 

57 

29 

59 

0 

58 

9 

3 

10 

30 

0 

29 

34 

5 

41 

60 

0 

59 

8 

11 

22 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


651 


Table  of  the  Regular  Composite  Movement  of  the  Sun 
IN  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Movement 

/ 

rr 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Movement 

r 

tt 

nt 

1 

5 

59 

45 

39 

19 

31 

5 

32 

35 

18 

53 

2 

5 

59 

31 

18 

38 

32 

5 

52 

21 

58 

12 

3 

5 

59 

16 

57 

57 

33 

5 

52 

6 

37 

31 

4 

5 

59 

2 

37 

16 

34 

5 

51 

52 

16 

51 

6 

5 

58 

48 

16 

35 

35 

5 

51 

38 

56 

10 

6 

5 

58 

33 

55 

54 

36 

5 

51 

23 

35 

29 

7 

5 

58 

19 

35 

14 

s 

37 

5 

51 

9 

14 

48 

8 

5 

58 

5 

14 

33 

38 

5 

50 

55 

54 

7 

9 

5 

57 

50 

53 

52 

i 

39 

5 

50 

40 

33 

26 

10 

5 

57 

36 

33 

11 

•2 

40 

5 

50 

26 

12 

46 

11 

5 

57 

22 

12 

30 

41 

5 

50 

11 

52 

5 

12 

5 

57 

7 

51 

49 

O 

42 

5 

49 

57 

31 

24 

13 

5 

56 

53 

31 

8 

43 

5 

49 

43 

10 

43 

14 

5 

56 

39 

10 

28 

44 

5 

49 

28 

50 

2 

15 

5 

56 

24 

49 

47 

45 

5 

49 

14 

29 

21 

16 

5 

56 

10 

29 

6 

5 

46 

5 

49 

0 

8 

40 

17 

5 

55 

56 

8 

25 

47 

5 

48 

45 

48 

0 

18 

5 

55 

41 

47 

44 

<< 

48 

5 

48 

31 

27 

19 

19 

5 

55 

27 

27 

3 

49 

5 

48 

17 

6 

38 

20 

5 

55 

13 

6 

23 

50 

5 

48 

2 

45 

57 

21 

5 

54 

58 

45 

42 

51 

5 

47 

48 

25 

16 

22 

5 

54 

44 

25 

1 

52 

5 

47 

34 

4 

35 

23 

5 

54 

30 

4 

20 

53 

5 

47 

19 

43 

54 

24 

5 

54 

15 

43 

39 

On 

54 

5 

47 

5 

23 

14 

25 

5 

54 

1 

22 

58 

55 

5 

46 

51 

2 

33 

26 

5 

53 

47 

2 

17 

56 

5 

46 

36 

41 

52 

27 

5 

53 

32 

41 

37 

57 

5 

46 

22 

21 

11 

28 

5 

53 

18 

20 

56 

58 

5 

46 

8 

0 

30 

29 

5 

53 

4 

0 

15 

59 

5 

45 

53 

39 

49 

30 

5 

52 

48 

39 

34 

60 

5 

45 

39 

19 

9 

Table  of  the  Regular  Composite  Movement  of  the  Sun 
IN  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60® 

o 

f 

tf 

tn 

60® 

0 

/ 

Ht 

1 

0 

0 

59 

8 

19 

31 

0 

30 

33 

18 

8 

2 

0 

1 

58 

16 

39 

32 

0 

31 

32 

26 

27 

3 

0 

2 

57 

24 

58 

33 

0 

32 

31 

34 

47 

4 

0 

3 

56 

33 

18 

34 

0 

33 

30 

43 

6 

6 

0 

4 

55 

41 

38 

35 

0 

34 

29 

51 

26 

6 

0 

5 

54 

49 

57 

O 

36 

0 

35 

28 

59 

46 

7 

0 

6 

53 

58 

17 

g 

37 

0 

36 

28 

8 

5 

8 

0 

7 

53 

6 

36 

38 

0 

37 

27 

16 

25 

9 

0 

8 

52 

14 

56 

39 

0 

38 

26 

24 

45 

10 

0 

9 

51 

23 

16 

40 

0 

39 

25 

33 

4 

11 

0 

10 

50 

31 

35 

41 

0 

40 

24 

41 

24 

12 

0 

11 

49 

39 

55 

o 

42 

0 

41 

23 

39 

43 

13 

0 

12 

48 

48 

15 

43 

0 

42 

22 

58 

3 

14 

0 

13 

47 

56 

34 

44 

0 

43 

22 

6 

23 

15 

0 

14 

47 

4 

54 

45 

0 

44 

21 

14 

42 

16 

0 

15 

46 

13 

13 

46 

0 

45 

20 

23 

2 

17 

0 

16 

45 

21 

33 

47 

0 

46 

19 

31 

21 

18 

0 

17 

44 

29 

53 

-si 

48 

0 

47 

18 

39 

41 

19 

0 

18 

43 

38 

12 

O 

49 

0 

48 

17 

48 

1 

20 

0 

19 

42 

46 

32 

s 

50 

0 

49 

16 

56 

20 

21 

0 

20 

41 

54 

51 

•1 

51 

0 

50 

16 

4 

40 

22 

0 

21 

41 

3 

11 

09 

52 

0 

51 

15 

13 

0 

23 

0 

22 

40 

11 

31 

eg 

53 

0 

52 

14 

21 

19 

24 

0 

23 

39 

19 

50 

54 

0 

53 

13 

29 

39 

25 

0 

24 

38 

28 

10 

55 

0 

54 

12 

37 

58 

26 

0 

25 

37 

36 

30 

56 

0 

55 

11 

46 

18 

27 

0 

26 

36 

44 

49 

57 

0 

56 

10 

54 

38 

28 

0 

27 

35 

53 

9 

58 

0 

57 

10 

2 

57 

29 

0 

28 

35 

1 

28 

59 

0 

58 

9 

11 

17 

30 

0 

29 

34 

9 

48 

60 

0 

59 

8 

19 

37 

652 


COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Regular  Movement  of  Anomaly^  of  the  Sun 
IN  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Movement 

/ 

n 

nr 

Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Movement 

r 

tr 

rtr 

1 

5 

59 

44 

24 

46 

31 

5 

51 

56 

48 

11 

2 

5 

59 

28 

49 

33 

32 

5 

51 

41 

12 

58 

3 

5 

59 

13 

14 

20 

33  . 

5 

51 

25 

37 

45 

4 

5 

58 

57 

39 

7 

34 

5 

51 

10 

2 

32 

6 

5 

58 

42 

3 

54 

35 

5 

50 

54 

27 

19 

6 

5 

58 

26 

28 

41 

36 

5 

50 

38 

52 

6 

7 

5 

58 

10 

53 

27 

o 

37 

5 

50 

23 

16 

52 

8 

5 

57 

55 

18 

14 

T 

38 

5 

50 

7 

41 

39 

9 

5 

57 

39 

43 

1 

39 

5 

49 

52 

6 

26 

10 

5 

57 

24 

7 

48 

05 

40 

5 

49 

36 

31 

13 

11 

5 

57 

8 

32 

35 

41 

5 

49 

20 

56 

0 

12 

5 

56 

52 

57 

22 

o 

42 

5 

49 

5 

20 

47 

13 

5 

56 

37 

22 

8 

43 

5 

48 

49 

45 

33 

14 

5 

56 

21 

46 

55 

44 

5 

48 

34 

10 

20 

15 

5 

56 

6 

11 

42 

45 

5 

48 

18 

35 

7 

16 

5 

55 

50 

36 

29 

46 

5 

48 

2 

59 

54 

17 

5 

55 

35 

1 

16 

47 

5 

47 

47 

24 

41 

18 

5 

55 

19 

26 

3 

48 

5 

47 

31 

49 

28 

19 

5 

55 

3 

50 

49 

49 

5 

47 

16 

14 

14 

20 

5 

54 

48 

15 

36 

50 

5 

47 

0 

39 

1 

21 

5 

54 

32 

40 

23 

s 

.o 

51 

5 

46 

45 

3 

48 

22 

5 

54 

17 

5 

10 

52 

5 

46 

29 

28 

35 

23 

5 

54 

1 

29 

57 

Sd 

c 

53 

5 

46 

13 

53 

22 

24 

5 

53 

45 

54 

44 

54 

5 

45 

58 

18 

9 

25 

5 

53 

30 

19 

f.SO 

55 

5 

45 

42 

42 

55 

26 

5 

53 

14 

44 

•  17 

56 

5 

45 

26 

7 

42 

27 

5 

52 

59 

9 

4 

57 

5 

45 

11 

32 

29 

28 

5 

52 

43 

33 

51 

58 

5 

44 

55 

57 

16 

29 

5 

52 

27 

58 

38 

59 

5 

44 

40 

22 

3 

30 

5 

52 

12 

23 

25 

60 

5 

44 

24 

46 

50 

1  Any  regular  movement  which,  when  compounded  with  a  mean  movement,  causes  an  appearance 
of  irregularity  is  called  a  movement  of  anomaly.  In  this  case,  the  regular  movement  of  anomaly  is 
the  movement  of  the  eccentric  circle,  or  the  first  epicycle. 


Movement  of  Anomaly  of  the  Sun  in  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60® 

o 

r 

tt 

trr 

60® 

o 

r 

tt 

ttt 

1 

0 

0 

59 

8 

7 

31 

0 

30 

33 

11 

48 

2 

0 

1 

58 

16 

14 

32 

0 

31 

32 

19 

55 

3 

0 

2 

57 

24 

22 

33 

0 

32 

31 

28 

3 

4 

0 

3 

56 

32 

29 

34 

0 

33 

30 

36 

10 

6 

0 

4 

55 

40 

36 

35 

0 

34 

29 

44 

17 

6 

0 

5 

54 

48 

44 

36 

0 

35 

28 

52 

25 

7 

0 

6 

53 

56 

51 

o 

37 

0 

36 

28 

0 

32 

8 

0 

7 

53 

4 

58 

38 

0 

37 

27 

8 

39 

9 

0 

8 

52 

13 

6 

T 

39 

0 

38 

26 

16 

47 

10 

0 

9 

51 

21 

13 

40 

0 

39 

25 

24 

54 

11 

0 

10 

50 

29 

21 

v! 

41 

0 

40 

24 

33 

2 

12 

0 

11 

49 

37 

28 

g 

42 

0 

41 

23 

41 

8 

13 

0 

12 

48 

45 

35 

43 

0 

42 

22 

49 

16 

14 

0 

13 

47 

53 

43 

44 

0 

43 

21 

57 

24 

15 

0 

14 

47 

1 

50 

45 

0 

44 

21 

5 

31 

16 

0 

15 

46 

9 

57 

■vs 

46 

0 

45 

20 

13 

38 

17 

0 

16 

45 

18 

5 

47 

0 

46 

19 

21 

46 

18 

0 

17 

44 

26 

12 

-< 

48 

0 

47 

18 

29 

53 

19 

0 

18 

43 

34 

19 

49 

0 

48 

17 

38 

0 

20 

0 

19 

42 

42 

27 

e 

50 

0 

49 

16 

46 

8 

21 

0 

20 

41 

50 

34 

K 

o 

51 

0 

50 

15 

54 

15 

22 

0 

21 

40 

58 

42 

*<SI 

52 

0 

51 

15 

2 

23 

23 

0 

22 

40 

6 

49 

eo 

O 

53 

0 

52 

14 

10 

30 

24 

0 

23 

39 

14 

56 

54 

0 

53 

13 

18 

37 

25 

0 

24 

38 

23 

4 

55 

0 

54 

12 

26 

45 

26 

0 

25 

37 

31 

11 

56 

0 

55 

11 

34 

52 

27 

0 

26 

36 

39 

18 

57 

0 

56 

10 

42 

59 

28 

0 

27 

35 

47 

26 

58 

0 

57 

9 

51 

7 

29 

0 

28 

34 

55 

33 

59 

0 

58 

8 

59 

14 

30 

0 

29 

34 

3 

41 

60 

0 

59 

8 

7 

22 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEA\T:NLY  SPHERES,  III 


653 


15.  Theorems  Prerequisite  for  Demonstrating  the  Apparent 
Irregularity  of  the  Movement  of  the  Sun 

[84^]  But  for  the  sake  of  making  a  better  determination  of  the  apparent  ir¬ 
regular  movement  of  the  sun  we  shall  now  demonstrate  more  clearly  that — 
with  the  sun  occupying  the  central  position  in  the  world  and  with  the  Earth 
revolving  around  it  as  around  a  centre — if,  as  we  said,  there  is  a  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  Earth  and  the  sun  which  cannot  be  perceived  in  relation  to  the  im¬ 
mensity  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars;  then  the  sun  will  be  seen  to  have  a 
regular  motion  with  reference  to  any  point  or  star  in  the  same  sphere  [of  the 
fixed  stars]* 

For  let  AB  be  the  greatest  circle  in  the  world  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  Let 
C  be  its  centre,  anddet  the  sun  be  situated  there.  And 
in  accordance  with  the  distance  CD  between  the  sun 
and  the  Earth^ — in  comparison  with  which  the  depth 
of  the  world  is  immense^ — let  the  circle  CDE,  in  which 
the  annual  revolution  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  is  lo¬ 
cated,  be  described  in  the  same  plane  of  the  ecliptic: 
I  say  that  the  sun  will  seem  to  have  a  regular  motion 
with  reference  to  any  point  or  star  taken  on  circle  AB, 
Let  some  point  be  taken;  and  let  it  be  A.  And  to  A 
let  the  view  of  the  sun  from  the  Earth — which  is  at  D 
— be  extended  as  DC  A.  Now  let  the  Earth  be  moved 
anyv^here  through  arc  DE)  and  let  AE  and  DE  be 
drawn  from  E  the  position  of  the  Earth.  Therefore 
the  sun  will  now  be  seen  from  E  at  point  B.  And  since 
AC  is  immense  in  comparison  Muth  CD  or  CE  its 
equal,  AE  too  will  be  immense  in  comparison  with 
CE.  For  let  any  point  H  be  taken  on  AC,  and  let  EF 
be  joined.  Therefore  since  two  straight  lines  from  the 
termini  C  and  E  of  the  base  fall  outside  triangle  EEC  on  point  A;  by  the  con¬ 
verse  of  Euclid's  Elements,  i,  21, 

angle  FAi?<  angle  EFC. 

Wherefore  the  straight  lines  extended  to  immensity  ^comprehend  at  last  an 
angle  CAE  so  acute  that  it  is  no  longer  perceptible;  and 
angle  CAE' =  angle  BCA- angle  AEC. 

Moreover,  on  account  of  the  slightness  of  the  difference  between  them  angles 
BCA  and  AEC  seem  to  be  equal;  and  lines  AC. and  AE  seem  to  be  parallel;  and 
the  sun  seems  to  have  [85^]  a  regular  motion  with  reference  to  any  point  on  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  just  as  if  it  were  revolving  around  the  centre  E,  as  was 
to  be  shown. 

But  its  irregular  movement  is  demonstrated,  because  the  movement  of  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  in  its  annual  revolution  is  not  absolutely  around  the  centre 
of  the  sun.  That  can  be  understood  in  two  ways,  either  through  an  eccentric 
circle,  i.e.,  one  whose  centre  is  not  the  centre  of  the  suni,  or  through  an  epicycle 
on  a  homocentric  circle. 

Now  it  is  made  clear  through  an  eccentric  in  this  way.  For  let  A  BCD  be  an 
eccentric  circle  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  let  its  centre  E  be  no  very  slight 
distance  away  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  or  world.  Let  the  centre  of  the  world 


654  COPERXICUS 

be  F;  and  let  AEFD  be  the  diameter  [of  circle  ABCD] 
passing  through  both  centres.  And  let  its  apogee  be  at 
A — which  is  called  the  highest  apsis  by  the  Romans 
— the  place  farthest  removed  from  the  centre  of  the 
world,  and  D  the  perigee,  which  is  nearest  [to  the 
centre  of  the  world]  and  is  the  lowest  apsis. 

Therefore  while  the  Earth  is  moved  regularly  in  its 
orbital  circle  ABCD  around  its  centre  F,  as  has  been 
already  said,  there  ^^ill  appear  to  be  an  irregular 
movement  around  F. 

For  let 

arc  AB  =  arc  CD ; 

and  let  the  straight  lines  BE,  CE,  BF,  and  CF  be 
dra^^’n. 

Angle  AFF  =  angle  CED, 
because  angles  AEB  and  CED  are  intercepting  equal  arcs  around  the  centre  E, 
But  angle  CFD  is  the  angle  of  sight,  and 

ext.  angle  CFZ)>int.  angle  CED, 

But 

angle  AFF  =  angle  CED. 

Hence 

angle  CFZ)>angle  AEB. 

But  also 

ext,  angle  AFF>int.  angle  AFB; 
and  hence  b^'  so  much  more 

angle  CFZ)>angle  AFB. 

But  an  equal  time  produces  both  angle  CFD  and  angle  AFB  because 

arc  AF  =  arc  CD. 

Therefore  the  movement  will  appear  regular  from  around  E  and  irregular  from 
around  F. 

Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  see  the  same  thing  more  simply,  because  arc  AB 
is  farther  away  from  F  than  arc  CD  is.  For  by  Euclid,  iii,  7,  lines  AF  and  BF 
by  which  arc  AB  is  intercepted  are  longer  than  CF  and  DF  by  which  arc  CD  is 
intercepted,  and,  as  is  sho^m  in  optics,  equal  magnitudes  which  are  nearer  ap¬ 
pear  greater  than  the  ones  farther  away.  And  so  what  was  proposed  in  the  case 
of  the  eccentric  circle  is  manifest. 

The  same  thing  vAll  also  be  made  clear  by  means  of  an  epicycle  on  a  homo¬ 
centric  circle.  For  let  the  centre  of  the  homocentric  circle  ABCD  and  the  centre 
of  the  world  where  the  sun  is  be  at  F;  and  in  the  same  plane  let  A  be  the  centre 
of  epicycle  FG.  And  through  both  centres  let  the  straight  line  CEAF  be  drawn. 
Let  F  be  the  apogee  of  the  epic^’cle;  and  /,  the  perigee.  Therefore  it  is  clear 
that  there  is  regularity"  [85^"]  in  A,  but  apparent  irregularity  in  epicycle  FG.  For 
if  the  movement  of  A  takes  place  in  the  direction  of  F,  i.e.,  eastward,  while  the 
movement  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  is  from  its  apogee  F  westward;  then  in 
the  perigee — which  is  I — F  will  appear  to  be  moving  faster,  because  the  two 
movements  of  A  and  /  are  in  the  same  direction.  But  in  the  apogee,  which  is  F, 
point  F  viHl  seem  to  be  moved  more  slowly,  namely  because  it  is  moved  only 
by  the  excelling  movement  out  of  two  contraries;  and  the  Earth  situated  at  G 
is  to  the  west  of  the  regular  movement  but  at  F  is  to  the  east  of  it,  and  the  dis- 


RZVOLUnOiS'S  OF  EFAFF:?rLY  IH  i5S 

Trance  of  die  EkrdL  &oiil  tiie  cwaULr  anwenumt  iH 
^leasTirsd  by  uki  AG^  iil  niooivtaaoR  vidi 

winciL  i^ne  Jim  will  ^eem  za  move  uT^ilariv. 

But  whsiZever  nhin^  r^ake  piaco  by  means  of 
die  epicyde  can  aappen  in.  die  ianii»  :vay  [ly  means 
of  die  eccentric  circle,  -^srhicii  Uie  transit  of  tie  plan¬ 
et  in  die  epicycai  describes  equal  to  the  iK^nn^cen- 
tric  circle  and  m  the  same  plants '  anil  die  Venn’s  of 
the  eccentrie  circle  is  at  a  distance  from  die  centre 
of  the  homocentnc  circle  erniai  to  tne  ratiins  of  the 
epicycle.  And  ail  this  occurs  in  three  '^vays,  since, 
if  the  epicycle  on  the  iicmccentric  circle  and  the 
planet  on  ttie  epicycle  mains  similar  rewiiiidoiiH 
but  with  mov^ements  opposite  to  one  another,  the 
mavement  of  the  planet  wilL  trace  a  hired  eccentric 
circle,  i.e.,  one  whose  apcase  and  perhree  possess  Tmcnamrinn  locations. 

In  this  way  let  ABC  he  the  homocentnc  circle,  and  the  centre  of  the  world  D. 
the  diameter  xtDC.  And  let  us  p^it  down  tnat, 
when  the-  epicycle  is  at  A,  the  planet  is  m  the 
apoiree  of  the  epicycle,  which  iff  at  C,  and  its 
radius  is  in  the  strah^t  line  DAG.  Xow  let  arc 
AB  of  the  homocentric  circle  be  taken,  and 
with  centre  B  and  raciiiiH  equal  to  AG,  let  the 
epicycle B'F  ce  described,  and  let  B.D  ino  B  Ybe 
extended  in  a  straight  line;  and  let  the  arc  EF 
be  similar  to  arc  AB,.but  let  arc  EF  be  taken  m 
the  apposite  direction.  And  let  the  planet  or 
Earth  be  in  F.  Let  BF  be  ioined.  And  on  line 
AD  let 

DK=BF. 

Therefore,  since 

anide  EBF  —  3,nsle  EDA^ 
and  for  those  reasons 

EF-=DK 

and  BF  is  parallel  to  DK;  and  since,  if  straight  lines  are  joined  to-  equal  and 
parailei  straight  lines,  they  are  also  equal  and  paraJei  by  Euclid,  n  -13 ,  and 
since 

DK^AG 

and  AK  is  their  commen  annex; 

iq.i  i  FT) 

and  therefore 


GAK=KF. 

Therefore  the  circic  described  with  centre  K  and  radius  KAG  will  pass  throiudi 
F.  By  means  of  a  movement  comp«iimded  of  A5  and  EF  point  F  describes  this 
circle  as  eccentric  and  equal  to  the  homocentnc  and  accordimriy  fixed  too.  For 
when  the  epicynie  maxes  proportionally  equal  revolutions  with  the  homt;  centric 
circle,  the  apsides  of  the  eccentric  circle  so  described  necessirily  remain  in  the 
aame  place. 


656  MT  COPERNICUS 

But  if  the  centre  and  the  circumference  of  the  epicycle  make  proportionately 
unequal  revolutions,  then  the  movement  of  the  planet  will  not  designate  a 
fixed  eccentric  circle  but  one  whose  centre  and  apsides  are  carried  westward  or 
eastward,  according  as  the  movement  of  the  planet  is  faster  or  slower,  than  the 
centre  of  its  epicycle.  In  this  way  if 
angle  angle  BDA^ 

let 

angle  BDM  =  angle  EBF, 

It  will  similarly  be  shown  that  if  on  line  DM 
there  be  taken  DL  equal  to  BF,  the  circle  de¬ 
scribed  with  L  as  centre  and  with  radius  LAIN 
equal  to  AD  will  pass  through  planet  F.  Hence 
it  is  clear  that  by  the  composite  movement  of 
the  planet  there  is  described  arc  NF  oi  the  ec¬ 
centric  circle,  whose  apogee  meanwhile  travels 
from  point  G  westward,  along  arc  GN, 

On  the  contrary,  if  the  movement  of  the 
planet  in  the  epicycle  were  slower,  then  the 
centre  of  the  eccentric  circle  should  follow  it 
eastward,  whither  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  is 
carried;  that  is  if 

angle  EBF  =  angle  BDM  >  angle  BDA , 
it  is  clear  that  what  we  have  spoken  of  will  take  place. 

From  all  that  it  is  clear  that  the  same  irregularity  of  appearance  is  always 

produced  whether  by  means  of  an  epicycle  on  a 
homocentric  circle  or  by  means  of  an  eccentric 
circle  equal  to  the  homocentric ;  and  they  by  no 
means  differ  from  one  another,  provided  the 
distance  between  the  centres  [of  the  homocen¬ 
tric  and  the  eccentric]  is  equal  to  the  radius  of 
the  epicycle.  Accordingly  it  is  not  easy  to  de¬ 
termine  which  of  them  exists  in  the  heavens. 
Indeed  Ptolemy,  where  he  understood  simple 
irregularity  and  certain  and  immutable  loca¬ 
tions  for  the  apsides — as  he  thought  was  the 
case  in  the  sun — judged  that  the  scheme  of  ec¬ 
centricity  was  sufficient.  But  to  the  moon  and 
to  the  five  planets  which  wander  in  two  or  more 
different  ways  [86*^]  he  applied  eccentric  circles 
carrying  epicycles. 

From  this  moreover  it  is  easily  demonstrated  that  the  greatest  difference  be¬ 
tween  regularity  and  appearance  is  seen  at  the  time  when  the  planet  appears  in 
the  mean  position  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest  apsis  in  the  case  of  the 
eccentric  circle,  but  in  the  case  of  the  epicycle  at  its  point  of  contact  [with  the 
circle  carrying  the  epicycle],  as  in  Ptolemy. 

In  the  case  of  the  eccentric  circle  thus:  For  let  there  be  the  circle  ABCD 
around  the  centre  E;  and  AEG  the  diameter  through  F  the  sun,  which  is  off 
centre.  Now  Jet  line  BFD  be  drawn  through  F  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter; 
and  let  BE  and  ED  be  joined.  Let  A  be  the  apogee  and  C  the  perigee;  and 


N 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  657 


let  B  and  D  be  the  means  appearing  between  them. 

I  say  that  no  angle  greater  than  angle  B  or  D  can 
be  constructed  with  its  vertex  on  the  circumference 
and  line  EF  as  its  base. 

For  let  points  G  and  H  be  taken  on  either  side  of 
B\  and  let  GD,  GE,  and  GF  be  joined,  and  also  HEj 
HFy  and  HD,  Since  line  FG  is  nearer  the  centre  than 
line  DFj 

line  FG>line  DF. 

And  therefore 

angle  GZ)F>  angle  DGF, 

But 


angle  EDG  =  angle  EGD^ 

because  sides  EG  and  ED  falling  upon  the  base  are  equal. 

And  therefore 


But 

Similarly  too 

and 

But 


angle  FZ)F>angle  EGF, 
angle  FDF  =  angle  EBF, 
line  i)F>line  FH; 
angle  Fi7i)>  angle  FDH, 


because 

Therefore,  by  subtraction. 
But 


angle  EHD  =  angle  EDH, 
line  EH  =  \me  ED, 
angle  EDFysmgle  EHF, 


angle  EDF  =  angle  EBF, 


Therefore  no  angle  greater  than  the  angles  at  points  B  and  D  will  ever  be  con¬ 
structed  with  line  EF  as  base.  And  so  the  greatest  difference  between  regularity 
and  appearance  is  found  in  the  mean  position  between  apogee  and  perigee. 


16.  On  the  Apparent  Irregularity  of  the  Sun 

These  things  have  been  demonstrated  generally;  and  they  are  applicable  not 
only  to  the  apparent  movements  of  the  sun  but  also  to  the  irregularity  of  the 
other  planets.  Now  we  shall  investigate  what  relates  to  the  sun  and  the  Earth, 
first  in  respect  to  what  has  been  handed  down  to  us  by  Ptolemy  and  the  other 
ancients,  and  then  in  respect  to  what  modern  times  and  experience  have  taught 
us.  Ptolemy  found  [87^]  that  94J^  days  were  comprehended  between  the  spring 
equinox  and  the  summer  solstice,  and  923^  between  the  solstice  and  the  autumn 
equinox.  Therefore  in  accordance  with  the  ratio  of  time  during  the  first  interval 
there  was  a  mean  and  regular  movement  of  93°9';  during  the  second  interval, 
one  of  9ni'. 


658 


COPERNICUS 


Let  ABCD  be  the  circle  of  the  year  as  divided  in  this  way;  and  let  E  be  the 
centre.  Let 

arc  AB  =  9S^9' 

for  the  first  period  of  time;  and  let 
arc^C  =  9ni' 

for  the  second.  Let  the  spring  equinox  be  viewed 
from  A ;  the  summer  solstice  from  B ;  the  autumn 
equinox  from  C ;  and  the  remaining  winter  solstice 
from  D.  Let  AC  and  BD  be  joined. 

AC  and  BD  cut  one  another  at  right  angles  at  F, 
where  we  set  up  the  sun.  Therefore  since 
arc  A5C>180° 

and  too 

arc  A^>arc  BC; 

Ptolemy  understood  from  this  that  the  centre  of  the  circle  was  located  between 
lines  BF  and  FAj  and  the  apogee  between  the  spring  equinox  and  the  summer 
tropic  of  the  sun.  Now  let  lEGj  which  will  cut  BFD  in  L,  be  drawn  through  cen¬ 
tre  E  parallel  to  AFCy  and  let  HEKy  which  will  cut  AF  m  M,  be  drawn  parallel 
to  BFD,  In  this  way  there  will  be  constructed  the  right  parallelogram  whose 
diameter  FE  extended  in  the  straight  line  FEN  will  indicate  the  Earth^s  greatest 
distance  in  length  from  the  sun  and  the  position  of  the  apogee  in  N. 

Therefore  since 

arc  AR(7=184°19', 

and 

arc  AH^y2  arc  ABC  =  92^93^'; 
arc  HB  =  arc  ACB  — arc  AH  =  b9\ 


Again 

Now 


arc  AG  =  arc  Aff-90°  =  2°10'. 

LF=3^ch.  2  AG=377, 

where  radius  =  10,000. 


But 


BL  =  Kch.  2BBr  =  172. 

And,  as  two  sides  of  triangle  ELF  are  given, 

side  EF  =  414  =.  3^4  radius  NE 

where  radius  A£/  =  10,000. 


But 

Therefore 
And  thus 
and 


EF\EL=NE:y2Q\i,2NH, 
arc  iV/f  =  243^°. 
angle  NEH  is  given, 


angle  A'Bi/  =  angle  LFEy 

which  is  the  angle  of  apparent  movement.  By  such  an  interval  therefore  did  the 
highest  apsis  before  Ptolemy  precede  the  summer  solstice  of  the  sun.  But 

arc  /A  =  90°, 


and 


[87^]  arc  7(7= arc  AG 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


659 


and 


Hence 

and 


arc  =  arc  HB. 

arc  CD  =  arc  IK-  (arcs  IC+DK)=m%V 
arc  DA  =  arc  CD  A  -  arc  CD  =  88°49'. 


But  to  the  86°51'  there  correspond  88}^  days;  and  to  the  88°49',  90  days  and  3 
hours — the  eighth  part  of  a  day.  During  these  periods  the  sun  on  account  of  the 
regular  movement  of  the  Earth  seemed  to  cross  from  the  autumn  equinox  to  the 
winter  solstice  and  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  to  return  from  the  winter  sol¬ 
stice  to  the  spring  equinox.  Indeed  Ptolemy  testifies  that  he  found  these  things 
no  different  from  what  were  reported  by  Hipparchus  before  him.  Wherefore  he 
judged  that  for  the  remainder  of  time  the  highest  apsis  would  be  243^°  before  the 
summer  tropic  and  that  the  eccentricity  of — as  I  said — a  24th  part  of  the  radius 
would  remain  perpetually. 

But  now  it  is  found  that  both  of  them  have  changed  by  a  manifest  difference. 
Al-Battani  noted  it  as  being  93  days  35  minutes  [of  a  day]  from  the  spring  equi¬ 
nox  to  the  summer  solstice,  and  186  days  37  minutes  to  the  autumn,  from  which 
by  Ptolemy’s  rule  he  elicited  an  eccentricity  of  not  more  than  346  parts  whereof 
the  radius  has  10,000.  Arzachel  the  Spaniard  agrees  with  him  in  the  ratio  of 
eccentricity  but  reported  an  apogee  12°  10'  west  of  the  solstice,  and  al-Battani 
viewed  it  as  7°43'  west  of  the  same  solstice.  By  these  tokens  it  has  been  grasped 
that  there  still  remains  another  irregularity  in  the  movement  of  the  centre  of 
the  Earth,  as  has  been  attested  by  the  observations  of  our  time  also.  For  during 
the  ten  and  more  years  in  which  we  applied  our  intelligence  to  investigating 
these  things  and  especially  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1515,  we  found  that  there 
were  186  days  53^  minutes  from  the  spring  equinox  to  the  autumnal.  And  so  as 
not  to  deceive  ourselves  in  determining  the  solstices — which  some  suspected  had 
happened  in  the  case  of  our  predecessors — we  took  certain  other  positions  of  the 
sun  into  consideration  in  this  business  which  were  not  difficult  to  observe  even 
in  comparison  with  the  equinoxes,  such  as  the  mean  positions  in  the  signs  of 
Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio,  and  Aquarius.  Therefore  we  found  that  there  were  45  days 
16  minutes  from  the  autumn  equinox  to  the  middle  point  of  Scorpio,  and  178 
days  533^  minutes  to  the  spring  equinox.  Now  the  regular  movement  during  the 
first  interval  was  44°37';  and  during  the  second  interval  176°19'. 

[88"^]  Now  that  these  preparations  have  been  made,  let  circle  A  BCD  be  re¬ 
peated;  and  let  A  be  the  point  from  which  the  sun  was  seen  at  the  spring 
equinox;  B  the  point  at  which  the  autumn  equinox  was  viewed;  and  C 
the  midpoint  of  Scorpio.  Let  AB  and  CD,  which  cut  one  another  at  F  the 
centre  of  the  sun,  be  joined;  and  let  arc  AC  be  subtended. 

Therefore,  since  L 


\0 


660 

Hence, 


COPERNICUS 


angle  ACZ)  =  45^23', 
arc  AD  =  45^23'. 
arc  ACD  =  176°19', 
arc  AC  =  arc  ACD  — arc  J5C=131°42', 
arc  CAD  =  arc  AC+arc  AD  =  177°5'. 
arc  ACJS<180°, 


because 
But 
and 
and 

Therefore,  since 
and 

arc  CAD  <180°, 

it  is  clear  that  the  centre  of  the  circle  is  located  in  the  remainder  BD.  And  let 
the  centre  be  E.  And  through  E  let  the  diameter  LEFG  be  drawn.  Let  L  be  the 
apogee  and  G  the  perigee.  Let  EK  be  erected  perpendicular  to  CFD.  But  the 
chords  subtending  the  given  arcs  are  also  given  by  the  table: 

AC=  182,494 

and 

CFD  =  199,934, 

where  diameter  =  200,000. 

Accordingly,  as  triangle  ACF  has  its  angles  given,  the  ratio  of  the  sides  will  be 
given  by  the  first  rule  for  plane  triangles. 

CF  =  97,697, 

according  as 
and  for  that  reason 
And  since 
and  since 

FK  =  3^ch.  2°55'  =  2,534; 

then,  in  triangle  EFK^  as  the  two  sides  FK  and  KE  comprehending  the  right 
angle  have  been  given,  the  triangle  will  have  its  sides  and  angles  given: 

EF  =  323, 

where  EL  =  1 0, 000 ; 

and 

angle  EFK  =  bl%% 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  AFL  =  m%^ 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  DFL  =  83 

But 

FF=1P56', 

where  FL  =  60p. 

This  is  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle:  and  it  has 


AC=182,494; 

FF:  =  K  CD -CF  =  2,000. 
180° -arc  CAD  =  2°55'; 


661 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

now  become  approximately  Mist  [of  the  radius  of  the  orbital  circle],  [88 though 
to  Ptolemy  it  seemed  to  be  And  the  apogee,  which  was  at  that  time  243/^° 

to  the  west  of  the  summer  solstice,  is  now  to  the  east  of  it. 


17.  Demonstration  of  the  First  and  Annual  Irregularity 
OF  THE  Sun  Together  with  Its  Particular  Differences 


Therefore  since  many  differences  of  the  irregular  movement  of  the  sun  are 
found,  we  judge  that  the  difference  which  occurs  annually  and  is  more  known 
than  the  rest  should  be  deduced  first. 

Accordingly  let  circle  ABC  be  constructed  again,  around  centre  B  with  di¬ 
ameter  ABC;  apogee  at  A,  perigee  at  C;  and  the  sun  at  B. 
Now  it  has  been  shown  that  the  greatest  difference  between 
regular  and  apparent  movement  occurs  at  the  position 
which  with  respect  to  the  apparent  movement  is  midway 
between  the  apsides.  For  that  reason  let  BD  be  erected  per¬ 
pendicular  to  ABC,  and  let  it  cut  the  circumference  in 
point  B,  and  let  BB  be  joined.  Therefore,  since  in  right  tri¬ 
angle  BBB  two  sides  have  been  given,  namely  BB  which  is 
the  radius  of  the  circle  and  DB  the  distance  of  the  sun  from 
the  centre;  the  triangle  will  have  its  angles  given.  And  angle 
DBB  will  be  given,  which  is  the  difference  between  the 
angle  BBA  of  regular  movement  and  right  angle  BDB  the  angle  of  apparent 
movement. 

But  as  DB  is  made  greater  or  less,  the  whole  species  of  the  triangle  changes. 
Thus,  before  Ptolemy 

angle  R  =  2°23'; 

in  the  time  of  al-Battani  and  Arzachel 

angle  ^  =  1°59'; 

but  at  present 


And  for  Ptolemy 


angle  ^  =  1°51'. 


arc  Ajg  =  92°23', 

which  is  intercepted  by  angle  ABB,  and 

arc  BC  =^87°37\ 


For  al-Battani 


and 

And  at  present 
and 


arc  AJ5  =  91°59' 
arc  BC  =  SS^V, 


arc  Aj5  =  91°51' 


arc  ^C  =  88‘^9'. 

Whence  too  the  remaining  differences  are  manifest.  For 
let  any  other  arc  AB  be  taken,  as  in  the  following  figure: 
and  let  angle  ABB  be  given,  and  the  interior  angle  BBD, 
and  the  two  sides  BB  and  BD.  By  the  calculus  of  plane 
triangles  there  will  be  given  [89^]  angle  BBD,  the  addi- 
tosub traction,  the  difference  between  the  regular  and  the 
apparent  movement.  And  it  is  necessary  for  these  differen¬ 
ces  to  change  on  account  of  the  change  of  side  BD,  as  has 
already  been  said. 


A 


662 


COPERNICUS 


18.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Regular  Movement  in  Longitude 

These  things  have  been  set  forth  concerning  the  annual  irregularity  of 
the  sun,  but  not  by  means  of  the  simple  difference  so  appearing  but  by 
means  of  the  difference  still  mingled  with  that  which  the  length  of  time  has 
disclosed. 

We  shall  distinguish  them  from  one  another  later  on.  Meanwhile,  the  mean 
and  regular  movement  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  will  be  given  in  numbers  which 
will  be  the  more  certain  the  more  that  movement  is  separated  from  any  differ¬ 
ences  of  irregularity  and  the  more  it  extends  in  time.  Now  that  will  be  estab¬ 
lished  in  this  way. 

We  have  taken  that  autumn  equinox  which  was  observed  by  Hipparchus  at 
Alexandria  in  the  32nd  year  of  the  third  period  of  Callippus — which,  as  was  said 
above,  was  the  177th  year  after  the  death  of  Alexander — at  midnight  after  the 
third  intercalary  day,  which  the  fourth  day  followed.  But  according  as  Alex¬ 
andria  is  approximately  1  hour  to  the  east  of  Cracow  in  longitude,  it  was  ap¬ 
proximately  1  hour  before  midnight.  Therefore  according  to  the  calculation 
handed  on  above  the  position  of  the  autumn  equinox  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars  was  176°  10'  from  the  head  of  Aries  and  that  was  the  apparent  position  of 
the  sun.  It  was  114J^°  distant  from  the  highest  apsis. 

In  accordance  with  this  model  let  there  be  traced  around  centre  D  the  circle 
ABC  which  the  centre  of  the  Earth  describes.  Let  ADC  be 
the  diameter;  and  let  the  sun  be  situated  on  the  diameter 
at  point  E ;  the  apogee  in  A ;  and  the  perigee  in  C.  But  let 
B  be  the  point  where  the  sun  appears  in  the  autumn  equi¬ 
nox,  and  let  the  straight  lines  BD  and  BE  be  joined. 

Since 

angle  DEB  =  1 14}^°, 

and  is  seen  to  measure  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the 
apogee;  and 

side  Z>E  =  414, 
where  BD  =  10,000; 

therefore,  by  the  fourth  theorem  on  plane  triangles,  triangle  BDE  has  its  sides 
and  angles  given.  And 

angle  BDE  =  angle  BDA  =  angle  BED  =  2°10'. 

[89^]  But 

angle  BED  =  114°30'. 

TTptipp 

angle  RZ)A  =  116°40'; 

and  the  mean  or  regular  position  of  the  sun  is  178°20'  from  the  head  of  the  Ram 
in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

With  this  we  have  compared  the  autumn  equinox  observed  by  us  in  Frauen- 
burg  under  the  same  meridian  of  Cracow  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1515,  on  the 
18th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  October,  in  the  1840th  year  since  the  death  of 
Alexander,  on  the  6th  day  of  Phaophi  the  second  month  by  the  Egyptian  calen¬ 
dar,  half  an  hour  after  sunrise.  At  this  time  the  position  of  the  autumn  equinox 
by  calculation  and  observation  was  152°45'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and 
was  83°29'  distant  from  the  highest  apsis  in  accordance  with  the  preceding 
demonstration. 


663 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


And 


And  as 


Now  let 

angle  BE  A  =SS^20' 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180°; 
and  two  sides  of  the  triangle  are  given: 

10,000 

and 

DE  =  323. 

By  the  fourth  theorem  on  plane  triangles 
angle  DBE=  I'' 50\ 

For,  if  a  circle  circumscribes  triangle  BDE,  then,  as  on  the 
circumference, 

angle  BED  =  166°40', 
where  2  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

ch.  iBD  =  19,864 

where  dmt.  =  20,000. 


and 


BD  :  DE  is  given, 
ch.  Z)£'  =  640, 


DE  =  ch,  DBE 


and,  as  on  circumference, 

angle  DBE  =  1°50'; 


but,  as  at  centre, 

angle  DBE  =  3°40'. 

And  this  was  the  additosubtraction  and  difference  between  the  regular  and  the 
apparent  movement.  And 

angle  BZ)A=angle  DJ5JS+angle  =  1°50'+83°20'  =  85°10', 
the  distance  of  the  regular  movement  from  the  apogee,  and  hence  the  mean  po¬ 
sition  of  the  sun  is  154°35'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Therefore  in  the  time  between  both  observations  there  are  1662  Egyptian 
years  37  days  18  minutes  [of  a  day]  45  seconds.  And  the  mean  and  regular  move¬ 
ment  over  and  above  the  whole  revolutions — of  which  there  were  1660 — is  ap¬ 
proximately  336°15',  which  is  consonant  with  the  number  which  we  set  out  in 
the  table  of  regular  movements. 


19.  On  Determining  the  Positions  of  the  Regular  Movement 
OF  THE  Sun  at  the  Beginnings  [of  Years] 

[90*"]  Accordingly  in  the  flow  of  time  between  the  death  of  Alexander  the 
Great  and  the  observation  made  by  Hipparchus  there  were  176  years  362  days 
273^  minutes,  in  which  the  mean  movement  was  312°43',  according  to  calcula¬ 
tion.  When  these  degrees  are  subtracted  from  the  sum  of  the  178°20'  of  Hip¬ 
parchus^  observation  and  from  the  360°  of  the  circle,  there  will  remain,  for  noon 
of  the  first  day  of  Thoth  the  first  month  of  the  Egyptians  at  the  beginning  of 
the  years  named  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  a  position  of  225°37'  beneath  the 
meridian  of  Cracow  and  of  Frauenburg,  the  place  of  our  observation. 

From  this  to  the  beginning  of  the  Roman  years  of  Julius  Caesar  in  278  years 
1183^  days  the  mean  movement  is  46°27'  over  and  above  the  complete  revolu¬ 
tions.  The  addition  of  these  degrees  to  the  degrees  of  the  position  of  Alexander 


664  COPERNICUS 

gives  272°4'  as  Caesar's  position  at  midnight  before  the  Kalends  of  January, 
from  which  the  Romans  are  accustomed  to  take  the  beginning  of  their  years  and 
days. 

Then  in  45  years  12  days,  or  in  323  years  1303^  days  from  the  death  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  there  arises  the  position  of  Christ  at  272°31'. 

And  since  Christ  was  born  in  the  third  year  of  the  194th  Olympiad,  the  cal¬ 
culations  which  give  775  years  and  123^  days  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  of 
the  first  Olympiad  to  midnight  before  the  Kalends  of  January  similarly  give 
96^16'  as  the  position  of  the  first  Olympiad  at  noon  of  the  first  day  of  the  month 
Hekatombaion,  the  anniversary  of  which  day  is  now  the  Kalends  of  July  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Roman  calendar. 

In  this  way  the  beginnings  of  the  simple  movement  of  the  sun  are  determined 
with  respect  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  Moreover,  the  positions  of  the  com¬ 
posite  movement  are  given  by  the  addition  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes 
and  similarly  to  the  others:  the  Olympic  position  at  90°59';  the  position  of 
Alexander  at  226°38';  that  of  Caesar  at  276°59';  and  that  of  Christ  at  278°2'. 
All  these  things,  as  we  said,  are  taken  with  respect  to  the  Cracow  meridian. 

20.  On  the  Second  and  Twofold  Irregularity  Which  Occurs  in 

THE  Case  of  the  Sun  on  Account  of  the  Change  of  the  Apsides 

[90^]  But  there  is  now  a  greater  difficulty  in  connexion  with  the  inconstancy 
of  the  apsis  of  the  sun,  since,  although  Ptolemny  thought  it  to  be  fixed,  others 
have  thought  it  to  follow  the  movement  of  the  starry  sphere,  according  as  they 
judged  that  the  fixed  stars  moved  too.  Arzachel  opined  that  this  movement 
also  was  irregular,  that  is  to  say,  as  happening  to  retrograde — from  the  token 
that,  although,  as  was  said,  al-Battani  had  found  the  apogee  7°44'  to  the  west 
of  the  solstice  (for  previously  during  the  740  years  after  Ptolemy  it  had  pro¬ 
gressed  approximately  17°),  it  seemed  to  Arzachel  193  years  later  to  have  retro¬ 
graded  approximately  43^°.  And  accordingly  he  thought  there  was  some  other 
movement  made  by  the  centre  of  the  annual  orbital  circle  in  a  small  circle,  in 
accordance  with  which  [movement]  the  apogee  was  deflected  back  and  forth 
and  the  centre  of  the  circle  [of  the  year]  was  at  unequal  distances  from  the 
centre  of  the  world.  That  was  a  good  enough  device,  but  it  was  not  accordingly 
accepted,  because  upon  a  universal  comparison  it  is  not  consonant  with  the 
rest;  that  is  to  say,  if  the  succession  in  the  order  of  movement  is  considered: 
namely,  that  at  some  time  before  Ptolemy  the  movement  came  to  a  standstill, 
that  during  740  years  or  thereabouts  it  traversed  17°,  that  in  the  200  years 
thereafter  it  retrograded  4°  or  5°,  that  in  the  time  remaining  down  to  us  it 
progressed,  and  that  no  other  retrogradation  was  perceived  during  the  total 
time,  and  no  more  standstills,  though  they  necessarily  intervene  in  the  case  of 
contrary  movements  back  and  forth.  And  this  can  by  no  means  be  understood 
as  occurring  in  uniform  and  circular  movement.  Wherefore  it  is  believed  by 
many  that  some  error  had  crept  into  their  observations.  But  each  mathematician 
is  alike  in  his  care  and  industry,  so  that  it  is  doubtful  which  one  we  should 
follow  in  preference  to  the  other.  At  all  events,  I  confess  that  nowhere  is  there 
greater  difficulty  than  in  determining  the  apogee  of  the  sun,  where  we  ratio¬ 
cinate  with  very  small  and  hardly  perceptible  magnitudes,  since  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  the  perigee  and  apogee  [a  movement  of]  1°  effects  only  a  variation 
of  approximately  2'  in  the  additosubtraction,  but  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III  665 

mean  apsides  [a  movement  of]  1'  effects  5°  or  6°  [in  the  additosubtraction] ;  and 
so  a  slight  [91®]  error  can  propagate  itself  greatly.  Hence  in  placing  the  apogee 
at  of  Cancer,  we  were  not  content  to  rely  upon  the  instruments  of  the 
horoscope,  unless  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  gave  us  more  certainty,  since 
if  any  error  lay  concealed  in  our  observations,  the  eclipses  would  uncover  it 
without  fail.  Therefore,  in  accordance  with  most  likelihood,  we  can  apply  our  in¬ 
telligence  to  conceiving  the  movement  as  a  whole:  it  is  eastward,  but  irregular, 
since  after  that  standstill  between  Hipparchus  and  Ptolemy  the  apogee  has  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  in  continuous,  orderly,  and  increased  progression  down  to  our  time, 
with  the  exception  of  the  movement  which  occurred  erroneously — it  is  believed 
— between  al-Battani  and  Arzachel,  as  all  the  rest  seems  to  be  in  harmony.  For 
it  seems  to  follow  from  the  same  ratio  of  circular  movement  that  the  additosub¬ 
traction  [of  the  movement]  of  the  sun  similarly  does  not  stop  decreasing  and 
that  corrections  are  made  for  these  two  irregularities  in  conjunction  with  the 
first  and  simple  anomaly  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  or  something  similar. 

But  in  order  for  this  to  become  more  clear,  let  the  circle  AB  around  centre  C 

be  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  And  let  the  di¬ 
ameter  be  ACBj  and  on  ACB  let  D  be  the 
globe  of  the  sun  as  it  were  at  the  centre  of  the 
world;  and  let  another  quite  small  circle  EF 
be  described  around  centre  C  in  such  a  way  as 
not  to  comprehend  the  sun.  And  let  it  be  un¬ 
derstood  that  the  centre  of  the  annual  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  Earth  moves  around  this  small 
circle  with  a  rather  slow  progress.  And  since 
the  small  circle  EF  together  ^nth  line  AD  has 
a  rather  slow  movement  eastward  and  the 
centre  of  the  annual  revolution  has  a  rather 
slow  movement  westward  along  circle  EF, 
sometimes  the  centre  of  the  annual  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  will  be  found  at  its  greatest  distance  which 
is  DEj  and  sometimes  at  its  least  which  is  DF, 
and  with  a  slower  movement  at  the  greatest  distance  and  a  faster  movement  at 
the  least.  And  along  the  middle  curves  the  small  circle  makes  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  centres  increase  and  decrease  with  time,  and  it  makes  the  highest 
apsis  alternately  precede  and  follow  the  apsis  or  apogee  which  is  on  line  ACD 
as  if  in  the  middle  position.  In  this  way,  if  arc  EG  is  taken  and  with  G  as  centre 
a  circle  equal  to  AB  is  described,  the  then  highest  apsis  will  be  on  line  DGK  and 
DG  will  be  a  shorter  distance  than  DE,  by  Euclid,  iii,  8. 

And  these  things  are  demonstrated  by  means  of  a  circle  eccentric  to  an  ec¬ 
centric  circle  as  above;  and  by  means  of  the  epicycle  [91*^]  on  the  epicycle  as 
follows:  Let  circle  AB  be  homocentric  with  the  world  and  with  the  sun,  and 
\oi  ABC  be  the  diameter,  whereon  the  highest  apsis  is.  And  with  A  as  centre 
let  the  epicycle  DE  be  described;  and  again  with  D  as  centre,  the  epicycle  FG, 
whereon  the  Earth  revolves.  And  all  in  the  same  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  Let 
the  movement  of  the  first  epicycle  be  eastward  and  approximately  annual; 
and  that  of  the  second  too,  f.e.,  D,  be  similar  but  westward.  And  let  both 
have  proportionately  equal  revolutions  with  respect  to  line  AC,  Moreover,  let 
the  centre  of  the  Earth  moving  westward  from  F  add  a  little  movement  to  D, 


666 


COPERNICUS 


From  this  it  is  clear  that 
when  the  Earth  is  at  F,  it  will 
make  the  apogee  of  the  sun  to 
be  farthest  away;  and  when  at 
G  it  will  make  the  apogee  to  be 
nearest;  but  in  the  mean  arcs 
of  epicycle  FG,  it  will  make 
the  apogee  precede  or  follow, 
increased  or  decreased,  great¬ 
er  or  less;  and  hence  it  will 
make  the  movement  appear 
irregular,  as  has  been  demon¬ 
strated  before  of  the  epicycle 
and  the  eccentric  circle. 

Now  let  arc  A/  be  taken. 

And  with  point  I  as  centre  let 
the  epicyclical  epicycle  be 
taken  again.  And  let  Cl  be 
joined  and  extended  in  the 
straight  line  CIK, 

angle  A/D  =  angle  AC  I 
on  account  of  the  revolutions 

being  proportionately  equal.  Therefore,  as  we  demonstrated  above,  point  D 
will  describe  around  centre  L  an  eccentric  circle  equal  to  homocentric  circle 
AD,  and  with  an  eccentricity  CL  equal  to  DI ;  and  F  will  describe  an  eccentric 
circle  having  an  eccentricity  CLM  equal  to  IDF]  and  G  similarly  an  eccen¬ 
tric  circle  having  an  eccentricity  CN  equal  to  IG.  Meanwhile,  if  the  centre 
of  the  Earth  has  by  now  measured  [92^]  any  Sivc  FO  on  its  second  epicycle, 
point  0  will  not  describe  an  eccentric  circle  whose  centre  is  on  line  AC  but  one 
whose  centre  is  on  a  line  parallel  [to  DO],  such  as  LP.  But  if  01  and  CP  are 
joined, 

01^  CP, 

but 

OI<IF 

and 

CP<CM. 

And 


angle  D/0  =  angle  LCP, 

by  Euclid,  i,  8.  And  that  is  the  interval  whereby  the  apogee  of  the  sun  on  line 
CP  will  be  seen  to  precede  A. 

From  this  moreover  it  is  clear  that  the  same  thing  occurs  through  the  eccen¬ 
tric  circle  having  an  epicycle,  since  with  the  eccentric  circle  alone  pre-existing 
which  epicycle  D  describes  around  centre  L,  the  centre  of  the  Earth  revolves 
through  arc  FO  in  accordance  with  the  aforesaid  conditions,  z.6.,  [in  a  movement] 
less  than  the  annual  revolution.  For  it  will  describe,  as  before,  another  circle 
eccentric  to  the  first,  around  centre  P;  and  the  same  things  will  occur  again. 
And  since  so  many  ways  lead  to  the  same  number,  I  could  not  really  say  which 
one  is  right,  except  that  the  perpetual  harmony  of  numbers  and  appearances 
compels  us  to  believe  that  it  is  some  one  of  them. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


667 


21.  How  Great  the  Second  Difference  in  the  Irregularity 

OF  THE  Sun  Is 

Therefore,  since  it  has  already  been  seen  that  the  second  irregularity  follows 
after  that  first  first  and  simple  anomaly  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  or  its 
similitude,  we  shall  have  its  fixed  differences,  if  some  error  on  the  part  of  past 
observers  does  not  stand  in  the  way.  For  according  to  calculation  we  have  a 
simple  anomaly  of  approximately  165^39'  for  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1515,  and 
also  its  beginning  by  a  calculation  backwards  to  approximately  64  years  before 
the  birth  of  Christ,  from  which  time  to  us  there  has  been  a  passage  of  1580  years. 
Now  the  greatest  eccentricity  of  that  beginning  has  been  found  by  us  to  be  414, 
whereof  the  radius  is  10,000.  But  the  eccentricity  of  our  time,  as  was  shown,  is 
323. 

Now  let  AB  be  a  straight  line,  and  on  it  let  B  be  the  sun  and  centre  of  the 
world.  Let  AB  be  the  greatest  eccentricity  and  BD  the  least.  Let  a  small  circle 
be  described  whose  diameter  is  AD,  and  let 


in  proportion  to  the  first  simple  anomaly.  Since  line  AB  has  [92^]  been  found  at 

the  beginning  of  the  simple  anomaly,  i.e.,  at  A,  and 

,  line  AD  =  414, 

and  now  ^ 

line  BC  =  323, 

therefore  we  shall  now  have  triangle  ABC  with  sides  AB  and  BC  given;  and 
also  one  angle  CAD  given,  because  CD  the  remaining  arc  of  the  semicircle  is 

arc  CZ)  =  14°21'. 

Therefore,  by  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles,  there  are  given 
the  remaining  side  AC  and  angle  ADC,  the  difference  between  the  mean  and  the 
irregular  movement  of  the  apogee;  and  inasmuch  as  line  AC  subtends  the  given 
arc,  diameter  AD  of  circle  A  CD  will  also  be  given.  For  since 
angle  CAD  =  14°21', 

CD  =  2496 

w’here  diameter  of  circle  circumscribing 
triangle  =  20,000, 


and  since 


DC  :  AD  is  given, 

AD  =  3225  =  ch.  ACD  =  ch.  34r26' 


Hence  by  subtraction 
And 

Therefore 


angle  CDD  =  4°13', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  360° 

ch.  CDD=AC=735. 

AC =95, 

where  AD =414. 


668  COPERNICUS 

And  according  as  AC  subtends  the  given  arc,  it  will  have  a  ratio  to  AD  as  to  a 
diameter.  Therefore 

AD  =  96, 

,  ,  X*  where  ADR  =  414; 

and,  by  subtraction,  ^ 

DR  =  321, 

and  that  is  the  distance  of  the  least  eccentricity.  But,  as  on  the  circumference 

angle  CRD  =  4°13', 

and  as  at  the  centre 

angle  CRD  =  2°63^', 

which  is  the  additosub traction  to  be  subtracted  from  the  regular  movement  of 
AR  around  centre  R.  Now  let  there  be  drawn  the  straight  line  BE  touching  the 
circle  at  point  R;  and  with  centre  F  taken,  let  EF  be  joined.  Therefore,  since  in 
right  triangle  RRR, 

j  sideRF  =  48, 

and 


And 

and 


side  RDF  =  369, 

RF=1300, 

where  radius  FB  =  10,000. 
EF=^^^  ch.  2  EBF\ 


angle  RRF  =  7°28', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360®; 

and  that  is  the  greatest  additosubtraction  between  the  regular  movement  at  F 
and  the.  apparent  at  E. 

Hence  the  remaining  and  particular  differences  can  be  discovered:  for  in¬ 
stance,  if 

angle  AFR  =  6®, 

For  we  shall  have  the  triangle  with  sides  EF  and  FB  and  angle  EFB  given. 
Hence 

angle  RRF  =  41', 

which  is  the  additosubtraction.  [93^]  But  if 

angle  AFR=  12®, 
add.  =  l®23'. 

And  if 

angle  AFR=  18®, 
add.  =  2®3'; 

and  so  for  the  rest  in  this  way,  as  was  said  above  in  the  case  of  the  additosub- 
tractions  for  the  annual  revolution. 


22.  How"  THE  Regular  Movement  of  the  Apogee  of  the  Sun 
AND  THE  Irregular  Movement  Are  Unfolded 

Therefore,  since  the  time  in  which  the  greatest  eccentricity  coincided  with  the 
beginning  of  the  first  and  simple  anomaly  was  the  third  year  of  the  178th 
Olympiad  but  the  259th  year  of  Alexander  the  Great  by  the  Egyptian  calendar, 
and  on  that  account  the  simultaneously  true  and  mean  position  of  the  apogee 
was  at  534®  of  Gemini,  t.e.,  6534^  fiom  the  spring  equinox;  and  since  the  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  equinoxes — the  true  at  that  time  coinciding  with  the  mean — was 
4®38':  the  subtraction  of  4®38'  from  6534°  leaves  60®52'  from  the  head  of  Aries 
in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  as  the  position  of  the  apogee. 


669 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

Again  in  the  second  year  of  the  573rd  Olympiad  and  in  the  1515th  year  of  Our 
Lord,  the  position  of  the  apogee  was  found  at  of  Cancer.  But  by  calculation 
the  precession  of  the  spring  equinox  was  2734°,*  and  the  subtraction  of  2734° 
from  96°40'  leaves  69°25'.  Now  it  was  shown  that  with  a  first  anomaly  of  165°39' 
existing  at  that  time  there  was  an  additosubtraction  of  2°7',  by  which  the  true 
locus  preceded  the  mean.  Wherefore  it  was  clear  that  the  mean  locus  of  the 
apogee  of  the  sun  was  71°32'. 

Therefore  during  the  middle  1580  Egyptian  years  the  mean  and  regular  move¬ 
ment  of  the  apogee  was  10°41'.  And  when  we  have  divided  that  b^^  the  number 
of  the  years,  we  shall  have  an  annual  rate  of  24"20"'14"". 

23.  On  the  Correction  of  the  Anomaly  of  the  Sun  and 
THE  Determination  of  Its  Prior  Positions 

[93^]  If  we  subtract  these  24"20'"14i""  from  the  simple  annual  movement, 
which  was  359°44'49"7'"4"",  there  will  remain  an  annual  regular  movement  of 
anomaly  of  359°44'24"46"'50"".  Again,  the  distribution  of  359°44'24"46"'50"" 
through  the  365  days  will  give  a  daily  rate  of  59'8"7'"22""  in  accord  with  what 
was  set  out  above  in  the  tables.  Hence  we  shall  have  the  positions  at  the  estab¬ 
lished  beginnings  of  years — starting  at  the  1st  Olympiad.  For  it  was  shown  that 
on  the  18th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  October  in  the  second  year  of  the  573rd 
Olympiad  at  half  an  hour  after  sunrise  the  mean  apogee  of  the  sun  was  at  71°32', 
from  which  the  sun  had  a  distance  of  82°58'.  And  from  the  first  Olympiad  there 
have  been  2290  Egyptian  years  281  days  46  minutes,  during  which  the  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly — the  whole  cycles  not  being  counted — ^was  42°33'.  The  sub¬ 
traction  of  42°33'  from  82°58'  leaves  40°25'  as  the  position  of  anomaly  for  the 
first  Olympaid. 

And  similarly,  as  above,  the  position  for  the  Alexander  years  is  166®38',*  for 
the  Caesar  years,  211°11';  and  for  the  years  of  Our  Lord,  211°19'. 

24.  Table  of  the  Differences  Between  Regular  and 
Apparent  Movement 

But  in  order  that  those  things  which  we  have  showti  concerning  the  [additive 
and  subtractive]  differences  between  the  regular  aiid  apparent  movements  of 
the  sun  may  be  better  fitted  up  for  use,  we  shall  also  set  out  a  table  of  them, 
having  sixty  rows  and  six  orders  of  columns. 

For  the  two  first  columns  of  both  semicircles — that  is  to  say,  of  the  ascending 
and  the  descending  semicircles— will  contain  numbers  increasing  by  3'^^s,  as 
above  in  the  case  of  the  movements  of  the  equinoxes. 

In  the  third  column  will  be  inscribed  the  degrees  of  additosubtraction  arising 
from  the  movement  [94^]  or  anomaly  of  the  solar  apogee;  and  this  additosub¬ 
traction  ascends  to  the  height  of  approximately  734°,  according  as  it  fits  each 
row  of  degrees. 

The  fourth  place  is  given  over  to  the  proportional  minutes,  which  go  up  to  60'; 
and  they  are  reckoned  according  to  the  differences  between  the  greater  and  the 
lesser  additosubtractions  arising  from  the  simple  anomaly.  For  since  the  greatest 
of  these  differences  is  32',  the  sixtieth  part  will  be  32".  Therefore  in  accordance 
with  the  magnitude  of  the  difference,  which  w^e  derive  from  the  eccentricity  by 
the  mode  described  above,  we  put  down  a  number  up  to  60  to  correspond  to  the 
single  items  in  the  column  of  the  3°'s.  , 


670  COPERNICUS 

In  the  fifth  column  the  single  additosubtractions  arising  from  the  annual  and 
first  anomaly  are  set  up  in  accordance  with  the  least  distance  of  the  sun  from 
the  centre. 

In  the  sixth  and  final  column,  the  differences  between  these  additosubtractions 
and  the  additosubtractions  which  occur  at  greatest  eccentricity.^  The  table  is  as 
follows: 


Table  of  the  Additions-and-Subtractions  of  the  Movement  of  the  Sun 


CO 

s 

O 

•e* 

<3 

-is 

1 

s 

CO 

g 

•2 

1 

o  ^ 

4s  ^ 

CO 

IS 

O 

1 

"s 

s 

CO 

CO 

IS 

.o 

•<«* 

e 

-is 

•«.»  •«>» 

-is 

Common 

Numbers 

IS 

e 

CO 

IS 

O 

•««* 

o 

g 

o 

<  £ 

.s  § 

1 

IS 

O 

1 

IS 

.§ 

o  «o 

S  o 

Cjs‘?S 

IS 

CO 

IS 

Common 

Numbers 

■-0 

■1 

IS 

? 

CO 

o 

s 

o 

i 

•c^ 

'c 

IS 

•S 

1-0 

IS 

e 

CO 

IS 

.O 

s  % 

.1“  8 

«o 

'C 

II 
©  ^ 

1 

Gs 

3 

•52  e 

O 

8  s 

o 

1 

•s  1 

e  ^o 

1 

Q 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Deg 

Min, 

Deg 

Min, 

Min, 

Deg, 

Deg, 

Deg. 

.  Min, 

Deg. 

.  Min, 

Min, 

3 

357 

0 

21 

60 

0 

6 

1 

93 

267 

7 

24 

30 

1 

50 

32 

6 

354 

0 

41 

60 

0 

11 

3 

96 

264 

■7 

24 

29 

1 

50 

33 

9 

351 

1 

2 

60 

0 

17 

4 

99 

261 

7 

24 

27 

1 

50 

32 

12 

348 

1 

23 

60 

0 

22 

6 

102 

258 

7 

23 

26 

1 

49 

32 

15 

345 

1 

44 

60 

0 

27 

7 

105 

255 

7 

21 

24 

1 

48 

31 

18 

342 

2 

3 

59 

0 

33 

9 

108 

252 

7 

18 

23 

1 

47 

31 

21 

339 

2 

24 

59 

0 

38 

11 

111 

249 

7 

13 

21 

1 

45 

31 

24 

336 

2 

44 

59 

0 

43 

13 

114 

246 

7 

6 

20 

1 

43 

30 

27 

333 

3 

4 

58 

0 

48 

14 

117 

243 

6 

58 

18 

1 

40 

30 

30 

330 

3 

23 

57 

0 

53 

16 

120 

240 

6 

49 

16 

1 

38 

29 

33 

327 

3 

41 

57 

0 

58 

17 

123 

237 

6 

37 

15 

1 

35 

28 

36 

324 

4 

0 

56 

1 

3 

18 

126 

234 

6 

25 

14 

1 

32 

27 

39 

321 

4 

18 

55 

1 

7 

20 

129 

231 

'6 

14 

12 

1 

29 

25 

42 

318 

4 

35 

54 

1 

12 

21 

132 

228 

6 

50 

11 

1 

25 

24 

45 

315 

4 

51 

53 

1 

16 

22 

135 

225 

5 

44 

10 

1 

21 

23 

48 

312 

5 

6 

51 

1 

20 

23 

138 

222 

5 

28 

9 

1 

17 

22 

51 

309 

5 

20 

50 

1 

24 

24 

141 

219 

5 

19 

7 

1 

12 

21 

54 

306 

5 

34 

49 

1 

28 

25 

144 

216 

4 

51 

6 

1 

7 

20 

57 

303 

5 

47 

47 

1 

31 

27 

147 

213 

4 

30 

5 

1 

3 

18 

60 

300 

6 

3 

46 

1 

34 

28 

150 

210 

4 

9 

4 

0 

58 

17 

63 

297 

6 

12 

44 

1 

37 

29 

153 

207 

3 

46 

3 

0 

53 

14 

66 

294 

6 

27 

42 

1 

39 

29 

156 

204 

3 

23 

3 

0 

47 

13 

69 

291 

6 

33 

41 

1 

42 

30 

159 

201 

3 

1 

2 

0 

42 

12 

72 

288 

6 

42 

40 

1 

44 

30 

162 

198 

2 

37 

1 

0 

36 

10 

75 

285 

6 

51 

39 

1 

46 

30 

165 

195 

2 

12 

1 

0 

30 

9 

78 

282 

6 

58 

38 

1 

48 

31 

168 

192 

1 

47 

1 

0 

24 

7 

81 

279 

7 

5 

36 

1 

49 

31 

171 

189 

1 

21 

0 

0 

18 

5 

84 

276 

7 

11 

35 

1 

49 

31 

174 

186 

0 

54 

0 

0 

12 

4 

87 

273 

7 

16 

33 

1 

50 

31 

177 

183 

0 

27 

0 

0 

6 

2 

90 

270 

7 

21 

32 

1 

51 

32 

180 

180 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

^The  movements  on  the  hompcentric  circle,  on  the  first  epicycle,  and  on  the  second  epi¬ 
cycle  are  proportionately  equal:  Hence,  from  the  first  two  columns  of  the  table  are  to  be 
taken  the  movement  on  the  second  epicycle,  or  arc  KJ;  and  from  the  third  column,  the 
additosubtraction  to  be  applied  to  the  annual  anomaly  or  movement  of  the  first  epicycle; 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 


671 


25.  On  the  Calculation  of  the  Apparent  Movement  of  the  Sun 

[95^]  From  that,  I  think,  it  is  now  sufficiently  clear  how  the  apparent  position 
of  the  sun  is  calculated  for  any  given  time.  For  we  must  seek  the  true  position  of 
the  spring  equinox  for  that  time  or  its  precession  together  with  its  first  and 
simple  anomaly,  as  we  have  set  forth  above,  and  then  the  mean  simple  move¬ 
ment  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth — or  you  may  call  it  the  movement  of  the  sun — 
and  the  annual  anomaly,  by  means  of  the  tables  of  regular  movements ;  and  they 
are  added  to  their  established  beginnings.  Accordingly  you  will  take  the  number 
of  the  first  simple  anomaly  found  in  the  first  or  second  column  of  the  preceding 
table;  and  in  the  third  column^  you  will  find  the  corresponding  additosubtrac- 
tion  for  correcting  the  annual  anomaly,  and  in  the  following  column  the  propor¬ 
tional  minutes;  save  the  proportional  minutes.  Now  add  the  additosubtraction 
to  the  annual  anomaly,  if  the  first  [and  simple  anomaly] — or  its  number  con¬ 
tained  in  the  first  column — is  less  than  a  semicircle;  otherwise  subtract.  For  the 
remainder  or  aggregate  will  be  the  corrected  anomaly  of  the  sun;  now  by  means 
of  this  take  the  additosubtraction  arising  from  the  annual  [eccentric]  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  [or  first  epicycle] — which  is  found  in  the  fifth  column — and  the  difference 
in  the  following  column.  If  this  difference,  when  adjusted  to  the  proportional 
minutes  you  have  saved,  amounts  to  something,  it  is  always  added  to  this  addi¬ 
tosubtraction,  and  the  additosubtraction  thus  becomes  corrected  and  is  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  if  the  number  of  the  annual  anomaly 
is  found  in  the  first  column  or  is  less  than  a  semicircle,  but  it  is  added,  if  the 
annual  anomaly  is  greater  or  is  found  in  one  of  the  other  columns  of  numbers. 
For  that  which  in  this  way  becomes  the  remainder  or  aggregate  will  determine 
the  true  position  of  the  sun  as  measured  from  the  head  of  the  constellation  of 
Aries,  and  if  finally  the  true  precession  of  the  spring  equinox  is  added  to  this 
[position  of  the  sun],  it  will  straightway  show  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the 
equinox  in  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  among  the  twelve  signs. 

But  if  you  wish  to  do  that  in  another  way,  take  the  regular  composite  move¬ 
ment  instead  of  the  simple,  and  do  the  other  things  we  spoke  of,  except  that  in¬ 
stead  of  the  precession  of  the  equinox,  you  add  or  subtract  merely  its  addito¬ 
subtraction,  as  the  case  demands.  And  so  the  rational  explanation  of  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  sun  by  means  of  the  mobility  of  the  Earth  is  consonant  with  ancient 
and  modern  findings;  and  it  is  all  the  more  [96^]  presumed  to  hold  for  the  future. 

H.e,,  since  the  movements  on  the  first  epicycle  and  on  the  second  epicycle  are  proportionate¬ 
ly  equal  to  one  another. 

this  additosubtraction,  angle  KFJ,  corrects  the  mean 
anomaly  from  H  to  I.  (Proportional  minutes  correspond¬ 
ing  to  arc  KJ  are  to  be  saved.)  Then  from  the  fifth 
column  is  to  be  taken  the  additosubtraction  GEI^  corre¬ 
sponding  to  angle  GFI.  But  since  the  true  position  of  the 
sun  is  not  at  I  but  at  the  additosubtraction  must  be  cor¬ 
rected  for  the  difference  between  angle  FBI  and  angle  FIJ. 

The  proportional  minutes  which  have  been  saved  enable 
one  to  adjust  the  final  difference,  angle  lEJ,  according 
as  chord  FJ  varies  in  length  between  FL  and  FK:  that 
is  to  say,  the  change  in  eccentricity  according  to  the  move¬ 
ment  around  circle  CO  may  be  considered  as  it  were  a 
variation  in  the  length  of  the  radius  of  the  corrected  epi¬ 
cycle  HK, 


672  COPERNICUS 

But  furthermore,  we  are  not  ignorant  of  the  fact  that,  if  anyone  thought  that 
the  centre  of  the  annual  revolutions  were  fixed  as  the  centre  of  the  world  but 
that  the  sun  moved  in  accordance  with  two  movements  similar  and  equal  to 
those  which  we  demonstrated  in  the  case  of  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle, 
everything  will  be  manifest  which  was  manifest  before — the  same  numbers  and 
the  same  demonstrations — since  nothing  else  is  changed  in  them  except  their 
situation,  especially  those  which  have  to  do  with  the  sun.  For  then  the  |move- 
ment  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  round  the  centre  of  the  world  would  be  absolute 
and  simple,  as  the  other  two  movements  would  be  attributed  to  the  sun  itself. 
And  on  that  account  there  will  still  remain  some  doubt  as  to  which  of  these  cen¬ 
tres  is  the  centre  of  the  world,  as  we  said  ambiguously  in  the  beginning  that  the 
centre  of  the  world  was  at  the  sun  or  around  the  sun.  But  we  shall  say  more 
about  this  question  in  our  explanation  of  the  five  wandering  stars;  and  we  shall 
decide  the  issue  to  the  extent  that  we  are  able,  holding  it  enough,  if  we  apply  to 
the  apparent  movement  of  the  sun  calculations  which  have  certitude  and  are  not 
misleading. 

26.  On  the  Ntxghmepon,  i.e.,  the  Difference  of  the  Natural  Day 

In  connection  with  the  sun  there  still  remains  some  thing  to  be  said  about 
the  inequality  of  the  natural  day.  This  time  is  comprehended  by  the  space  of 
twenty-four  hours,  which  up  to  now  we  have  used  as  the  common  and  certain 
measure  of  the  celestial  movements.  But  some,  like  the  Chaldees  and  the  ancient 
Jews,  define  such  a  day  as  the  time  between  two  sunrises;  others,  like  the  Athen¬ 
ians,  as  that  between  two  sunsets;  or  like  the  Romans,  from  midnight  to  mid¬ 
night;  or  like  the  Egyptians,  from  noon  to  noon.  Now  it  is  clear  that  during  this 
time  the  revolution  proper  to  the  terrestrial  globe  is  completed  together  with 
that  which  is  added  by  the  annual  revolution  in  accordance  with  the  apparent 
movement  of  the  sunh  The  apparent  irregular  course  of  the  sun  in  especial  shows 
that  this  addition  is  unequal,  as  does  the  fact  that  the  natural  day  takes  place 
with  respect  to  the  poles  of  the  equator,  but  the  year  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic. 
Wherefore  that  apparent  time  cannot  be  the  common  and  certain  measure  of 
movement,  since  day  does  not  accord  with  day  in  every  respect;  and  so  it  was 
necessary  to  choose  among  them  some  mean  and  equal  day,  by  which  it  would 
be  possible  [96^]  to  measure  regularity  of  movement  without  trouble.  Therefore 
since  in  the  circle  of  the  total  year  there  are  365  revolution^  around  the  poles 

Hn  Ptolemy  the  daily  revolution  and  the  annual  movement  were 
in  opposite  directions,  and  thus  the  solar  day  was  slightly  longer 
than  the  sidereal  day.  Here  the  daily  revolution  of  the  Earth  and 
its  annual  movement  are  both  of  them  in  the  same  direction,  t.6., 
eastward,  and  the  solar  day  remains  longer  than  the  sidereal  day  on 
account  of  the  third  movement  of  the  Earth,  t.6.,  the  declination  of 
the  pole  of  the  Earth,  which  is  approximately  equal  to  the  annual 
revolution  but  in  the  opposite  direction. 

Let  A  be  the  sun,  Cf  and  DEF  the  Earth  with  centre  B  and  G. 

And  let  FBC  and  FGD  be  the  same  meridian  line.  Let  the  centre  of 
the  Earth  move  from  BtoG  during  the  space  of  24  equatorial  hours. 

As  the  movement  of  declination  keeps  the  axis  of  the  Earth  parallel 
to  itself,  so  too  the  meridian  line  FBC  or  FGD  will  be  parallel  to  it¬ 
self  at  the  end  of  one  daily  revolution,  but  it  will  not  be  one  with 
GEAf  the  line  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  to  the  centre  of  the  sun, 
until  the  Earth  has  further  revolved  through  arc  DE.  That  is  to  say, 
the  solar  day  is  equal  to  the  360®  of  sidereal  day  DEF D  plus  arc  DE. 


673 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  III 

of  the  Earth,  to  which  there  accretes  approximately  one  whole  supernumerary 
revolution  on  account  of  the  daily  addition  made  by  the  apparent  progress  of 
the  sun:  consequently  one  365th  part  of  that  would  fill  out  the  natural  day  upon 
an  equal  basis. 

Wherefore  we  must  define  and  separate  the  equal  day  from  the  apparent  and 
irregular.  Accordingly  we  call  that  the  equal  day  which  comprehends  the  whole 
revolution  of  the  equator  and  over  and  above  that  the  portion  which  the  sun  is 
seen  to  traverse  with  regular  movement  during  that  time;  but  the  unequal  and 
apparent  day  that  which  comprehends  the  360  “times”^  of  one  revolution  of  the 
equator  and  in  addition  that  which  ascends  in  the  horizon  or  meridian  together 
with  the  apparent  progress  of  the  sun.  Although  the  difference  between  these 
days  is  very  slight  and  not  immediately  perceptible,  nevertheless  it  becomes  evi¬ 
dent  after  the  passage  of  a  certain  number  of  days. 

There  are  two  causes  for  this:  the  irregularity  of  the  apparent  movement  of 
the  sun  and  the  unequal  ascension  of  the  oblique  ecliptic.  The  first  cause,  which 
exists  by  reason  of  the  irregular  apparent  movement  of  the  sun,  has  already  been 
explained,  since  in  the  case  of  the  semicircle  in  which  the  highest  apsis  holds  the 
midpoint  there  is  a  deficiency  of  4^  ^ ^times’'  with  respect  to  the  ecliptic,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Ptolemy,  and  in  the  case  of  the  other  semicircle,  in  which  the  lowest  apsis 
is,  there  is  a  similar  excess  of  the  same  amount.  Accordingly  the  total  excess  of 
one  semicircle  over  the  other  was  ^^times.'^ 

But  in  the  case  of  the  other  cause — which  has  to  do  with  the  rising  and  setting 
— the  greatest  difference  occurs  between  the  semicircles  comprehending  each 
solstice.  This  is  the  difference  which  exists  between  the  shortest  and  the  longest 
day  and  which  is  most  variable,  as  being  particular  to  each  region.  The  differ¬ 
ence  which  is  measured  from  noon  or  midnight  is  comprehended  by  four  termini 
everywhere,  since  from  16®  of  Taurus  to  14®  of  Leo,  88®  [of  the  ecliptic]  cross 
the  meridian  together  with  approximately  93  ^^times^^;  and  from  14®  of  Leo 
to  16®  of  Scorpio,  92®  [of  the  ecliptic]  and  87  ^^times^^  pass  over  the  meridian, 
so  that  in  the  latter  case  there  is  a  deficiency  of  5  “times”  and  in  the  former  case 
an  excess  of  5  “times.”  And  so  the  sum  of  the  days  in  the  first  segment  exceeds 
those  in  the  second  by  ten  “times” — which  make  two  thirds  of  one  hour;  and 
the  same  thing  takes  place  conversely  in  the  other  semicircle  within  the  remain¬ 
ing  termini  set  diametrically  opposite  to  these.  Now  the  mathematicians  chose 
[97®]  to  take  the  natural  day  from  noon  or  midnight  rather  than  from  sunrise  or 
sunset.  For  the  difference  which  is  taken  from  the  horizon  is  more  manifold;  for 
it  extends  to  a  certain  number  of  hours,  and  moreover  it  is  not  everywhere  the 
same  but  varies  manifoldly  according  to  the  obliquity  of  the  sphere.  But  the  one 
which  pertains  to  the  meridian  is  everywhere  the  same  and  is  more  simple. 
Therefore  the  total  difference,  which  is  constituted  by  the  aforesaid  causes:  the 
apparent  irregular  progress  of  the  sun  and  the  irregular  passage  over  the  merid¬ 
ian,  in  the  time  before  Ptolemy,  took  its  beginning  of  decrease  at  the  midpoint 
of  Aquarius  and,  increasing  from  the  beginning  of  Scorpio,  added  up  to  83^ 
“times”;  and  now  decreasing  from  20®  of  Aquarius  or  thereabouts  to  10®  of 
Scorpio  and  increasing  from  10®  of  Scorpio  to  20®  of  Aquarius,  it  has  contracted 
to  7  “times”  48'.  For  these  things  too  are  changed  on  account  of  the  incon¬ 
stancy  of  the  perigee  and  the  eccentricity  with  the  passage  of  time.  Finally, 
moreover,  if  the  greatest  difference  in  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  is  taken 

‘The  unit  parts  of  the  equator  are  called  “times’^  instead  of  degrees. 


674  COPERNICUS 

into  account,  the  total  difference  of  the  natural  days  can  extend  itself  to  above 
10  ^^times”  for  a  period  of  years.  In  this  the  third  cause  of  the  inequality  of  days 
was  hidden  up  to  now,  because  the  revolution  of  the  equator  was  found  regular 
in  respect  to  the  mean  and  regular  equinox  but  not  in  respect  to  the  apparent 
equinoxes,  which — as  is  clear  enough — are  not  wholly  regular.  Therefore  the 
doubling  of  the  10  ^  Times”  makes  13^  hours,  by  which  sometimes  the  longer 
days  can  exceed  the  shorter. 

These  things  can  perhaps  be  neglected  this  side  of  manifest  error  in  connexion 
with  the  annual  progress  of  the  sun  and  rather  slow  movement  of  the  fixed  stars; 
but  on  account  of  the  speed  of  the  moon — by  reason  of  which  an  inexactitude  of 
in  the  movement  of  the  sun  can  cause  error — they  are  by  no  means  to  be 
neglected.  Accordingly,  the  method  of  reducing  the  irregular  and  apparent  time 
— wherein  all  differences  agree — to  the  equal  time,  is  as  follows. 

For  any  period  of  time  proposed  there  must  be  sought  in  each  limit  of  the 
time — I  mean  in  the  beginning  and  the  end — the  mean  position  of  the  sun  with 
respect  to  the  mean  equinox  according  to  its  regular  movement  which  we  called 
composite,  and  also  the  true  apparent  position  with  respect  to  the  true  equinox; 
and  we  must  consider  how  many  “times”  the  right  ascensions  [97^]  at  midday 
or  midnight  have  amounted  to,  or  how  many  “times”  intervened  between  the 
first  true  position  and  the  second  true  position.  For  if  they  are  equal  to  the  de¬ 
grees  between  the  two  mean  positions,  then  the  apparent  time  assumed  will  be 
equal  to  the  mean  time.  But  if  the  “times”  exceed,  the  excess  should  be  added 
to  the  given  time;  and  if  they  are  deficient,  the  deficiency  should  be  subtracted 
from  the  apparent  time.  For  if  we  take  the  sums  and  remainders,  we  shall  have 
the  time  reduced  to  equality  by  taking  for  one  “time”  four  minutes  of  an  hour 
or  ten  seconds  of  a  minute  of  a  day.  But  if  the  equal  time  is  given,  and  you  want 
to  know  how  much  apparent  time  corresponds  to  it,  you  will  do  the  contrary. 

Now  for  the  first  Olympiad  we  have  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  at  90°59'  in 
relation  to  the  mean  spring  equinox,  on  noon  of  the  first  day  of  Hekatombaion, 
the  first  month  by  the  Athenian  calendar,  and  at  0®36'  of  Cancer  in  relation  to 
the  apparent  equinox.  But  for  the  years  of  Our  Lord  we  have  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun  at  8®2'  of  Capricorn  and  the  true  movement  at  8°48'  of  the  same. 
Therefore  178  “times”  54'  ascend  in  the  right  sphere  from  0°36'  of  Cancer  to 
8°48'  of  Capricorn,  and  they  exceed  the  distance  of  the  mean  positions  by  1 
“times”  51',  which  make  7  minutes  of  an  hour.  And  so  for  the  rest,  by  means 
of  which  the  course  of  the  moon  can  be  examined  most  accurately:  we  shall 
speak  of  that  in  the  following  book. 


BOOK  FOUR 


[98*"]  Since  in  the  preceding  book,  to  the  extent  that  our  mediocrity  was  able, 
we  explained  the  appearances  due  to  the  movement  of  the  Earth  around  the 
sun,  and  we  proposed  by  that  same  means  to  determine  the  movements  of  all 
the  planets;  the  circular  movement  of  the  moon  interrupts  us  now  and  does  so  of 
necessity  because  through  her  in  particular,  who  shares  in  both  night  and  day, 
the  positions  of  the  stars  are  apprehended  and  examined;  then,  because  she 
alone  of  all  the  planets  refers  her  revolutions  however  irregular  directly  to  the 
centre  of  the  earth  and  is  most  closely  akin  to  the  earth.  And  on  that  account, 
in  so  far  as  she  is  considered  in  herself,  she  does  not  indicate  anything  about  the 
mobility  of  the  Earth — except  perhaps  in  the  case  of  the  daily  movement;  and 
for  that  reason  the  ancients  believed  that  the  Earth  was  the  centre  of  the  world 
and  the  centre  common  to  all  revolutions.  In  our  explanation  of  the  circular 
movement  of  the  moon  we  do  not  differ  from  the  ancients  as  regards  the  opinion 
that  it  takes  place  around  the  Earth.  But  we  shall  bring  forward  certain  things 
which  are  different  from  what  we  received  from  our  elders  and  are  more  con¬ 
sonant;  by  means  of  them  we  shall  try  to  set  up  the  movement  of  the  moon  with 
more  certitude,  in  so  far  as  that  is  possible. 

1.  The  Hypotheses  of  the  Circles  of  the  Moon  According  to  the 
Opinion  of  the  Ancients 

Accordingly  the  movement  of  the  moon  has  the  following  property:  it  does 
not  follow  the  ecliptic  but  follows  an  incline  proper  to  itself,  which  bisects  the 
ecliptic  and  is  in  turn  bisected  by  it,  and  from  this  line  of  intersection  the  moon 
crosses  over  into  both  latitudes.  These  facts  are  as  firmly  established  as  the  sol¬ 
stices  in  the  annual  movement  of  the  sun.  As  the  year  belongs  to  the  sun,  so  the 
month  belongs  to  the  moon.  Now  the  middle  positions  at  the  sections  are  called 
[by  some]  ecliptic;  by  others,  nodes — and  the  conjunctions  and  oppositions  of 
the  sun  and  moon  occurring  at  those  positions  are  called  ecliptic.  [98*^]  For  there 
are  not  any  other  points  common  to  both  circles  except  these  in  which  the 
eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  can  take  place.  For  in  other  places  the  divagation 
of  the  moon  keeps  the  sun  and  moon  from  opposing  one  another  with  their  lights; 
but,  as  they  pass  by,  they  do  not  block  one  another.  Moreover,  the  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  of  the  moon  with  its  four  “hinges'^  or  cardinal  points  revolves  obliquely 
around  the  centre  of  the  Earth  in  a  regular  movement  of  approximately  3'  per 
day,  and  it  completes  its  revolution  in  19  years.  Accordingly  the  moon  is  per¬ 
ceived  always  to  move  eastward  in  this  orbital  circle  and  in  its  plane,  but  some¬ 
times  with  least  velocity  and  at  other  times  with  greatest  velocity.  For  it  is  slow¬ 
er,  the  higher  up  it  is;  and  faster,  the  nearer  to  Earth;  and  this  fact  can  be  appre¬ 
hended  more  easily  in  the  case  of  the  moon  than  in  that  of  any  other  planet  on 
account  of  the  nearness  of  the  moon. 

Accordingly  the  ancients  understood  that  change  in  velocity  to  occur  on  ac¬ 
count  of  an  epicycle;  in  running  around  this  epicycle  the  moon,  when  in  the 

675 


676  COPERNICUS 

upper  semicircle,  subtracts  from  the  regular  movement,  but  when  in  the  lower 
semicircle,  it  adds  the  same  amount  to  it.  Besides,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that 
those  things  which  take  place  through  an  epicycle  can  take  place  through  an 
eccentric  circle.  But  the  ancients  chose  the  epicycle  because  the  moon  seemed  to 
admit  to  a  twofold  irregularity.  For  when  it  was  at  the  highest  or  the  low’est  apsis 
of  the  epicycle,  there  was  no  apparent  difference  from  regular  movement.  But 
around  the  point  of  contact  of  the  epicycle  and  the  greater  circle  there  was  a 
variable  difference,  for  the  difference  was  far  greater  when  the  half  moon  was 
waxing  or  waning  than  when  there  was  a  full  moon;  and  this  in  a  fixed  and  or¬ 
derly  succession.  Wherefore  they  thought  that  the  circle  in  which  the  epicycle 
moved  was  not  homocentric  with  the  Earth;  but  that  there  was  an  eccentric 
circle  carrying  an  epicycle  in  which  the  moon  was  moved  in  accordance  with 
the  law  that  in  all  mean  oppositions  and  conjunctions  of  the  sun  and  moon  the 
epicycle  should  be  at  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  but  in  the  mean  quad¬ 
rants  of  the  [synodic]  circle^  at  the  perigee  of  the  eccentric  circle.  Therefore 
they  imagined  two  equal  and  mutually  opposing  movements  around  the  centre 
of  the  Earth — namely,  that  of  the  epicycle  eastward  and  that  of  the  centre  of 
the  eccentric  circle  and  its  apsides  westward,  with  the  line  of  the  mean  position 
of  the  sun  always  half-way  between  them.  And  in  this  way  the  epicycle  tra¬ 
verses  the  eccentric  circle  twice  a  month. 

And  in  order  that  these  things  may  be  brought  before  our  eyes,  let  ABCD  be 
the  oblique  lunar  circle  homocentric  with  the 
Earth.  Let  it  bequadrisected  by  the  diameters 
AEG  and  BED;  and  let  E  be  the  centre  of  the 
Earth.  Now  on  line  AC  there  will  be  the  mean 
conjunction  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  at  the 
same  position  and  time  the  apogee  of  the  ec¬ 
centric  circle — whose  centre  is  F — and  the 
centre  [99®]  of  the  epicycle  MN,  Now  let  the 
apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  be  moved  as  far 
westward  as  the  epicycle  eastward,  and  let 
them  both  move  regularly  around  E  in  regular 
and  monthly  revolutions  as  measured  by  the 
mean  conjunctions  or  oppositions  of  the  sun. 

And  let  line  AEG  of  the  mean  position  of  the 
sun  be  always  half  way  between  them;  and 
furthermore  let  the  moon  move  westward 
from  the  apogee  of  the  epicycle.  For  astrono¬ 
mers  think  that  the  appearances  agree  with  this  set-up.  For  since  the  epi¬ 
cycle  in  the  time  of  half  a  month  moves  the  distance  of  a  semicircle  away  from 
the  sun  but  completes  a  full  revolution  from  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle; 
as  a  consequence,  at  the  midpoint  of  this  time — when  the  moon  is  half  full — 
the  moon  and  the  apogee  are  in  opposition  to  one  another  along  diameter  BD; 
and  the  epicycle  is  at  the  perigee  of  the  eccentric  circle,  as  at  point  G  where 
— having  become  nearer  to  the  Earth — it  makes  greater  differences  of  irregu¬ 
larity.  For  when  equal  magnitudes  are  set  out  at  unequal  intervals,  the  one 
which  is  nearer  to  the  eye  appears  the  greater.  Accordingly  the  differences  will 
be  least  when  the  epicycle  is  at  A,  but  greatest  when  it  is  at  G,  since  the  diam- 

^The  synodic  circle  is  the  lunar  cycle  of  revolution  with  respect  to  the  sun. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  677 

eter  MN  of  the  epicycle  will  be  to  line  AE  m  its  least  ratio  but  will  be  to  GE 
in  a  greater  ratio  than  to  all  the  other  lines  which  are  found  in  the  rest  of  the 
positions,  since  GE  is  the  shortest  line  and  AE  or  its  equal  DE  the  longest  of  all 
those  lines  which  can  be  extended  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  to  the  eccentric 
circle. 


2.  On  the  Inadequacy  of  Those  Assumptions 

Our  predecessors  assumed  that  such  a  composition  of  circles  was  consonant  with 
lunar  appearances.  But  if  we  consider  the  thing  itself  rather  carefully,  we  shall 
not  find  this  hypothesis  very  fitting  or  adequate,  as  we  can  prove  by  reason  and 
sense.  For  while  they  admit  that  the  movement  of  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  is 
regular  around  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  they  must  also  admit  that  the  movement 
is  irregular  on  its  own  eccentric  circle  which  it  describes.  If — ^for  example — it  is 

assumed  that 

angle  angle  A£'Z)=45®, 

so  that  by  addition 

angle  5EZ)  =  90°; 

and  if  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  is  taken  in  G 
[99^]  and  GF  is  joined;  it  is  clear  that 
angle  GFD  >  angle  GEF, 
the  exterior  than  the  interior  and  opposite  angle. 
Wherefore  the  dissimilar  arcs  DAB  and  DG  are 
both  described  during  one  period  of  time,  so  that 
when 

arc  Z)A5  =  90'^; 
arc  Z)G>90®, 

and  arc  DG  has  been  described  by  the  centre  of 
the  epicycle  during  this  same  time.  But  it  is  clear 
at  half  moon 

arc  DAB  =  arc  DG=I80°: 

therefore  the  movement  of  the  epicycle  on  the  eccentric  circle  which  it  describes 
is  not  regular. 

But  if  this  is  so,  what  shall  we  reply  to  the  axiom :  The  movement  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  is  regular  except  for  seeming  irregular  with  respect  to  appearances]  if  the  ap¬ 
parent  regular  movement  of  the  epicycle  is  really  irregular  and  takes  place  ut¬ 
terly  contrary  to  the  principle  set  up  and  assumed?  But  if  you  say  that  the 
epicycle  moves  regularly  around  the  centre  of  the  Earth  and  that  that  takes  care 
sufficiently  of  the  regularity,  then  what  sort  of  regularity  will  that  be  which  oc¬ 
curs  in  a  circle  foreign  to  the  epicycle,  in  which  its  movement  does  not  exist,  and 
not  in  its  own  eccentric  circle? 

We  also  are  amazed  at  the  fact  that  they  mean  the  regularity  of  the  moon  in 
its  epicycle  to  be  understood  not  in  relation  to  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  namely, 
in  respect  to  line  EGM^  to  which  the  regularity  having  to  do  with  the  centre  of 
the  epicycle  should  rightly  be  referred,  but  in  relation  to  some  other  different 
point,  which  has  the  Earth  midway  between  it  and  the  centre  of  the  eccentric 
circle,  and  that  line  IGH  is,  as  it  were,  the  index  of  the  regularity  of  the  moon 
in  the  epicycle.  And  that  shows  well  enough  that  this  movement  is  really  irregu¬ 
lar.  For  the  appearances  which  in  part  follow  upon  this  hypothesis  force  this 
admission.  And  now  that  the  moon  traverses  its  owm  epicycle  irregularly,  we 


678  COPERNICUS 

may  mark  what  the  line  of  reasoning  would  be  like  if  we  should  try  to  con¬ 
firm  the  irregularity  of  apparent  movement  by  means  of  real  irregularities. 
For  what  else  shall  we  be  doing  except  giving  a  hold  to  those  who  detract  from 
this  art? 

Furthermore,  experience  and  sense-perception  teach  us  that  the  parallaxes  of 
the  moon  are  not  consonant  with  those  which  the  ratio  of  the  circles  promises. 
For  the  parallaxes,  which  are  called  commutations,  take  place  on  account  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  Earth  being  evident  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  moon.  For 
since  the  straight  lines  which  are  extended  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  and  its 
surface  do  not  appear  parallel  but  [100^]  in  accord  with  a  manifest  inclination 
cut  one  another  in  the  body  of  the  moon,  they  are  necessarily  able  to  make  for 
irregularity  in  the  apparent  movement  of  the  moon,  so  that  the  moon  is  seen  in 
a  different  position  by  those  viewing  it  obliquely  along  the  convexity  of  the 
Earth  and  by  those  who  behold  the  moon  from  the  centre  or  vertex  [of  the 
Earth].  Accordingly  such  parallaxes  vary  in  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the 
moon  from  the  Earth.  For  by  the  consensus  of  all  the  mathematicians  the 
greatest  distance  is  643^  units  whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth  is  one  unit;  but 
in  accordance  with  the  commensurability  of  these  things  the  least  distance 
should  be  33^33',  so  that  the  moon  would  move  towards  us  through  approxi¬ 
mately  half  the  total  distance — and  by  the  ensuing  proportion  it  was  necessary 
for  the  parallaxes  at  greatest  and  least  distance  to  differ  from  one  another  in  the 
ratio  of  the  squares.^  But  we  see  that  those  parallaxes,  which  occur  at  the  time 
of  the  half  moon  waxing  or  waning,  even  in  the  perigee  of  the  epicycle  differ 
slightly  or  not  at  all  from  those  which  occur  at  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
as  we  shall  show  satisfactorily  in  the  proper  place. 

But  the  body  itself  of  the  moon  makes  perfectly  clear  that  error,  because  for 
the  same  reason  it  would  appear  twice  as  large  and  twice  as  small  in  its  diameter. 
But  just  as  circles  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares^  of  their  diameters,  the  moon 
should  seem  almost  four  times  greater  in  its  quadratures  when  nearest  the  earth 
than  when  opposite  the  sun,  if  it  were  a  full  moon  shining;  but  since  a  half  moon 
is  shining,  nevertheless  it  should  shine  with  twice  the  area  of  light  as  a  full 
moon  there — although  the  contrary  of  this  is  self-evident.  If  someone  who  is  not 
content  with  simple  sight  wishes  to  make  an  experiment  with  the  dioptra  of 
Hipparchus  or  some  other  instruments  by  which  the  diameter  of  the  moon  may 
be  determined,  he  will  find  that  the  diameter  does  not  vary  except  in  so  far  as 
the  epicycle  without  the  eccentric  circle  demands.  For  that  reason  Menelaus 
and  Timochares  in  investigating  the  fixed  stars  by  means  of  the  positions  of  the 
moon  did  not  hesitate  to  use  the  same  lunar  diameter  always  as  3^°,  which  the 
moon  was  seen  to  occupy  most  of  the  time. 

3.  Another  Theory  of  the  Movement  of  the  Moon 

In  this  way  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  it  is  not  an  eccentricity  which  makes  the 
epicycle  appear  greater  and  smaller,  but  some  other  relation  of  circles.  [lOOb] 
For  let  AjB  be  the  epicycle  which  we  shall  call  first  and  greater;  and  let  C  be 
its  centre.  Let  D  be  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  and  from  D  let  the  straight  line 
DC  be  extended  to  the  highest  apsis  of  the  epicycle;  and  with  A  as  centre  let 
another  small  epicycle  EF  also  be  described — and  all  this  in  the  same  plane  of 

^Literally,  in  duplicate  ratio. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  679 

the  oblique  circle 
of  the  moon. 
Now  let  C  be 
moved  eastward 
but  A  westward; 
F  and  again  let  the 
moon  be  moved 
eastward  from  F 
the  upper  part  of 
EF.  And  let  such 
an  order  be  kept 
that  when  line 
DE  is  one  with 

line  of  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  the  moon  is  always  nearest  to  centre  C,  i.e., 
is  in  point  E,  but  in  the  quadratures  is  farthest  away  at  F.  I  say  that  the  lunar 
appearances  agree  with  this  set-up. 

For  it  follows  that  twice  a  month  the  moon  runs  around  epicycle  EF,  during 
which  time  C  makes  one  revolution  with  respect  to  the  mean  position  of  the 
sun.  And  the  new  and  the  full  moon  ^dll  be  seen  to  cause  the  least  circle,  namely, 
that  whereof  the  radius  is  CE;  but  the  moon  in  its  quadratures  will  cause  the 
greatest  circle  with  radius  CF;  and  thus  again  in  the  conjunctions  and  opposi¬ 
tions  it  will  make  lesser  differences  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent  move¬ 
ment,  but  in  the  quadratures  greater  differences  by  means  of  similar  but  un¬ 
equal  arcs  around  centre  E,  And  since  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  is  always  in  a 
circle  homocentric  with  the  Earth,  it  will  not  exhibit  such  diverse  parallaxes  but 
parallaxes  in  conformity  with  the  epicycle.  And  the  reason  will  be  evident  why 
the  body  of  the  moon  is  seen  somehow  similar  to  itself ;  and  all  the  other  things 
which  are  perceived  in  the  movement  of  the  moon  will  come  about  in  this  way. 

We  shall  demonstrate  them  successively  by  means  of  our  hypothesis,  although 
the  same  things  can  take  place  through  eccentric  circles,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
sun — the  due  proportion  being  kept.  Now  we  shall  take  our  start  from  the  regu¬ 
lar  movements,  as  we  did  above,  without  which  the  irregular  movement  cannot 
be  separated  out.  But  here  there  is  no  small  difficulty  on  account  of  the  paral¬ 
laxes,  which  we  mentioned;  and  for  that  reason  the  position  [of  the  moon]  is  not 
observable  by  means  of  astrolabes  and  other  such  instruments.  But  the  kindness 
of  nature  makes  provision  for  human  longing  even  in  this  respect,  so  that  the 
position  [of  the  moon]  is  more  surely  determinable  through  its  eclipses  than  by 
means  of  instruments  and  without  any  suspicion  of  error.  [101^]  For  since  the 
other  parts  of  the  world  are  pure  and  are  filled  with  the  light  of  day,  it  stands 
to  reason  that  night  is  nothing  except  the  shadow  of  the  Earth,  which  has  the 
figure  of  a  cone  and  ends  in  a  point.  Falling  upon  this  cone,  the  moon  is  dimmed; 
add,  when  placed  at  the  midpoint  of  its  darkness,  is  understood  to  have  arrived 
without  any  doubt  at  the  position  opposite  the  sun.  But  the  eclipses  of  the  sun, 
which  take  place  when  the  moon  moves  in  front  of  it,  do  not  offer  such  a  certain 
determination  of  the  position  of  the  moon.  For  it  happens  that  the  conjunction 
of  the  sun  and  moon  is  seen  by  us  at  some  given  time,  although  in  relation  to  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  the  conjunction  has  passed  or  has  not  yet  taken  place,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  aforesaid  parrallax.  And  accordingly  in  different  parts  of  the  Earth 
we  view  the  same  eclipse  of  the  sun  as  unequal  in  magnitude  and  duration  and 


680  COPERNICUS 

not  similar  in  all  respects.  But  in  the  case  of  the  eclipses  of  the  moon  no  such 
hindrance  occurs,  since  the  Earth  transmits  the  axis  of  that  blotting  shadow 
through  its  centre  from  the  sun;  and  for  that  reason  the  eclipses  of  the  moon  are 
best  fitted  for  determining  the  course  of  the  moon  with  the  utmost  certainty. 

4.  On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Moon  and  Its  Particular  Movements 

Among  the  ancients  who  cared  to  hand  these  things  down  to  posterity  by 
means  of  numbers  was  found  Meton  the  Anthenian,  who  flourished  around  the 
37th  Olympiad.  He  reported  that  in  19  solar  years  there  were  235  full  months, 
whence  that  great  hveadeKarepis  year,  z.e.,  year  of  nineteen  years,  was  called 
the  Metontic  year.  That  number  was  so  suitable  that  it  was  set  up  pubhcly  in 
the  market  place  at  Athens  and  other  famous  cities,  and  even  down  to  the  pres¬ 
ent  it  has  remained  in  common  use,  because  they  think  that  through  it  the  be¬ 
ginnings  and  ends  of  the  months  are  established  in  a  sure  order  and  that  through 
it  also  the  solar  year  of  365j^  days  is  commensurable  with  the  months.  Hence 
the  Callippic  period  of  76  years,  in  which  there  is  an  intercalation  of  19  days 
and  which  they  call  the  Callippic  year. 

But  Hipparchus  discovered  through  careful  study  that  in  304  years  there  was 
an  excess  of  a  total  day,  and  that  [the  Callippic  year]  was  verifiable  only  when 
the  solar  year  was  )4oo  of  a  day  smaller.  And  so  by  some  men  that  year  was 
called  the  great  year  of  Hipparchus,  [lOP]  in  which  there  were  3760  full  months. 
These  years  are  called  more  simply  and  crassly,  so  to  speak,  Minerva's,  when 
the  recurrences  of  anomaly  and  of  latitude  are  also  sought,  for  the  sake  of  which 
that  same  Hipparchus  was  making  further  investigations.  For  by  comparing  the 
readings  which  he  took  in  making  careful  observation  of  the  lunar  eclipses  with 
those  which  he  had  got  from  the  Chaldees,  he  determined  the  time  in  which  the 
revolutions  of  the  months  and  of  the  anomaly  recurred  simultaneously  to  be  345 
Egyptian  years  82  days  and  1  hour;  and  during  that  time  there  were  4267  full 
months  and  4573  cycles  of  anomaly.  Therefore  when  the  number  of  months  has 
been  reduced  to  days  and  there  are  126,007  days  1  hour,  one  month  is  found 
equal  to  29  days  31  minutes  50  seconds  8  thirds  9  fourths  20  fifths.  According  to 
that  ratio  the  movement  during  any  time  is  manifest.  For  the  division  of  the  360° 
of  revolution  of  one  month  by  the  number  of  days  in  a  month  produces  a  daily 
movement  of  the  moon  in  relation  to  the  sum  of  12°1U26"41"'20""18'"".  The 
multiplication  of  that  by  365  makes — in  addition  to  the  12  revolutions — an 
annual  movement  of  129°37'21"28'"29"". 

Furthermore,  since  the  4267  months  and  4573  cycles  of  anomaly  are  given  in 
numbers  which  are  composite  with  respect  to  one  another,  that  is,  as  being 
numbered  by  the  common  measure  of  17,  the  ratio  of  4267  months  to  4573  cy¬ 
cles  of  anomaly  will  in  least  terms  be  the  ratio  of  251  to  269;  and  by  Euclid,  x, 
15,  we  shall  have  the  proportion  of  the  revolution  of  the  moon  to  the  movement 
of  anomaly  in  that  ratio.  Accordingly,  when  we  have  multiplied  the  [annual] 
movement  of  the  moon  by  269  and  divided  the  product  by  251,  the  quotient 
will  be  annual  movement  of  anomaly  of  13  full  revolutions  and  88°43'8"40'"- 
20"",  and  hence  a  daily  movement  of  13°3'53"56"'29"". 

But  the  revolution  in  latitude  has  another  ratio.  For  it  does  not  agree  with 
the  prescribed  time  in  which  the  anomaly  has  recurred;  but  we  understand  that 
the  latitude  of  the  moon  has  returned  only  at  that  time  when  a  later  eclipse  of 
the  moon  is  in  every  respect  similar  and  equal  to  an  earlier,  so  that  both  obscura- 


681 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

tions  are  in  the  same  part  of  the  moon  and  are  equal,  in  magnitude  and  dura¬ 
tion.  And  this  happens  when  the  distances  of  the  moon  from  the  highest  or  the 
lowest  apsis  are  equal.  For  then  the  moon  is  understood  to  have  traversed 
equal  shadows  in  equal  time.  [102^]  Now  according  to  Hipparchus  such  a  return¬ 
ing  occurs  once  in  5458  months,  to  which  there  correspond  5923  revolutions  of 
latitude.  And  by  that  ratio  the  particular  movements  of  latitude  in  years  and 
days  will  be  established,  as  in  the  case  of  the  others.  For  when  we  have  multi¬ 
plied  the  movement  of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun  by  5923  months  and  divided 
the  product  by  5458,  we  shall  have  an  annual  movement  of  the  moon  in  latitude 
of  13  revolutions  148°42'46"49"'3""  and  a  daily  movement  of  13°13'45"39'"- 
40"". 

Hipparchus  gave  this  as  the  rate  of  the  regular  movements  o£  the  moon,  and 
no  one  before  him  had  made  a  closer  approximation.  Nevertheless  the  succeed¬ 
ing  ages  did  not  show  these  movements  absolved  by  all  the  same  numbers.  For 
Ptolemy  found  the  same  mean  movement  away  from  the  sun  as  did  Hipparchus, 
but  an  annual  movement  of  anomaly  deficient  with  respect  to  the  former  in 
1"11"'39""  and  an  annual  movement  of  latitude  with  an  excess  of  53"'41"". 
But  now  after  the  passage  of  many  ages  since  Hipparchus  we  also  found  a  mean 
annual  movement  deficient  in  1"2"'49""  and  a  movement  of  anomaly  deficient 
in  only  24'"49"".  Moreover,  there  is  an  excess  of  1"1'"44""  in  the  movement  in 
latitude.  And  so  the  regular  movement  of  the  moon,  whereby  it  differs  from  the 
terrestrial  movement,  will  be  an  annual  movement  of  129°37'22"32"'40"",  a 
movement  of  anomaly  of  88°43'9"5"'9""  and  a  movement  in  latitude  of  148°- 
42'45"17"'21"". 


682  COPERNICUS 


Movement  of  the  Moon  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

/ 

n 

trr 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

/ 

If 

/// 

1 

2 

9 

37 

22 

36 

31 

0 

58 

18 

40 

48 

2 

4 

19 

14 

45 

12 

32 

3 

7 

56 

3 

25 

3 

0 

28 

52 

7 

49 

33 

5 

17 

33 

26 

1 

4 

2 

38 

29 

30 

25 

34 

1 

27 

10 

48 

38 

5 

4 

48 

6 

53 

2 

35 

3 

36 

48 

11 

14 

6 

0 

57 

44 

15 

38 

•o 

36 

5 

46 

25 

33 

51 

7 

3 

7 

21 

38 

14 

37 

1 

56 

2 

56 

27 

8 

5 

16 

59 

0 

51 

o 

T 

38 

4 

5 

40 

19 

3 

9 

0 

26 

36 

23 

27 

39 

0 

15 

17 

41 

40 

10 

3 

36 

13 

46 

4 

1 

40 

2 

24 

55 

4 

16 

11 

5 

45 

31 

8 

40 

41 

4 

34 

32 

26 

53 

12 

1 

55 

28 

31 

17 

g 

42 

0 

44 

9 

49 

29 

13 

4 

5 

5 

53 

53 

43 

2 

53 

47 

12 

5 

14 

0 

14 

43 

16 

29 

44 

5 

3 

24 

34 

42 

15 

2 

24 

20 

39 

6 

<< 

45 

1 

13 

1 

57 

18 

16 

4 

33 

58 

1 

42 

46 

3 

22 

39 

19 

55 

17 

0 

43 

35 

24 

19 

47 

5 

32 

16 

42 

31 

18 

2 

53 

12 

46 

55 

48 

1 

41 

54 

5 

8 

19 

5 

2 

50 

9 

31 

49 

3 

51 

31 

27 

44 

20 

1 

12 

27 

32 

8 

e 

50 

0 

1 

8 

50 

20 

21 

3 

22 

4 

54 

44 

•2 

51 

2 

10 

46 

12 

57 

22 

5 

31 

42 

17 

21 

52 

4 

20 

23 

35 

33 

23 

1 

41 

19 

39 

57 

00 

O 

53 

0 

30 

0 

58 

10 

24 

3 

50 

57 

2 

34 

a. 

54 

2 

39 

38 

20 

46 

25 

0 

0 

34 

25 

10 

55 

4 

49 

15 

43 

22 

26 

2 

10 

11 

47 

46 

56 

0 

58 

53 

5 

59 

27 

4 

19 

49 

10 

23 

57 

3 

8 

30 

28 

35 

28 

0 

29 

26 

32 

59 

58 

5 

18 

7 

51 

12 

29 

2 

39 

3 

55 

36 

59 

1 

27 

45 

13 

48 

30 

4 

40 

41 

18 

12 

60 

3 

37 

22 

36 

25 

Movement  of  the  Moon  in  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60° 

o 

f 

tt 

/// 

60° 

o 

/ 

" 

/// 

1 

0 

12 

11 

26 

41 

31 

6 

17 

54 

47 

26 

2 

0 

24 

22 

53 

23 

32 

6 

30 

6 

14 

8 

3 

0 

36 

34 

20 

4 

33 

6 

42 

17 

40 

49 

4 

0 

48 

45 

46 

46 

34 

6 

54 

29 

7 

31 

5 

1 

0 

57 

13 

27 

35 

7 

6 

40 

34 

12 

6 

1 

13 

8 

40 

9 

36 

7 

18 

52 

0 

54 

7 

1 

25 

20 

6 

50 

37 

7 

31 

3 

27 

35 

8 

1 

37 

31 

33 

32 

o 

38 

7 

43 

14 

54 

17 

9 

1 

49 

43 

0 

13 

T 

39 

7 

55 

26 

20 

58 

10 

2 

1 

54 

26 

55 

•1 

40 

8 

7 

37 

47 

40 

11 

2 

14 

5 

53 

36 

41 

8 

19 

49 

14 

21 

12 

2 

26 

17 

20 

18 

g 

42 

8 

32 

0 

41 

3 

13 

2 

38 

28 

47 

0 

43 

8 

44 

12 

7 

44 

14 

2 

50 

40 

13 

41 

44 

8 

56 

23 

34 

26 

15 

3 

2 

51 

40 

22 

45 

9 

8 

35 

1 

7 

16 

3 

15 

3 

7 

4 

CQ 

46 

9 

20 

46 

27 

49 

17 

3 

27 

14 

33 

45 

47 

9 

32 

57 

54 

30 

18 

3 

39 

26 

0 

27 

48 

9 

45 

9 

21 

12 

19 

3 

51 

37 

27 

8 

49 

9 

57 

20 

47 

53 

20 

4 

3 

48 

53 

50 

0 

50 

10 

9 

32 

14 

35 

21 

4 

16 

0 

20 

31 

5S 

o 

51 

10 

21 

43 

41 

16 

22 

4 

28 

11 

47 

13 

•es 

52 

10 

33 

55 

7 

58 

23 

4 

40 

23 

13 

54 

OD 

o 

53 

10 

46 

6 

34 

40 

24 

4 

52 

34 

40 

36 

a. 

54 

10 

58 

18 

1 

21 

25 

5 

4 

46 

7 

17 

55 

11 

10 

29 

28 

2 

26 

5 

16 

57 

33 

59 

56 

11 

22 

40 

54 

43 

27 

5 

29 

9 

0 

40 

57 

11 

34 

52 

21 

25 

28 

5 

41 

20 

27 

22 

58 

11 

47 

3 

48 

7 

29 

5 

53 

31 

54 

3 

59 

11 

59 

15 

14 

48 

30 

6 

5 

43 

20 

45 

60 

12 

11 

26 

41 

31 

1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

)aj/ 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


683 


Movement  of  Anomaly  of  the  Moon  in  Years 
AND  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


60° 

o 

Movement 

/ 

tf 

m 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

t 

/// 

1 

28 

43 

9 

1 

31 

3 

50 

17 

42 

44 

2 

57 

26 

18 

14 

32 

5 

19 

0 

51 

52 

4 

26 

9 

27 

21 

33 

0 

47 

43 

0 

59 

5 

54 

52 

36 

29 

34 

2 

16 

27 

10 

6 

1 

23 

35 

45 

36 

> 

35 

3 

45 

10 

19 

13 

2 

52 

18 

54 

43 

c>» 

36 

5 

13 

53 

28 

21 

4 

21 

2 

3 

59 

37 

0 

42 

36 

37 

28 

5 

49 

45 

12 

58 

? 

38 

2 

11 

19 

46 

35 

1 

18 

28 

22 

5 

1 

39 

3 

40 

2 

55 

42 

2 

47 

11 

31 

12 

.'oo 

40 

5 

8 

46 

4 

50 

4 

15 

54 

40 

19 

41 

0 

37 

29 

13 

57 

5 

44 

37 

49 

27 

o 

42 

2 

6 

12 

23 

4 

1 

13 

20 

58 

34 

43 

3 

34 

55 

32 

11 

2 

42 

4 

7 

41 

44 

5 

3 

38 

41 

19 

4 

10 

47 

16 

48 

45 

0 

32 

21 

50 

26 

5 

39 

30 

25 

56 

46 

2 

1 

4 

59 

33 

1 

8 

13 

35 

3 

47 

3 

29 

48 

8 

40 

2 

36 

56 

44 

10 

48 

4 

58 

31 

17 

48 

4 

5 

39 

53 

17 

49 

0 

27 

14 

26 

55 

5 

34 

23 

2 

25 

50 

1 

55 

57 

36 

2 

1 

3 

6 

11 

32 

.o 

51 

3 

24 

40 

45 

9 

2 

31 

49 

20 

39 

52 

4 

53 

23 

54 

17 

4 

0 

32 

29 

46 

53 

0 

22 

7 

3 

24 

5 

29 

15 

38 

54 

54 

1 

50 

50 

12 

31 

0 

57 

58 

48 

1 

55 

3 

19 

33 

21 

38 

2 

26 

41 

57 

8 

56 

4 

48 

16 

30 

46 

3 

55 

25 

6 

15 

57 

0 

16 

59 

39 

53 

6 

24 

8 

15 

23 

58 

1 

45 

42 

49 

0 

0 

52 

51 

24 

30 

59 

3 

14 

25 

58 

7 

2 

21 

34 

33 

37 

60 

4 

43 

9 

7 

15 

OF  Lunar  Anomaly  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


60° 

0 

o 

13 

Movement 

/ 

3 

n 

53 

nt 

56 

Days 

31 

60° 

6 

o 

45 

Movement 

t 

0 

It 

52 

trr 

11 

0 

26 

7 

47 

53 

32 

5 

58 

4 

46 

8 

0 

39 

11 

41 

49 

33 

7 

11 

8 

40 

4 

0 

52 

15 

35 

46 

34 

7 

24 

12 

34 

1 

1 

5 

19 

29 

42 

35 

7 

37 

16 

27 

57 

1 

18 

23 

23 

39 

36 

7 

50 

20 

21 

54 

1 

31 

27 

17 

35 

37 

8 

3 

24 

15 

50 

1 

44 

31 

11 

32 

§ 

38 

8 

16 

28 

9 

47 

1 

57 

35 

5 

28 

39 

8 

29 

32 

3 

43 

2 

10 

38 

59 

25 

•«* 

40 

8 

42 

35 

57 

40 

2 

23 

42 

53 

21 

41 

8 

55 

39 

51 

36 

2 

36 

46 

47 

18 

o 

42 

9 

8 

43 

45 

33 

2 

49 

50 

41 

14 

43 

9 

21 

47 

39 

29 

3 

2 

54 

35 

11 

44 

9 

34 

51 

33 

26 

3 

15 

58 

29 

7 

45 

9 

47 

55 

27 

22 

3 

29 

2 

23 

4 

46 

10 

0 

59 

21 

19 

3 

42 

6 

17 

0 

47 

10 

14 

3 

15 

15 

3 

55 

10 

10 

57 

1 

48 

10 

27 

7 

9 

12 

4 

8 

14 

4 

53 

49 

10 

40 

11 

3 

8 

4 

21 

17 

58 

50 

e 

50 

10 

53 

14 

57 

5 

4 

34 

21 

52 

46 

s 

•2 

51 

11 

6 

18 

51 

1 

4 

47 

25 

46 

43 

52 

11 

19 

22 

44 

58 

5 

0 

29 

40 

39 

09 

O 

53 

11 

32 

26 

38 

54 

5 

13 

33 

34 

36 

0. 

54 

11 

45 

30 

32 

51 

5 

26 

37 

28 

32 

55 

11 

58 

34 

26 

47 

5 

39 

41 

22 

29 

56 

12 

11 

38 

20 

44 

5 

52 

45 

16 

25 

57 

12 

24 

42 

14 

40 

6 

5 

49 

10 

22 

58 

12 

37 

46 

8 

37 

6 

18 

53 

4 

18 

59 

12 

50 

50 

2 

33 

6 

31 

56 

58 

15 

60 

13 

3 

53 

56 

30 

684 


COPERNICUS 


Lunar  Movement  in  Latitude  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

t 

It 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

t 

n 

/// 

1 

2 

28 

42 

45 

17 

31 

4 

50 

5 

23 

57 

2 

4 

57 

25 

30 

34 

32 

1 

18 

48 

9 

14 

3 

1 

26 

8 

15 

52 

33 

3 

47 

30 

54 

32 

4 

3 

54 

51 

1 

9 

34 

0 

16 

13 

39 

48 

5 

0 

23 

33 

46 

26 

35 

2 

44 

56 

25 

6 

6 

2 

52 

16 

31 

44 

36 

5 

13 

39 

10 

24 

7 

5 

20 

59 

17 

1 

37 

1 

42 

21 

55 

41 

8 

1 

49 

42 

2 

18 

38 

4 

11 

4 

40 

58 

9 

4 

18 

24 

47 

36 

7 

39 

0 

39 

47 

26 

16 

10 

0 

47 

7 

32 

53 

09 

40 

3 

8 

30 

11 

33 

11 

3 

15 

50 

18 

10 

V. 

41 

5 

37 

12 

56 

50 

12 

5 

44 

33 

3 

28 

g 

42 

2 

5 

55 

42 

8 

13 

2 

13 

15 

48 

45 

43 

4 

34 

38 

27 

25 

14 

4 

41 

58 

34 

2 

44 

1 

3 

21 

12 

42 

15 

1 

10 

41 

19 

20 

45 

3 

32 

3 

58 

0 

16 

3 

39 

24 

4 

37 

CQ 

46 

0 

0 

46 

43 

17 

17 

0 

8 

6 

49 

54 

47 

2 

29 

29 

28 

34 

18 

2 

36 

49 

35 

12 

48 

4 

58 

12 

13 

52 

19 

5 

5 

32 

20 

29 

49 

1 

26 

54 

59 

8 

20 

1 

34 

15 

5 

46 

e 

50 

3 

55 

37 

44 

26 

21 

4 

2 

57 

51 

4 

s 

o 

51 

0 

24 

29 

29 

44 

22 

0 

31 

40 

36 

21 

*"S 

52 

2 

53 

3 

15 

1 

23 

3 

0 

23 

21 

38 

e» 

c 

53 

5 

21 

46 

0 

18 

24 

5 

29 

6 

6 

56 

54 

1 

50 

28 

45 

36 

25 

1 

57 

48 

52 

13 

55 

4 

19 

11 

30 

53 

26 

4 

26 

31 

37 

30 

56 

0 

47 

54 

16 

10 

27 

0 

55 

14 

22 

48 

57 

3 

16 

37 

1 

28 

28 

3 

23 

57 

8 

5 

58 

5 

45 

19 

46 

45 

29 

5 

52 

39 

53 

22 

59 

2 

14 

2 

32 

2 

30 

2 

21 

12 

38 

40 

60 

4 

42 

45 

17 

21 

Movement  in  Latitude  of  the  Moon  in  Days  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60° 

o 

/ 

n 

/// 

60° 

o 

/ 

/// 

1 

0 

13 

13 

45 

39 

31 

6 

50 

6 

35 

20 

2 

0 

26 

27 

31 

18 

32 

7 

3 

20 

20 

59 

3 

0 

39 

41 

16 

58 

33 

7 

16 

34 

6 

39 

4 

0 

52 

55 

2 

37 

34 

7 

29 

47 

52 

18 

5 

1 

6 

8 

48 

16 

35 

7 

43 

1 

37 

58 

6 

1 

19 

22 

33 

56 

o 

36 

7 

56 

15 

23 

37 

7 

1 

32 

36 

19 

35 

05 

37 

8 

9 

29 

9 

16 

8 

1 

45 

50 

5 

14 

38 

8 

22 

42 

54 

56 

9 

1 

59 

3 

50 

54 

39 

8 

35 

56 

40 

35 

10 

2 

12 

17 

36 

33 

.'«0 

40 

8 

49 

10 

26 

14 

11 

2 

25 

31 

22 

13 

<< 

41 

9 

2 

24 

11 

54 

12 

2 

38 

45 

7 

52 

o 

42 

9 

15 

37 

57 

33 

13 

2 

51 

58 

53 

31 

43 

9 

28 

51 

43 

13 

14 

3 

5 

12 

39 

11 

44 

9 

42 

5 

28 

52 

15 

3 

18 

26 

24 

50 

45 

9 

55 

19 

14 

31 

16 

3 

31 

40 

10 

29 

46 

10 

8 

33 

0 

11 

17 

3 

44 

53 

56 

9 

47 

10 

21 

46 

45 

50 

18 

3 

58 

7 

41 

48 

48 

10 

35 

0 

31 

29 

19 

4 

11 

21 

27 

28 

e 

49 

10 

48 

14 

17 

9 

20 

4 

24 

35 

13 

7 

g 

50 

11 

1 

28 

2 

48 

21 

4 

37 

48 

58 

46 

c 

•»* 

51 

11 

14 

41 

48 

28 

22 

4 

51 

2 

44 

26 

52 

11 

27 

55 

34 

7 

23 

5 

4 

16 

30 

5 

53 

11 

41 

9 

19 

46 

24 

5 

17 

30 

15 

44 

54 

11 

54 

23 

5 

26 

25 

5 

30 

44 

1 

24 

55 

12 

7 

36 

51 

5 

26 

5 

43 

57 

47 

3 

56 

12 

20 

50 

36 

44 

27 

5 

57 

11 

32 

43 

57 

12 

34 

4 

22 

24 

28 

6 

10 

25 

18 

22 

58 

12 

47 

18 

8 

3 

29 

6 

23 

39 

4 

1 

59 

13 

0 

31 

53 

43 

30 

6 

36 

25 

49 

41 

60 

13 

13 

45 

39 

22 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


685 


5.  Demonstration  of  the  First  Irregularity  of  the  Moon 
Which  Occurs  at  the  New  and  at  the  Full  Moon 

[105^]  We  have  set  out  the  regular  movements  of  the  moon,  according  as  they 
can  be  known  by  us  at  present.  Now  we  must  approach  the  ratio  of  irregularity 
which  we  shall  demonstrate  by  way  of  the  epicycle,  and  first  the  irregularity 
which  occurs  in  the  conjunction  and  oppositions  with  the  sun,  in  connexion  with 
which  the  ancient  mathematicians  exercised  their  amazing  genius  in  triads  of 
lunar  eclipses.  We  shall  also  follow  the  road  thus  prepared  for  us  by  them,  and 
we  shall  take  three  eclipses  carefully  observed  by  Ptolemy  and  compare  them 
with  three  others  noted  with  no  less  care,  in  order  to  examine  the  regular  move¬ 
ments  already  set  out,  to  see  if  they  have  been  set  out  correctly*.  In  explaining 
them  we  shall  in  imitation  of  the  ancients  employ  as  regular  the  mean  movement 
of  the  sun  and  moon  away  from  the  position  of  the  spring  equinox,  since  the  vari¬ 
ation  which  occurs  on  account  of  the  irregular  precession  of  equinoxes  is  not 
perceptible  in  such  a  short  time  or  even  in  ten  years. 

Accordingly,  Ptolemy  took  as  first  the  eclipse  occurring  in  the  17th  year  of 
Hadrian^s  reign,  after  the  close  of  the  20th  day  of  the  month  Pauni  by  the 
Egyptian  calendar;  and  it  was  the  year  of  Our  Lord  133  on  the  6th  day  of  Alay 
or  the  day  before  the  Nones.  There  was  a  total  eclipse,  the  midtime  of  which  was 
a  quarter  of  an  equal  hour  before  midnight  at  Alexandria;  but  at  Frauenburg  or 
Cracow  it  was  an  hour  and  a  quarter  before  the  midnight  which  the  seventh  day 
followed;  and  the  sun  was  at  of  Taurus,  but  according  to  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  at  12°21'  of  Taurus. 

He  says  that  the  second  occurred  in  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian,  when  two  days 
of  Chiach — the  fourth  Egyptian  month — had  passed:  that  was  in  the  year  of  Our 
Lord  134,  13  days  before  the  Kalends  of  November.  There  was  an  eclipse  from 
the  north  covering  ten  twelfths  of  its  diameter.  The  midtime  was  one  equatorial 
hour  before  midnight  at  Alexandria,  but  two  hours  before  midnight  at  Cracow; 
and  the  sun  was  at  253^  ®of  Libra  but  by  its  mean  movement  at  26°43'  of  the 
same. 

The  third  eclipse  occurred  in  the  20th  year  of  Hadrian,  when  19  days  of  Phar- 
muthi — the  eighth  Egyptian  month — had  passed;  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord 
[106^]  135,  when  the  6th  day  of  March  had  passed.  The  moon  was  again  eclipsed 
in  the  north  to  the  extent  of  half  its  diameter.  The  midtime  was  four  equatorial 
hours  past  midnight  at  Alexandria,  but  at  Cracow  it  was  three  hours  after  mid¬ 
night,  that  morning  being  the  Nones  of  March.  At  that  time  the  sun  was  at 
143-^2°  of  Pisces,  but  by  its  mean  movement  at  11®44'  of  Pisces. 

Now  it  is  clear  that  in  the  middle  space  of  time  between  the  first  and  the 
second  eclipse  the  moon  traversed  as  much  space  as  the  sun  in  its  apparent 
movement — not  counting  the  full  circles — f.e.,  161°55';  and  between  the  second 
and  the  third  ecUpse,  138®55'.  Now  in  the  first  interval  there  were  1  year  166 
days  23M  equal  hours  according  to  apparent  time,  but  by  corrected  time  23^ 
hours;  but  in  the  second  interval  1  year  137  days  5  hours  simply,  but  53^  hours 
correctly. 

And  during  the  first  interval  the  regular  movement  of  the  sun  and  the  moon 
measured  as  one — not  counting  the  circles — was  169^37',  and  there  was  a  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly  of  110°21';  in  the  second  interval  the  similarly  regular  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  was  137°34'  and  there  was  a  movement  of  anomaly 


686 


COPERNICUS 


of  81°36'.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that  during  the  first  interval  the  110°21'  of  the 
epicycle  subtract  7°42'  from  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon;  and  during  the 
second  interval  the  81°36'  of  the  epicycle  add  1®21'. 

With  these  things  thus  before  us,  let  there  be  described  the  lunar  epicycle 


O 


ABC,  in  which  the  first  eclipse  of  the  moon  is  at  the  second  at  B,  and  the  re¬ 
maining  one  at  C,  and  in  the  order  as  above  let  the  transit  of  the  moon  be  under¬ 
stood  as  occurring  westward.  And  let 

arc  =  110^^21', 

hence 


as  we  said ;  and  let 


-add.  AB  =  r42\ 
arc  BC  = 


hence 


-fadd.  BDC  =  r21'. 


And,  as  the  remainder  of  the  circle, 

arc  CA  =  168°3' 

and  it  adds  the  remainder  of  the  additosubtraction,  i,e., 

-fadd.  Ci)A  =  6°21'. 

Since  on  the  ecliptic 

arc  AB  =  7%2\ 

therefore 

angle  AJ[)5  =  7°42', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180®. 


But 

angle  AZ)£  =  15®24', 

[106^]  where  2  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

And,  as  on  the  circumference  and  as  an  exterior  angle  of  triangle  BDE, 

,  ,  angle  A^5  =  110°21': 

therefore 

angle  EBD  =  M%7', 

But  the  sides  of  triangles  whose  angles  are  given  are  themselves 
given: 

,  DjE;  =  147,396 

and 


=  26,798, 

where  diameter  of  circle  circumscribing  triangle  =  200,000. 
Again,  since  on  the  ecliptic 

arc  AEC  =  &^21\ 
angle  i?DC  =  6°21', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180°. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

angle  £;Z)(7=12°42', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

angle  AJ57C  =  191°57'. 


687 


But 

And 
And 

angle  £'(7Z>  =  angle  angle  CZ)£7  =  179°15'. 

Therefore  the  sides  are  given: 

DE=  199,996 

and 

C^;  =  22,120, 

where  the  diameter  of  the  circle  circumscribing  triangle  =  200,000. 

But 

CE=  16,302 

and 

BE  =  26,798, 

where  DE  =  147,396. 

Again,  since  in  triangle  BEC 

side  BE  is  given, 
side  EC  is  given, 

and 

angle  C^;R  =  81°36' 

and  hence 

arc  RC  =  81°36': 

therefore,  by  the  proofs  concerning  plane  triangles, 

side  BC=  17, 960. 

But  since  the  diameter  of  the  epicycle  =  200,000, 
and 

arc  BC  =  8r36', 
chord  5C=  130,684. 

And  in  accordance  with  the  ratio  given 

i7Z)  =  1,072,684 

and 
and 

But,  by  construction. 

Therefore,  by  subtraction, 
and 

Hence  by  addition 

line  A£D  =  1,220,470. 

But  since  segment  EA  is  less  than  a  semicircle,  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  will 
not  be  in  [107^]  it  but  in  the  remainder  ABCE.  Therefore  let  K  be  the  centre, 
and  let  DMKL  be  drawn  through  both  apsides,  and  let  L  be  the  highest  apsis 
and  M  the  lowest.  Now,  by  Euclid,  iii,  36,  it  is  clear  that 


CE  =  118,637, 
arc  C^  =  72°46'10". 
arc  CE A  =  168^3\ 
arc  ^A=95°16'50" 
chord  =  147,786. 


688  COPERNICUS 

rect.  ADy  Z)iS  =  rect.  LD,  DM, 

Now  since  LM ,  the  diameter  of  the  circle — to  which  DM  is  added  in  a  straight 
line — is  bisected  at  Kj  then 

rect.  LDy  DM +sq.  KM  =  sq.  DK, 

Therefore 

/)K=  1,148,556 

,  ,,  ,  .  where  KL=  100,000; 

and  on  that  account, 

LK  =  8,706 

where  DKL  =  100,000 

and  LK  is  the  radius  of  the  epicycle.  Having  done  that,  draw  KNO  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  AD.  Since  KD,  DE,  and  EA  have  their  ratios  to  one  another  given  in  the 
parts  whereof  LK  =  100,000,  and  since 

iVJ5;  =  HA£7  =  73,893: 

thereiore,  by  addition, 

Z)j5JiV=  1,146,577. 

But  in  triangle  DKN 

side  DK  is  given, 
side  ND  is  given, 

angle  =  90®; 

on  that  account,  at  the  centre, 

angle  iVifZ)  =  86®383^' 


and 

Hence, 

Now 

and 


arcM£70  =  86®38K'. 
arc  LAO  =  180® -arc  iVLO  =  93®21i^'. 
arc  OA  =  3^  arc  AOL  =  47®38i^'; 


arc  LA  =  arc  LAO  — arc  OA  =45®43', 

which  is  the  distance — or  position  of  anomaly — of  the  moon  from  the  highest 

apsis  of  the  epicycle  at  the  first  eclipse.  But 

A  1  K  K.  arc  AL  =  110®21'. 

Accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

arc  LB  =  64®38', 

v'hich  is  the  anomaly  at  the  second  eclipse.  And  by  addition 

arc  LBC  =  146®  14', 

where  the  third  eclipse  falls.  Now  it  will  also  be  clear  that  since 
angle  Z)i^Ar  =  86®38i^', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360®, 
angle  L:L)A  =  90® -angle  L)KiV  =  3®2lK'; 
and  that  is  the  additosubtraction  which  the  anomaly  adds  at  the  first  eclipse. 
Now 

angle  AOL  =  7®42'; 

therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  LOL  =  4®20i^', 

which  arc  LB  subtracts  from  the  regular  movement  of  the  moon  at  the  second 
eclipse.  And  since 

[107‘^]  angle  BDC  =  r21', 
and  therefore,  by  subtraction, 

angle  CLAf  =  2®49', 

the  subtractive  additosubtraction  caused  by  arc  LBC  at  the  third  eclipse;  there- 


689 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

fore  the  mean  position  of  the  moon,  Le.,  of  centre  /C,  at  the  first  eclipse  was 
9°53'  of  Scorpio,  because  its  apparent  position  was  at  13^15'  of  Scorpio;  and 
that  was  the  number  of  degrees  of  the  sun  diametrically  opposite  in  Taurus.  And 
thus  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon  at  the  second  eclipse  was  at  293^°  of 
Aries;  and  in  the  third  eclipse,  at  17°4'  of  Virgo.  Moreover,  the  regular  distances 
of  the  moon  from  the  sun  were  177°33'  for  the  first  eclipse,  182°47'  for  the 
second,  185®20'  for  the  last.  So  Ptolemy. 

Following  his  example,  let  us  now  proceed  to  a  third  trinity  of  eclipses  of  the 
moon,  which  were  painstakingly  observed  by  us.  The  first  was  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  1511,  after  October  6th  had  passed.  The  moon  began  to  be  eclipsed 
IJ/g  equal  hours  before  midnight,  and  was  completely  restored  23^  hours  after 
midnight,  and  in  this  way  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  was  at  %2  hours  after  mid¬ 
night — the  morning  following  being  the  Nones  of  October,  the  7th.  There  was  a 
total  eclipse,  while  the  sun  was  in  22°25'  of  Libra  but  by  regular  movement  at 
24°  13'  of  Libra. 

We  observed  the  second  eclipse  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1522,  in  the  month  of 
September,  after  the  lapse  of  five  days.  The  eclipse  was  total,  and  began  at  % 
equal  hours  before  midnight,  but  its  midpoint  occurred  IJ^  hours  after  mid¬ 
night,  which  the  6th  day  followed — the  8th  day  before  the  Ides  of  September. 
The  sun  was  in  223^°  of  Virgo  but,  according  to  its  regular  movement,  in  23°59' 
of  Virgo. 

We  observed  the  third  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1523,  at  the  close  of  August 
25th.  It  began  2%  hours  after  midnight,  was  a  total  eclipse,  and  the  midtime 
was  4^f2  hours  after  the  midnight  prior  to  the  7th  day  before  the  Kalends  of 
September.  The  sun  was  in  11°21'  of  Virgo  but  according  to  its  mean  movement 
at  13°2'  of  Virgo. 

And  here  it  is  also  manifest  that  the  distance  between  the  true  positions  of 
the  sun  and  the  moon  from  the  first  eclipse  to  the  second  was  329°47',  [lOS""]  but 
from  the  second  to  the  third  it  was  349°9'.  Now  the  time  from  the  first  eclipse  to 
the  second  was  10  equal  years  337  days  hours  according  to  apparent  time,  but 
by  corrected  equal  time  %  hours.  From  the  second  to  the  third  there  were  354 
days  3  hours  5  minutes;  but  according  to  equal  time  3  hours  9  minutes. 

During  the  first  interval  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  meas¬ 
ured  as  one — not  counting  the  complete  circles — amounted  to  334°47',  and  the 
movement  of  anomaly  to  250°36',  subtracting  approximately  5°  from  the  regu¬ 
lar  movement;  in  the  second  interval  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun  and  moon 
was  346°10';  and  the  movement  of  anomaly  was  306°43',  adding  2°59'  to  the 
mean  movement. 

Now  let  ABC  be  the  epicycle,  and  let  A  be  the  position  of  the  moon  at  the 


tU>0  COrKKNlCUS 

iniddlo  of  the  oolipse,  />  at  the  soooiul^  C  at  tho  thinl.  Aiul  lot  tiio  movojuont 
of  tho  opioyoio  bo  undoi'stoinl  a^?  piwooding  fniin  C  to  />'  aiul  from  B  to  f\o., 
fix>m  abovo.  wostwaixl,  aiul  fi^om  bolow,  oa^'^twaixl.  Aiul 

a  IV  A  ( '/> «  2o0‘^ob\ 

aiul.  as  wo  Sivid.  it  subtraots  from  t  ho  moan  mo\  omont  ihiring  the  first  iutcrvivl 
of  tinu\  lUit 

aiv 

whioh  adds  to  tho  moan  movomout  of  tho  moon;  and  acooixlingly  by  sulv 
traction  tho  ivmaindor 

aiv  ACm\dr\\)\ 

whioh  subtraots  tho  ix'maininix  Hut  sinoo  aix'  AC  is  gix'ator  than  a  soini- 
oiix'lo  and  is  subtraotivo,  thon  it  must  contain  tho  hii;host  apsis.  For  tho  highost 
ai>sis  cannot  bo  in  aix's  BA  or  CBA,  whiolv  aix'  additive  and  oaoh  loss  than  a 
somioiix'lo;  but  tho  lossor  movoiuont  is  placed  by  tho  apoi::oo.  Thoix'foix'  lot  D 
bo  taken  oppasito  as  tho  oontix'  of  tho  Farth;  and  lot  .l/)»  /)/>,  DBC,  AB,  AK, 
and  BB  bo  joined, 

Now  sinoo  in  triani^lo  DBB 

exterior  angle  CKB^BiC\'7\ 

Invauso  angle  CBB  intoroopts  arc  CB,  and 

aiv  ('7>'«;hUF-aro  BAC\ 
and  sinoo,  as  at  tho  oontix\ 

angle  BDE-^n^V. 

but,  ivs  at  tho  oiivumfoixmoo, 

a nglo  BDE  •«  rf^f>8' ; 
aiul  sinoo,  llioixM'oiw  bv  subtraction, 

angle 

w'hoix'fort' 

side  BE^  1042 

and 

side  /)/•;«  ^<024 

-■llOS^']  w  hoix'  radius  of  ciixdo  oiix'umsoribing 
tho  tnajiglo—  10,1X>0. 

Similarly,  as  standing  on  aiv  AC  of  tho  oiivumfon'noo, 

angle  AEC^\\):A\)\ 

and,  as  at  the  oontix\ 

angle 

but,  as  on  tho  oiivumfoivnoo, 

angle  .1 /)(^-4^'2'; 

thoix'foix',  by  subtraction, 

angle  />,4  Tv  —  lOiFMT', 

w  hoix'  2  rt.  angles  — 

’fhoix'foix'  tho  siilos  aix'  also  given  in  the  parts  whoix'of  tho  radius  of  the  circle 
ciix'umscribing  triangle  ADE^  lO.OiXh 

A/*: -702 

and 

D/v  - 10,805: 


but  Nvhoivas 


7)f;- 8.024, 


•4nff 


Tierefore  mce  niore  !raT^  zn^n^t  A3£.  ~yrigg*ii 

A£  ^ 

-jjiii*  FR  is  zr^^’ea. 

ind 


ingle  -lZ3=25ir3d\ 

'TOfiie  2  icgies—ltxJ' 

AircordiiiEiT  by  wiiar  Save  snawii  ooMcefnmg  "iracgseg 

^  =  1.227 


'viier? 

Ai^rormiig^y  in  'iiis  'Tiy  Tpe  iave  Z9C  bofei  -Jt  lae  j£  :;ae  burs?  Int^  jlJ. 

E3.  ind  SD:  ind  b«iee  ’rillbc^-?me  :Tianifesy  Ji  Tgmg  if  :::»  psirrs  ^«beir»f 
die  radius  at  die  epkyoe^lD.OOQ: 

du  ^L3  =  I6.JS. 

57/ =  106.751. 

iod 

dL  55  =  ra.553. 


Whence  ilso 


iod 


irr  5S=5rHr; 

ire  SBC  =icr  55— in?  5C=I4ir5^ 


ind 

incL  by  itMtic«i. 


A.  C^^IS.SoI 


Xow  !e?  the  w'encce  vjt  the  ew>“cje  >?  set  ^i«h:  ^  aecesssssirfi^  m  segn«t 
filic'  being:  gn^ter  thin  i  semksrr^  Aad  jk:  5  be  :^e  :^tnM  and 
be  attended  tn  i  straight  Sne  thn.^usd  bech  ipsu^  /  tht  levees  iad  the 
bigheist.  .\giUi  ;£  c^mt  Aar 

reel.  c7i?.  (7ZJL  Dt- 

Bu( 

n?ct.  tyi>.  i>f— FT  =;5<J.  Df, 

Theiea>xe 

wh^  *'--iOLOoa 

Aoconiiajglv 

wbw 


—wlueh  agrws  with  whar  w?  inJ  bw  a»<er  xet  7r!»is«!;>?<6s.'r!:  ac^sr 

>\>w  tKaa  o«?otr>*  F"  Ft  be  &iwtt  «  r;gb:  sag^  "o  iad  at. 
»iKte«i  in  Ae  sttsugnt  aa*  R-  wsfl  bisect  .'T  avtiar  X-  5f<.>w  ssaee 

line 

aoa 

theratut^  bv  addittoB. 


wheat  l!d.^ 
and  wihsw  ^=-=lJQjU3Jx 


692 

Therefore,  in  triangle  DFL 


COPERNICUS 


and,  by  subtraction, 
and  similarly 
and 

hence,  by  addition, 
and' 


side  DF  is  given, 
side  DL  is  given, 
angle  DFL  =  88^21', 

angle  FDL=  1°39'; 

arc  /LM  =  88°21' 

arc  MC  =  }/2  arc  Fj5C  =  70°29'; 

arc  /MC=158°50', 


arc  GC=180®  — arc  IMC  =  21^10'. 

And  this  was  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  apogee  of  the  epicycle,  or  the 
position  of  anomaly  at  the  third  eclipse.  And  at  the  second  eclipse 

arc  (?CL  =  74°27'; 

and  at  the  first  eclipse 


arc  GBA  =  183°51'. 

Again  at  the  third  eclipse,  and  as  at  the  centre, 

angle  IDE 

which  is  the  subtractive  additosubtraction.  And  at  the  second  eclipse 

angle  IDB  =  4°38', 

which  is  still  a  subtractive  addition-and-subtraction,  because 

angle  /DL  =  angle  GDC+angle  CDJ5  =  l°39'+2°59'. 

And  accordingly 

angle  AD/ =  angle  ADD  — angle  /DD  =  5°  — 4°38'  =  22' 
which  are  added  to  the  regular  movement  at  the  first  eclipse. 

For  that  reason  the  position  of  regular  movement  of  the  moon  in  the  first 
eclipse  was  22°3'  of  Aries,  but  the  position  of  the  apparent  movement  was  at 
22°25' ;  and  the  sun  was  opposite,  at  the  same  number  of  degrees  of  Libra.  In 
this  way  too  the  mean  position  of  the  moon  in  the  second  eclipse  was  at  26°50' 
of  Pisces,  but  in  the  third  eclipse,  at  13°  of  Pisces,  and  the  mean  lunar  movement 
by  which  it  is  separated  from  the  annual  movement  of  the  Earth,  was  177°50' 
at  the  first  eclipse;  at  the  second  eclipse,  182°51';  and  at  the  third  eclipse, 
179°58'. 


6.  Confirmation  of  What  Has  Been  Set  Out  Concerning 
THE  Moon^s  Movements  of  Anomaly  in  Longitude 


Moreover,  by  means  of  these  things  which  are  set  out  concerning  the  eclipses 
of  the  moon,  it  will  be  possible  to  test  whether  we  have  set  out  the  regular  move¬ 
ments  of  the  moon  correctly.  For  it  was  shown  that  in  the  second  of  the  two 
eclipses  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  sun  was  182°47',  and  [the  movement] 
of  anomaly  was  64°38';  [109^]  but  in  the  second  of  those  eclipses  occurring  in 
our  time  the  movement  of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun  was  182°51'  but  [the 
movement]  of  anomaly  was  74°27'.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  intervening  time  there 
were  17,166  full  months  and  as  it  were  a  movement  of  4'  and  a  movement  of 
anomaly — not  counting  the  whole  cycles — of  9°49'.  Now  the  time  which  inter¬ 
venes  between  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  2nd  day  of  the  Egyptian  month 
Chiach  2  hours  before  midnight,  followed  by  the  3rd  day  of  the  month,  and  the 
1522nd  year  of  Our  Lord  on  September  5th,  IJ^  hours  after  midnight  amounts 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  693 

to  1388  Eguptian  years  302  days  33^  hours  by  apparent  time;  and  when  cor¬ 
rected,  3  hours  34  minutes  after  midnight. 

And  in  that  time  after  the  17,165  complete  revolutions  of  equal  months  there 
was  according  to  Ptolemy  and  Hipparchus  a  movement  away  from  the  sun  of 
359°38'.  And  according  to  Hipparchus  the  movement  of  anomaly  was  9®39',  but 
according  to  Ptolemy  9°lP.  Accordingly  the  lunar  movement  away  from  the 
sun  calculated  by  Hipparchus  and  Ptolemy  is  deficient  in  26',  and  the  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly  of  Ptolemy  and  of  Hipparchus  is  deficient  in  38'.  These  min¬ 
utes  swell  our  movements,  and  are  consonant  with  the  numbers  which  we  have 
set  out. 

7.  On  the  Positions  of  the  Moon  in  Longitude  and  Anomaly 

Now  we  shall  speak  of  these  things,  as  above;  and  here  we  are  to  determine 
positions  for  the  established  beginnings  of  calendar  years  of  the  Olympiads,  of 
the  years  of  Alexander,  Caesar,  and  Our  Lord,  and  any  additional  one  desired. 
Therefore  if  we  consider  the  second  of  the  three  ancient  eclipses — the  one  which 
occurred  in  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian,  on  the  2nd  day  of  the  Egyptian  month 
Chiach,  one  equatorial  hour  before  midnight  at  Alexandria  but  for  us  under  the 
Cracow  meridian  at  2  hours  before  midnight — we  shall  find  from  the  beginning 
of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  to  this  movement  133  Egyptian  years  325  days  22  hours 
simply,  but  21  hours  37  minutes  correctly.  During  this  time  the  movement  of 
the  moon  according  to  our  calculation  was  332^49'  and  [the  movement]  of  anom¬ 
aly  was  217°32'.  [110^]  And  when  they  have  been  subtracted  from  the  findings 
for  the  eclipse,  each  from  its  own  kind,  there  remain  209^58'  as  the  mean  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun,  and  a  position  of  anomaly  of  207^7'  at  the 
beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  at  midnight  before  the  Kalends  of  January. 

Again  [from  the  1st  Olympiad]  to  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord, 
there  are  193  Olympiads  2  years  194J^  days,  which  make  775  Egyptian  years 
123^  days,  but  by  corrected  time  12  hours  11  minutes.  Similarly  from  the  death 
of  Alexander  to  the  birth  of  Christ,  they  compute  323  Egyptian  years  1303^ 
days  by  apparent  time,  but  by  corrected  time  12  hours  16  minutes.  And  from 
Caesar  to  Christ  there  are  45  Egyptian  years  12  days,  in  which  the  ratios  of 
equal  and  apparent  time  agree. 

Accordingly  when  we  have  deducted  the  movements  corresponding  to  the  in¬ 
tervals  of  time  from  the  positions  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  by  subtracting  single 
items  from  single  items,  we  shall  have  for  noon  of  the  1st  day  of  the  month 
Hekatombaion  of  the  1st  Olympiad  a  regular  lunar  distance  from  the  sun  of 
39°43'  and  a  distance  of  anomaly  of  46°20'. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander  at  noon  on  the  first  day  of  the 
month  Thoth  the  moon  was  310®44'  distant  from  the  sun,  and  the  movement  of 
anomaly  was  85°41'. 

And  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Julius  Caesar  at  midnight  before  the 
Kalends  of  January  the  moon  was  350°39'  distant  from  the  sun,  and  the  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly  was  17°58'.  All  this  with  reference  to  the  Cracow  meridian, 
since  Gynopolis — commonly  called  Frauenburg — where  we  took  our  observa¬ 
tions  at  the  mouth  of  the  Vistula,  lies  under  this  meridian,  as  the  eclipses  of  the 
sun  and  moon  observed  in  both  places  at  the  same  time  teach  us;  and  Dyrrha- 
chium  in  Macedonia — which  was  called  Epidamnum  in  antiquity — is  also  under 
this  meridian. 


694 


COPERNICUS 


8.  On  the  Second  Irregularity  of  the  Moon  and  What 
Ratio  the  First  Epicycle  Has  to  the  Second 
Accordingly,  in  this  way  the  regular  movement  of  the  moon  together  with  its 
first  irregularity  has  been  demonstrated.  Now  we  must  inquire  into  what  ratio 
the  first  epicycle  has  to  the  second  and  both  of  them  to  the  distance  of  the  centre 
of  the  Earth.  But,  as  we  said,  the  greatest  difference  [between  regular  and  ap¬ 
parent  movement]  is  found  in  the  mean  quadratures  when  the  half  moon  is 
waxing  or  waning,  and  that  difference  is  7^°,  [llO^j  as  even  the  observations  of 
the  ancients  record.  For  they  were  making  observations  of  the  time  in  which  the 
half  moon  had  nearly  reached  the  mean  distance  of  the  epicycle  and  was  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  tangent  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth — and  that  is  easily 
perceptible  by  means  of  the  calculus  set  forth  above.  And  as  the  moon  was  then 
at  about  90°  of  the  ecliptic  measured  from  its  rising  or  setting,  they  were  aware 
of  the  error  which  the  parallax  could  bring  into  the  movement  of  longitude.  For 
at  that  time  the  circle  through  the  vertex  of  the  horizon  divides  the  ecliptic  at 
right  angles  and  does  not  admit  any  parallax  in  longitude  but  the  parallax  falls 
wholly  in  latitude.  Then  by  means  of  the  astrolabe  they  determined  the  position 
of  the  moon  in  relation  to  the  sun.  When  they  made  their  comparison,  the  moon 
was  found  to  differ  from  its  regular  movement  by  7^°,  as  we  said,  instead  of 
by  5°. 

Now  let  epicycle  AB  be  described;  and  let  its  centre  be  C.  Let  the  centre  of 
the  Earth  be  i),  and  from  D  let  the  straight  line  DBCA  be  extended.  Let  A 
be  the  apogee  of  the  epicycle,  B  the  perigee;  and  let  DE  be  drawn  tangent  to 


the  epicycle,  and  let  CE  be  joined.  Accordingly  since  the  greatest  additosub- 
traction  is  at  the  tangent  and  in  this  case  is  7°40',  and  hence 

angle  BDE  =  7°40', 


and 


angle  C ED  =^90^, 
as  being  at  the  point  of  tangency  of  circle  AB: 
wherefore 


CE=1334, 

where  radius  CD  =  10,000. 
But  at  the  full  moon  it  was  much  shorter,  that  is, 

CD  =  860. 


695 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


Let  CE  be  sut  again,  and  let 

CE  =  860. 

Point  Fy  which  the  new  moon  and  the  full  moon  occupy,  wdll  be  circumcurrent 
around  the  same  centre;  and  accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

F£;  =  474 

and  is  the  diameter  of  the  second  epicycle.  Let  FE  be  bisected  at  centre  (7,  and 
by  addition 

CE(?=1097 

and  will  be  the  radius  of  the  circle  which  the  centre  of  the  second  epicycle  de¬ 
scribes.  And  so  it  is  established  that 

CG  :(?£'=  1097  :  237, 

where  CD  =  10,000. 


9.  On  the  Remaining  Difference,  by  Reason  of  Which  the  Moon  Seems 
TO  Move  Irregularly  Away  from  the  Highest  Apsis  of  Its  Epicycle 


[IID]  By  this  induction  it  is  given  to  understand  how  the  moon  is  moved 
irregularly  in  its  first  epicycle,  and  that  its  greatest  difference  occurs  when  the 


half  moon  is  horn-shaped  or  gibbous.  Once  more,  let  AB  be  that  first  epicycle, 
which  the  centre  of  the  second  epicycle  describes  through  its  mean  movement; 
let  C  be  the  centre,  A  the  highest  apsis,  and  B  the  lowest.  Let  point  E  be  taken 
anywhere  in  the  circumference,  and  let  CE  be  joined.  Now  let 

CE:  EE  =1097  :  237. 

And  with  radius  EE  let  the  second  epicycle  be  described  around  centre  E.  And 
let  the  straight  lines  CL  and  Cilf  be  drawn  tangent  to  it  on  both  sides.  Let  the 
movement  of  the  small  epicycle  be  from  A  to  E,  i.e,,  from  above,  westward;  and 
let  the  movement  of  the  moon  be  from  E  to  L,  still  westward.  Accordingly  it  is 
clear  that,  since  movement  AE  is  regular,  the  second  epicycle  by  virtue  of  its 
motion  EL  adds  arc  EL  to  the  regular  movement  and  by  virtue  of  MF  subtracts 
from  the  regular  movement.  But  since  in  triangle  CEL 

angle  L  =  90°, 


and 


Therefore 


EL  =  237 y 

where  CE  =  1,097. 


EL  =  2, 160, 

where  CE  =  10,000. 


And  by  the  table 


EL  =  i^ch.  2ECL. 


696 

And 


COPERNICUS 


angle  J5CL  =  angle  MCFy 

since  the  triangles  are  similar  and  equal.  And  that  is  the  greatest  difference  by 
which  the  moon  varies  in  its  movement  from  the  highest  apsis  of  the  first  epi¬ 
cycle.  It  occurs  when  the  moon  by  its  mean  movement  is  38°46'  distant  on  either 
side  of  the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  Earth.  And  so  it  is  perfectly  clear  that 
these  greatest  additosubtractions  occur  at  a  mean  distance  of  38°46'  between 
the  sun  and  moon,  and  at  the  same  distance  on  either  side  of  the  mean  opposi¬ 
tion. 

10.  How  THE  Apparent  Movement  of  the  Moon  Is  Demonstrated 
FROM  the  Regular  Movements 

[IIH]  Having  seen  all  that  first,  we  now  wish  to  show  by  means  of  diagrams 
how  the  regular  and  apparent  movements  of  the  moon  are  separated  out  from 
those  regular  lunar  movements  which  were  set  before  us,  taking  our  example 
from  among  the  observations  of  Hipparchus,  so  that  in  this  way  our  teaching 
ma}^  at  the  same  time  be  confirmed  experimentally.  Accordingly  in  the  197th 
year  from  the  death  of  Alexander,  on  the  17th  day  of  Pauni,  which  is  the  10th 
month  in  the  Egyptian  calendar,  when  hours  of  the  day  had  passed  at 
Rhodes,  Hipparchus  by  an  observation  of  the  sun  and  moon  through  an  astro¬ 
labe  found  that  they  were  48°6'  distant  from  one  another,  and  that  the  moon 
was  to  the  east  of  the  sun.  And  since  he  judged  that  the  position  of  the  sun  was  in 
10^0°  Cancer,  as  a  consequence  the  moon  was  at  29°  of  Leo.  At  that  time 
29°  of  Scorpio  was  rising,  and  10°  of  Virgo  was  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  over 
Rhodes,  which  has  an  elevation  of  the  north  pole  of  36°.  By  this  argument  it  is 
clear  that  the  moon,  which  was  situated  at  90°  of  the  ecliptic  from  the  meridian 
had  at  that  time  admitted  no  parallax  in  vision  or  else  one  imperceptible  in 
longitude.  But  since  this  observation  was  made  33^  hours  after  midday  of  the 
17th — which  corresponds  at  Rhodes  to  four  equatorial  hours— at  Cracow  it  was 
3K  equatorial  hours  after  midday  in  accordance  with  the  distance  which  makes 
Rhodes  a  sixth  of  an  hour  nearer  to  us  than  Alexandria.  Accordingly  from  the 
death  of  Alexander  there  were  196  years,  286  days,  33^  hours  simply,  but  33^ 
hours  by  equal  time.  At  that  time  the  sun  by  its  mean  movement  had  arrived 
at  12°3'  of  Cancer,  but  by  its  apparent  movement  at  10°40'  of  Cancer,  whence 
the  moon  appeared  in  truth  to  be  at  28°37'  of  Leo.  But  the  regular  movement 
of  the  moon  according  to  the  monthly  revolution  was  at  45°9',  and  the  move¬ 
ment  of  anomaly  was  333°  away  from  the  highest  apsis  by  our  calculations. 

With  this  example  before  us  let  us  describe  the  first  epicycle  AB.  Let  C  be  its 
centre.  [112^]  Let  ACB  be  its  diameter,  and  let  ACB  be  extended  as  ABD  in  a 
straight  line  to  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  And  in  the  epicycle,  let 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  697 

arc  = 

Let  CE  be  joined  and  again  cut  in  E,  so  that 

EF  =  237, 

where  EC  =  1,097. 

And  with  E  as  centre  and  EF  as  radius,  let  FG  the  epicycle  of  the  epicycle  be 
described.  Let  the  moon  be  at  point  G;  and  let 

arc  FG  =  90°18', 

in  the  ratio  of  double  to  the  regular  movement  away  from  the  sun,  which  was 
45°9'.  And  let  CG,  EG,  and  DG  be  joined.  Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  CEG 
two  sides  are  given: 

(7E  =  1,097 

and 

EG=EF  =  237; 

and 

angle  GEC  =  90^8'; 

therefore,  by  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles 

side  CG=  1,123 

and 

angle  ECG=12°11'. 

By  this  means  there  are  determined  arc  El  and  the  additive  additosubtraction 
caused  by  the  anomaly;  and,  by  addition, 

arc  A5E/  =  345°11'. 


And,  by  subtraction, 

angle  GCA  =  14®49', 

and  is  the  true  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  highest  apsis  of  epicycle  AB]  and 

angle  5CG=165°11'. 

Wherefore  in  triangle  GDC  two  sides  are  given  also. 

GC- 1,123, 

where  CD  =  10,000; 

and 


angle  GGZ)  =  165^1 1'. 

Hence 


angle  C/)G=  1°29', 

the  additosubtraction  which  was  added  to  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon. 
Hence  the  true  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun  is 
46°34',  and  its  apparent  position  is  at  28°37'  of  Leo,  and  is  47°57'  distant  from 
the  true  position  of  the  sun.  And  there  is  a  deficiency  of  9'  according  to  Hip¬ 
parchus^  observation. 

But  in  order  that  no  one  on  that  account  should  suspect  that  either  his  in¬ 
vestigation  or  ours  is  wrong — though  the  deficiency  is  very  slight — neverthe¬ 
less  I  shall  show  that  neither  he  nor  we  committed  any  error  but  that  this  is 
the  way  things  rightly  are.  For  if  we  recollect  that  the  lunar  circle  which  the 
moon  itself  follows  is  oblique,  we  will  admit  that  it  produces  some  sort  of 
longitudinal  irregularity  in  the  ecliptic,  especially  around  the  mean  positions, 
which  he  between  the  northern  and  the  southern  limits  of  latitude  and  the 
ecliptic  sections,  in  approximately  the  same  way  as  between  the  oblique  [112^] 
ecliptic  and  the  equator,  as  we  expounded  in  connection  with  the  inequality 
of  the  natural  day.  And  so  if  we  transfer  the  ratios  to  the  orbital  circle  of  the 
moon,  which  Ptolemy  recorded  as  being  inclined  to  the  ecliptic,  we  find  that 


698  COPERNICUS 

at  those  positions  the  ratios  cause  a  7'  difference  in  longitude  in  relation  to 
the  ecliptic — and  twice  that  difference  is  14';  and  the  difference  increases  and 
decreases  proportionally,  since  when  the  sun  and  moon  are  a  quadrant  of  a 
circle  distant  from  one  another,  and  if  the  limit  of  northern  or  southern  latitude 
is  at  the  midpoint  between  them,  then  the  arc  intercepted  on  the  ecliptic  will 
be  14'  greater  than  a  quadrant  of  the  lunar  circle;  and  conversely  in  the  other 
quadrants,  which  the  ecliptic  sections  halve,  the  circles  through  the  poles 
of  the  ecliptic  intercept  an  arc  that  much  less  than  a  quadrant.  So  in  the 
present  case.  Since  the  moon  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mean  position 
between  the  southern  limit  of  latitude  and  the  ascending  ecliptic  section — 
which  the  moderns  call  the  head  of  the  Dragon — and  the  sun  had  already 
passed  by  the  other  descending  section — ^which  they  call  the  tail;  it  is  not 
surprising  if  when  the  moon's  distance  of  47°57'  in  its  own  orbital  circle  was 
referred  to  the  ecliptic,  it  increased  by  at  least  7',  without  the  fact  of  the  sun 
declining  in  the  west  causing  any  subtractive  parallax  of  vision.  We  shall 
speak  more  clearly  of  all  that  in  our  explanation  of  the  parallaxes. 

And  so  the  distance  of  the  luminaries,  which  Hipparchus  determined  by 
his  instrument  as  being  48°6',  agrees  with  our  calculation  perfectly  and  as  it 
were  unanimously. 

11.  On  the  Table  of  the  Lunar  Additions-and-Subtractions 

OR  Aequationes 

Accordingly,  I  judge  that  the  mode  of  determining  the  motions  of  the  moon 
is  understood  generally  from  this  example,  since  in  triangle  CEG^  the  two 
sides  GE  and  CE  always  remain  the  same.  But  we  determine  the  remaining 
side  GC  together  with  angle  EGG — which  is  the  additosubtraction  to  be  used 


in  correcting  the  anomaly — according  to  angle  GEC  which  changes  continually 
but  which  is  given.  Then  in  triangle  CDGj  since  the  two  sides  DC  and  GC 
together  with  angle  DCG  have  been  computed,  in  the  same  way  angle  D  at 
the  centre  of  the  Earth,  the  angular  difference  between  the  true  and  the 
regular  movement,  becomes  established. 

So  that  these  things  may  be  at  hand,  [113*^]  we  shall  set  out  a  table  of  the 
additosub tractions,  which  will  contain  six  columns.  For  after  the  two  columns 
of  common  numbers  of  the  circle,  in  the  third  column  will  come  the  additosub- 
tractions  which  are  caused  by  the  small  epicycle  and  vary  the  regular  move¬ 
ment  of  the  first  epicycle  in  accordance  with  the  bi-monthly  revolution.  Then, 
we  shall  leave  the  fourth  column  vacant  for  the  time  being,  and  fill  up  the 
fifth  column  first,  in  which  we  shall  inscribe  the  additosubtractions  caused 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  699 

by  the  first  and  greater  epicycle  which  occur  at  the  mean  conjunctions  and 
oppositions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the  greatest  is  4°56'.  In  the  next  to  the 
last  column  will  be  placed  the  numbers  whereby  the  additosubtractions  which 
occur  at  half  moon  exceed  the  former  additosubtractions,  and  the  greatest 
of  these  excesses  is  2°44'.  But  in  order  that  the  other  excesses  may  be  evalu¬ 
ated,  the  proportional  minutes  have  been  worked  out,  and  this  is  the  ratio 
of  them.  For  we  have  taken  2°44'  as  60  minutes  in  relation  to  any  other  ex¬ 
cesses  occurring  at  the  point  of  tangency  of  the  [small]  epicycle  [with  the  line 
from  the  centre  of  the  Earth]. 

In  this  way,  in  the  same  example, 

CG=1123, 

where  CD  =  10,000. 

And  that  makes  the  greatest  additosubtraction  at  the  point  of  tangency  of 
the  [small]  epicycle  [with  the  line  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth]  to  be  6°29', 
which  exceeds  the  first  additosubtraction  by  1°33'.  But 

2°44'  :  r33'  =  60'  :34'; 

and  so  we  have  the  ratio  of  the  excess  which  occurs  at  the  semicircle  of  the 
small  epicycle  to  the  excess  corresponding  to  the  given  arc  of  90®18'.  Therefore 
we  shall  write  do^vn  34  minutes  in  that  part  of  the  table  corresponding  to  90°. 
In  this  way  we  shall  find  the  minutes  which  are  proportional  to  the  arcs  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  table;  and  we  shall  set  them  out  in  the  fourth  column. 

Finally  we  have  added  the  degrees  of  northern  and  southern  latitude  in  the 
last  column,  and  w^e  shall  speak  of  them  below.  For  convenience  and  ease  of 
operation  advise  us  to  put  them  in  this  order. 


on 

ers 

Deg. 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

330 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


of 

"n 

ie 

Min 

59 

58 

56 

53 

50 

45 

40 

34 

27 

20 

12 

3 

53 

43 

32 

20 

8 

56 

44 

30 

16 

2 

47 

33 

18 

2 

47 

31 

16 

0 

16 

31 

47 

2 

18 

33 

47 

2 

16 

30 

44 

56 

9 

21 

32 

43 

53 

3 

12 

20 

27 

34 

40 

45 

50 

53 

56 

58 

59 

0 


COPERNICUS 


OF  Additions-and-Subtractions  of  the 


Additions-and- 
subtractions 
caused  by 
small  epicycle 

•2 

Additions-<ind^ 
subtractions 
caused  by 
great  epicycle 

Excesses 

Deg, 

Min. 

Deg, 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

0 

51 

0 

0 

14 

0 

7 

1 

40 

0 

0 

28 

0 

14 

2 

28 

1 

0 

43 

0 

21 

3 

15 

1 

0 

57 

0 

28 

4 

1 

2 

1 

11 

0 

35 

4 

47 

3 

1 

24 

0 

43 

5 

31 

3 

1 

38 

0 

50 

6 

13 

4 

1 

51 

0 

56 

6 

54 

5 

2 

5 

1 

4 

7 

34 

5 

2 

17 

1 

12 

8 

10 

6 

2 

30 

1 

18 

8 

44 

7 

2 

42 

1 

25 

9 

16 

8 

2 

54 

1 

30 

9 

47 

10 

3 

6 

1 

37 

10 

14 

11 

3 

17 

1 

42 

10 

30 

12 

3 

27 

1 

48 

11 

0 

13 

3 

38 

1 

52 

11 

21 

15 

3 

47 

1 

57 

11 

38 

16 

3 

56 

2 

2 

11 

50 

18 

4 

5 

2 

6 

12 

2 

19 

4 

13 

2 

10 

12 

12 

21 

4 

20 

2 

15 

12 

18 

22 

4 

27 

2 

18 

12 

23 

24 

4 

33 

2 

21 

12 

27 

25 

4 

39 

2 

25 

12 

28 

27 

4 

43 

2 

28 

12 

26 

28 

4 

47 

2 

30 

12 

23 

30 

4 

51 

2 

34 

12 

17 

32 

4 

53 

2 

37 

12 

12 

34 

4 

65 

2 

40 

12 

3 

35 

4 

56 

2 

42 

11 

53 

37 

4 

56 

2 

42 

11 

41 

38 

4 

55 

2 

43 

11 

27 

39 

4 

54 

2 

43 

11 

10 

41 

4 

51 

2 

44 

10 

52 

42 

4 

48 

2 

44 

10 

35 

43 

4 

44 

2 

43 

10 

17 

45 

4 

39 

2 

41 

9 

57 

46 

4 

34 

2 

38 

9 

35 

47 

4 

27 

2 

35 

9 

13 

48 

4 

20 

2 

31 

8 

50 

49 

4 

11 

2 

27 

8 

25 

50 

4 

2 

2 

22 

7 

59 

51 

3 

53 

2 

18 

7 

33 

52 

3 

42 

2 

13 

7 

7 

53 

3 

31 

2 

8 

6 

38 

54 

3 

19 

2 

1 

6 

9 

55 

3 

7 

1 

53 

5 

40 

56 

2 

53 

1 

46 

5 

11 

57 

2 

40 

1 

37 

4 

42 

57 

2 

25 

1 

28 

4 

11 

58 

2 

10 

1 

20 

3 

41 

58 

1 

55 

1 

12 

3 

10 

59 

1 

39 

1 

4 

2 

39 

59 

1 

23 

0 

53 

2 

7 

59 

1 

7 

0 

43 

1 

36 

60 

0 

61 

0 

33 

1 

4 

60 

0 

34 

0 

22 

0 

32 

60 

0 

17 

0 

11 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


701 


12.  On  the  Computation  of  the  Course  of  the  Moon 

[114^]  Accordingly  the  method  of  computing  the  apparent  movement  of  the 
moon  is  clear  from  what  has  been  shown  and  is  as  follows.  We  shall  reduce  to 
equal  time  the  time  for  which  we  are  seeking  the  position  of  the  moon  proposed 
to  us.  By  means  of  the  time  we  shall  deduce  the  mean  movements  of  longitude, 
anomaly,  and  latitude — w’hich  last  we  shall  also  define  soon — as  we  did  in  the  case 
of  the  sun,  from  the  given  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord,  or  from  some 
other  beginning,  and  we  shall  declare  the  positions  of  the  single  movements  at 
the  time  set  before  us.  Then  we  shall  seek  in  the  table  twice  the  regular  longi¬ 
tude  of  the  moon  or  twice  its  angular  distance  from  the  sun  and^  the  correspond¬ 
ing  additosub traction  found  in  the  third  column;  and  we  shall  note  the  pro¬ 
portional  minutes  which  are  in  the  next  column.  Accordingly  if  the  number  with 
which  we  entered  upon  the  table  was  found  in  the  first  column  or  is  less  than 
180°,  we  shall  add  the  additosubtraction  to  the  lunar  anomaly;  but  if  it  is 
greater  than  180°  or  is  in  the  second  column,  the  additosubtraction  will  be  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  anomaly;  and  we  shall  have  the  corrected  anomaly  of  the  moon 
and  its  true  angular  distance  from  the  highest  apsis. 

And  entering  the  table  again  with  this  [distance]  we  shall  determine  the  corre¬ 
sponding  additosubtraction  in  the  fifth  column  and  the  excess  which  follows  in 
the  sixth  column,  which  the  second  [the  small]  epicycle  adds  [to  the  additosub¬ 
traction],  over  and  above  the  first  epicycle.  The  proportional  part  of  this  excess 
taken  in  accordance  with  the  ratio  of  the  60  minutes  is  always  added  to  this  ad¬ 
ditosubtraction.  The  sum  is  subtracted  from  the  mean  movement  of  longitude 
or  latitude,  if  the  corrected  anomaly  is  less  than  180°  or  a  semicircle;  and  it  is 
added,  if  the  anomaly  is  greater.  And  in  this  way  we  shall  have  the  true  distance 
of  the  moon  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  and  the  corrected  movement  of 
latitude.  Wherefore  the  true  position  of  the  moon  will  not  be  unknowm, either  its 
distance  from  the  first  star  of  Aries  in  the  case  of  the  simple  movement  of  the 
sun  or  its  distance  from  the  spring  equinox  in  the  case  of  the  composite  move¬ 
ment  or  the  addition  of  the  precession.  Finally  by  means  of  the  corrected  move¬ 
ment  in  latitude  we  shall  have  in  the  seventh  and  last  place  of  the  table  the 
degrees  of  latitude  which  measure  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  ecliptic. 
That  latitude  will  be  northern  at  the  time  when  the  movement  of  latitude  is 
found  in  the  first  part  of  the  table,  [115^]  i.e.y  if  it  is  less  than  90°  or  greater  than 
270°;  otherwise  it  will  be  following  a  southern  latitude.  And  so  the  moon  will  be 
coming  down  from  the  north  to  180°,  and  afterwards  it  will  be  going  up  from 
the  southern  limit,  until  it  has  completed  the  remaining  parts  of  the  circle.  Thus 
the  apparent  course  of  the  moon  has  somehow  as  many  affairs  around  the  centre 
of  the  Earth  as  the  Earth  has  around  the  sun. 

13.  How  THE  Movement  of  Lunar  Latitude  Is  Examined 
AND  Demonstrated 

Now  too  vre  must  give  the  ratio  of  the  lunar  movement  in  latitude,  and  it 
seems  more  difficult  to  discover,  as  it  is  complicated  by  more  attendant  cir¬ 
cumstances.  For,  as  we  said  before,  if  two  eclipses  of  the  moon  were  similar  and 
equal  in  all  respects,  t.e.,  with  the  parts  eclipsed  having  the  same  position  to 

^Because  the  moon  traverses  the  small  epicycle  twice  during  one  synodic  month,  the  time 
of  one  revolution  with  respect  to  the  sun. 


702  COPERNICUS 

the  north  or  to  the  south  and  at  the  same  ascending  or  descending  ecliptic  sec¬ 
tion:  its  distance  from  the  Earth  or  from  the  highest  apsis  would  be  equal, 
since  in  this  harmony  the  moon  is  understood  to  have  completed  its  whole 
circles  of  latitude  by  true  movement.  For  since  the  shadow  of  the  Earth  is 
conoid,  and  if  a  right  cone  is  cut  in  a  plane  parallel  with  the  base,  the  section  is  a 
circle  which  is  smaller  the  greater  the  distance  from  the  base  and  greater  the 
shorter  the  distance  from  the  base,  and  similarly  equal  at  an  equal  distance. 
And  so  the  moon  at  equal  distances  from  the  Earth  traverses  equal  circles  of 
shadow  and  presents  to  our  vision  equal  disks  of  itself.  Hence  the  moon,  stand¬ 
ing  out  with  equal  parts  in  the  same  direction  according  to  an  equal  distance 
from  the  centre  of  the  shadow  makes  us  certain  of  equal  latitudes,  from  which  it 
necessarily  follows  that  the  moon  has  returned  to  its  former  position  in  latitude 
and  is  now  distant  from  the  same  ecliptic  node  by  an  equal  interval.  But  that 
is  especially  true  if  the  position  fulfils  two  of  those  conditions.  For  its  approach 
to  the  Earth  or  withdrawal  from  it  changes  the  total  magnitude  of  the  shadow, 
[115^]  but  so  slightly  that  it  can  hardly  be  grasped.  Accordingly  the  greater  the 
interval  of  time  between  both  eclipses,  the  more  definite  can  we  have  the  move¬ 
ment  in  latitude  of  the  moon,  as  was  said  in  the  case  of  the  sun. 

But  since  you  rarely  find  two  eclipses  agreeing  in  these  conditions — and  up 
to  now  none  have  come  our  way — nevertheless  we  note  there  is  another  method 
which  will  give  us  the  same  result,  since — the  other  conditions  remaining — ^if 
the  moon  is  eclipsed  in  different  directions  and  at  opposite  sections,  then  it  will 
signify  that  at  the  second  eclipse  the  moon  has  arrived  at  a  position  diametrically 
opposite  to  the  former  and  in  addition  to  the  whole  circles  has  described  a  semi¬ 
circle;  and  that  will  seem  to  be  satisfactory  for  investigating  the  thing. 

Accordingly  we  have  found  two  eclipses  fairly  close  in  these  respects:  the 
first  in  the  7th  year  of  Ptolemy  Philometor,  which  was  the  150th  year  of  Alex¬ 
ander  when — as  Claud  says — 27  days  of  Phamenoth  the  7th  month  of  the 
Egyptians  had  passed,  in  the  night  which  the  28th  day  followed.  And  the  moon 
was  eclipsed  from  the  beginning  of  the  8th  hour  till  the  end  of  the  10th  hour  in 
Alexandrian  nocturnal  seasonal  hours,  to  the  extent  of  seven-twelfths  of  the 
lunar  diameter,  and  it  was  eclipsed  from  the  north  around  a  descending  section. 
Therefore  the  midtime  of  the  eclipse  was,  he  says,  2  seasonal  hours  after  mid¬ 
night,  which  make  23^  equatorial  hours,  since  the  sun  was  at  6°  of  Taurus,  but 
13^  hours  after  midnight  at  Cracow. 

We  have  taken  the  second  eclipse  beneath  the  same  Cracow  meridian  in  the 
year  of  Our  Lord  1519,  after  the  4th  day  before  the  Nones  of  June,  when  the  sun 
was  at  21°  of  Gemini.  The  mid  time  of  the  eclipse  was  11*^  equatorial  hours  after 
midday;  and  the  moon  was  eclipsed  for  approximately  eight-twelfths  of  its  di¬ 
ameter,  from  the  south,  at  an  ascending  section. 

Accordingly,  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander  [to  the  first  eclipse] 
there  are  149  Egyptian  years  206  days  143^  hours  at  Alexandria,  but  at  Cracow 
133^  hours  according  to  apparent  time,  but  133^  upon  correction.  At  that  time 
the  position  of  anomaly  by  our  calculation,  which  agreed  approximately  with 
Ptolemy ^s,  was  at  163°33'  of  regular  movement;  and  there  was  a  subtractive 
additosubtraction  of  1°23',  by  which  the  true  position  of  the  moon  was  exceeded 
by  the  regular.  But  from  the  established  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander  to 
the  second  eclipse  [116^]  there  are  1832  Egyptian  years  295  days  11  hours  45 
minutes  by  apparent  time,  but  by  equal  time  1 1  hours  55  minutes :  whence  the 


703 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

regular  movement  of  the  moon  was  182^18'.  The  position  of  anomaly  was 
159°55',  but  as  corrected  it  was  I61°13';  and  the  additive  additosubtraction,  by 
which  the  regular  movement  was  exceeded  by  the  apparent,  was  1°44'. 

Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  in  both  eclipses  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the 
Earth  was  equal,  and  the  sun  was  approximately  at  the  apogee  in  both  cases, 
but  there  was  a  difference  of  one-twelfth  in  the  eclipses.  But  since  the  diameter 
of  the  moon  usually  occupies  approximately  as  we  will  show  afterwards,  its 
twelfth  part  will  be  2)^',  which  corresponds  to  approximately  in  the  oblique 
circle  of  the  moon  at  the  ecliptic  sections.  And  so  the  moon  was  farther  away 
from  the  ascending  section  at  the  second  eclipse  than  from  the  descending  sec¬ 
tion  at  the  first  eclipse.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  true  movement  in  latitude  of 
the  moon  was  179^°  after  the  complete  revolutions.  But  the  lunar  anomaly 
between  the  first  and  second  eclipse  adds  21' — which  is  the  difference  between 
the  additosubtractions — to  the  regular  [movement].  Accordingly  we  shall  have 
a  regular  lunar  movement  in  latitude  of  179°5I'  after  the  full  circles.  Now  the 
time  between  the  two  eclipses  was  1683  years  88  days  22  hours  35  minutes  by 
apparent  time,  \vhich  agreed  with  the  equal  [time].  During  that  time  there  were 
40,577  complete  equal  revolutions  and  179°51',  which  agree  with  the  numbers 
which  we  have  already  set  down. 

14.  On  the  Positions  of  Lunar  Anomaly  in  Latitude 

However,  in  order  to  determine  the  positions  of  the  moon's  movement  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  established  beginnings  of  calendar  years,  we  have  here  also  assumed 
two  lunar  eclipses,  not  at  the  same  section  and  not  at  diametrically  opposite 
parts,  as  in  the  foregoing,  but  at  equal  distances  north  or  south,  and  fulfilling 
all  the  other  requirements,  [116^]  as  we  said,  in  accordance  with  Ptolemy's  rule, 
and  in  this  way  we  shall  solve  our  problem  without  any  error. 

Accordingly,  the  first  eclipse,  which  we  have  already  used  in  investigating 
other  movements  of  the  moon,  is  the  one  which  we  said  w^as  observed  by  Claud 
Ptolemy  in  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian  when  two  days  of  the  month  Chiach  had 
passed,  one  equatorial  hour  before  midnight  at  Alexandria,  but  at  Cracow  two 
hours  before  midnight,  which  the  third  day  followed.  The  moon  was  eclipsed  at 
the  midpoint  of  the  eclipse  to  the  extent  of  ten-tw^elfths  of  the  diameter,  z.c., 
ten-twelfths  from  the  north,  while  the  sun  was  at  25°10'  of  Libra,  and  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  lunar  anomaly  was  64°38'  and  its  subtractive  additosubtraction  was 
4°20'  around  the  descending  section. 

We  made  careful  observations  of  the  other  eclipse  at  Rome,  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  1500,  after  the  Nones  of  November,  2  hours  after  midnight,  and  it  was 
the  8th  daybreak  before  the  Ides  of  November.  But  at  Cracow  which  is  5°  to 
the  east,  it  was  2%  hours  after  midnight,  while  the  sun  was  at  23^16'  of  Scorpio; 
and  once  more  there  was  a  ten-twelfths  eclipse  from  the  north. 

Therefore,  since  the  death  of  Alexander  there  have  passed  1824  Egyptian 
years  84  days  14  hours  20  minutes  by  apparent  time,  but  by  equal  time  14  hours 
16  minutes.  Accordingly  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon  was  174°14',  and  the 
lunar  anomaly  was  294°44',  but  as  corrected  it  was  291°35';  and  there  was  an 
additive  additosubtraction  of  4°27'. 

Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  at  both  these  eclipses  the  distances  of  the  moon 
from  the  highest  apsis  was  approximately  equal,  and  at  both  times  the  sun  was 
at  its  mean  apsis,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  shadows  was  equal.  All  that  makes 


704 


COPERNICUS 


clear  that  the  latitude  of  the  moon  was  southern  and  equal ;  and  hence  that  the 
moon  was  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  sections  but  was  ascending  at  the  second 
eclipse  and  descending  at  the  first.  Accordingly  between  both  eclipses  there  are 
1366  Egyptian  years  358  days  4  hours  20  minutes  by  apparent  time,  but  by 
equal  time  4  hours  24  minutes,  wherein  the  movement  in  latitude  was  159°55'. 

Now  let  ABCD  be  the  oblique  circle  of  the  moon;  and  let  AB  be  its  diameter 
and  common  section  with  the  ecliptic.  Let  C  be  the 
northern  limit,  and  D  the  southern;  [117^]  A  the  ecliptic 
section  descending,  and  B  the  ecliptic  section  ascending. 

Now  let  there  be  taken  AF  and  BE  two  equal  arcs  in 
the  south,  according  as  the  first  eclipse  was  at  point  F 
and  the  second  at  E.  And  again  let  FK  be  the  subtrac¬ 
tive  additosubtraction  at  the  first  eclipse,  and  EL  the 
additive  additosubtraction  at  the  second.  Accordingly, 
since 

arc  AL=  159°55' 


and 

and 

And 


arc  FA:  =  4°20' 
arc  £7L  =  4°27'; 

arc  FKLE  =  2ltcs  FK+KL+LE  = 
180^- 168^42' =  ir  18'. 


Now 

arc  AE  =  arc  5i7  =  K(ll°18')  =5°39', 

which  is  the  true  distance  of  the  moon  from  section  AB,  and  on  that  account 

arc  AFK  =  9%9\ 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  K  the  mean  position  in  latitude  is  99°59'  away  from  the 
northern  limit. 

From  the  death  of  Alexander  to  this  position  and  time  of  Ptolemy's  ob¬ 
servation  there  are  457  Egyptian  years  91  days  10  hours  by  apparent  time, 
but  by  equal  time  9  hours  54  minutes,  during  which  the  mean  movement  in 
latitude  is  50°59'.  And  when  50°59'  is  subtracted  from  99°59',  there  remain 
49°  for  noon  on  the  first  day  of  Thoth  the  first  month  by  the  Egyptian  cal¬ 
endar  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander  but  on  the  Cracow  meridian. 
Hence  for  each  of  the  other  beginnings  there  are  given  in  accordance  with  the 
differences  of  time  the  positions  of  the  course  of  the  moon  in  latitude  as  taken 
in  relation  to  the  northern  limit,  from  which  we  measure  the  movement. 

Now  from  the  first  Olympiad  to  the  death  of  Alexander  there  are  451  Egyp¬ 
tian  years  247  days — from  which  in  accordance  with  equality  of  time  7  minutes 
of  an  hour  are  subtracted — and  during  that  time  the  progress  in  latitude  was 
136°57'.  Again  from  the  first  Olympiad  to  Caesar  there  are  780  Egyptian 
years  12  hours,  but  10  minutes  of  an  hour  are  added  to  the  equal  time;  and 
during  that  time  the  movement  is  206°53'.  Then  come  45  years  12  days  up  to 
Christ.  Accordingly  if  136°57'  are  subtracted  from  49°  plus  the  360°  of  the 
circle,  there  remain  272°3'  for  noon  of  the  first  day  of  the  month  Hekatombaion 
of  the  first  Olympiad. 

Now  if  206°53'  are  added  to  272°3',  the  sum  will  be  118°56'  for  midnight 
before  the  Kalends  of  January  [117^]  at  the  beginning  of  the  Julian  years. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  705 

Finally,  with  the  addition  of  10°49'  the  sum  becomes  129°45'  as  the  position 
[at  the  beginning  of  the  years]  of  Our  Lord  similarly  at  midnight  before  the 
Kalends  of  January. 

15.  Construction  op  the  Instrument  for  Observing  Parallaxes 

But  chance  and  the  hindrance  of  the  lunar  parallaxes  did  not  grant  to  us, 
as  it  had  to  Ptolemy,  the  occasion  of  discovering  experimentally  that  the 
greatest  latitude  of  the  moon — in  accordance  with  the  angle  of  section  of  its 
orbital  circle  and  the  ecliptic — is  5°,  whereof  the  circle  is  360°.  For  he  was 
watching  at  Alexandria — which  has  30°58'  as  the  elevation  of  the  north  pole — 
until  the  moon  should  come  most  near  to  the  vertex  of  the  horizon,  namely 
when  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  Cancer  and  at  the  northern  limit,  which  can 
be  foreknown  by  means  of  calculations.  Therefore  at  that  time  by  means  of 
an  instrument  which  he  called  the  parallacticon  and  which  was  constructed 
for  measuring  the  parallaxes  of  the  moon,  he  found  that  the  least  distance 
was  only  23^°  from  the  vertex,  and  if  any  parallax  had  occurred  at  this  dis¬ 
tance  it  would  necessarily  have  been  very  slight  in  such  a  small  spatial  interval. 
Accordingly  by  the  subtraction  of  23^°  from  30°58'^  the  remainder  is  28°503/^', 
which  exceeds  the  greatest  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic — which  at  that  time  was 
23°51'20" — by  approximately  5°;  and  this  latitude  for  the  moon  is  found  to 
agree  in  every  respect  with  the  other  particulars. 

But  the  instrument  for  observing  parallaxes  consists  of  three  straight¬ 
edges.  Two  of  them  are  of  equal  length  and  are  at  least  eight  or  nine  feet  long; 
the  third  is  somewhat  longer.  The  latter  and  one  of  the  former  two  are  joined 
to  both  extremities  of  the  remaining  straight-edge,  by  carefully  making  holes 
and  fitting  cylinders  or  pivots  into  them  in  such  a  way  that  while  the  straight¬ 
edges  are  movable  in  a  plane  surface  they  do  not  wobble  at  all  at  the  joints. 
Now  in  the  longer  straight-edge  a  straight  line  should  be  drawm  from  the 
centre  of  its  place  of  joining  through  its  total  length,  and  the  line  is  made 
equal  to  the  distance  between  the  places  of  joining  [on  the  other  straight-edge] 
measured  as  accurately  as  possible.  This  line  is  divided  into  1,000  equal  parts — 
or  into  more,  if  that  can  be  done;  and  the  division  of  the  remainder  should  be 
carried  on  [118®]  in  the  same  unit  parts,  until  it  reaches  1414  parts,  which 
subtend  the  side  of  a  square  that  may  be  inscribed  in  a  circle  whose  radius  has 
1,000  parts.  It  will  be  all  right  to  cut  off  as  superfluous  the  remainder  of  the 
straight-edge  over  and  above  this.  In  the  other  ruler  too,  there  should  be 
drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  joining-place  a  line  equal  to  those  1,000  parts 
or  to  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  two  joining-places;  the  ruler 
should  have  eyepieces  fastened  to  it  on  one  side,  as  in  a  dioptra,  which  sight 
may  have  passage  through.  The  eyepieces  should  be  so  adjusted  that  the 
sight-passages  do  not  at  all  swerve  away  from  the  line  already  drawn  the 
length  of  the  straight-edge,  but  keep  at  an  equal  distance;  and  provided  also 
that  the  line  as  extended  from  its  terminus  to  the  longer  ruler  can  touch  the 
divided  line.  And  in  this  way  by  means  of  the  rulers  an  isosceles  triangle  is 
made,  the  base  of  which  will  be  along  the  parts  of  the  divided  line.  Then  a 
pole,  which  has  been  divided  crosswise  in  the  best  manner  and  well  smoothed, 
should  be  erected  on  a  firm  base.  The  ruler  which  has  the  two  joining-places 

^The  elevation  of  the  north  pole  above  the  horizon  is  equal  to  the  declination  of  the  vertex 
of  the  horizon  from  the  equator. 


706  COPERNICUS 

should  be  affixed  to  this  pole  by  means  of  pivots,  around  which  the  instrument 
may  swing,  like  a  swinging  door,  but  in  such  a  way  that  the  straight  line 
through  the  centres  of  the  joining-places  will  always  correspond  to  the  plumb- 
line  of  the  ruler  and  point  towards  the  vertex  of  the  horizon,  as  if  its  axis. 
Accordingly  when  a  person  who  wishes  to  find  the  distance  of  some  star  from 
the  vertex  of  the  horizon  has  the  star  itself  in  full  view  along  a  straight  line 
through  the  eyepieces,  then  by  the  application  underneath  of  the  ruler  with 
the  divided  line,  he  should  learn  how  many  unit  parts — whereof  the  diameter 
of  the  circle  has  20,000 — subtend  the  angle  between  the  line  of  vision  and  the 
axis  of  the  horizon;  and  by  means  of  the  table  he  will  get  the  sought  arc  of  the 
great  circle  passing  through  the  star  and  the  vertex  of  the  horizon. 

16.  How  THE  Parallaxes  of  the  Moon  Are  Determined 

By  means  of  this  instrument,  as  we  said,  Ptolemy  found  the  greatest  latitude 
of  the  moon  to  be  5°.  Next  he  turned  to  observing  the  parallax  and  said  he  dis¬ 
covered  that  at  Alexandria  its  was  1°7',  while  the  sun  was  at  5°28'  of  Libra  and 
the  mean  movement  of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun  was  78°13',  the  regular 
anomaly  was  262°20';  the  movement  in  latitude  was  354°40';  the  additive  ad- 
ditosubtraction  was  7°26';  [118^]  and  accordingly  the  position  of  the  moon  was 
at  3°9'  of  Capricorn.  The  corrected  movement  in  latitude  was  2'^6';  the  northern 
latitude  of  the  moon  was  4°59';  its  declination  from  the  equator  was  23°49';  and 
the  latitude  of  Alexandria  was  30°58'.  The  moon,  he  says,  as  seen  through  the 
instrument,  was  approximately  in  the  meridian  circle  at  50°45'  from  the  vertex 
of  the  horizon,  i.e.,  1°7'  more  than  the  computation  demanded.  Hence  by  the 
rule  of  the  ancients  concerning  the  eccentric  circle  and  the  epicycle,  he  shows 
that  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  was  then  39^45' 
whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth  is  1^;  and  what  next  follows  from  the  ratio  of 
the  circles,  namely  that  the  greatest  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  Earth — 
which  they  say  occurs  at  a  new  and  at  a  full  moon  in  the  apogee  of  the  epicycle — 
is  64P10',  but  the  least  distance — at  the  quadratures  and  at  the  half  moon  in  the 
perigee  of  the  epicycle — is  only  33^33'.  Hence  he  even  evaluated  the  parallaxes, 
which  occur  at  about  90®  from  the  vertex  [of  the  horizon]:  the  least  at  53 '34", 
and  the  greatest  at  1®43' — as  it  is  possible  to  see  in  a  broad  outline  what  he 
built  up  concerning  them.  But  now  it  is  perfectly  obvious  to  those  wishing  to 
consider  the  question  that  these  things  are  far  otherwise,  as  we  have  found  out 
experimentally  very  often. 

However,  we  shall  review  two  observations,  by  which  it  is  again  made  clear 
that  our  hypotheses  as  to  the  moon  have  more  certitude  than  his,  because  they 
are  found  to  agree  better  with  the  appearances  and  to  leave  nothing  in  doubt. 
In  the  1522nd  year  since  the  birth  of  Christ,  on  the  5th  day  before  the  Kalends 
of  October,  after  the  passage  of  5%  equal  hours  since  midday,  at  about  sunset 
at  Frauenburg  we  found  by  means  of  the  parallactic  instrument  that  the  centre 
of  the  moon,  which  was  in  the  meridian  circle,  was  82®50'  distant  from  the 
vertex  of  the  horizon.  Accordingly  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord 
to  this  hour  there  were  1522  Egyptian  years  284  days  17%  hours  by  apparent 
time  but  by  equal  time  17  hours  24  minutes.  Wherefore  the  apparent  position 
of  the  sun  was  by  calculation  at  13®29'  of  Libra  and  the  regular  movement  of 
the  moon  away  from  the  sun  [119®]  was  87®6';  the  regular  anomaly  was  357®39'; 
but  the  true  [the  corrected]  anomaly  was  358®40',  and  it  added  7';  and  thus  the 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  707 

true  position  of  the  moon  was  at  12°32'  of  Aries.  The  mean  movement  in  lati¬ 
tude  was  197°!'  from  the  northern  limit,  the  true  was  197°8';  the  southern  lati¬ 
tude  of  the  moon  was  4°47',*  the  moon  had  a  declination  of  27°41'  from  the  equa¬ 
tor;  the  latitude  of  the  place  of  our  observation  was  54°I9',  and  the  addition  of 
54°  19'  to  the  lunar  declination  makes  the  true  distance  of  the  moon  from  the 
pole  of  the  horizon  to  be  82°.  Accordingly  the  50'  not  accounted  for  belong  to 
the  parallax,  which  by  Ptolemy’s  teaching  should  be  1°17'. 

Once  more  we  made  another  observation  at  the  same  place  in  the  1524th  year 
of  Our  Lord  on  the  7th  day  before  the  Ides  of  August  6  hours  after  midday;  and 
we  saw  through  the  same  instrument  the  moon  ar  82°  from  the  vertex  of  the 
horizon.  Accordingly  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  to  this  hour 
there  were  1524  Egyptian  years  234  days  18  hours  [by  apparent  time]  and  also 
18  hours  by  exact  time.  The  position  of  the  sun  was  by  calculation  at  24°14'  of 
Leo;  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun  was  97°6';  the  regular 
anomaly  was  242°10';  the  corrected  anomaly  was  239°43',  adding  approximately 
7°  to  the  mean  movement;  wherefore  the  true  position  of  the  moon  was  at  9°39' 
of  Sagittarius;  the  mean  movement  of  latitude  was  193°19';  the  true,  200°17'; 
the  southern  latitude  of  the  moon  was  4°41';  the  southern  declination  was 
26°36',  and  the  addition  of  26°36'  to  54°19'  of  the  latitude  of  the  place  of  ob¬ 
servation  makes  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  pole  of  the  horizon  to  be 
80°55'.  But  there  appeared  to  be  82°.  Accordingly  the  difference  of  1°5'  came 
from  the  lunar  parallax,  which  according  to  Ptolemy  should  have  been  1°38' 
and  also  according  to  the  theory  of  the  ancients,  as  the  harmonic  ratio,  which 
follows  from  their  hypotheses,  forces  you  to  admit. 


17.  Distance  of  the  Moon  from  the  Earth  and  Demonstration 
OF  Their  Ratio  in  Parts  Whereof  the  Radius  of  the 
^  Earth  Is  THE  Unit 

[119^]  From  this  it  will  now  be  made  apparent  how  great  the  distance  of  the 
moon  from  the  earth  is.  And  without  this  distance  a  sure 
ratio  cannot  be  given  for  the  parallaxes,  for  they  are  mu¬ 
tually  related.  And  it  will  be  established  in  this  way.  Let 
AB  be  a  great  circle  of  the  Earth,  and  let  C  be  its  centre. 
Around  C  let  another  circle  be  described  in  comparison 
with  which  the  Earth  has  considerable  magnitude,  and 
let  this  circle  be  DE.  Let  D  be  the  pole  of  the  horizon,  and 
let  the  centre  of  the  moon  be  at  so  that  DE  its  distance 

from  the  vertex  is  known.  Accordingly,  since  at  the  first 
observation, 

angle  DA^  =  82°50' 


and  by  calculation 


angle  AC£J  =  82° 


and  hence 


angle  D A £7  — angle  ACE  =  bO\ 

which  belonged  to  the  parallax;  we  have  triangle  ACE  with  its  angles  given  and 
therefore  with  its  sides  given.  For  since 

angle  CAE  is  given, 
side  Ci5;  =  99,219 


708 


COPERNICUS 

where  diameter  of  circle  circumscribing  triangle  AEC—  100,000 
^C=  1,454; 


and 


and 


CE  =  68^, 

where  ACj  radius  of  Earth,  =  1^. 

And  this  was  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  at  the 
first  observation. 

But  at  the  second  observation 

angle  DAE  =  82^, 
as  the  apparent  movement;  and,  by  calculation, 

angle  AC£=80°55'; 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  AEC  =  l°5\ 

Accordingly, 

side  EC  =  99fi27 

and 

side  AC  =1894 

where  diameter  of  circle  circumscribing  triangle  =  100,000. 

And  so 

C£  =  56P42', 

w^here  the  radius  of  Earth  =  P. 

And  that  was  the  distance  of  the  moon. 


But  now  let  ABC  be  the  greater  epicycle  of  the  moon;  and  let  its  centre 
be  jD.  Let  E  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  and  from  E  let  the  straight 
line  EBDA  be  drawn,  so  that  A  is  the  apogee  and  B  the  perigee.  Now  let 

arc  ABC  =  242^0', 

in  accordance  with  the  computed  regularity  of  the  lunar  anomaly. 

And  with  C  as  centre  let  epicycle  FGK  be  described,  whereon 

arc  ECA:  =  194°10', 

twice  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  sun.  And  let  DK  be  joined. 

Thus, 

angle  COX  =- add.  [120"]  2°27'; 

and,  by  subtraction, 

corr.  anomaly  =  59°43', 

since 

arc  CDB  =  arc  ABC-\S(f  =  &2°m', 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


709 


angle  BEK  =  r, 

Therefore,  in  triangle  KDE  the  angles  are  given  in  the  degrees  whereof  2  rt. 
angles  =  180°;  and  the  ratio  of  the  sides  is  also  given: 

Z)J5;  =  91,856 


and 


i;A:  =  86,354, 

where  diameter  of  circle  circumscribing  triangle  2iLZ)£^=  100,000. 

But 

A:^  =  94,010 

where  DE=^  100,000. 

Now  it  was  shown  above  that 

i)F  =  8,600 

and 


2)F(?=  13,340. 

Accordingly  it  follows  from  the  given  ratio  that  when,  as  was  shown, 

£A:  =  56^42', 

where  radius  of  the  Earth  =  1^^; 


then 


DE  =  60^18', 

Z)F  =  5Pll', 

DEG  =  8^2'; 

and  hence,  as  extended  in  a  straight  line. 

EDG=68J^p; 

and  that  is  the  greatest  altitude  of  the  half  moon.  Furthermore, 

EZ)-i3G  =  52°17', 

which  is  its  least  distance.  And  thus,  at  its  greatest, 

jSDF  =  65Kp, 

which  is  the  altitude  occurring  at  the  bright,  full  moon;  and  at  its  least, 

EDF—DF=^55^S'. 


And  we  should  not  be  moved  by  the  fact  that  others — and  especially  those  to 
whom  the  parallaxes  of  the  moon  could  not  become  known  except  partially, 
on  account  of  the  location  of  their  places — estimate  the  greatest  distance  of 
the  new  moon  and  the  full  moon  to  be  64^10'.  But  the  greater  nearness  of  the 
moon  to  the  horizon — for  it  is  clear  that  the  parallaxes  are  filled  out  in  relation 
to  the  horizon — has  allowed  us  to  perceive  them  more  perfectly,  and  we  have 
not  found  the  parallaxes  to  differ  by  more  than  1'  on  account  of  the  difference 
caused  by  the  nearness  of  the  moon  to  the  horizon. 


18.  On  the  Diameter  of  the  Moon  and  on  the  Diameter  of  the 
Terrestrial  Shadow  in  the  Place  of  Passage  of  the  Moon 

[120^]  Moreover,  the  apparent  diameters  of  the  moon  and  the  shadow  vary 
with  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  Earth.  Wherefore  it  is  pertinent  to  speak 
of  them.  And  although  the  diameters  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  rightly  de¬ 
termined  through  the  dioptra  of  Hipparchus,  nevertheless  in  the  case  of  the  moon 
astronomers  judge  that  this  is  done  with  more  certainty  through  some  particular 
eclipses  of  the  moon,  in  which  the  moon  is  at  an  equal  distance  from  its  highest 
or  lowest  apsis,  especially  if  at  that  time  the  sun  too  is  in  the  same  relative  situa¬ 
tion,  so  that  the  circle  of  shadow  which  the  moon  passes  through  is  found  equal 


710  COPERNICUS 

— unless  the  eclipses  themselves  are  unequal  in  extent.  For  it  is  clear  that  the 
comparison  of  the  difference  in  extent  of  the  eclipses  with  the  latitude  of  the 
moon  shows  how  much  of  the  circle  around  the  centre  of  the  Earth  the  diameter 
of  the  moon  subtends.  When  that  has  been  perceived,  the  semidiameter  of  the 
shadow  is  also  known. 

All  this  will  be  made  clearer  by  an  example.  In  this  way  at  the  midpoint  of 
the  first  eclipse  ^2  of  the  diameter  of  the  moon  was  eclipsed;  and  the  moon  had 
a  latitude  of  47'54";  but  at  the  other  eclipse  of  the  diameter  was  eclipsed, 
and  the  latitude  was  29'37".  The  difference  between  the  extent  of  the  eclipses  is 
]^2of  the  diameter;  the  difference  in  latitude  is  18' 17";  and  the  propor¬ 

tional  to  the  31 '20"  which  the  diameter  of  the  moon  subtends.  Accordingly  it  is 
clear  that  the  centre  of  the  moon  at  the  midpoint  of  the  first  eclipse  was  about 
a  quarter  of  the  moon's  diameter — or  7'50"  of  latitude — beyond  the  shadow.  If 
these  7'50"  are  subtracted  from  the  47'54"  of  the  total  latitude,  40'4"  remain  as 
the  semidiameter  of  the  shadow;  just  as  at  the  other  eclipse  the  shadow  occupied 
— in  proportion  to  J^of  the  lunar  diameter — 10'27"more  than  the  latitude  of  the 
centre  of  the  moon.  The  addition  of  29'37"  to  10'27"  similarly  makes  the  semi¬ 
diameter  of  the  shadow  to  be.40'4".  And  so  in  accordance  with  Ptolemy's  con¬ 
clusion,  when  the  sun  and  moon  are  in  conjunction  or  opposition  at  their  great¬ 
est  distance  from  the  Earth,  the  diameter  of  the  moon  is  31'20" —  [12P]  as  he 
admits  he  found  the  sun's  diameter  to  be  through  the  dioptra  of  Hipparchus — 
but  the  diameter  of  the  shadow  is  1°21'  20";  and  he  believed  that  the  diameters 
were  in  the  ratio  of  13  to  5,  i.e.,  the  ratio  of  double  plus  three-fifths. 

19.  How  THE  Distances  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  from  the  Earth, 
Their  Diameters  and  That  of  the  Shadow  at  the  Place  of 
Crossing  of  the  Moon,  and  the  Axis  of  the  Shadow 
Are  Demonstrated  Simultaneously 

But  even  the  sun  has  some  parallax;  and  since  it  is  very  slight,  it  is  not  per¬ 
ceived  so  easily,  except  that  the  following  things  are  related  reciprocally:  namely 
the  distance  of  the  sun  and  moon  from  the  Earth,  their  diameters  and  that  of 
the  shadow  at  the  crossing  of  the  moon,  and  the  axis  of  the  shadow;  and  for 
that  reason  they  are  mutually  productive  of  one  another  in  analytical  demon¬ 
strations.  First  we  shall  review  Ptolemy's  conclusions  on  these  things,  and  how 
he  demonstrated  them,  and  we  shall  draw  out  from  them  what  seems  the  most 
true.  He  assumed  31 as  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  sun,  which  he  employed 
without  any  qualification.  He  assumed  as  equal  to  that  the  diameter  of  the  full 
and  new  moon  when  at  its  apogee,  which  he  says  was  at  a  distance  of  64p10', 
whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth  is  1^. 

From  that  he  demonstrated  the  rest  in  this  way:  Let  ABC  be  the  circle  of  the 
solar  globe  around  centre  D;  and  let  EFG  be  the  circle  of  the  terrestrial  globe 
around  its  centre  K  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the  sun.  Let  AG  and  CE  be 
straight  lines  touching  both  circles,  and  let  them  as  extended  meet  at  the  apex 
of  the  shadow,  as  at  point  S,  And  let  DKS  be  a  line  through  the  centres  of  the 
sun  and  the  Earth.  Moreover,  let  AK  and  KC  be  drawn,  and  let  AC  and  GE  be 
joined,  which  should  hardly  differ  at  all  from  the  diameters  on  account  of  the 
great  distance  between  them.  Now  on  DKS  let  equal  segments  LK  and  KM 
be  taken  in  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the  moon  in  the  apogee  when  new  and 
when  full;  in  his  opinion  64^10',  where  EK  is  1^.  Let  QMR  be  the  diameter  of 


711 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


the  shadow  at  this  crossing  of  the  moon;  and  let  NLO  be  the  diameter  of  the 
moon  at  right  angles  to  DK,  and  let  it  be  extended  as  LOP. 

The  first  problem  is  to  find 

DK  :  KE. 

Accordingly,  since 

angle  NKD=31}4', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°, 

and  [121  *>] 

angle  LK0  =  }4  angle  NKO, 
angle  LKO  =  15%'. 

And 


angle  L  =  90°. 

Accordingly,  in  triangle  LKO,  which  has  its  angles  given, 

KL  :  LO  is  given, 


and 


LO  =  17^33', 

and 

Li!:=64PlO', 


And  because 


where  KE=1^. 


But  since  LOP  and 
And 


LO:MB=5  : 13, 
ilfig =45'38". 


MR  are  parallel  to  KE  at  equal  intervals,  on  that  account 
LOP-PMR  =  2KE. 


OP=LOP-{MR-\-W)  =  55'W. 

Now  by  Euchd,  vi,  2, 

EC  :  PC=KC  :  OC=KD  :  LD=KE  :  OP  =  60'  :  56'49". 

Hence 


And  accordingly,  by 


LZ) =56'49", 

where  DLK = P. 


subtraction, 

KL  =  3'n". 


But  according  as 


Z:L  =  64p10', 

where  FK  =  Ip, 


712  COPERNICUS 

i^D  =  1210p. 

Now  it  is  also  clear  that 

M7J  =  45'38^ 

Hence 

KE  :  MR  is  given 

and 

KMS  :  ilfiS  is  given. 

And  of  the  whole  KMS 

A:M  =  14'22". 


And,  separando, 

KMS  =  2(jS^ 

where  =  64^10'. 

So  in  truth  Ptolemy. 

But  others  after  Ptolemy,  since  they  found  that  these  things  did  not  agree 
sufficiently  with  the  appearances,  published  other  things  concerning  all  this. 
None  the  less  they  admit  that  the  greatest  distance  of  the  full  moon  and  the 
new  moon  from  the  Earth  is  64^10';  and  that  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  sun 
at  its  apogee  is  They  even  grant  that  the  diameter  of  the  shadow  at  the 

place  of  crossing  of  the  moon  is  as  13  to  5,  even  as  Ptolemy  himself.  Neverthe¬ 
less  they  deny  that  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  moon  at  that  time  is  greater 
than  293^2^  reason  they  put  the  diameter  of  the  shadow  at  ap¬ 

proximately  1°16^'.  They  hold  that  it  follows  from  this  that  at  its  apogee  the 
distance  of  the  sun  from  the  Earth  is  1146^  and  that  the  axis  of  the  shadow  is 
254P,  whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth  is  1^.  [122^]  And  astronomers  attribute 
these  things  to  the  Harranite  philosopher  [al-Battani]  as  the  discoverer,  although 
they  cannot  be  joined  together  at  all  reasonably.  We  considered  that  these 
things  must  be  adjusted  and  corrected  as  follows,  since  we  put  the  apparent 
diameter  of  the  sun  in  its  apogee  at  31 '40" — for  it  should  be  somewhat  greater 
now  than  before  Ptolemy — and  that  of  the  full  or  the  new  moon  in  its  highest 
apsis  at  30'  and  the  diameter  of  the  shadow  in  its  crossing  at  80^'.  For  as¬ 
tronomers  should  have  a  slightly  greater  ratio  than  that  of  5  to  13,  that  is  to 
say  150  to  403.  And  the  whole  sun  is  not  covered  by  the  moon,  unless  the  moon 
is  at  a  lesser  distance  from  the  Earth  than  62^,  whereof  the  radius  of  the  Earth 
is  IP.  For  when  these  things  are  put  down  in  this  way  they  seem  to  be  connected 
with  one  another  and  the  rest  in  a  sure  fashion  and  to  be  consonant  with  the 
apparent  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon.  And  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing 
demonstration: 

LO  =  17'85" 

where  KE  radius  of  Earth  =  Ip. 


And  for  that  reason 

and 

And 


M/B  =  46'l", 
OP  =  56'51". 


Z)L7^=1179P, 

the  distance  from  the  Earth  of  the  sun  at  its  apogee;  and 

KMS  =  265, 

which  is  the  axis  of  the  shadow. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


713 


20.  On  the  Magnitude  of  These  Three  Celestial  Bodies: 
THE  Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth,  and  Their  Comparison  with 
One  Another 


Hence  it  is  also  manifest  that 

LKiKD^l  :  18 


and 


LO  :Z)(7=1  : 18. 


Now 


1:18  =  17'8":5P27' 

where  KE  —  Ip. 


And 

SK  :  JYE  =  265p  :  1^  =  SKD  :  Z)C=1444p  :  5p27'. 

For  they  are  all  proportional;  and  that  will  be  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the 
sun  and  Earth.  But,  as  globes  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  cubes^  of  their  diameters, 
accordingly 

(5p27')'=161  3^p; 

and  the  sun  is  161  ]/$  greater  than  the  terrestrial  globe. 

Again,  since 

moon^s  radius  =  17'9" 

where  K£’  =  1p, 

[122^]  Earth’s  diameter  :  moon’s  diameter  =  7  :  2,  Le.,  in  the  triple  sesquialter 
ratio.  When  the  cube^  of  that  ratio  is  taken,  it  shows  that  the  Earth  is  42J^ 
greater  than  the  moon. 

And  hence  the  sun  will  be  6,999  greater  than  the  moon. 


21.  On  the  Apparent  Diameter  of  the  Sun  and  Its  Parallaxes 

But  since  the  same  magnitude  when  farther  away  appears  smaller  than  when 
nearer;  for  that  reason  it  happens  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  shadow  of  the 
Earth  vary  with  their  unequal  distances  from  the  Earth  no  less  than  do  their 
parallaxes.  By  means  of  the  aforesaid,  all  these  things  are  easily  determinable 
for  any  elongation  whatsoever.  That  is  first  made  manifest  in  the  case  of  the 
sun.  For  since  we  have  shown  that  the  Earth  at  its  farthest  is  10,323  parts  dis- 
that  from  the  sun,  whereof  the  radius  of  the  orbital  circle  of  annual  revolution  = 
10,000;  and  at  its  nearest  the  Earth  has  a  distance  of  9,678  parts  of  the  remain¬ 
der  of  the  diameter:  accordingly  the  highest  apsis  is  1179p  whereof  the  radius  of 
the  Earth  is  Ip,  the  lowest  apsis  will  be  1105p,  and  so  the  mean  apsis  will  be 
1142P.  Accordingly  in  the  right  triangle^ 

1,000,000-M179  =  848^  =  H  ch.  2  (2'55"), 

which  is  the  small  angle  of  greatest  parallax,  and  that  is  found  around  the  hori¬ 
zon.  Similarly,  as  the  least  distance  is  1105p, 

Hiterallyy  in  the  triplicate  ratio. 

Hiterally,  the  triplicate. 

H.e.y  the  right  triangle  formed  by  the  line  joining  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  the  Earth,  the 
tangent  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  the  Earth’s  surface,  and  the  radius  of  the  Earth  to  that 
point  of  tangency. 

H.e.y  when  the  highest  apsis  =  1 179**,  1**  =  848 
whereof  radius  of  circle  =  1,000,000. 


714  COPERNICUS 

1,000,000-1105  =  9051  =  1^  ch.  2  (37"); 
and  37"  measures  the  angle  of  greatest  parallax  of  the  lowest  apsis.  Now  it  was 
shown  that  the  diameter  of  the  sun  is  5^27',  whereof  the  diameter  of  the  Earth 
is  IP,  and  that  it  appears  at  the  highest  apsis  as  31'48".  For 
1179P  :  5p  27' =  2,000,000  :  9,245; 

where  diameter  of  circle  =  2,000,000, 

and 

i^ch.  2(31'48")=9245. 

It  follows  that  at  the  least  distance  of  1105p  there  is  an  apparent  diameter  of 
33'54".  Therefore  the  difference  between  them  is  2'6";  but  there  is  a  difference 
of  only  12"  [123a]  between  the  parallaxes.  Ptolemy  considered  that  both  of 
these  differences  should  be  ignored  on  account  of  their  smallness;  for  1'  or  2'  is 
not  easily  perceptible  to  the  senses,  much  less  than  are  a  few  seconds  perceptible. 
Wherefore  if  we  keep  the  greatest  parallax  of  the  sun  at  3'  everywhere,  we  shall 
be  seen  to  have  made  no  error.  Now  we  shall  determine  the  mean  apparent 
diameters  of  the  sun  through  its  mean  distances;  or,  as  do  others,  through  the 
apparent  hourly  movement  of  the  sun,  which  they  believe  to  be  to  its  diameter 
as  5  to  66  or  as  1  to  14,1^.  For  its  hourly  movement  is  approximately  proportional 
to  its  distance. 

22.  On  the  Unequal  Apparent  Diameter  of  the  Moon  and  Its  Parallaxes 

A  greater  diversity  in  the  apparent  diameter  and  parallaxes  appears  in  the 
case  of  the  moon  as  being  the  nearest  planet.  For  since  its  greatest  distance  from 
the  Earth  is  653^^  at  new  moon  and  full  moon,  its  least  distance  will  by  the 
above  demonstrations  be  55^8';  and  the  greatest  [altitudinal]  elongation  of  the 
half  moon  will  be  68^21',  and  the  least  52p17'.  Accordingly  we  shall  have  the 
parallaxes  of  the  setting  or  rising  moon  at  these  four  termini,  when  we  have  di¬ 
vided  the  radius  of  the  circle  by  the  distances  of  the  moon  from  the  Earth:  the 
parallax  of  the  farthest  half  moon  will  be  50'18"  and  that  of  the  farthest  new  or 
full  moon  will  be  52'24";  the  parallax  of  the  nearest  full  or  new  moon  will  be 
62'21"  and  that  of  the  nearest  half  moon  65'45". 

Furthermore  by  this  the  apparent  diameters  of  the  moon  are  established.  For 
it  was  shown  that  the  diameter  of  the  Earth  is  to  the  diameter  of  the  moon  as 
7  to  2,  and  the  radius  of  the  Earth  will  be  to  the  diameter  of  the  moon  as  7  to  4. 
Moreover,  the  parallaxes  are  in  that  ratio  to  the  apparent  diameters  of  the  moon, 
since  the  straight  lines,  which  comprehend  the  angles  of  the  greater  parallaxes, 
do  not  differ  at  all  from  the  apparent  diameters  at  the  same  crossing  of  the  moon; 
and  the  angles,  [or  arcs  of  parallax]  are  approximately  proportional  to  the  chords 
subtending  them;  and  their  difference  is  not  perceptible  to  sense.  By  this  sum¬ 
mary  it  is  clear  that  at  the  first  limit  of  the  parallaxes  which  have  been  already 
set  forth  the  apparent  [123^]  diameter  of  the  moon  will  be  28?^';  at  the  second, 
approximately  30';  at  the  third,  35'38";  and  at  the  last  limit,  37'34".  By  the 
hypothesis  of  Ptolemy  and  others  the  diameter  would  have  been  approximately 
1°,  and  so  it  ought  to  have  been,  as  the  half  moon  at  that  time  was  shedding  as 
much  light  on  the  Earth  as  the  full  moon  would. 

^Similarly,  where  the  lowest  apsis  =  1105®,  1®  =  905 
whereof  radius  of  circle  =  1,000,000. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


715 


23.  What  the  Ratio  of  Difference  Between  the 
Shadows  of  the  Earth  Is 


We  have  already  made  clear  that 

shadow^s  diameter  :  moon^s  diameter  =  403  :  150. 

For  that  reason  at  a  full  or  a  new  moon,  when  the  sun  is  at  its  apogee,  the  shad¬ 
ow’s  is  found  to  be  80'36"  at  its  least  and  95'44"  at  its  greatest;  and  the  greatest 
difference  is  15'8".  Moreover,  the  shadow  of  the  Earth  varies,  even  in  the  same 
place  of  crossing  of  the  moon,  on  account  of  the  unequal  distance  of  the  Earth 
from  the  sun,  as  follows: 

For,  as  in  the  foregoing  diagram,  let  DKS  the  straight  line  through  the  cen¬ 
tres  of  the  sun  and  the  Earth 
be  drawn  again,  and  also  CES 
the  line  of  tangency.  As  was 
shown,  when 
distance  DK  =  1 179^, 

where  KE  = 

and 


KM  =  62^ 

then  the  semidiameter  of  the  shadow 

A//2  =  46'l" 

where  KE=1^; 

and  [KR  being  joined] 

angle  MKR  =  A2'S2", 

which  is  the  angle  of  sight,  and  the  axis  of  the  shadow 

KM  S  =  265^. 

Now  when  the  Earth  is  nearest  to  the  sun,  so  that 

DK  =  1105^, 

we  shall  evaluate  the  shadow  of  the  Earth  at  the  same  crossing  of  the  moon,  as 
follows:  For  let  EZ  be  drawn  parallel  to  DK,  Then 

CZ  :ZE  =  EK:KS, 

But 

CZ  =  4p27' 

and 

ZE  =  1105^. 

For 

ZE=DK 

and 

DZ  =  KE, 

as  KZ  is  a  parallelogram.  Accordingly 

A:aS  =  248^19' 

where  KE=1^. 

Now 


KM  =  62; 

and  accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

MS  =  186^19'. 


But  since 


therefore 


SM  :MR=/}K  :KE, 


716 


COPERNICUS 


And  hence 


where  [124^]  KE  —  \^, 


angle  MKR  =  ^VZb\ 

which  is  the  angle  of  sight.  Whence  it  happens  that  on  account  of  the  approach 
and  withdrawal  of  the  sun  and  the  Earth,  the  greatest  difference  in  the  diam¬ 
eters  of  the  shadow  at  the  same  place  of  crossing  of  the  moon  is  1',  whereof  EK 
=  IP,  in  proportion  to  an  angle  of  sight  of  57'',  whereof  4  rt.  angles  =360®. 
Furthermore,  in  the  first  case 

shadow’s  diameter  :  moon’s  diameter  >13  :  5; 


but  here 

shadow’s  diameter  :  moon’s  diameter  <13  :  5, 
as  13  :  5  is  a  sort  of  mean  ratio.  Wherefore  we  shall  make  but  slight  error  if  we 
employ  it  as  everywhere  the  same,  thus  saving  labour  and  following  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  the  ancients. 


24.  On  the  Table  of  the  Particular  Parallaxes  in  the  Circle 
Passing  Through  the  Poles  of  the  Horizon 

Moreover,  it  will  not  be  difficult  now  to  determine  all  the  single  parallaxes  of 
the  sun  and  the  moon.  For  let  there  be  drawn  again  AB 
the  terrestrial  circle  through  the  vertex  of  the  horizon, 
with  C  as  its  centre.  And  in  the  same  plane  let  DE  be 
the  orbital  circle  of  the  moon,  FG  that  of  the  sun,  CDF 
the  line  through  the  vertex  of  the  horizon;  and  let  line 
CEG  be  drawn,  in  which  the  true  positions  of  the  sun 
and  the  moon  are  understood  to  be,  and  let  the  lines  of 
sight  AG  and  AE  be  joined  to  those  points.  Therefore 
the  parallaxes  of  the  sun  are  measured  by  angle  AGC, 
those  of  the  moon  by  angle  AEG,  Moreover,  there  is  a 
parallax  between  the  sun  and  moon  which  is  measured 
by  angle  GAEy  which  is  determined  according  to  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  angles  AGC  and  AEC.  Now  let  us  take  angle  ACG,  with  which 
we  wish  to  compare  those  angles;  and,  for  example,  let 

angle  ACG  =  30®. 

Now  it  is  clear  from  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles  that  when 

fine  CG=  1142P, 

where  AC  =1P, 
angle  AGC  =  13^', 

which  is  the  difference  between  the  true  and  the  seeming  altitude  of  the  sun. 
But  when 

angle  ACG  =  60®, 
angle  AGC  =  2'36". 

Everything  will  be  similarly  clear  as  regards  the  remaining  angles. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  moon  at  its  four  limits:  If  at  the  greatest  lunar  distance 
from  the  Earth,  wherein,  as  we  said, 

CE  =  68^21', 

[124^]  where  CA  =  1^, 
angle  i)CE  =  30®, 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360®, 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  717 


we  shall  have  triangle  ACE  in  which  the  two  sides  AC  and  CE  together  with 

angle  ACE  have  been  given.  From  that  we  find 

that 


And  when 


parallax  AEC  =  2b'2%\ 


CE  =  bby2^ 
angle  A£'C  =  26'36". 
Similarly  in  the  third  case  when 

CF;  =  55p8', 

parallax  AEC  —  ZV42". 
Finally,  at  the  least  distance  when 

CE^b2nr, 

angle  AEC  =  33'27". 


Again,  when 


arc  DE  =  60°, 

the  parallaxes  in  the  same  order  will  be  as  follows: 

First  parallax  =  43'55", 
second  parallax  =  45'5 1 " , 
third  parallax  =  54 


and 


fourth  parallax  =  57 

We  shall  inscribe  all  these  things  after  the  order  of  the  subjoined  table, 
which  for  the  sake  of  convenience  we  shall  extend  like  all  the  other  tables  into 
a  series  of  thirty  rows  but  proceeding  by  6°'s  by  which  twice  the  arcs  from  the 
vertex  of  the  horizon — of  which  the  greatest  is  90° — are  given  to  be  understood. 
But  we  have  divided  the  table  into  nine  columns.  For  in  the  first  and  second 
will  be  found  the  common  numbers  of  the  circle.  We  shall  put  the  parallaxes 
of  the  sun  in  the  third,  and  in  the  next  the  lunar  parallaxes,  and  in  the  fifth 
column  the  differences,  by  which  the  least  parallaxes,  which  occur  at  the  half 
moon  and  at  the  apogee,  are  deficient  as  measured  by  the  parallaxes  occurring 
at  the  apogee  of  the  full  moon  or  the  new  moon.  The  sixth  column  will  contain 
the  parallaxes  which  the  full  or  bright  moon  produces  at  its  perigee;  and  in 
the  next  column  are  the  minutes  of  difference,  by  which  the  parallaxes  which 
occur  at  half  moon  when  the  moon  is  nearest  to  us  exceed  those  occurring  at 
half  moon  in  the  apogee.  Then,  the  two  spaces  which  are  left  are  reserved  for 
the  proportional  minutes,  by  which  the  parallaxes  between  these  four  hmits 
can  be  computed.  We  shall  set  forth  these  parallaxes,  and  first  in  connection 
with  the  apogee  and  the  parallaxes  which  are  between  the  first  two  limits — as 
follows. 


straight  line  EF  =  2^bVy 
side  GA  =  1p25' 
side  AC  =  6P36'; 


718  COPERNICUS 

Let  circle  [125*^]  AB  be  the  first  epicycle  of  the  moon,  and  let  C  be  its  centre. 
With  D  taken  as  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  let  the  straight  line  DBCA  be  drawn; 
and  with  apogee  A  as  centre  let  the  second  epicycle  EFG  be  described.  Now  let 

arc  EG  =  60°, 

and  let  AG  and  CG  be  joined.  Accordingly,  since  in  the  foregoing  it  was  shown 
that 

straight  line  CE  =  5Hl'y 

where  radius  of  Earth  =  1^, 

straight  line  DC  = 

and 

then  in  triangle  ACG 
and 
and 

angle  CAG  is  given, 

which  is  the  angle  comprehended  by  GA  and  AC.  Accordingly,  by  what  has 
been  shown  concerning  plane  triangles, 

side  CG  =  6^7\ 

Accordingly,  as  extended  in  a  straight  line, 

DC(?=Z)CL  =  66p25'. 

But 

Therefore,  by  subtraction, 

£L  =  55J^', 

and  that  is  the  excess.  Moreover,  by  this  given  ratio,  when 

DC£'  =  60P; 

EF  =  2^S7\ 

and 

i7L  =  46'. 

Therefore,  according  as, 

EF=Q0', 
excess  EL=  18'. 

We  shall  mark  these  down  in  the  eighth  column  of  the  table  as  corresponding 
to  60°  [in  the  first  column]. 

We  shall  show  something  similar  in  the  case  of  perigee  B.  Let  the  second 
epicycle  MNO  be  drawn  again  around  centre  jB,  and  let 

angle  MBN  =  60"^. 

For,  as  before,  triangle  BCN  will  have  its  sides  and  angles  given,  and  similarly 

excess  ilfP  =  553^' 

where  Earth^s  radius  =  1^. 

But  that  is  because 


If 


DPM  =  60P; 
ilfPO  =  3p7', 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  719 

and 

excess  il/P  =  55'. 

Now 

3P7'  :55'  =  60'  :  18'; 

and  so  on,  the  same  as  before.  Nevertheless  there  is  a  difference  of  a  few  seconds. 
We  shall  do  this  for  the  rest;  and  thus  we  shall  fill  out  the  eighth  column  of 
the  table.  But  if  we  were  to  employ  instead  of  them,  those  [proportional 
minutes]  which  were  set  out  in  the  table  of  additosubtractions,  we  shall  make 
no  error.  For  they  are  approximately  the  same — and  it  is  a  question  of  very 
small  numbers.  [125^]  There  remain  the  proportional  minutes  which  occur  at 
the  mean  termini,  namely  between  the  second  and  the  third  termini. 

Now  let  circle  AB  be  the  first  epicycle  at  the  new  or  full  moon.  Let  C  be  its 
centre;  and  let  D  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  And  let  the  straight  line 


DBCA  be  extended.  Now  from  apogee  A  let  some  arc  be  taken:  for  instance,  let 

arc  AE  =  G0^; 

and  let  DE  and  CE  be  joined.  For  we  shall  have  the  triangle  DCE^  in  which 
two  sides  are  given: 

CD  =  60^19' 


and 


CD  =  5Pll'. 


Now  angle  DCE  is  an  interior  angle,  and 

angle  DCE  =  180° — angle  ACE. 
Accordingly,  by  what  we  have  shown  concerning  triangles, 

DD  =  63P4'. 

But 

DDA  =  65^p, 

and 


Now 

and 


DBA—ED  =  2m'. 
AB  =  10^22'; 


10P22'  :  2p26'  =  60'  :  14'. 

And  they  are  inscribed  in  the  table  in  the  ninth  column  opposite  60°.  Following 
this  example,  we  have  completed  the  rest  and  filled  out  the  table,  which  fol¬ 
lows.  And  we  have  added  another  table  of  the  semidiameters  of  the  sun  and 
the  moon,  and  the  shadow  of  the  Earth,  so  that  as  far  as  possible  they  may 
be  at  hand. 


720 


COPERNICUS 


Table  of  the  Parallaxes  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 


Common 

Parallaxes 

Parallax  of 
the  moon  at 
the  second 

Differencebe- 
tween  the  first 
and  second 
limit  of  the 
moon:  to  be 

Parallax  of 
the  moon  at 
the  third 

Difference 
between  the 
third  and 
fourth  lunar 
limit:  to  be 

60  ^ 

g 

CO  Q) 

i  §• 

li 

Numbers 

of  the  sun 

limit 

subtracted 

limit 

added 

Deg. 

Deg. 

Min, 

Sec. 

Min.  Sec. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Os 

Os  ^ 

6 

354 

0 

10 

2 

46 

0 

7 

3 

18 

0 

12 

0 

0 

12 

348 

0 

19 

5 

33 

0 

14 

6 

36 

0 

23 

1 

0 

18 

342 

0 

29 

8 

19 

0 

21 

9 

53 

0 

34 

3 

1 

24 

336 

0 

38 

11 

4 

0 

28 

13 

10 

0 

45 

4 

2 

30 

330 

0 

47 

13 

49 

0 

35 

16 

26 

0 

56 

5 

3 

36 

324 

0 

56 

16 

32 

0 

42 

19 

40 

1 

6 

7 

5 

42 

318 

1 

5 

19 

5 

0 

48 

22 

47 

1 

16 

10 

7 

48 

312 

1 

13 

21 

39 

0 

55 

25 

47 

1 

26 

12 

9 

54 

306 

1 

22 

24 

9 

1 

1 

28 

49 

1 

35 

15 

12 

60 

300 

1 

31 

26 

36 

1 

8 

31 

42 

1 

45 

18 

14 

66 

294 

1 

39 

28 

57 

1 

14 

34 

31 

1 

54 

21 

17 

72 

288 

1 

46 

31 

14 

1 

19 

37 

14 

2 

3 

24 

20 

78 

282 

1 

53 

33 

25 

1 

24 

39 

50 

2 

11 

27 

23 

84 

276 

2 

0 

35 

31 

1 

29 

42 

19 

2 

19 

30 

26 

90 

270 

2 

7 

37 

31 

1 

34 

44 

40 

2 

26 

34 

29 

96 

264 

2 

13 

39 

24 

1 

39 

46 

54 

2 

33 

37 

32 

102 

258 

2 

20 

41 

10 

1 

44 

49 

0 

2 

40 

39 

35 

108 

252 

2 

26 

42 

50 

1 

48 

50 

59 

2 

46 

42 

38 

114 

246 

2 

31 

44 

24 

1 

52 

52 

49 

2 

53 

45 

41 

120 

240 

2 

36 

45 

51 

1 

56 

54 

30 

3 

0 

47 

44 

126 

234 

2 

40 

47 

8 

2 

0 

56 

2 

3 

6 

49 

47 

132 

228 

2 

44 

48 

15 

2 

2 

57 

23 

3 

11 

51 

49 

138 

222 

2 

49 

49 

15 

2 

3 

58 

36 

3 

14 

53 

52 

134 

216 

2 

52 

50 

10 

2 

4 

59 

39 

3 

17 

55 

54 

150 

210 

2 

54 

50 

55 

2 

4 

60 

31 

3 

20 

57 

56 

156 

204 

2 

56 

51 

29 

2 

5 

61 

12 

3 

22 

58 

57 

162 

198 

2 

58 

51 

56 

2 

5 

61 

47 

3 

23 

59 

58 

168 

192 

2 

59 

52 

13 

2 

6 

62 

9 

3 

23 

59 

59 

174 

186 

3 

0 

52 

22 

2 

6 

62 

19 

3 

24 

60 

60 

180 

180 

3 

0 

52 

24 

2 

6 

62 

21 

3 

24 

60 

60 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


Table  of  the  Semidiameters  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Shadow 


Common 

Semidiameter 
of  the 

Semidiameter 
of  the 

Semidiameter 
of  the 

iriation 
of  the 
hadow 

Numbers 

Sun 

Moon 

Shadmo 

-  CQ 

Deg, 

Deg, 

Min, 

Sec, 

Min, 

Sec, 

Min, 

Sec, 

Min. 

6 

354 

15 

50 

15 

0 

40 

18 

0 

12 

358 

15 

50 

15 

1 

40 

21 

0 

18 

342 

15 

51 

15 

3 

40 

26 

1 

24 

336 

15 

52 

15 

6 

40 

34 

'  2 

30 

330 

15 

53 

15 

9 

40 

42 

3 

36 

324 

15 

55 

15 

14 

40 

56 

4 

42 

318 

15 

57 

15 

19 

41 

10 

6 

48 

312 

16 

0 

15 

25 

41 

26 

9 

54 

306 

16 

3 

15 

32 

41 

44 

11 

60 

300 

16 

6 

15 

39 

42 

2 

14 

66 

294 

16 

9 

15 

47 

42 

24 

16 

72 

288 

16 

12 

15 

56 

42 

40 

19 

78 

282 

16 

15 

16 

5 

43 

13 

22 

84 

276 

16 

19 

16 

13 

43 

34 

25 

90 

270 

16 

22 

16 

22 

43 

58 

27 

96 

264 

16 

26 

16 

30 

44 

20 

31 

102 

258 

16 

29 

16 

39 

44 

44 

33 

108 

252 

16 

32 

16 

47 

45 

6 

36 

114 

246 

16 

36 

16 

55 

45 

20 

39 

120 

240 

16 

39 

17 

4 

45 

52 

42 

126 

234 

16 

42 

17 

12 

46 

13 

45 

132 

228 

16 

45 

17 

19 

46 

32 

47 

138 

222 

16 

48 

17 

26 

46 

51 

49 

144 

216 

16 

50 

17 

32 

47 

7 

51 

150 

210 

16 

53 

17 

38 

47 

23 

53 

156 

204 

16 

54 

17 

41 

47 

31 

54 

162 

198 

16 

55 

17 

44 

47 

39 

55 

168 

192 

16 

56 

17 

46 

47 

44 

56 

174 

186 

16 

57 

17 

48 

47 

49 

56 

180 

180 

16 

57 

17 

49 

47 

52 

57 

721 


722 


COPERNICUS 


25.  On  Computing  the  Parallax  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 

[127^]  We  shall  also  set  out  briefly  the  mode  of  computing  the  parallaxes  of 
the  sun  and  moon  by  the  table.  If  for  the  distance  of  the  sun  or  twice  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  moon  from  the  vertex  of  the  horizon  we  take  the  corresponding  par¬ 
allaxes  in  the  table — the  solar  parallaxes  simply  but  the  lunar  parallaxes  at  the 
four  limits — and  if  we  take  the  first  proportional  minutes  corresponding  to 
twice  the  movement  of  the  moon  or  twice  its  distance  from  the  sun;  by  means  of 
these  minutes  we  shall  determine  the  parts  of  the  difference  between  the  first 
and  the  last  terminus  which  are  proportional  to  sixty  minutes;  we  shall  always 
subtract  these  parts  from  the  parallaxes  following  next,  and  we  shall  always  add 
the  later  parts  to  the  parallax  at  the  next  to  the  last  limit.  And  we  shall  have  two 
corrected  parallaxes  of  the  moon  at  the  apogee  and  perigee;  the  lesser  epicycle 
increases  or  decreases  these  parallaxes.  Then  we  shall  take  the  last  proportional 
minutes  corresponding  to  the  lunar  anomaly;  and  by  means  of  them  we  shall 
determine  the  proportional  part  of  the  difference  between  the  two  parallaxes 
found  nearest;  we  shall  always  add  this  proportional  part  to  the  first  corrected 
parallax,  the  parallax  at  the  apogee;  and  the  result  will  be  the  parallax  of  the 
moon  sought  for  that  place  and  time,  as  in  the  following  example. 

Let  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  vertex  [of  the  horizon]  be  54°,  the  mean 
movement  of  the  moon  15°,  and  the  corrected  anomaly  100°:  I  wish  to  find  from 
them  by  means  of  the  table  the  lunar  parallax.  I  double  the  degrees  of  distance, 
and  the  result  is  108°,  to  which  in  the  table  there  correspond  a  difference  of  1'48" 
between  the  first  and  second  limit,  a  parallax  of  42'50"  at  the  second  limit,  a 
parallax  of  50'59"  at  the  third  limit,  and  a  difference  of  2'46"  between  the  third 
and  the  fourth  limit — which  I  shall  mark  down  separately.  Doubling  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  moon  makes  30°;  I  find  five  of  the  first  proportional  minutes  corres¬ 
ponding  to  it,  and  with  them  I  determine  9"  to  be  the  part  of  the  first  difference 
which  is  proportional  to  sixty  minutes:  I  subtract  these  9"  from  the  42'50"  of 
the  parallax,  and  the  remainder  is  42'41".  Similarly  the  proportional  part  of  the 
second  difference — which  was  2'46" — is  14";  and  I  add  it  to  the  50'59"  of  the 
parallax  at  the  third  limit;  the  sum  is  51'13".  The  difference  between  these  par¬ 
allaxes  is  8'32".  After  this  I  take  the  last  proportional  minutes  corresponding  to 
the  corrected  anomaly,  and  there  are  39'.  By  means  of  them  I  take  4'50"  as  the 
proportional  part  of  the  difference  of  8'32";  [127^]  I  add  this  4'50"  to  the  first 
corrected  parallax,  and  the  sum  is  47'31",  which  will  be  the  sought  parallax  of 
the  moon  in  the  circle  of  altitude. 

But  since  any  other  parallaxes  of  the  moon  differ  very  little  from  the  paral¬ 
laxes  at  full  moon  and  new  moon,  it  would  seem  to  be  sufficient  if  we  kept  within 
the  mean  limits  everywhere,  for  we  have  great  need  of  them  for  the  sake  of  pre¬ 
dicting  eclipses.  The  rest  do  not  require  such  great  examination,  which  will  be 
held  to  offer  perhaps  less  in  the  way  of  utility  than  in  the  satisfaction  of  curiosity. 

26.  How  THE  Parallaxes  of  Longitude  and  Latitude  Are  Distinguished 

Now  the  parallax  is  divided  simply  into  the  parallax  of  longitude  and  that  of 
latitude,  or  the  parallax  between  the  sun  and  moon  is  distinguished  according 
to  the  arcs  and  angles  of  the  intersection  of  the  echptic  and  the  circle  through 
the  poles  of  the  horizon;  since  it  is  clear  that  when  this  circle  falls  at  right  angles 
upon  the  echptic,  it  makes  no  parallax  in  longitude,  but  the  parallax  is  trans- 


723 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

ferred  wholly  to  latitude,  as  the  circle  is  wholly  a  circle  of  latitude  and  altitude. 
But  where  conversely  the  echptic  falls  at  right  angles  upon  the  horizon  and  be¬ 
comes  wholly  the  same  as  the  circle  of  altitude;  then,  if  the  moon  has  no  latitude, 
it  does  not  admit  anything  except  a  parallax  in  longitude,  but  if  it  has  a  digres¬ 
sion  in  latitude,  it  does  not  escape  some  parallax  in  latitude. 

In  this  way  let  circle  ABC  be  the  ecliptic,  and  let  it  be  at  right  angles  to  the 
horizon,  and  let  A  be  the  pole  of  the  horizon.  Accordingly  cir¬ 
cle  ABC  will  be  the  same  as  the  circle  of  altitude  of  a  moon 
without  latitude.  Let  B  be  the  position  of  the  moon,  and  BC 
its  total  parallax  in  longitude. 

But  when  it  also  has  latitude,  let  DBE  be  the  circle  describ¬ 
ed  through  the  poles  of  the  echptic  and  with  DB  or  BE  as  the 
latitude  of  the  moon,  it  is  clear  that  side  AD  or  AE  will  not 
be  equal  to  AB;  and  the  angle  bXD  or  E  will  not  be  right,  since 
DA  and  EA  are  not  circles  through  the  poles  of  DBE]  and  the 
parallax  will  participate  in  latitude,  and  it  will  do  so  all  the 
more  the  nearer  the  moon  is  to  the  vertex.  For  let  triangle 
ADE  keep  the  same  base,  but  let  sides  AD  and  AE  be  shorter 
and  comprehend  acuter  angles  at  the  base;  the  greater  the 
distance  of  the  moon  from  the  vertex  is,  the  more  like  right 
angles  will  the  angles  be. 

Now  let  ABC  be  the  ecliptic,  and  DBE  the  obhque  circle  of  altitude  of  a  moon 
not  having  latitude,  as  being  at  an  echptic  section.  [128*] 

Let  B  be  the  ecliptic  section,  and  BE  the  parallax  in  the 
circle  of  altitude.  Let  there  be  drawn  EF  the  arc  of  a  cir¬ 
cle  through  the  poles  of  ABC.  Accordingly  since  in  tri¬ 
angle  BEF  angle  EBF  is  given,  as  was  shown  above,  and 
angle  F=  90°, 

and  side  BE  is  also  given:  by  what  has  been  shown  con¬ 
cerning  spherical  triangles,  the  remaining  sides  are  giv¬ 
en:  BF  the  parallax  in  longitude  and  FE  the  parallax  in 
latitude,  which  agree  with  parallax  BE.  But  since  BE^ 

EFf  and  FB  on  account  of  their  shortness  differ  but 
shghtly  and  imperceptibly  from  straight  lines,  we  shall 
not  make  an  error  if  we  use  the  right  triangle  as  rectilinear;  and  on  that  account 
the  ratio  will  become  easy. 

For  let  circle  ABC  be  drawn  as  the  ecliptic, 
and  let  DB  the  oblique  circle  through  the  poles 
of  the  horizon  fall  upon  it.  Let  B  be  the  position 
in  longitude  of  the  moon  and  FB  the  northern  lat¬ 
itude  or  BE  the  southern.  Let  the  vertex  of  the 
horizon  be  D,  and  from  D  let  fall  on  the  moon  the 
circles  of  altitude  DEK  or  DFC,  whereon  are 
the  parallaxes  EK  and  FG.  For  the  true  positions 
of  the  moon  in  longitude  and  latitide  will  be  at 
points  E  or  F,  but  the  seeming  positions  will  be  at 
K  or  G.  And  from  K  and  G  let  arcs  KM  and  LG  be 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic  ABC.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  since  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  the  moon 


724  COPERNICUS 

have  been  established  together  with  the  latitude  of  the  region;  in  triangle 
DEB  two  sides  DB  and  BE  will  be  known  and  also  ABD  the  angle  of  section  and 
angle  =  angle  ARZ)+90°. 

Accordingly  the  remaining  side  DE  will  be  given  together  with  angle  DEB, 

Similarly  in  triangle  DBF  since  two  sides  DB  and  BF  are  given  together  with 
angle  DBF,  which  with  angle  ABD  makes  up  a  right  angle,  DF  will  also  be 
given  together  with  angle  DFB,  Accordingly  parallaxes  EK  and  FG  on  arcs  DE 
and  DF  are  given  by  the  table,  and  so  is  DE  or  DF,  the  true  distance  of  the  moon 
from  the  vertex,  and  similarly  the  seeming  distance  DEK  or  DFG.  But  in  tri¬ 
angle  EBN,  which  has  the  intersection  of  DE  with  the  echptic  at  point  N,  angle 
NEB  is  given,  and  base  BE  is  given,  and  angle  NBE  is  right:  the  remaining 
angle  BNE  will  become  known  too  together  with  the  remaining  sides  BN  and 
NE,  And  similarly  in  the  whole  triangle  NKM,  as  angles  M  and  N  and  the  whole 
side  KEN  are  given,  the  base  KM  will  be  established.  KM  is  the  seeming  south¬ 
ern  latitude  of  the  moon,  and  its  excess  over  EB  is  the  parallax  of  latitude:  and 
the  remaining  side  NBM  is  given:  by  the  subtraction  of  NB  from  NBM  the  re¬ 
mainder  BM  will  be  the  parallax  in  longitude. 

Moreover,  thus  in  the  northern  triangle  BFC,  since  side  BF  is  given  together 
with  angle  BFC  [128^]  and  angle  B  is  right,  the  remaining  sides  BLC  and  FGC 
together  with  the  remaining  angle  C  are  given;  and  after  the  subtraction  of  FG 
from  FGC  there  remains  GC,  which  is  a  side  given  in  triangle  GLC  together  with 
the  angle  LCG  and  angle  CLG,  which  is  right.  Accordingly  the  remaining  sides 
are  given:  GL  and  LC,  and  hence  BL  which  is  the  remainder  of  BC  and  is  the 
parallax  in  longitude;  and  GL  is  the  seeming  latitude,  and  its  parallax  is  the 
excess  of  BF  the  true  latitude  over  GL. 

As  you  see  however,  this  computation,  which  deals  with  very  small  magni¬ 
tudes,  contains  more  labour  than  fruitfulness.  For  it  will  be  sufficient  if  we  use 
angle  ABD  instead  of  DCB  and  angle  DBF  instead  of  DEB,  and  as  before, 
simply  the  mean  DB  instead  of  arcs  DE  and  DF — neglecting  the  latitude  of  the 
moon.  For  no  error  will  appear  because  of  that,  especially  in  regions  of  the 
northern  part  of  the  Earth;  but  in  very  southern  regions,  where  B  touches  the 
vertex  of  the  horizon  at  the  greatest  latitude  of  5°  and  when  the  moon  is  at  its 
perigee,  there  is  a  difference  of  approximately  6'.  But  in  the  echptic  conjunc¬ 
tions  with  the  sun,  where  the  latitude  of  the  moon  cannot  exceed  3^®,  there  can 
be  a  difference  of  merely  1^'.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  from  this  that  the  parallax 
is  always  added  to  the  true  position  of  the  moon  in  the  eastern  quadrant  of  the 
echptic  and  is  always  subtracted  in  the  other  quadrant,  so  that  we  may  have  the 
seeming  longitude  of  the  moon;  and  may  have  the  seeming  latitude  through  the 
parallax  in  latitude,  since  if  the  true  latitude  and  the  parallax  are  in  the  same 
direction,  they  are  added  together;  if  in  different  directions,  the  lesser  is  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  greater,  and  the  remainder  is  the  seeming  latitude  of  that  same 
part,  to  which  the  greater  falls  away. 

27.  Confirmation  of  What  Has  Been  Expounded  Concerning 
THE  Parallaxes  of  the  Moon 

Accordingly  we  can  confirm  by  many  other  observations  (such  as  the  follow¬ 
ing  one)  that  the  parallaxes  of  the  moon  as  set  forth  above  are  in  conformity 
with  the  appearances.  We  made  this  observation  at  Bologna,  after  sunset  on 
the  seventh  day  before  the  Ides  of  March,  in  the  year  of  Christ  1497.  For  we 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV  725 

observed  how  long  [129®^]  the  moon  would  occult  the  bright  star  of  the  Hyades 
(which  the  Romans  call  Paliticium),  and  with  this  in  mind,  we  saw  the  star 
brought  into  contact  with  the  shadowy  part  of  the  lunar  body  and  already 
lying  hidden  between  the  horns  of  the  moon  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  hour  of  the 
night,  though  the  star  was  nearer  the  southern  horn  by  three  quarters  as  it  were 
of  the  width  or  diameter  of  the  moon.  And  since  according  to  the  tables  the 
star  was  at  2°52'  of  Gemini  with  a  southerly  latitude  of  53^°,  it  was  clear  that 
to  eyesight  the  centre  of  the  moon  was  half  a  diameter  to  the  west  of  the  star, 
and  accordingly  its  seen  position  was  2°36'  in  longitude  and  approximately  5°6' 
in  latitude. 

Accordingly  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Christ  there  have  been  1497 
Egyptian  years  76  days  23  hours  at  Bologna;  but  at  Cracow,  which  is  ap¬ 
proximately  8®  farther  east,  23  hours  36  minutes,  to  which  equal  time  adds  4 
minutes.  For  the  sun  was  at  283^°  of  Pisces  and  therefore  the  regular  movement 
of  the  moon  away  from  the  sun  was  74°,  the  regular  anomaly  was  the 

true  position  of  the  moon  was  at  3°24'  of  Gemini,  the  southerly  latitude  4°35', 
for  the  true  movement  of  latitude  was  203 °41'.  Moreover,  at  that  time  at 
Bologna,  26°  of  Scorpio  was  rising,  with  an  angle  of  573^°;  and  the  moon  was 
83°  from  the  vertex  of  the  horizon,  and  the  angle  of  section  between  the  circle 
of  altitude  and  the  ecliptic  was  approximately  29°,  the  parallax  of  the  moon  was 
1°51'  in  longitude  and  30'  in  latitude.  Those  things  agree  perfectly  with  the 
observations;  and  all  the  less  will  anyone  doubt  that  our  hypotheses  and  what 
results  from  them  are  correct. 

28.  On  the  Mean  Oppositions  and  Conjunctions  of 
THE  Sun  and  Moon 

The  method  of  investigating  the  conjunctions  and  oppositions  of  the  sun  and 
the  moon  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  so  far  concerning  their  movement. 
For  in  relation  to  that  approaching  time  at  which  we  think  this  or  that  con¬ 
junction  or  opposition  will  take  place,  we  shall  seek  the  regular  movement  of  the 
moon ;  and  if  we  find  that  the  regular  movement  has  already  completed  a  circle, 
we  understand  a  full  conjunction  at  the  semicircle.  [129^]  But  since  that  rarely 
presents  itself,  we  shall  have  to  observe  the  distance  between  the  sun  and  the 
moon;  and  when  we  have  divided  it  by  the  daily  movement  of  the  moon,  we 
shall  know  by  how  much  time  the  one  of  them  is  in  advance  of  the  other,  or  how 
far  off  in  the  future  the  conjunction  or  the  opposition  is.  Therefore  we  shall 
seek  out  the  movements  and  positions  for  this  time,  and  with  them  we  shall  set 
up  ratios  for  the  true  new  moons  and  full  moons;  and  we  shall  distinguish  the 
ecliptic  conjunctions  from  the  others,  as  we  shall  indicate  below.  When  we  have 
got  these  things  set  up,  it  will  be  possible  to  go  on  into  any  number  of  months 
and  continue  through  some  number  of  years  by  means  of  the  table  of  twelve 
months,  which  contains  the  time  and  the  regular  movements  of  the  anomaly  of 
the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  regular  movement  of  the  moon  in  latitude — 
joining  single  movements  to  the  single  movements  already  found.  But’ we  shall 
put  down  the  anomaly  of  the  sun  as  true,  so  as  to  have  it  as  corrected  im¬ 
mediately.  For  its  difference  is  not  perceptible  to  sense  in  one  or  more  years  on 
account  of  its  slowness  at  its  beginning,  z.e.,  at  its  highest  apsis. 


726  COPERNICUS 


Table  op  the  Conjunction  and  Opposition  of  Sun  and  Moon 


Months 

Days 

Divisions  of  Time 
Min. 

of  Sec.  Thirds 

ecr 

Movements  of 
Lunar  Anomaly 

Deg.  Min. 

Sec. 

Movement  in  Latitude 
of  the  Moon 

6(f  Deg.  Min.  Sec. 

1 

29 

Day 

31 

50 

8 

0 

25 

49 

0 

0 

30 

40 

13 

2 

59 

3 

40 

16 

0 

51 

38 

0 

1 

1 

20 

27 

3 

88 

35 

30 

24 

1 

17 

27 

0 

1 

32 

0 

41 

4 

118 

7 

20 

32 

1 

43 

16 

0 

2 

2 

40 

55 

5 

147 

39 

10 

40 

2 

9 

5 

0 

2 

33 

21 

9 

6 

177 

11 

0 

48 

2 

34 

34 

0 

3 

4 

1 

23 

7 

206 

42 

50 

57 

3 

0 

43 

0 

3 

34 

41 

36 

8 

236 

14 

41 

25 

3 

26 

32 

0 

4 

5 

21 

50 

9 

265 

46 

31 

13 

3 

52 

21 

0 

4 

36 

2 

4 

10 

295 

18 

21 

21 

4 

18 

10 

0 

5 

6 

42 

18 

11 

324 

50 

11 

29 

4 

4 

59 

0 

5 

37 

22 

32 

12 

354 

22 

1 

37 

5 

9 

48 

0 

0 

8 

2 

46 

The  Half  Month  Between  the  Full  and  New  Moon 
3^  I  14  45  55  4  I  3  12  54  30  I  3  15  20  6 

Movement  of  Solar  Anomaly 


CO 

o 

60^ 

o 

f 

// 

8 

o 

o 

r 

// 

1 

0 

29 

6 

18 

7 

3 

23 

44 

6 

2 

0 

58 

12 

36 

8 

3 

52 

50 

24 

3 

1 

27 

18 

54 

9 

4 

21 

56 

42 

4 

1 

56 

25 

12 

10 

4 

51 

3 

0 

5 

2 

25 

31 

30 

11 

5 

20 

9 

19 

6 

2 

54 

57 

48 

12 

5 

49 

15 

37 

The  Half  Month 

I  3^  I  0  14  33  9 

29.  On  the  Close  Examination  of  the  True  Conjunctions 
AND  Oppositions  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 

]130^]  Since  we  possess,  as  was  said,  the  time  of  mean  conjunction  or  opposi¬ 
tion  of  these  heavenly  bodies  together  with  their  movements,  then  the  true 
distance  between  them,  whereby  they  precede  or  follow  one  another,  will  be 
necessary  in  order  to  find  their  true  [conjunctions  and  oppositions].  For  if  the 
[true]  moon  is  prior  to  the  sun  in  [mean]  conjunction  or  opposition,  it  is  clear 
that  the  true  one  will  be  in  the  future;  but  if  the  sun,  then  it  is  already  past  the 
true  one  which  we  are  seeking.  This  is  made  clear  by  the  additosubtractions  in 
the  case  of  both  of  them,  since  if  there  were  no  additosubtractions,  or  if  they 
were  equal  and  of  the  same  quality,  viz.^  both  additive  or  both  subtractive,  it  is 
clear  that  at  the  same  moment  the  true  conjunctions  or  oppositions  and  the 
mean  ones  coincide.  But  if  they  are  unequal,  the  difference  indicates  what  their 
distance  is  and  that  the  star  to  which  the  additive  or  subtractive  difference  be- 


727 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 

• 

longs  precedes  or  follows.  But  when  they  are  in  different  parts  [of  their  circles] 
that  star  all  the  more  precedes  whose  additosubtraction  is  subtractive;  and  the 
adding  together  of  the  additosubtractions  shows  what  the  distance  between 
them  is.  In  connection  with  this  we  shall  decide  how  many  whole  hours  can  be 
traversed  by  the  moon — taking  two  hours  for  every  degree  of  distance. 

In  this  way,  if  there  were  about  6®  of  distance,  we  should  take  12  hours  as 
corresponding  to  them.  Therefore  we  shall  seek  the  true  movement  of  the  moon 
away  from  the  sun  for  the  interval  of  time  thus  set  up;  and  we  shall  do  that 
easily,  when  we  know  that  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon  is  1°1'  per  2  hours, 
but  that  the  true  hourly  movement  of  anomaly  around  the  full  moon  or  the  new 
moon  is  approximately  50'.  In  6  hours  that  makes  the  regular  movement  to  be 
3°3',  and  the  true  movement  of  anomaly  5°;  and  in  the  table  of  lunar  addito¬ 
subtractions  we  shall  note  the  difference  between  the  additosubtractions  and 
add  it  to  the  mean  movement — if  the  anomaly  is  in  the  lower  part  of  the  circle — 
and  subtract  it  if  the  anomaly  is  in  the  upper.  For  the  sum  or  the  remainder  is 
the  true  movement  of  the  moon  for  the  hours  taken.  Therefore  that  movement,  if 
equal  to  the  distance  first  existing,  is  sufficient.  Otherwise  the  distance  multi¬ 
plied  by  the  number  of  estimated  hours  should  be  divided  by  this  movement; 
or  else  we  shall  divide  the  true  simple  distance  by  the  hourly  movement  taken. 
[131®]  For  the  quotient  will  be  the  true  difference  in  time  in  hours  and  minutes 
between  the  mean  and  the  true  conjunction  or  opposition.  We  shall  add  this 
difference  to  the  mean  time  of  conjunction  or  opposition,  if  the  moon  is  west  of 
the  sun,  or  to  the  position  of  the  sun  diametrically  opposite:  or  we  shall  subtract, 
if  the  moon  is  eastward;  and  we  shall  have  the  time  of  true  conjunction  or  oppo¬ 
sition,  although  we  must  confess  that  the  anomaly  of  the  sun  too  adds  or  sub¬ 
tracts  something,  but  it  is  rightly  neglected,  as  in  the  whole  tract  and  at  greatest 
elongation — which  extends  beyond  7° — the  anomaly  cannot  fill  1';  and  the  meth¬ 
od  of  evaluating  the  lunar  movements  is  more  certain. 

For  those  who  rely  only  upon  the  hourly  movement  of  the  moon,  which  they 
call  the  hourly  excelling  movement,  make  mistakes  sometimes  and  are  forced 
rather  often  to  repeat  their  calculations.  For  the  moon  is  changeable  even  from 
hour  to  hour  and  does  not  stay  like  itself.  Accordingly,  for  the  time  of  true  con¬ 
junction  or  opposition,  we  shall  work  out  the  true  movement  in  latitude,  so  as 
to  learn  the  latitude  of  the  moon  and  work  out  the  true  position  of  the  sun  in 
relation  to  the  spring  equinox,  f.e.,  in  the  signs,  whereby  the  true  position  of  the 
moon  is  known  to  be  the  same  or  opposite  to  it.  And  since  time  is  here  under¬ 
stood  as  mean  and  equal  with  respect  to  the  Cracow  meridian,  we  shall  reduce 
it  to  apparent  time  by  the  method  described  above.  But  if  we  should  wish  to 
set  this  up  for  any  other  place  than  Cracow,  we  shall  note  its  longitude  and  take 
four  minutes  of  an  hour  for  each  degree  of  longitude  and  four  seconds  of  an  hour 
for  each  minute  of  longitude;  and  we  shall  add  them  to  the  Cracow  time,  if  the 
other  place  is  to  the  east,  and  subtract  them,  if  it  is  to  the  west.  And  the  sum 
or  the  remainder  will  be  the  time  of  conjunction  or  opposition  of  the  sun  and 
moon. 

30.  How  THE  Ecliptic  Conjunctions  and  Oppositions  of  the  Sun  and 
Moon  Are  Distinguished  from  the  Others 

In  the  case  of  the  moon  it  is  easily  discernible  whether  or  not  they  are  ecliptic ; 
since,  if  the  latitude  of  the  moon  is  less  than  half  the  diameters  of  the  moon  and 


728  COPERNICUS 

the  shadow,  it  will  undergo  an  eclipse,  but  if  greater,  it  will  not.  But  there  is 
more  than  enough  bother  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  as  the  parallax  of  each  of  them, 
by  which  for  the  most  part  the  visible  conjunction  differs  from  the  true,  is  mixed 
up  in  it.  Accordingly  when  we  have  examined  [131^]  what  the  parallax  in  longi¬ 
tude  between  the  sun  and  moon  is  at  the  time  of  true  conjunction,  similarly  we 
shall  look  for  the  apparent  [angular]  elongation  of  the  moon  from  the  sun  at  the 
interval  of  an  hour  before  the  true  conjunction  in  the  eastern  quarter  of  the 
ecliptic  or  after  the  true  conjunction  in  the  western  quarter,  in  order  to  under¬ 
stand  how  far  the  moon  seems  to  move  away  from  the  sun  in  one  hour.  There¬ 
fore  when  we  have  divided  the  parallax  by  this  hourly  movement,  we  shall  have 
the  difference  in  time  between  the  true  and  the  seen  conjunction.  When  that  is 
subtracted  from  the  time  of  the  true  conjunction  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic  or  added  in  the  western — for  in  the  eastern  part  the  seen  conjunction  pre¬ 
cedes  the  true,  and  in  the  western  it  follows  it — the  result  will  be  the  time  of 
seen  conjunction  which  we  were  looking  for.  Therefore  we  shall  reckon  the  seen 
latitude  of  the  moon  in  relation  to  the  sun  for  this  time,  or  the  distance  between 
the  centres  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  at  the  seen  conjunction,  after  deducting  the 
parallax  of  the  sun.  If  this  latitude  is  greater  than  half  the  diameters  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  the  sun  will  not  undergo  an  eclipse;  but  if  smaller,  it  will.  From  this  it 
is  clear  that  if  the  moon  at  the  time  of  true  conjunction  does  not  have  any  paral¬ 
lax  in  longitude,  the  seen  and  the  true  conjunction  will  be  the  same,  and  the 
conjunction  will  take  place  at  90°  of  the  ecliptic  as  measured  from  the  east  or 
the  west. 

31.  How  Great  an  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  or  Moon  Will  Be 

Therefore,  after  we  have  learned  that  the  sun  or  moon  will  undergo  an 
eclipse,  we  shall  easily  come  to  know  how  great  the  eclipse  will  be — in  the 
case  of  the  sun  by  means  of  the  seen  latitude  between  the  sun  and  moon  at 
the  time  of  seen  conjunction.  For  if  we  subtract  the  latitude  from  half  the 
diameters  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  remainder  is  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  as 
measured  along  its  diameter;  and  when  we  have  multiplied  that  by  twelve 
and  divided  the  product  by  the  diameter  of  the  sun,  we  shall  have  the  number 
of  twelfths  of  the  eclipse  of  the  sun.  But  if  there  is  no  latitude  between  the 
sun  and  the  moon,  there  will  be  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  as  much  of  it  as 
the  moon  can  cover. 

Approximately  the  same  method  [is  used]  in  the  case  of  a  lunar  eclipse, 
except  that  instead  of  the  seen  latitude  we  employ  the  simple  latitude.  When 
the  latitude  is  subtracted  from  half  the  diameters  of  the  moon  and  shadow, 
the  remainder  is  the  part  of  [132^]  the  moon  eclipsed,  provided  the  latitude 
of  the  moon  is  not  less  than  half  the  diameters  of  the  moon  and  shadow,  as 
taken  along  the  diameter  of  the  moon.  For  then  there  will  be  a  total  eclipse. 
And  furthermore  the  lesser  latitude  even  adds  some  delay  in  the  darkness; 
and  the  delay  will  be  greatest  when  there  is  no  latitude — as  I  think  is  per¬ 
fectly  clear  to  those  who  consider  it.  Accordingly,  in  the  case  of  a  particular 
eclipse  of  the  moon,  when  we  have  multiplied  the  eclipsed  part  by  twelve  and 
divided  the  product  by  the  diameter  of  the  moon,  we  shall  have  the  number 
of  twelfths  of  the  eclipse — just  as  in  the  case  of  the  sun. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  TV 


729 


32.  How  TO  Know  Beforehand  How  Long  an  Eclipse  Will  Last 


It  remains  to  see  how  long  an  eclipse  will  last.  It  should  be  noted  that  we 
use  the  arcs  which  occur  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  shadow  as  straight 
lines;  for  they  are  so  small  that  they  do  not  seem  to  be  different  from  straight 
lines. 

Accordingly  let  us  take  point  A  as  the  centre  of  the  sun  or  of  the  shadow, 
and  line  BC  as  the  passage  of  the  orb  of  the  moon.  And 
let  B  be  the  centre  of  the  moon  touching  the  sun  or 
shadow  at  the  beginning  of  incidence  and  C  at  the  end 
of  its  transit.  Let  AB  and  BC  be  joined,  and  let  fall  AD 
perpendicular  to  BC, 

It  is  clear  that  when  the  centre  of  the  moon  is  at  D, 
it  will  be  the  middle  of  the  eclipse.  For  A Z)  is  the  short¬ 
est  of  the  lines  falling  from  A,  and 
BD=DC, 

since 


AB  =  AC, 

and  AB  or  AC  is  equal  to  half  the  sum  of  the  diameters  of  the  sun  and  the 
moon  in  a  solar  eclipse  and  to  that  of  the  diameters  of  the  moon  and  shadow 
in  a  lunar  eclipse;  and  AD  is  the  true  latitude  of  the  moon  or  the  seen  latitude 
at  the  middle  of  the  eclipse.  Accordingly,  when  we  have  subtracted  the  square 
on  AD  from  the  square  on  AB^  the  remainder  is  the  square  on  BD.  Therefore 
BD  will  be  given  in  length.  When  we  have  divided  it  by  the  true  hourly  move¬ 
ment  of  the  moon  during  the  eclipse  of  the  moon,  or  by  the  visible  movement 
in  the  case  of  a  solar  eclipse,  we  shall  have  the  time  of  half  the  duration.  But 
the  moon  very  often  delays  in  the  middle  of  the  darkness — that  happens  when 
half  the  sum  of  the  diameters  of  the  moon  and  the  shadow  exceeds  the  latitude 
of  the  moon  by  more  than  the  moon^s  diameter,  as  we  said.  Accordingly  when 
we  have  placed  E  the  centre  of  the  moon  at  the  starting-point  of  the  total 
[132^]  obscuration,  when  the  moon  touches  the  concave  circumference  of  the 
shadow,  and  F  at  the  other  point  of  contact,  when  the  moon  first  emerges, 
and  have  joined  AE  and  AF,  it  will  be  made  clear  in  the  same  way  as  before 
that  ED  and  DF  are  the  halves  of  the  delay  in  darkness,  because  AD  is  the 
known  latitude  of  the  moon,  and  AE  or  AF  is  that  whereby  the  half  of  the 
diameter  of  the  shadow  is  greater  than  half  the  diameter  of  the  moon.  There¬ 
fore  DE  or  DF  will  be  established;  and  once  more  when  we  have  divided  it 
by  the  true  hourly  movement  of  the  moon,  we  shall  have  the  time  of  half  the 
delay,  which  we  were  looking  for. 

Nevertheless  we  must  notice  here  that  since  the  moon  moves  in  its  own 
orbital  circle,  it  does  not,  by  the  mediation  of  the  circles  passing  through  the 
poles  of  the  ecliptic,  cut  arcs  of  longitude  on  the  ecliptic  wholly  equal  to  the 
arcs  in  its  own  orbital  circle.  But  the  difference  is  very  slight,  so  that  at  the 
total  distance  of  12°  from  the  ecliptic  section,  which  is  approximately  the 
farthest  limit  of  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  arcs  of  the  circles  do  not 
differ  from  one  another  by  2',  which  makes  hour;  on  that  account  we  often 
use  one  instead  of  the  other  as  if  they  were  the  same.  So  too  we  use  the  same 
latitude  of  the  moon  at  the  limits  of  the  eclipses  as  at  the  middle  of  the  eclipse, 
although  the  latitude  of  the  moon  is  always  increasing  or  decreasing,  and  on 


730 


COPERNICUS 


that  account  the  intervals  of  incidence  and  withdrawal  are  not  wholly  equal, 
but  the  difference  is  so  slight  that  it  seems  a  waste  of  time  to  examine  them 
more  closely.  In  this  way  the  times,  durations,  and  magnitudes  of  eclipses 
have  been  unfolded  with  respect  to  the  diameters. 

But  since  it  is  the  opinion  of  many  persons  that  the  parts  eclipsed  should  be 
distinguished  not  with  respect  to 
the  diameters  but  with  respect  to 
the  surfaces,  for  it  is  not  lines  but 
surfaces  which  are  eclipsed:  ac¬ 
cordingly  let  ABCD  be  the  circle 
of  the  sun  or  of  the  shadow,  and 
let  E  be  its  centre.  Let  AFCG  be 
the  lunar  circle,  and  let  I  be  its 
centre.  Let  the  circles  cut  one  an¬ 
other  in  points  A  and  (7,  let  the 
straight  line  BE  IF  be  drawn 
through  the  centres  of  both,  and 
let  AE,  ECy  lAy  IC  he  joined  and 
line  AKC  right  angles  to  BF. 

By  means  of  this  we  wish  to  ex¬ 
amine  how  great  ADCG  the  surface 
obscured  is,  or  how  many  twelfths 
of  the  whole  surface  of  the  orb  of  the  moon  or  sun  belong  to  the  part  eclipsed. 
Accordingly  since  the  semidiameters  AE  and  A I  of  each  circle  are  given  by 
the  above,  and  also  El  the  distance  between  their  centres  or  the  lunar  latitude, 
we  shall  have  [133^]  triangle  AEI  with  its  sides  given;  and  for  that  reason  with 
its  angles  given  by  the  demonstrations  above;  and  angle  AEI  is  similar  and 
equal  to  angle  EIC.  Accordingly 

arcs  ADC  and  AGC  will  be  given, 

where  the  circumference  =  360°. 

Furthermore,  in  the  measurement  of  the  circle  Archimedes  of  Syracuse  records 
that 


B 


circumference  :  diameter  <  3J^  :  1 


but 


circumference  :  diameter  >  3i%i  :  1. 
Ptolemy  assumed  as  a  mean  between  these 

3p8'30"  :  IP. 

By  means  of  this  ratio 

arcs  AGC  and  ADG  will  be  given, 
in  terms  of  the  same  parts  as  the  semidiameters  AE  and  AL 
And 

quad.  EA,  AZ)  =  sector  AEC, 


and 


quad.  I  Ay  AG  =  sector  AIC. 

But  in  the  isosceles  triangles  AEC  and  AIC  the  common  base  AKC  and  the  per¬ 
pendiculars  EK  and  K1  are  given.  And  accordingly  the  quadrilateral  AKy  KE  is 
given,  which  is  the  area  of  triangle  AEC — and  similarly  the  quadrilateral  AKy 
KI  is  the  area  of  triangle  AC  I.  Accordingly 


731 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  IV 


sect.  AFCK  —  irgl,  A/C  =  seg.  circ.  AFC 

and 

sect.  ABCK—irgl.  Aj&C  =  seg.  circ.  ABC 

and  hence, 

figure  ADCG  is  given, 

which  was  sought. 

And  moreover,  the  total  area  of  the  circle — which  is  comprehended  by  BE  and 
BAD  in  a  solar  eclipse  or  by  FI  and  FAG  in  a  lunar  eclipse — was  given.  Accord¬ 
ingly  it  will  be  manifest  how  many  twelfths  of  the  total  circle  of  the  sun  or  moon 
was  eclipsed  in  ADCG.  Let  all  this — which  has  been  treated  in  more  detail  by 
others — be  enough  now  concerning  the  moon:  for  we  are  in  a  hurry  to  get  to  the 
revolutions  of  the  remaining  five  planets,  which  will  be  spoken  of  in  the  books 
following. 


BOOK  FIVE 


[133^]  Up  to  now  we  have  been  explaining  to  the  best  of  our  ability  the  revo¬ 
lutions  of  the  Earth  around  the  sun  and  of  the  moon  around  the  Earth.  Now  we 
are  turning  to  the  movements  of  the  five  wandering  stars;  the  mobility  of  the 
Earth  binds  together  the  order  and  magnitude  of  their  orbital  circles  in  a  won¬ 
derful  harmony  and  sure  commensurability,  as  we  said  in  our  brief  survey  in 
the  first  book,  when  we  showed  that  the  orbital  circles  do  not  have  their  centres 
around  the  Earth  but  rather  around  the  sun.  Accordingly  it  remains  for  us  to 
demonstrate  all  these  things  singly  and  with  greater  clarity;  and  let  us  fulfil  our 
promises  adequately,  in  so  far  as  we  can,  particularly  by  measuring  the  appear¬ 
ances  by  the  experiments  which  we  have  got  from  the  ancients  or  from  our  own 
times,  in  order  that  the  ratio  of  the  movements  may  be  held  with  greater  cer¬ 
tainty.  Now  in  Plato's  Timaeus  each  of  thse  five  stars  is  named  in  accordance 
with  its  visible  aspect:  Saturn,  Phaenon — as  if  to  say  “shining”  or  “appearing,” 
for  Saturn  is  hidden  less  than  the  others,  and  emerges  more  quickly  after  under¬ 
going  occultation  by  the  sun;  Jupiter,  Phaeton  from  his  radiance;  Mars,  Pyrois 
from  his  fiery  glow;  Venus  sometimes  0coo-06pos  and  sometimes  eoTrepos,  i.e.y 
Lucifer  and  Vesperugo,  according  as  she  shines  at  morning  or  evening;  and 
finally  Mercury,  Stilbon  from  his  sparkling  and  twinkling  light.  Moreover  the 
planets  have  greater  irregularities  in  longitude  and  in  latitude  than  the  moon. 

1.  On  Their  Revolutions  and  Mean  Movements 

Two  longitudinal  movements  which  are  quite  different  appear  in  the  planets. 
One  of  them  is  on  account  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth,  as  we  said;  and  the 
other  is  proper  to  each  planet.  We  may  rightly  call  the  first  the  movement  of 
parallax,  since  it  is  the  one  which  makes  the  planets  appear  to  have  stoppings, 
progressions,  and  retrogradations — [134®]  not  that  the  planet  which  always  pro¬ 
gresses  by  its  own  movement,  is  pulled  in  different  directions,  but  that  it  ap¬ 
pears  to  do  so  by  reason  of  the  parallax  caused  by  the  movement  of  the  Earth 
taken  in  relation  to  the  differing  magnitudes  of  their  orbital  circles. 

Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  the  true  position  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  be¬ 
come  visible  to  us  only  at  the  time  when  they  are  in  opposition  to  the  sun;  and 
that  occurs  approximately  in  the  middle  of  their  retrogradations.  For  at  that 
time  they  fall  on  a  straight  line  with  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  and  lay  aside 
their  parallax. 

Furthermore  there  is  a  different  ratio  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury:  for 
they  are  hidden  at  the  time  they  are  in  conjunction  with  the  sun,  and  they  show 
only  the  digressions  which  they  make  on  either  side  away  from  the  sun:  hence 
they  are  never  found  without  parallax. 

Therefore  the  revolution  of  parallax — I  mean  the  movement  of  the  Earth  with 
respect  to  the  planet — is  private  to  each  planet;  and  the  planet  and  the  Earth 
are  mutually  explanatory  of  it.  For  we  say  that  the  movement  of  parallax  is 

732 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  733 

nothing  except  that  wherein  the  regular  movement  of  the  Earth  exceeds  their 
movement,  as  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  or  is  exceeded  by  it,  as 
in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury.  But  since  such  periods  of  parallax  are  found 
unequal  by  a  manifest  difference,  the  ancients  recognized  that  the  movements 
of  these  planets  too  were  irregular  and  had  apsides  of  circles  to  which  their  ir¬ 
regularity  returned,  and  the  ancients  supposed  that  these  apsides  had  perpetual 
seats  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  By  that  argument  the  road  is  opened  for 
learning  their  mean  movements  and  equal  periods.  For  when  the  ancients  had 
recorded  in  memory  the  position  of  some  planet  with  respect  to  its  exact  distance 
from  the  sun  and  a  fixed  star,  and  after  an  interval  of  time  found  that  it  had  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  same  position  with  an  equal  distance  from  the  sun;  the  planet  was 
seen  to  have  completed  its  whole  movement  of  irregularity  and  to  have  returned 
through  all  to  its  former  relationship  with  the  Earth.  And  so  by  means  of  the 
time  which  intervened  they  calculated  the  number  of  whole  and  equal  revolu¬ 
tions  and  from  them  the  particular  movements  of  the  planet.  Ptolemy  surveyed 
the  circuits  through  a  number  of  years,  according  as,  he  acknowledged,  he  got 
them  from  Hipparchus.  Now  he  means  solar  years  to  be  understood  as  the  years 
measured  from  an  equinox  or  solstice.  But  it  has  already  been  made  clear  that 
such  years  are  not  quite  equal;  on  that  account  we  shall  use  years  measured 
from  the  fixed  stars,  and  by  means  of  them  the  movements  of  these  five  planets 
have  been  reconstituted  more  correctly  by  us,  according  as  in  our  time  [134*"] 
we  found  there  was  some  deficiency  in  them  or  excess,  as  follows. 

For  the  Earth  has  57  revolutions  in  respect  to  Saturn — we  call  this  the  move¬ 
ment  of  parallax — in  59  of  our  solar  years  1  day  6  minutes  of  a  day  48  seconds 
approximately:  during  this  time  the  planet  has  by  its  own  movement  completed 
two  circuits  plus  1®6'6". 

Jupiter  is  outrun  by  the  Earth  65  times  in  71  solar  years  minus  5  days  45 
minutes  27  seconds:  during  this  time  the  planet  by  its  own  movement  has  6 
revolutions  minus  5°41'23^". 

Mars  has  37  revolutions  of  parallax  in  79  solar  years  2  days  27  minutes  3 
seconds:  during  this  time  the  planet  by  its  own  movement  completes  42  periods 
plus  2°24'56". 

Venus  outruns  the  movement  of  the  Earth  5  times  in  8  solar  years  minus  2 
days  26  minutes  46  seconds.  And  during  this  time  it  has  13  revolutions  minus 
2°24'40"  around  the  sun. 

Finally,  Mercury  completes  145  periods  of  parallax,  by  which  it  outruns  the 
movement  of  the  Earth,  in  46  solar  years  plus  34  minutes  of  a  day  23  seconds. 
And  it  has  191  revolutions  around  the  sun  in  that  time  plus  34  minutes  of  a  day 
23  seconds  approximately. 

Accordingly  the  single  circuits  of  parallax  are  as  follows:  for  the  single  planets: 
Saturn:  378  days  5  min.  32  sec.  11  thirds 

Jupiter:  398  days  23  min.  25  sec.  56  thirds 

Mars:  779  days  56  min.  19  sec.  7  thirds 

Venus:  583  days  45  min.  17  sec.  24  thirds 

Mercury:  115  days  52  min.  42  sec.  12  thirds 

When  we  have  reduced  these  circuits  to  the  degrees  of  a  circle  and  multiplied 
by  the  ratio  of  365  to  the  number  of  days  and  minutes,  we  shall  have  as  the 
annual  movements  [of  parallax]: 


734  COPERNICUS 

347°  32'  2"  54"'  12"" 

329°  25'  8"  15'"  6"" 

168°  28'  29"  13'"  12"" 

225°  1' 48"  54'"  30"" 

Mercury:  3(360°)+  53°  56'  46"  54'"  40"" 

[135®]  The  three-hundred-sixty-fifth  part  of  these  is  the  daily  movement: 


Saturn: 

Jupiter: 

Mars: 

Venus: 


Saturn: 

57'  7"  44'" 

Jupiter: 

54'  9"  3'"  49"" 

Mars: 

27' 41"  40'"  8"" 

Venus: 

36'  49"  28'"  35"" 

Mercury:  3° 

6'  24"  7'"  43"" 

according  as  they  are  set  out  in  the  following  tables,  like  the  mean  movement  of 
the  sun  and  moon. 

But  we  thought  it  unnecessary  to  set  down  their  proper  movements  in  this 
way.  For  the  proper  movements  are  determined  by  the  subtraction  of  the  move¬ 
ments  of  parallax  from  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun,  as  the  proper  movement 
of  the  planet  and  the  mean  movement  of  parallax  compose  the  mean  movement 
of  the  sun.  For  the  proper  annual  movements  in  relation  to  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  are  as  follows  for  the  upper  planets: 


Saturn:  12°  12'  46"  12'"  52"" 

Jupiter:  30°  19'  40"  51"'  58"" 

Mars:  191°  16'  19"  53'"  52"" 

But  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  since  their  proper  movements  are  not 
apparent  to  us^  the  movement  of  the  sun  itself  is  used  by  us  instead;  and  it 
furnishes  a  way  of  investigating  and  demonstrating  their  apparent  movements, 
in  the  following  tables. 


‘The  proper  movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  not  apparent  to  us  in  that  their  positions 
are  never  viewed  without  parallax. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  735 


Saturn's  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60» 

o 

M  ovement 
/ 

ff 

nr 

Egyptian 

Years 

60° 

o 

Movement 

r 

tt 

/// 

1 

5 

47 

32 

3 

9 

31 

5 

33 

33 

37 

59 

2 

5 

35 

4 

6 

19 

32 

5 

11 

5 

41 

9 

3 

5 

22 

36 

9 

29 

33 

5 

8 

37 

44 

19 

4 

5 

10 

8 

12 

38 

34 

4 

56 

9 

47 

28 

5 

4 

57 

40 

15 

48 

35 

4 

43 

41 

50 

38 

6 

4 

45 

12 

18 

58 

36 

4 

31 

13 

53 

48 

7 

4 

32 

44 

22 

7 

37 

4 

18 

45 

56 

57 

8 

4 

20 

16 

25 

17 

38 

4 

6 

18 

0 

7 

9 

4 

7 

48 

28 

27 

39 

3 

53 

50 

3 

17 

10 

3 

55 

20 

31 

36 

40 

3 

41 

22 

6 

26 

11 

3 

42 

52 

34 

46 

41 

3 

18 

54 

9 

36 

12 

3 

30 

24 

37 

56 

42 

3 

16 

26 

12 

46 

13 

3 

17 

56 

41 

5 

43 

3 

3 

58 

15 

55 

14 

3 

5 

28 

44 

15 

44 

2 

51 

30 

19 

5 

15 

2 

53 

0 

47 

25 

45 

2 

39 

2 

22 

15 

16 

2 

40 

32 

50 

34 

46 

2 

26 

34 

25 

24 

17 

2 

28 

4 

53 

44 

47 

2 

14 

6 

28 

34 

18 

2 

15 

36 

56 

54 

48 

2 

1 

38 

31 

44 

19 

2 

3 

9 

0 

3 

49 

1 

49 

10 

34 

53 

20 

1 

50 

41 

3 

13 

50 

1 

36 

42 

38 

3 

21 

1 

38 

13 

6 

23 

51 

1 

24 

14 

41 

13 

22 

1 

25 

45 

9 

32 

52 

1 

11 

46 

44 

22 

23 

1 

13 

17 

12 

42 

53 

0 

59 

18 

47 

32 

24 

1 

0 

49 

15 

52 

54 

0 

46 

50 

50 

42 

25 

0 

48 

21 

19 

1 

55 

0 

34 

22 

43 

51 

26 

0 

35 

53 

22 

11 

56 

0 

21 

54 

57 

1 

27 

0 

23 

25 

25 

21 

57 

0 

9 

27 

0 

11 

28 

0 

10 

57 

28 

30 

58 

5 

56 

59 

3 

20 

29 

5 

58 

29 

31 

40 

59 

5 

44 

31 

6 

30 

30 

5 

46 

1 

34 

50 

60 

5 

32 

3 

9 

40 

Saturn's  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60° 

o 

r 

// 

/// 

0 

O 

CD 

o 

/ 

tt 

ttt 

1 

0 

0 

57 

7 

44 

31 

0 

29 

30 

59 

46 

2 

0 

1 

54 

15 

28 

32 

0 

30 

28 

7. 

30 

3 

0 

2 

51 

23 

12 

33 

0 

31 

25 

15 

14 

4 

0 

3 

48 

30 

56 

34 

0 

32 

22 

22 

58 

5 

0 

4 

45 

38 

40 

35 

0 

33 

19 

30 

42 

6 

0 

5 

42 

46 

24 

36 

0 

34 

16 

38 

26 

7 

0 

6 

39 

54 

8 

37 

0 

35 

13 

46 

1 

8 

0 

7 

37 

1 

52 

38 

0 

36 

10 

53 

55 

9 

0 

8 

34 

9 

36 

39 

0 

37 

8 

1 

39 

10 

0 

9 

31 

17 

20 

40 

0 

38 

5 

9 

23 

11 

0 

10 

28 

25 

4 

41 

0 

39 

2 

17 

7 

12 

0 

11 

25 

32 

49 

42 

0 

39 

59 

24 

51 

13 

0 

12 

22 

40 

33 

43 

0 

40 

56 

32 

35 

14 

0 

13 

13 

48 

17 

44 

0 

41 

53 

40 

19 

15 

0 

14 

16 

56 

1 

45 

0 

42 

50 

48 

3 

16 

0 

15 

14 

3 

45 

46 

0 

43 

47 

55 

47 

17 

0 

16 

11 

11 

29 

47 

0 

44 

45 

3 

31 

18 

0 

17 

8 

19 

13 

48 

0 

45 

42 

11 

16 

19 

0 

18 

5 

26 

57 

49 

0 

46 

39 

19 

0 

20 

0 

19 

2 

34 

41 

50 

0 

47 

36 

26 

44 

21 

0 

19 

59 

42 

25 

51 

0 

48 

33 

34 

28 

22 

0 

20 

56 

50 

9 

52 

0 

49 

30 

42 

12 

23 

0 

21 

53 

57 

53 

53 

0 

50 

27 

49 

56 

24 

0 

22 

51 

5 

38 

54 

0 

51 

24 

57 

40 

25 

0 

23 

48 

13 

22 

55 

0 

52 

22 

5 

24 

26 

0 

24 

45 

21 

6 

56 

0 

53 

19 

13 

8 

27 

0 

25 

42 

28 

50 

57 

0 

54 

16 

20 

52 

28 

0 

26 

39 

36 

34 

58 

0 

55 

13 

28 

36 

29 

0 

27 

36 

44 

18 

59 

0 

56 

10 

36 

20 

30 

0 

28 

33 

52 

2 

60 

0 

57 

7 

44 

5 

736 


COPERNICUS 


JupiTER^s  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Movement 

Egyptian 

M  ovement 

Years 

60° 

o 

/ 

/// 

Years 

60° 

o 

/ 

ft 

/// 

1 

5 

29 

25 

8 

15 

31 

2 

11 

59 

15 

48 

2 

4 

58 

50 

16 

30 

32 

1 

41 

24 

24 

3 

3 

4 

28 

15 

24 

45 

33 

1 

10 

49 

32 

18 

4 

3 

57 

40 

33 

0 

34 

0 

40 

14 

40 

33 

6 

3 

27 

5 

41 

15 

35 

0 

9 

39 

48 

48 

6 

2 

56 

30 

49 

30 

36 

5 

39 

4 

57 

8 

7 

2 

25 

55 

57 

45 

37 

5 

8 

30 

5 

18 

8 

1 

55 

21 

6 

0 

38 

4 

37 

55 

13 

33 

9 

1 

24 

46 

14 

15 

39 

4 

7 

20 

21 

48 

10 

0 

54 

11 

22 

31 

40 

3 

36 

45 

30 

4 

11 

0 

23 

36 

30 

46 

41 

3 

6 

10 

38 

19 

12 

5 

53 

1 

39 

1 

42 

2 

35 

35 

46 

34 

13 

5 

22 

25 

47 

16 

43 

2 

5 

0 

54 

49 

14 

4 

51 

51 

55 

31 

44 

1 

34 

26 

3 

4 

15 

4 

21 

17 

3 

46 

45 

1 

3 

51 

11 

19 

16 

3 

50 

42 

12 

1 

46 

0 

33 

16 

19 

34 

17 

3 

20 

7 

20 

16 

47 

0 

2 

41 

27 

49 

18 

2 

49 

32 

28 

31 

48 

5 

32 

6 

36 

4 

19 

2 

18 

57 

35 

46 

49 

5 

1 

31 

44 

19 

20 

1 

48 

22 

45 

2 

50 

4 

30 

56 

52 

34 

21 

1 

17 

47 

58 

17 

51 

4 

0 

22 

0 

50 

22 

0 

47 

13 

1 

32 

52 

3 

29 

47 

9 

5 

23 

0 

16 

38 

9 

47 

53 

2 

59 

12 

17 

20 

24 

5 

45 

3 

18 

2 

54 

2 

28 

37 

25 

33 

25 

5 

15 

28 

26 

17 

55 

1 

58 

2 

33 

50 

26 

4 

44 

53 

34 

32 

56 

1 

27 

27 

42 

5 

27 

4 

14 

18 

42 

47 

57 

0 

56 

52 

50 

20 

28 

3 

43 

43 

51 

2 

58 

0 

26 

17 

58 

35 

29 

3 

13 

8 

59 

17 

59 

5 

55 

43 

6 

50 

30 

2 

42 

34 

7 

33 

60 

5 

25 

8 

15 

6 

Jupiter’s 

Movement  of  Parallax  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 

Days 

Movement 

Days 

Movement 

60° 

o 

/ 

n 

/// 

60° 

o 

/ 

/// 

1 

0 

0 

54 

9 

3 

31 

0 

27 

58 

40 

58 

2 

0 

1 

49 

18 

7 

32 

0 

28 

52 

50 

2 

3 

0 

2 

42 

27 

11 

33 

0 

29 

46 

59 

5 

4 

0 

3 

36 

36 

15 

34 

0 

30 

41 

8 

9 

5 

0 

4 

30 

45 

19 

35 

0 

31 

35 

17 

13 

6 

0 

5 

24 

54 

22 

36 

0 

32 

29 

26 

17 

7 

0 

6 

19 

3 

26 

37 

0 

33 

23 

35 

21 

8 

0 

7 

13 

12 

30 

38 

0 

34 

17 

44 

25 

9 

0 

8 

7 

21 

34 

39 

0 

35 

11 

53 

29 

10 

0 

9 

1 

30 

38 

40 

0 

36 

6 

2 

32 

11 

0 

9 

55 

39 

41 

41 

0 

37 

0 

11 

36 

12 

0 

10 

49 

48 

45 

42 

0 

37 

54 

20 

40 

13 

0 

11 

43 

57 

49 

43 

0 

38 

48 

29 

44 

14 

0 

12 

38 

6 

53 

44 

0 

39 

42 

38 

47 

15 

0 

13 

32 

15 

57 

45 

0 

40 

36 

47 

51 

16 

0 

14 

26 

25 

1 

46 

0 

41 

30 

56 

55 

17 

0 

15 

20 

34 

4 

47 

0 

42 

25 

5 

59 

18 

0 

16 

14 

43  ‘ 

8 

48 

0 

43 

19 

15 

3 

19 

0 

17 

8 

52 

12 

49 

0 

44 

13 

24 

6 

20 

0 

18 

3 

1 

16 

50 

0 

45 

7 

33 

10 

21 

0 

18 

57 

10 

20 

51 

0 

46 

1 

42 

14 

22 

0 

19 

51 

19 

23 

52 

0 

46 

55 

51 

18 

23 

0 

20 

45 

28 

27 

53 

0 

47 

50 

0 

22 

24 

0 

21 

39 

37 

31 

54 

0 

48 

44 

9 

26 

25 

0 

22 

33 

46 

35 

55 

0 

49 

38 

18 

29 

26 

0 

23 

27 

55 

39 

56 

0 

50 

32 

27 

33 

27 

0 

24 

22 

4 

43 

57 

0 

51 

26 

36 

37 

28 

0 

25 

16 

13 

46 

58 

0 

52 

20 

45 

41 

29 

0 

26 

10 

22 

50 

59 

0 

53 

14 

54 

45 

30 

0 

27 

4 

31 

54 

60 

0 

54 

9 

3 

49 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEA\T:NLY  SPHERES,  V  737 


Mars^  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Yk\rs 


Egyptian 

Years 

60* 

o 

^^OTement 

/ 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60* 

o 

yiorement 

/ 

m 

/// 

1 

2 

48 

28 

30 

36 

31 

3 

2 

43 

48 

38 

2 

5 

36 

57 

1 

12 

32 

5 

51 

12 

19 

14 

3 

2 

25 

25 

31 

48 

33 

2 

39 

40 

49 

50 

4 

5 

13 

54 

2 

24 

34 

5 

28 

9 

20 

26 

5 

2 

2 

22 

33 

0 

35 

2 

16 

37 

51 

2 

6 

4 

50 

51 

3 

36 

36 

5 

5 

6 

21 

38 

7 

1 

39 

19 

34 

12 

37 

1 

53 

34 

52 

14 

8 

4 

27 

48 

4 

48 

38 

4 

42 

3 

99 

50 

9 

1 

16 

16 

35 

24 

39 

1 

30 

31 

53 

26 

10 

4 

4 

45 

6 

0 

40 

4 

19 

0 

24 

2 

11 

0 

53 

13 

36 

36 

41 

1 

7 

28 

54 

38 

12 

3 

41 

42 

7 

12 

42 

3 

55 

57 

25 

14 

13 

0 

30 

10 

37 

46 

43 

0 

44 

25 

55 

50 

14 

3 

18 

39 

8 

24 

44 

3 

32 

54 

26 

26 

15 

0 

7 

7 

39 

1 

45 

0 

21 

22 

57 

3 

16 

2 

55 

36 

9 

37 

46 

3 

9 

51 

97 

39 

17 

5 

44 

4 

40 

13 

47 

5 

58 

19 

58 

15 

18 

2 

32 

33 

10 

49 

48 

2 

46 

48 

28 

51 

19 

5 

21 

1 

41 

25 

49 

5 

35 

16 

59 

27 

20 

2 

9 

30 

12 

1 

50 

2 

23 

45 

30 

3 

21 

4 

57 

58 

42 

37 

51 

5 

12 

14 

0 

39 

22 

1 

46 

27 

13 

13 

52 

2 

0 

42 

31 

15 

23 

4 

34 

55 

43 

49 

53 

4 

49 

11 

1 

51 

24 

1 

23 

24 

14 

25 

54 

1 

37 

39 

32 

27 

25 

4 

11 

52 

45 

1 

55 

4 

26 

8 

3 

3 

26  1 

;  1 

0 

21 

15 

37 

56 

1 

14 

36 

33 

39 

27 

3 

48 

49 

46 

13 

57 

4 

3 

5 

4 

15 

28 

0 

37 

18 

16 

49 

58 

0 

51 

33 

34 

51 

29 

3 

25 

46 

47 

25 

59 

3 

40 

2 

5 

27 

30 

0 

14 

15 

18 

2 

60 

0 

28 

30 

36 

4 

^L\rs’  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

1 

60* 

0 

Movement 

t 

m 

/// 

Days 

60* 

0 

Movement 

m 

/// 

1 

0 

0 

27 

41 

40 

31 

0 

14 

18 

31 

51 

2 

0 

0 

55 

23 

20 

32 

0 

14 

46 

13 

31 

3 

0 

1 

23 

5 

1 

33 

0 

15 

14 

55 

12 

4 

0 

1 

50 

46 

41 

34 

0 

15 

41 

36 

52 

5 

0 

2 

18 

28 

21 

35 

0 

16 

9 

18 

32 

6 

0 

2 

46 

10 

2 

36 

0 

16 

37 

0 

13 

7 

0 

3 

13 

51 

42 

37 

0 

17 

4 

41 

53 

8 

0 

3 

41 

33 

22 

38 

0 

17 

32 

23 

33 

9 

0 

4 

9 

15 

3 

39 

0 

18 

0 

5 

14 

10 

0 

4 

36 

35 

43 

40 

0 

18 

27 

46 

54 

11 

0 

5 

4 

38 

24 

41 

0 

18 

55 

28 

35 

12 

0 

5 

32 

20 

4 

42 

0 

19 

23 

10 

15 

13 

0 

6 

0 

1 

44 

43 

0 

19 

50 

51 

55 

14 

0 

6 

27 

43 

25 

44 

0 

20 

18 

33 

36 

15 

0 

6 

55 

25 

5 

45 

0 

20 

46 

15 

16 

16 

0 

7 

23 

6 

45 

46 

0 

21 

13 

56 

56 

17 

0 

7 

50 

48 

26 

47 

0 

21 

41 

38 

37 

18 

0 

8 

18 

30 

6 

48 

0 

22 

9 

20 

17 

19 

0 

8 

46 

11 

47 

49 

0 

22 

37 

1 

57 

20 

0 

9 

13 

53 

27 

50 

0 

23 

4 

43 

38 

21 

0 

9 

41 

35 

7 

51 

0 

23 

32 

25 

18 

22 

0 

10 

9 

16 

48 

52 

0 

24 

0 

6 

59 

23 

0 

10 

36 

58 

28 

53 

0 

24 

27 

48 

39 

24 

0 

11 

4 

40 

8 

54 

0 

24 

55 

30 

19 

25 

0 

11 

32 

21 

48 

55 

0 

25 

23 

12 

0 

26 

0 

12 

0 

3 

29 

56 

0 

25 

50 

53 

40 

27 

0 

12 

27 

45 

9 

57 

0 

26 

18 

35 

20 

28 

0 

12 

59 

25 

50 

58 

0 

26 

46 

17 

1 

29 

0 

13 

23 

8 

30 

59 

0 

27 

13 

58 

41 

30 

0 

13 

50 

50 

11 

60 

0 

27 

41 

40 

22 

738 


COPERNICUS 


Venus'  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

o 

Movement 

/ 

ff 

/// 

Egyptian 

Years 

60® 

0 

Movement 

f 

If 

/// 

1 

3 

45 

1 

45 

3 

31 

2 

15 

54 

16 

53 

2 

1 

30 

3 

30 

7 

32 

0 

0 

56 

1 

57 

3 

5 

15 

5 

15 

11 

33 

3 

45 

57 

47 

1 

4 

3 

0 

7 

0 

14 

34 

1 

30 

59 

32 

4 

6 

0 

45 

8 

45 

18 

35 

5 

16 

1 

17 

8 

6 

4 

30 

10 

30 

22 

36 

3 

1 

3 

2 

12 

7 

2 

15 

12 

15 

25 

37 

0 

46 

4 

47 

15 

8 

0 

0 

14 

0 

29 

38 

4 

31 

6 

32 

19 

9 

3 

45 

15 

45 

33 

39 

2 

16 

8 

17 

23 

10 

1 

30 

17 

30 

36 

40 

0 

1 

10 

2 

26 

11 

5 

15 

19 

15 

40 

41 

3 

46 

11 

47 

30 

12 

3 

0 

21 

0 

44 

42 

1 

31 

13 

32 

34 

13 

0 

45 

22 

45 

47 

43 

5 

16 

15 

17 

37 

14 

4 

30 

24 

30 

51 

44 

3 

1 

17 

2 

41 

15 

2 

15 

26 

15 

55 

45 

0 

46 

18 

47 

45 

16 

0 

0 

28 

0 

58 

46 

4 

31 

20 

32 

48 

17 

3 

45 

29 

46 

2 

47 

2 

16 

22 

17 

52 

18 

1 

30 

31 

31 

6 

48 

0 

1 

24 

2 

56 

19 

5 

15 

33 

16 

9 

49 

3 

46 

25 

47 

59 

20 

3 

0 

35 

1 

13 

50 

1 

31 

27 

33 

3 

21 

0 

45 

36 

46 

17 

51 

5 

16 

29 

18 

7 

22 

4 

30 

38 

31 

20 

52 

3 

1 

31 

3 

10 

23 

2 

15 

40 

16 

24 

53 

0 

46 

32 

48 

14 

24 

0 

0 

42 

1 

28 

54 

4 

31 

34 

33 

18 

25 

3 

45 

43 

46 

31 

55 

2 

16 

36 

18 

21 

26 

1 

30 

45 

31 

35 

56 

0 

1 

38 

3 

25 

27 

5 

15 

47 

16 

39 

57 

3 

46 

39 

48 

29 

28 

3 

0 

49 

1 

42 

58 

1 

31 

41 

33 

32 

29 

0 

45 

50 

46 

46 

59 

5 

16 

43 

18 

36 

30 

4 

20 

52 

31 

50 

60 

3 

1 

45 

3 

40 

Venus'  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

60® 

Movement 

o  / 

If 

ff! 

Days 

60® 

o 

Movement 

f 

ff 

Hf 

1 

0 

0 

36 

59 

28 

31 

0 

19 

6 

43 

46 

2 

0 

1 

13 

58 

57 

32 

0 

19 

43 

43 

14 

3 

0 

1 

50 

58 

25 

33 

0 

20 

20 

42 

43 

4 

0 

2 

27 

57 

54 

34 

0 

20 

57 

42 

11 

5 

0 

3 

4 

57 

22 

35 

0 

21 

34 

41 

40 

6 

0 

3 

41 

56 

51 

36 

0 

22 

11 

41 

9 

7 

0 

4 

18 

56 

20 

37 

0 

22 

48 

40 

37 

8 

0 

4 

55 

55 

48 

38 

0 

23 

25 

40 

6 

9 

0 

5 

32 

55 

17 

39 

0 

24 

2 

39 

34 

10 

0 

6 

9 

54 

45 

40 

0 

24 

39 

39 

3 

11 

0 

6 

46 

54 

14 

41 

0 

25 

16 

38 

31 

12 

0 

7 

23 

53 

43 

42 

0 

25 

53 

38 

0 

13 

0 

8 

0 

53 

11 

43 

0 

26 

30 

37 

29 

14 

0 

8 

37 

52 

40 

44 

0 

27 

7 

36 

57 

15 

0 

9 

14 

52 

8 

45 

0 

27 

44 

36 

26 

16 

0 

9 

51 

51 

37 

46 

0 

28 

21 

35 

54 

17 

0 

10 

28 

51 

5 

47 

0 

28 

58 

35 

23 

18 

0 

11 

5 

50 

34 

48 

0 

29 

35 

34 

52 

19 

0 

11 

42 

50 

2 

49 

0 

30 

12 

34 

20 

20 

0 

12 

19 

49 

31 

50 

0 

30 

49 

33 

49 

21 

0 

12 

56 

48 

59 

51 

0 

31 

26 

33 

17 

22 

0 

13 

33 

48 

28 

52 

0 

32 

3 

32 

46 

23 

0 

14 

0 

47 

57 

53 

0 

32 

40 

32 

14 

24 

0 

14 

47 

47 

26 

54 

0 

33 

17 

31 

43 

25 

0 

15 

24 

46 

54 

55 

0 

33 

54 

31 

12 

26 

0 

16 

1 

46 

23 

56 

0 

34 

31 

30 

40 

27 

0 

16 

38 

45 

51 

57 

0 

35 

8 

30 

9 

28 

0 

17 

15 

45 

20 

58 

0 

35 

45 

29 

37 

29 

0 

17 

52 

44 

48 

59 

0 

36 

22 

29 

6 

30 

0 

18 

29 

44 

17 

60 

0 

36 

59 

28 

35 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  739 


Mercury^s  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Years  and  Periods  of  Sixty  Years 


Egyptian 

M  ovement 

Egyptian 

Movement 

Years 

60® 

0 

f 

m 

Years 

60® 

o 

/ 

ft 

/// 

1 

0 

53 

57 

23 

6 

31 

3 

52 

38 

56 

21 

2 

1 

47 

54 

46 

13 

32 

4 

46 

36 

19 

28 

3 

2 

41 

52 

9 

19 

33 

5 

40 

33 

42 

34 

4 

3 

35 

49 

32 

26 

34 

0 

34 

31 

5 

41 

5 

4 

29 

46 

55 

32 

35 

1 

28 

28 

28 

47 

6 

5 

23 

44 

18 

39 

36 

2 

22 

25 

51 

54 

7 

0 

17 

41 

41 

45 

37 

3 

16 

23 

15 

0 

8 

1 

11 

39 

4 

52 

38 

4 

10 

20 

38 

7 

9 

2 

5 

36 

27 

58 

39 

5 

4 

18 

1 

13 

10 

2 

59 

33 

51 

5 

40 

5 

58 

15 

24 

20 

11 

3 

53 

31 

14 

11 

41 

0 

52 

12 

47 

26 

12 

4 

47 

28 

37 

18 

42 

1 

46 

10 

10 

33 

13 

5 

41 

26 

0 

24 

43 

2 

40 

7 

33 

39 

14 

0 

35 

23 

23 

31 

44 

3 

34 

4 

56 

46 

15 

1 

29 

20 

46 

37 

45 

4 

28 

2 

19 

52 

16 

2 

23 

18 

9 

44 

46 

5 

21 

59 

42 

59 

17 

3 

17 

15 

32 

50 

47 

0 

15 

57 

6 

5 

18 

4 

11 

12 

55 

57 

48 

1 

9 

54 

29 

12 

19 

5 

5 

10 

19 

3 

49 

2 

3 

51 

52 

18 

20 

5 

59 

7 

42 

10 

50 

2 

57 

49 

15 

25 

21 

0 

53 

5 

5 

16 

51 

3 

51 

46 

38 

31 

22 

1 

47 

2 

28 

23 

52 

4 

45 

44 

1 

38 

23 

2 

40 

59 

51 

29 

53 

5 

39 

41 

24 

44 

24 

3 

34 

57 

14 

36 

54 

0 

33 

38 

47 

51 

25 

4 

28 

54 

37 

42 

55 

1 

27 

36 

10 

57 

26 

5 

22 

52 

0 

49 

56 

2 

21 

33 

34 

4 

27 

0 

16 

49 

23 

55 

57 

3 

15 

30 

57 

10 

28 

1 

10 

46 

47 

2 

58 

4 

9 

28 

20 

17 

29 

2 

4 

44 

10 

8 

59 

5 

3 

25 

43 

23 

30 

2 

58 

41 

33 

15 

60 

5 

57 

23 

6 

30 

Mercury^s  Movement  of  Parallax  in  Periods  of  Sixty  Days 


Days 

60® 

o 

Movement 

f 

ft 

/// 

Days 

60® 

o 

Movement 

r 

ft 

trt 

1 

0 

3 

6 

24 

13 

31 

1 

36 

18 

31 

3 

2 

0 

6 

12 

48 

27 

32 

1 

39 

24 

55 

17 

3 

0 

9 

19 

12 

41 

33 

1 

42 

31 

19 

31 

4 

0 

12 

25 

36 

54 

34 

1 

45 

37 

43 

44 

5 

0 

15 

32 

1 

8 

35 

1 

48 

44 

7 

58 

6 

0 

18 

38 

25 

22 

36 

1 

51 

50 

32 

12 

7 

0 

21 

44 

49 

35 

37 

1 

54 

56 

56 

25 

8 

0 

24 

51 

13 

49 

38 

1 

58 

3 

20 

39 

9 

0 

27 

57 

38 

3 

39 

2 

1 

9 

44 

53 

10 

0 

31 

4 

2 

16 

40 

2 

4 

16 

9 

6 

11 

0 

34 

10 

26 

30 

41 

2 

7 

22 

33 

20 

12 

0 

37 

16 

50 

44 

42 

2 

10 

28 

57 

34 

13 

0 

40 

23 

14 

57 

43 

2 

13 

35 

21 

47 

14 

0 

43 

29 

39 

11 

44 

2 

16 

41 

46 

1 

15 

0 

46 

36 

3 

25 

45 

2 

19 

48 

10 

15 

16 

0 

49 

42 

27 

38 

46 

2 

22 

54 

34 

28 

17 

0 

52 

48 

51 

52 

47 

2 

26 

0 

58 

42 

18 

0 

55 

55 

16 

6 

48 

2 

29 

7 

22 

56 

19 

0 

59 

1 

40 

19 

49 

2 

32 

13 

47 

9 

20 

1 

2 

8 

4 

33 

50 

2 

35 

20 

11 

23 

21 

1 

5 

14 

28 

47 

51 

2 

38 

26 

35 

37 

22 

1 

8 

20 

53 

0 

52 

2 

41 

32 

59 

50 

23 

1 

11 

27 

17 

14 

53 

2 

44 

39 

24 

4 

24 

1 

14 

33 

41 

28 

54 

2 

47 

45 

48 

18 

25 

1 

17 

40 

5 

41 

55 

2 

50 

52 

12 

31 

26 

1 

20 

46 

29 

55 

56 

2 

53 

58 

36 

45 

27 

1 

23 

52 

54 

9 

57 

2 

57 

5 

0 

59 

28 

1 

26 

59 

18 

22 

58 

3 

0 

11 

25 

12 

29 

1 

30 

5 

42 

36 

59 

3 

3 

17 

49 

26 

30 

1 

33 

12 

6 

50 

60 

3 

6 

24 

13 

40 

740 


COPERNICUS 


2.  Demonstration  of  the  Regular  and  Apparent  Movements  op 
These  Planets  According  to  the  Theory  of  the  Ancients 

[140^]  Accordingly  this  is  the  way  the  mean  movements  are.  Now  let  us  turn 
to  the  apparent  irregularity.  The  ancient  mathematicians  who  kept  the  earth 
immobile  imagined  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  ]Mars,  and  Venus  eccentric 
circles  bearing  epicycles,  and  another  further  eccentric  circle,  with  respect  to 
which  the  epicycle  and  the  planet  in  the  epicycle  should  move  regularly. 

In  this  way  let  AB  be  an  eccentric  circle,  and  let  its  centre  be  at  C.  Let  ABC 
be  its  diameter,  whereon  D  is  the  centre  of  the 
Earth,  so  that  A  is  the  apogee  and  B  the  perigee. 

Let  DC  be  bisected  at  E,  and  with  E  as  centre  let 
FG  another  eccentric  circle  to  the  first  be  describ¬ 
ed.  Let  H  be  anyivhere  on  this  eccentric  circle,  and 
with  H  as  centre  let  the  epicycle  IK  be  described. 

Through  its  centre  let  there  be  drawn  the  straight 
line  IHKC  and  similarly  LHME,  Now  let  it  be  un¬ 
derstood  that  on  account  of  the  latitudes  of  the 
planet  the  eccentric  circles  are  inclined  to  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic  and  similarly  the  epicycle  to  the 
plane  of  the  eccentric  circle;  but  here  they  are  rep¬ 
resented  as  if  in  one  plane  for  the  sake  of  ease  of 
demonstration.  Accordingly  the  ancients  say  that 
this  whole  plane  together  with  points  E  and  C 
moves  around  D — the  centre  of  the  ecliptic — in  the 
movement  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars:  by  this  they  mean  that  these  points 
have  unchanging  positions  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  And  they  say  that 
the  epicycle  moves  eastward  in  circle  FHG  but  in  accordance  with  fine  IHCj  and 
in  relation  to  this  line  the  planet  revolves  regularly  in  epicycle  IK.  But  it  is  clear 
that  the  regularity  of  the  epicycle  should  occur  in  relation  to  E  the  centre  of  its 
deferent^,  and  the  revolution  of  the  planet  in  relation  to  line  LME.  Accordingly 
they  concede  that  in  this  case  the  regularity  of  the  circular  movement  can  occur 
with  respect  to  a  foreign  and  not  the  proper  centre;  similarly  and  more  so  in  the 
case  of  Mercury.  But  I  think  I  have  already  made  a  sufficient  refutation  of  that 
in  the  case  of  the  moon.  These  and  similar  things  furnished  us  with  an  occasion 
for  working  out  the  mobihty  of  the  Earth  and  some  other  ways  by  which  regu¬ 
larity  and  the  principles  of  this  art  might  be  preserved,  and  the  ratio  of  apparent 
irregularity  rendered  more  constant. 

3.  General  Demonstration  of  Apparent  Irregularity 
ON  Account  of  the  Movement  of  the  Earth 

[14D]  Accordingly  there  are  two  reasons  why  the  regular  movement  of  a 
planet  should  appear  irregular:  on  account  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth  and 
on  account  of  its  proper  movement.  We  shall  make  both  of  them  clear  generally 
and  separately  by  ocular  demonstration,  whereby  they  can  be  better  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  one  another;  and  we  shall  begin  with  the  movement  which 
mixes  itself  with  all  of  them  on  account  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth:  and  first 

^The  deferent  of  an  epicycle  is  the  circle  on  the  circumference  of  which  the  centre  of  the 
epicycle  moves. 


A 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  741 

in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  which  are  comprehended  by  the  [orbital] 
circle  of  the  Earth. 

Therefore  let  AB  be  the  circle  eccentric  to  the  sun,  which  the  centre  of  the 

Earth  describes  during  its  annual  circuit  in  the 
way  w'e  explained  above;  and  let  C  be  its  centre. 
But  now  let  us  put  dovm  that  the  planet  has  no 
other  irregularity  except  this  one;  and  that  will 
be  the  case  if  we  make  DEy  the  orbital  circle  of 
Venus  or  Mercury,  homocentric  vdth  AB;  and 
DE  should  be  inclined  to  AB  on  account  of  its 
latitude.  But  for  the  sake  of  ease  of  demonstra¬ 
tion  they  can  be  thought  of  as  if  in  the  same 
plane.  Let  the  Earth  be  assumed  at  point  A ;  and 
from  A  let  there  be  drawn  the  lines  of  sight  AFL 
and  AGM  touching  the  circle  of  the  planet  at 
points  F  and  G\  and  let  ACB  the  diameter  com¬ 
mon  to  both  circles  be  dra^ra. 

Now  let  the  movement  of  both  the  Earth  and 
the  planet  be  in  the  same  direction,  i.e.y  eastward,  but  with  greater  velocity  in 
the  case  of  the  planet  than  in  that  of  the  Earth.  Therefore  C  and  line  ACB  vd\l 
appear  to  the  eye  borne  along  at  A  to  move  in  accordance  with,  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun;  but  the  planet  in  circle  DFG  as  in  an  epicycle  will  traverse  arc 
FDG  eastward  in  greater  time  than  it  will  the  remaining  arc  GEF  westward; 
and  in  the  upper  arc  it  will  add  the  total  angle  FAG  to  the  mean  movement  of 
the  sun,  and  in  the  lower  arc  will  subtract  the  same.  Accordingly  where  the  sub¬ 
tractive  movement  of  the  planet,  especially  around  E  the  perigee,  is  greater 
than  the  additive  [movement]  of  (7,  it  will  seem  to  A  to  retrograde  in  proportion 
to  the  excelling  [movement] — as  happens  in  these  planets,  when  line  CE  has  a 
greater  ratio  to  line  AE  than  the  movement  at  A  has  to  the  movement  of  the 
planet,  according  to  the  demonstrations  of  Apollonius  of  Perga,  as  will  be  said 
later.  But  where  the  additive  movement  is  equal  to  the  subtractive,  [141^]  the 
planet  will  seem  to  come  to  a  stop  on  account  of  the  mutual  equilibrium;  all  this 
agrees  with  the  appearances. 

Accordingly  if  there  were  no  other  irregularity  in  the  movement  of  the  planet, 
as  Apollonius  opined,  this  would  be  sufficient.  But  the  greatest  angular  elonga¬ 
tions  from  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun,  which 
these  planets  have  in  the  morning  and  evening 
and  which  are  understood  by  angles  FAE  and 
GAEy  are  not  ever^^vffiere  equal,  neither  the  one 
to  the  other,  nor  are  the  sums  of  the  two  equal; 
for  the  apparent  reason  that  the  route  of  these 
planets  is  not  along  circles  homocentric  with  the 
terrestrial  circle  but  along  certain  others,  by 
which  they  effect  the  second  irregularity. 

The  same  thing  is  also  demonstrated  in  the 
case  of  the  three  upper  planets,  Saturn,  Jupiter, 
and  Mars,  which  circle  around  the  Earth.  For  let 
the  former  circle  of  the  Earth  be  drawn  again,  and 
let  DE  be  as  an  exterior  homocentric  circle  in  the 


D 


742  COPERNICUS 

same  plane:  let  the  position  of  the  planet  be  taken  anywhere,  at  point 
D;  and  from  D  let  there  be  drawn  DACBE  the  common  diameter  and  DF  and 
DG  straight  lines  touching  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  at  points  F  and  G. 
It  is  manifest  that  from  point  A  only  will  the  true  position  of  the  planet  in 
DE  the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun  be  apparent,  when  the  planet  is 
opposite  the  sun  and  is  nearest  to  the  Earth.  For  when  the  Earth  is  in  the  oppo¬ 
site  position  at  J5,  the  opposition  [of  the  planet  and  the  sun],  although  in  the  same 
straight  line,  will  not  be  at  all  apparent  on  account  of  the  closeness  of  the  sun  to 
C.  But  as  the  movement  of  the  Earth  is  speedier,  so  that  it  outruns  the  movement 
of  the  planet,  it  will  seem  along  FBG  the  arc  of  apogee  to  add  the  total  angle  GDF 
to  the  movement  of  the  planet  and  along  the  remaining  arc  GAF  to  subtract 
the  same,  according  as  arc  GAF  is  smaller.  But  where  the  subtractive  movement 
of  the  Earth  excels  the  additive  movement  of  the  planet,  especially  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  A,  the  planet  will  seem  to  be  left  behind  by  the  Earth,  to 
move  westward  and  to  come  to  a  stop  at  the  place  where  there  is  least  difference 
between  the  movements  which  are  contrary  according  to  sight. 

And  so  it  is  once  more  manifest  that  all  these  apparent  movements — which 
the  ancients  were  looking  into  b}’'  means  of  the  epicycles  of  the  individual  planets 
— occur  on  account  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth.  But  since  in  spite  of  the 
opinion  of  Apollonius  and  the  ancients  the  movement  of  the  planet  is  not  found 
regular,  as  the  irregular  revolution  of  the  Earth  with  respect  to  the  planet  pro¬ 
duces  that;  accordingly  the  planets  are  not  carried  in  a  homocentric  circle  but 
in  some  other  which  we  shall  demonstrate  straightway. 

4.  Why  the  Proper  Movements  of  the  Planets 
Appear  Irregular 

[142*^]  But  since  their  proper  movements  in  longitude  follow  approximately 
the  same  mode  except  for 
Mercury,  which  is  seen  to 
differ  from  them,  we  shall 
treat  of  those  four  planets 
together,  but  another  place 
has  been  given  over  to 
Mercury.  Accordingly  as 
the  ancients  placed  one 
movement  in  two  eccentric 
circles,  as  was  shown,  we 
have  decreed  two  regular 
movements  out  of  which 
the  apparent  irregularity 
is  compounded  either  by  a 
circle  eccentric  to  an  eccen¬ 
tric  circle,  or  by  the  epicycle 
of  an  epicycle  or  by  a  com¬ 
bination  of  an  eccentric  cir¬ 
cle  carrying  an  epicycle.  For 
they  can  all  effect  the  same 
irregularity,  as  we  demon¬ 
strated  above  in  the  case  of 
the  sun  and  the  moon. 


E 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  743 


Accordingly  let  AB  be  an  eccentric  circle  around  centre  C.  Let  ACB  be  the 
diameter  drawn  through  the  highest  and  lowest  apsis  of  the  planet  and  con¬ 
taining  the  mean  position  of  the  sun.  On  ACB  let  D  be  the  centre  of  the  orbital 
circle  of  the  Earth;  and  with  the  highest  apsis  A  as  centre  and  the  third  part  of 
CD  as  radius,  let  epicycle  EF  be  described.  Let  Fhe  its  perigee,  and  let  the  planet 
be  placed  there.  Now  let  the  movement  of  the  epicycle  along  eccentric  circle  AB 
take  place  eastward;  and  let  the  movement  of  the  planet  in  the  upper  arc  [of 
the  epicycle]  take  place  similarly  eastward  [142^]  but  in  the  remaining  arc 
westw’ard;  and  let  the  revolutions  of  the  epicycle  and  the  planet  be  propor¬ 
tionately  equal  to  one  another. 

On  that  account  when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric 
circle  and  the  planet  on  the  contrary  is  at  the  perigee  of  thq  epicycle,  the 
relation  between  their  movements  is  reversed^  wdth  respect  to  one  another, 
since  both  the  planet  and  the  epicycle  have  traversed  their  semicircle.  But  in 
both  mean  quadrants  each  will  have  its  mean  apsis,  and  then  only  will  the 
diameter^  of  the  epicycle  be  parallel  to  line  AB;  and  at  the  midpoints  [be¬ 
tween  the  mean  quadrants  and  the  perigee  or  apogee]  the  diameter  will  be 
perpendicular  to  AB:  the  rest  of  the  time  always  moving  towards  AB  or 
moving  away.  All  that  is  easily  understood  as  following  from  the  movements. 

Hence  it  vdll  also  be  demonstrated  that  by  this  composite  movement  the 
planet  does  not  describe  a  perfect  circle  in  accordance  with  the  theory  of  the 
ancient  mathematicians  but  a  curve  differing  imperceptibly  from  one. 

For  let  the  same  epicycle  KL  be  drawn  again,  and  let  B  be  its  centre.  Let 
AG  the  quadrant  of  a  circle  be  assumed,  and  let  HI  be  an  epicycle  around  G, 
Let  CD  be  cut  into  three  equal  parts,  and  let 

And  let  GC  and  /AT,  which  cut  one  another  at  Q,  be  joined. 

Accordingly  since,  by  hypothesis 

arcAG  =  arcH/ 


then 

And 


angle  ACG= 90°; 
angle  HGI  =  90°, 


angle  /QG  =  angle  MQC, 

because  they  are  vertical  angles.  Therefore  triangles  GIQ  and  QCM  are  equi¬ 
angular;  and  they  have  correspondingly  equal  sides,  since  by  hypothesis 

base  GI  =  base  CM, 

QI>QC  =  QM>QG; 

IQM>GQC, 

FM  =  ML=AC  =  CG. 

Therefore  the  circle  which  is  described  around  centre  AI  through  points  F 
and  L  and  is  hence  equal  to  circle  AB  will  cut  line  IM.  The  same  demonstra- 


And 

therefore 

but 


^That  is  to  say,  during  the  hemicycle  of  movement  wherein  the  epicycle  is  passing  from  the 
lowest  to  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  and  the  planet  is  passing  from  the  apogee  to 
the  perigee  of  the  epicycle,  the  movement  on  the  epicycle  adds  to  the  movement  on  the  ec¬ 
centric  circle;  but  during  the  hemicycle  wherein  the  epicycle  is  passing  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest  apsis,  the  movement  on  the  epicycle  subtracts  from  the  movement  on  the  eccentric 
circle. 


*In  this  passage  Copernicus  is  speaking  as  if  the  planet  were  borne  around  the  epicycle  by 
the  revolving  diameter,  although  he  usually  speaks  as  if  the  diameter  of  the  epicycle  pointed 
perpetually  at  the  centre  of  the  homocentric  circle. 


744  COPERNICUS 

tion  will  hold  in  the  opposite  quadrant.  Accordingly  by  the  regular  move¬ 
ments  of  the  epicycle  in  the  eccentric  circle  the  planet  in  the  epicycle  will  not 
describe  a  perfect  circle  but  a  quasi-circle — as  ^vas  to  be  demonstrated.^ 

Now  around  centre  D  let  NO  the  annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  de¬ 
scribed;  let  IDR  be  extended;  and  let  PDS  be  drawn  parallel  to  CG.  Accord¬ 
ingly  I  DR  will  be  the  straight  line  of  the  true  movement  of  the  planet;  GC, 
the  straight  line  of  the  mean  and  regular  movement.  And  R  will  be  the  true 
apogee  of  the  Earth  with  respect  to  the  planet;  and  aS,  the  mean  apogee.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  angle  RDS  or  IDP  is  the  difference  between  the  regular  and  the  ap¬ 
parent  movement  of  both,  namely  between  angle  ACG  and  angle  GDI. 

But  in  place  of  eccentric  circle  AB  we  may  take  an  equal  homocentric  circle 
around  D  as  the  deferent  of  the  epicycle,  whose  radius  is  equal  to  DC  and 
which  is  the  deferent  of  the  other  epicycle,  whose  semi-diameter  is  half  MD} 
Now  let  the  first  epicycle  be  moved  [143^]  eastward,  but  the  second  in  the 
opposite  direction;  and  lastly  let  the  planet  on  it  [t.e.,  on  the  second  epicycle] 
be  deflected  by  the  twofold  movement.  The  same  things  will  happen  as  before 
and  no  differently  from  in  the  moon,  or  by  some  other  of  the  aforesaid  modes. 

But  here  we  have  chosen  the  eccentric  circle  bearing  the  epicycle,  because 
by  remaining  always  between  the  sun  and  C  centre  D  is  meantime  found  to 
have  changed,  as  was  shown  in  the  case  of  solar  appearances.  But  as  the  re¬ 
maining  appearances  do  not  accord  proportionately  with  this  change  there 
must  be  some  other  irregularity  in  those  planetary  movements:  this  irregu¬ 
larity,  although  very  slight,  is  perceptible  in  the  case  of  Mars  and  Venus,  as 
will  be  seen  in  the  right  place. 

Accordingly  we  shall  soon  demonstrate  from  observations  that  these  hypo¬ 
theses  are  suflScient  for  the  appearances;  and  we  shall  do  that  first  in  the  case 
of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars:  in  them  the  position  of  the  apogee  and  the  dis¬ 
tance  CD  are  very  diflScult  to  find  and  of  the  greatest  importance,  since  the 
rest  is  easily  demonstrable  by  means  of  the  apogee  and  the  distance  CD, 
Now  in  this  case  we  shall  use  the  method  we  used  concerning  the  moon,  namely 
a  comparison  of  three  ancient  solar  oppositions  with  the  same  number  of 
modern  ones,  which  the  Greeks  call  their  “acronychial  gleams”  and  we  the 
‘‘deeps  of  the  night,”  namely  when  the  planet  opposite  the  sun  falls  upon 
the  straight  line  of  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun,  where  it  throws  off  all 
that  irregularity  which  the  movement  of  the  Earth  brings  to  it.  Such  positions 
are  determined  by  observations  with  an  astrolabe  and  by  computation  of  the 
oppositions  of  the  sun,  until  it  is  clear  that  the  planet  has  arrived  at  a  point 
opposite  the  sun. 

5.  Demonstrations  of  the  movement  of  Saturn 

Accordingly  we  shall  begin  with  Saturn  by  taking  three  oppositions  once  ob¬ 
served  by  Ptolemy.  The  first  of  them  occurred  in  the  11th  year  of  Hadrian  on 

^As  has  been  pointed  out,  if  in  the  foregoing  diagram  we  consider  a  point 
X  so  situated  on  semi-diameter  CA  that  CX  is  equal  to  GI  (and  consequently 
DM  is  equal  to  MX),  then  since  the  planet  on  reaching  point  I  has  expended 
one  quarter  of  its  periodic  time  and  has  traversed  one  quarter  of  a  full  revolu¬ 
tion  about  point  X,  evidently  point  X  is  analogous  to  the  centre  of  a  Ptole¬ 
maic  equant,  point  M  (the  centre  of  the  quasi-circle)  to  the  centre  of  the 
Ptolemaic  deferent,  and  point  D  (the  centre  of  the  sun  for  Copernicus)  to  the 
centre  of  the  Earth. 

*As  in  the  accompanying  diagram: 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  745 

the  7th  day  of  the  month  Pachom  at  the  first  hour  of  night;  in  the  year  of  Our 
Lord  127  on  the  7th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  April,  17  equal  hours  after  mid¬ 
night  in  relation  to  the  Cracow  meridian,  which  we  find  an  hour  distant  from 
Alexandria.  Now  the  position  of  the  planet  in  relation  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars,  to  which  as  to  the  starting-point  of  the  regular  movement  we  are  referring 
all  these  things,  was  found  to  be  at  approximately  174®40',  sinc%  [143^]  the  sun 
by  its  simple  movement  was  then  opposite  at  354®40'  from  the  horn  of  Aries,  the 
starting-point  assumed. 

The  second  opposition  was  in  the  17th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  18th  day  of  the 
month  Epiphi  by  the  Egyptian  calendar;  but  by  the  Roman,  in  the  year  of  Our 
Lord  133  on  the  3rd  day  before  the  Nones  of  June,  11  equatorial  hours  after 
midnight:  he  found  the  planet  at  243®3',  while  by  its  mean  movement  the  sun 
was  at  63*^3',  15  hours  after  midnight. 

He  recorded  the  third  as  occurring  in  the  20th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  24th 
day  of  the  month  Mesori  by  the  Egyptian  calendar;  which  was  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  136  on  the  8th  day  before  the  Ides  of  July,  11  hours  after  midnight 
(similarly  according  to  the  Cracow  meridian)  at  277^37',  while  by  its  mean 
movement  the  sun  was  at  97®37'. 

Accordingly  in  the  first  interval  there  are  6  years  70  days  55  minutes  [of  a  day], 
during  which  the  planet  is  moved  62®23'  in  relation  to  sight,  and  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  the  Earth  with  respect  to  the  planet,  i,e,,  the  movement  of  parallax,  is 
352®44'.  Accordingly  the  7®  16'  in  which  the  circle  is  deficient  belong  to  the  mean 
movement  of  the  planet,  so  that  it  is  75°39'. 

In  the  second  interval  there  are  3  Egyptian  years  35  days  50  minutes;  the 
apparent  movement  of  the  planet  is  34°34',  [the  movement]  of  parallax  356®43'; 
and  the  remaining  3°17'  of  a  circle  are  added  to  the  apparent  movement  of  the 
planet,  so  that  the  mean  movement  is  37°51'. 

After  this  survey  let  ABC  the  eccentric  circle  of  the  planet  be  described.  Let 

D  be  its  centre,  and  FDG  its 
diameter,  whereon  E  is  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  great  orbital  circle  of 
the  Earth.  Now  let  A  be  the 
centre  of  the  epicycle  at  the 
first  opposition  to  the  sun;  R, 
at  the  second;  and  C,  at  the 
third;  and  around  them  let  the 
same  epicycle  be  described  with 
a  radis  equal  to  one-third  of 
DE.  Let  the  centres  A,  R,  and 
C  be  joined  to  D  and  E  by 
straight  lines,  which  will  cut 
the  circumference  of  the  epi¬ 
cycle  at  points  K,  L,  and  M. 
And  let  there  be  taken  arc  KN 
similar  to  AF,  arc  LO  similar 
to  BFy  and  MP  similar  to 
FBC ;  and  let  EN,  EO,  and  EP 
G  be  joined.  Therefore  by  com¬ 

putation 


746 


COPERNICUS 
arc  A5  =  75°39' 


and 

arc  J5C  =  37°51'; 

and  of  the  angles  of  apparent  movement, 

angle  A^£'0  =  68°23' 

and  * 

angle  0£;P  =  34°34'. 

Our  problem  is  to  examine  the  positions  of  highest  and  lowest  apsis,  t.e.,  of 
F  and  G,  together  with  the  distance  DE  between  the  centres,  without  which 
there  is  no  way  of  discerning  the  regular  and  the  apparent  [144®]  movement. 

But  here  too  we  run  into  as  great  a  difficulty  as  in  this  part  of  Ptolemy,  since, 
if  the  given  angle  NEO  comprehended  the  given  arc  AB,  and  [angle]  OEP  [arc] 
BC,  the  entrance  to  demonstrating  what  we  are  looking  for  would  be  already 
opened.  But  the  known  arc  AB  subtends  the  unknown  angle  AEB^  and  similarly 
the  unknown  angle  BEC  is  subtended  by  the  known  arc  BC\  for  it  was  necessary 
for  both  of  them  to  be  known.  But  AEN,  BEOy  and  CEPy  the  differences  be¬ 
tween  the  angles,  cannot  be  perceived,  unless  arcs  AF,  FB,  and  FBC  are  first 
set  up  as  similar  to  those  on  the  epicycle;  accordingly  these  things  are  mutually 
dependent  so  as  to  be  simultaneously  known  or  unknown.  Therefore  those  who 
were  destitute  of  the  means  of  demonstration  relied  upon  detours  and  the  a 
'posteriori  method,  as  the  straightforward  and  a  priori  approach  was  not  open. 
So  Ptolemy  in  this  investigation  expended  his  energies  in  a  profix  argument  and 
a  great  multitude  of  calculations,  which  I  judge  boring  and  supererogatory  to 
review,  especially  as  in  our  calculations,  which  follow,  we  shall  copy  the  same 
method  approximately. 

Finally  in  going  over  his  calculations  again  he  found  that 


arc  AF  =  57°1', 
arc  FF=18°37', 

and 

arc  FJ5C  =  563/^°. 

But 

ecc.  =  6p  50', 

where  Z)F  =  60p. 

But 

ecc.  =  1139. 

where  Z)F=  10,000. 

Now 

^(1139)  =  854, 

and 

34(1139)  =  285. 

Hence 

Z)F  =  854 

and 

rad.  ep  =  285. 

Making  these  assumptions  and  borrowings  for  our  hypothesis,  [144^]  we  shall 
show  that  these  things  agree  with  the  appearances  observed. 

Now  at  the  first  solar  opposition,  in  triangle  ADE, 

side  AD  =  10,000, 


and 

and 


side  £)F  =  854; 

angle  AZ)F=  180°— angle  ADF. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 

Hence,  by  means  of  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles, 

side  =  10,489, 

and 

angle  DEA  =  53°6', 

and 

angle  DAE  =  Z^bb', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

But 

angle  =  angle  ADF  =  bl^V. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  iVA£7  =  60°56'. 

Accordingly  in  triangle  NAE  two  sides  are  given: 

side  AE  =  10,489, 
side  N A  =285 

where  AD  =  10,000, 

and 

angle  NAE  is  given. 

Hence 

angle  AEN  =  1^22') 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  NED  =  bV4.4!, 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

Similarly  at  the  second  solar  opposition.  For  in  triangle  BDE 
side  DE  =  854, 

j  where  BD  =  10,000 ; 

and 

angle  BZ)£7=  180°-^Z)F  =  161°22'. 

So  triangle  BDE  too  has  its  sides  and  angles  given: 

side  j&i7  =  10,812, 

where  BD  =  10,000, 


747 


and 

and 

But 


angle  DBE  =  r27\ 
angle  ^J5Z)  =  17°11'. 


angle  O.BL  =  angle  BDF=  18°36'. 

Therefore,  by  addition 

angle  EBO  =  20°S'. 

Accordingly  in  triangle  EBO  two  sides  are  given  together  with  angle  EBO: 

BE  =  10, S12 

50  =  285. 

By  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles 
Hence  angle  550  =  32'. 

angle  BED  =  10^39'. 

Moreover,  in  the  third  solar  opposition,  in  triangle  CDE,  as  before, 

side  CD  is  given 


and 

and 


side  DE  is  given; 
angle  =  180°  -  56°29'. 


748  COPERNICUS 

By  the  fourth  rule  for  plane  triangles 

base  C£  =  10,512, 

where  CD  =  10,000 ; 

and 

angle  DCE  =  3%3' 

and,  by  subtraction, 

angle  C ED  =  52°3&. 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  £CP  =  60°22', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

So  also  in  triangle  ECP  two  sides  are  given  together  with  angle  ECP;  further¬ 
more, 

angle  CPP  =  1°22', 

whence,  by  subtraction, 

angle  PPZ)  =  51°14'. 

Hence,  of  the  total  angles  of  apparent  movement, 

angle  OW=68°23', 

and 

angle  OPP  =  34°35', 

which  agree  with  the  observations.  And  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of 
of  the  eccentric  circle 

P  =  226°20' 

from  the  head  of  Aries.  And  as  the  then  existing  precession  of  [145®]  the  spring 
equinox  was  6°40', 

226°20'+6°40'  =  23°  of  Scorpio, 

in  accordance  with  Ptolemy^s  conclusion.  For  the  apparent  position  of  the 
planet  at  this  third  solar  opposition,  as  was  reported  above,  was  227°37'. 
And  as  the  angle  of  apparent  movement, 
angle  PPZ)  =  51°14'. 

Hence 

227°37'-51°14'  =  226°23', 
which  is  the  position  of  the 
highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric 
circle. 

Now  let  there  be  described 
RST  the  annual  orbital  circle 
of  the  Earth,  which  will  cut 
line  PE  at  point  R ;  and  let  the 
diameter  SET  be  drawn  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  line  of  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  the  planet. 

Accordingly,  as 

angle  SED  =  angle  CZ>P, 
angle  SER  will  be  the  differ¬ 
ence  and  the  additosubtraction 
between  the  apparent  and 
mean  movement,  i.e.,  between 
angles  CDF  and  PED,  and 
angle  aSPP  =  5°16'. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  749 

And  there  is  the  same  difference  between  the  mean  and  the  true  movements 
of  parallax.  Now 

arc  RT=^  180° -arc  =  174°44', 

which  is  the  regular  movement  of  parallax  from  starting-point  T,  t.e.,  from 
the  mean  conjunction  of  the  sun  and  the  planet,  to  this  third  solar  opposition 
or  true  opposition  of  the  Earth  and  the  planet. 

Accordingly  at  the  time  of  this  observation,  namely  in  the  20th  year  of  the 
reign  of  Hadrian,  but  in  the  136th  year  of  Our  Lord  on  the  8th  day  before  the 
Ides  of  July,  11  hours  after  midnight,  we  have  the  movement  of  anomaly  of 
Saturn  from  the  highest  apsis  of  its  eccentric  circle  as  56}^°,  and  the  mean 
movement  of  parallax  as  174°44',  as  was  timely  to  demonstrate  on  account  of 
what  follows. 

6.  On  Three  Other  Solar  Oppositions  of  Saturn  Recently  Observed 

[145^]  Now  since  the  computation  of  the  movement  of  Saturn  handed  down 
by  Ptolemy  has  no  small  discrepancy  with  our  times,  and  since  it  cannot  be 
understood  right  away  in  what  quarter  the  error  lies,  we  are  forced  to  make  new 
observations,  out  of  which  we  have  again  taken  three  solar  oppositions.  The 
first  opposition  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1514,  on  the  3rd  day  before  the 
Nones  of  May  hours  before  midnight,  at  which  time  Saturn  was  discovered 
at  205°24'. 

The  second  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1520  on  the  third  day  before  the  Ides 
of  July  at  midday,  and  the  planet  was  at  273°25'. 

The  third  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1527  on  the  6th  day  before  the  Ides  of 
October  6%  hours  after  midnight;  and  Saturn  appeared  at  7'  from  the  horn  of 
Aries. 

Accordingly  between  the  first  and  second  solar  oppositions  there  are  6  Egyp¬ 
tian  years  70  days  33  minutes  [of  a  day],  during  which  time  the  apparent  move¬ 
ment  of  Saturn  is  68°1'. 

From  the  second  to  the  third  there  are  7  Egyptian  years  89  days  46  minutes, 
and  the  apparent  movement  of  the  planet  is  86°42' ;  and  the  mean  movement 
during  the  first  interval  is  75°39';  and  during  the  second,  88°29'.  Accordingly  in 
investigating  the  highest  apsis  and  the  eccentricity,  we  must  at  first  abide  by 
the  rule  of  Ptolemy,  just  as  if  the  planet  moved  in  a  simple  eccentric  circle;  and 

although  that  is  not  sufficient,  nevertheless  we 
shall  be  led  fairly  near  and  shall  arrive  at  the 
truth  more  easily. 

Accordingly,  let  ABC  be  the  circle  in  which  the 
planet  is  moved  regularly:  and  let  the  first  oppo¬ 
sition  be  at  A,  the  second  atB,  and  the  third  at  C. 
Let  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be 
E  taken  within  it  as  D.  Let  AD,  BD,  and  CD  be 
joined,  and  let  any  one  of  them  be  extended  in  a 
straight  line  to  the  opposite  part  of  the  circum¬ 
ference — say  CDE — and  let  AE  and  BE  be  joined. 
Accordingly,  since 
angle  RZ)C  =  86°42', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180°; 
angle  RZ)^  =  [146^]  93°18'; 


750  COPERNICUS 

but  angle  RZ)£  =  186^36', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  360®. 

And,  as  intercepting  arc  BC, 

angle  BED  =  88^29\ 

and 

angle  DBE  =  84®55'. 

Accordingly,  as  the  angles  of  triangle  BDE  are  given,  the  sides  are  given  by  the 
table: 

R£'  =  19,953 

and 

DE  =13,501 

where  diameter  of  circle 
circumscribing  triangle  =  20,000. 

Similarly  in  triangle  ADE,  since 

angle  Ai:)C  =  154®43', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180®; 
angle  ADjB  =  180® —  angle  ADC  =  25®17'; 

but 

angle  AZ)i;  =  50®34', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  360®. 

And,  as  intercepting  arc  ABC, 

angle  AED  =  164®8', 

and 

angle  DA£7=  145®18': 
hence  the  sides  are  established: 

DE  =  19,090 

and 

A£?= 8,542, 

where  diameter  of  circle 
circumscribing  triangle  ADE  =  20,000. 

But 

A£?  =  6,043 

where  DE=  13,501  and 
BE  =19,953. 

Hence  too,  in  triangle  ABE,  these  two  sides  BE  and  EA  have  been  given; 
and,  as  intercepting  arc  AB, 

angle  A^B  =  75®39'. 

Accordingly  by  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles, 

AR  =  15,647 

where  BE  =19,908. 

But  according  as 

ch.  AB  =  12,266, 

where  diameter  of 
eccentric  circle  =  20,000 ; 

j  £75  =  15,664 

and 

55=10,599. 

Accordingly,  in  proportion  to  chord  BE, 

arc5A5  =  103®7'. 

Hence,  by  addition. 


arc5A5C=191®36'; 


and 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  751 

arc  CE=Zm° -a.rc  EABC=m°2^'] 

and  hence 

ch.  CZ)£^  =  19,898. 

And 

CD  =  CDE-DE=9,299. 

And  now  it  is  manifest  that,  if  CDE  were  the  diameter  of  the  eccentric  circle, 
the  positions  of  highest  and  lowest  apsis  would  fall  upon  it,  and  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  centres  would  be  evident;  but  because  segment  EABC  is  greater,  the 
centre  will  be  in  it.  Let  F  be  the  centre,  and  let  the  diameter  GFDG  be  extended 
through  F  and  D,  and  let  FKL  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  CDE, 

Now  it  is  manifest  that 


But 

rect.  CD,  DE  =  rect.  GD,  DH. 

Accordingly 

rect.  Gi),i>i/+sq.  FD  =  sq.  (3^GDff)=sq.  FDH. 

sq.  FDH— rect.  CD,  DE =sq.  FD. 

Therefore 

but 

FD  =  1,200 

where  radius  (jF  =  10,000; 

FD  =  7P12' 

where  radius  =  60^, 

[146^]  which  differs  little  from  Ptolemy. 

But  since 


and 

CDK  =  }4CDE  =  9,d49 

therefore 

CD  =  9,299, 

DK=CDK-CD  =  050, 

But 

where  GF=  10,000 
and  FZ>  =  1,200. 

And  since 

DK  =  5,411 

where  FD  =  10,000. 

DK  =  }4  ch.  2  DFK, 
angle  DFK  =  Z2°45', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°; 

and  as  standing  at  the  centre  of  the  circle  it  intercepts  a  similar  chord  and  arc 
HL  on  the  circumference. 

But 


therefore 

arc  CHL  =  HGLE  =  84°1Z'; 

arc  Ci:/  =  CHL-/fL  =  51°28', 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  perigee. 
Now 

180°— 51°28'  =  C5G=  128°32' 
from  the  highest  apsis  to  the  third  opposition.  And  since 

arc  CJ5  =  88°29', 
arc  ^G  =  C.6ff-C^  =  40°3', 


752  COPERNICUS 

from  the  highest  apsis  to  the  second  solar  opposition.  Then,  as 

arc  ^GA=75°39', 
arc  =  =  35^36' 

from  the  first  opposition  to  the  apogee  G, 

Now  let  ABC  be  a  circle  with  diameter  FDEGj  centre  Z),  apogee  F,  perigee 
G.  Let 

arc  ^F  =  35°36', 
arc  FF  =  40°3', 

and 

arcFFC  =  128°32'. 

Now  let  DE  be  taken  as  three 
quarters  of  what  has  already 
been  shown  to  be  the  distance 
between  the  centres,  i.e.,  let 
DE  =  900; 

and 

quarter  distance  =  300 
where  radius  =  10,000. 

And  with  that  quarter  distance 
as  radius,  let  the  epicycle  be  de¬ 
scribed  around  centres  A,  Bj 
and  C — and  let  the  figure  be 
completed  according  to  the  hy¬ 
pothesis  set  before  us.  But  if 
with  this  lay-out  we  wish  to 
elicit  the  observed  positions  of 
Saturn  [147^]  by  the  method 
handed  down  above  and  soon  to  be  repeated,  we  shall  find  some  discrepancy. 

And — to  speak  briefly,  so  as  not  to  burden  the  reader  with  many  Avords  or 
seem  to  have  laboured  more  in  indicating  by-ways  than  in  pointing  out  the  high 
road — these  things  will,  by  means  of  Avhat  we  have  shown  concerning  triangles, 
necessarily  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that 

angle  iVFO==67°35' 

and 

angle  OFP  =  87°12'. 

But  angle  OEP  is  greater  than  the  apparent  angle,  and  the  angle  NEO  is 
26'  smaller.  And  Ave  find  that  they  square  Avith  one  another  only  if  Ave  move  the 
apogee  forAvard  a  little,  and  set  up 

arc  AF  =  38°50', 
arc  FB  =  36®49', 
arcFBC=125®18', 

Z)F  =  854, 

which  is  the  distance  between  the  centres,  and 

rad.  ep.  =  285, 

where  FD  =  10,000; 

and  that  agrees  approximately  Avith  Ptolemy,  as  set  out  above.  For  it  is  clear 
from  this  that  these  magnitudes  agree  with  the  three  apparent  solar  oppositions 
observed. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  753 

Since  at  the  first  opposition,  in  triangle  ADE, 

side  DE  =  854, 

j  where  AD=  10,000, 

and 

angle  141°10', 

where  angle  AZ)£7+angle  ADF  =  2  rt.  angles; 

hence  it  is  shown  that 

side  A£  =  10,079, 

where  radius  FD  =  10,000, 

,  angle  DA  E  =  2°52', 

and 

angle  DEA  =35°58'. 

Similarly  in  triangle  AEN^  since 

angle  KAN  =  angle  ADF\ 
angle  EAN  = 


side  4?^  =  285, 

where  AS  =10,679. 

angle  AEN  =  1®3'. 

angle  DEA  =35°58'; 


and 

Hence 
But 

accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

angle  DEN  =  M%b\ 

In  the  second  solar  opposition  triangle  DEB  has  two  sides  given: 

Z)£  =  854, 

where  DB  =  10,000 

and 

angle  BDE=lb^m\ 

Accordingly 

J5^  =  10,697, 
angle  DBE  =  2^^b', 

and 

angle  ^£:Z)  =  34°4'. 

But 

angle  LBO  =  angle  BDF; 

therefore,  as  at  the  centre, 

angle  £/50  =  39°34'. 

Now  this  angle  is  comprehended  by  the  given  sides: 

iBO  =  285 

and 

=  10, 697; 

hence 

angle  BEO  =  59'. 

And 

angle  OED  =  angle  BED  —  angle  BEO  =  33°5'. 

But  in  the  first  solar  opposition  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

angle  Z)£JA^  =  34°55'. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  OEN  =  6S°, 

by  which  the  distance  of  the  first  solar  opposition  from  the  second  becomes  ap¬ 
parent;  and  it  harmonizes  with  the  observations. 


754  COPERNICUS 

The  same  thing  will  be  shown  at  the  third  opposition. 


In  triangle  CDE 

angle  CDE  =  b^°A2', 

side  CD  =  10,000, 

and 

side  DE  =  854; 

[147^]  hence 

side  EC =9,582, 

and 

angle  CED  =  12l°5'. 

therefore  by  addition 

angle  DCE= 4°  18'; 

angle  PCE  =129°81'. 

So  again  in  triangle  EPC 

side  CE  =  9,582 

and 

side  PC = 285, 

and 

angle  PCE=m°81' 

hence 

angle  PEC=m8'. 

And 

angle  PED  =  angle  CED  —  angle  PEO  =  1 19°47' 
from  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  to  the  position  of  the  planet  at  the 
third  opposition. 

Now  it  was  sho^\^l  that  there  were  33°5'  to  the  second  solar  opposition:  ac¬ 
cordingly  between  the  second  and  third  solar  oppositions  of  Saturn  there  remain 
86°42',  which  agree  with  the  observations.  Now  the  position  of  Saturn  was  found 
by  observation  at  that  time  to  be  at  7'  from  the  assumed  starting-point  of  the 
first  star  of  Aries,  and  it  was  shown  that  there  were  60°13'  from  it  to  the  lowest 
apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle:  accordingly  the  lowest  apsis  is  approximately  603^°, 
and  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  is  diametrically  opposite  at  2403^®. 

Now  let  RST  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  set  around  its  centre  E^ 
and  let  its  diameter  SET  be  parallel  to  CD  the  line 
of  mean  movement;  and  let 

angle  FDC  =  angle  DES. 

Therefore  the  Earth  and  our  point  of  sight  will  be 
on  line  PE,  namely  at  point  /2.  Now 
angle  PES  =  b^^V, 

and  angle  PES  or  arc  RS  is  the  difference  between 
FDC  the  angle  of  regular  movement  and  DEP  the 
angle  of  apparent  movement. 

Now 

arc  /?T=180°-5°31'  =  174^29' 
which  is  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  apogee 
of  the  orbital  circle,  i.e.,  from  T,  as  if  from  the 
mean  position  of  the  sun. 

And  so  we  have  demonstrated  that  in  the  year 
of  Our  Lord  1527  on  the  sixth  day  before  the  Ides 
of  October  at  6%  hours  after  midnight,  the  move- 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  755 

ment  of  anomaly  of  Saturn  from  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  was 
125^18',  the  movement  of  parallax  was  174®29',  and  the  position  of  the  highest 
apsis  was  at  240°21'  from  the  first  star  of  Aries  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

7.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Movement  of  Saturn 
[148*]  Now  it  was  shown  that  Saturn  at  the  time  of  the  last  of  the  three  obser¬ 
vations  of  Ptolemy  was  by  its  movement  of  parallax  at  174°44',  and  the  position 
of  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  at  226^23',  from  the  head  of  the 
constellation  of  Aries.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  in  the  midtime  between  the 
two  observations  Saturn  has  completed  1344  revolutions  minus  34°  of  regular 
parallaxes. 

Now  from  the  20th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  24th  day  of  the  Egyptian  month 
Mesori  one  hour  before  midday  to  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1527  on  the  6th  day 
before  the  Ides  of  October  at  6  hours  [after  midnight,  the  time]  of  this  observa¬ 
tion,  there  are  1392  Egyptian  years  75  days  48  minutes  [of  a  day]. 

Hence  if  we  wish  to  get  the  movement  itself  from  the  table,  we  shall  similarly 
find  359°45',  the  movement  beyond  the  1343  revolutions  of  parallax.  Accord¬ 
ingly  what  was  set  dovm  concerning  the  mean  movements  of  Saturn  is  correct. 
Moreover  during  that  time  the  simple  movement  of  the  sun  is  82°30'.  If  359°45' 
are  subtracted  from  82°30',  the  remainder  is  the  82°45'  of  the  mean  movement 
of  Saturn,  which  are  already  being  added  up  in  its  47th  revolution,  in  harmony 
with  the  computation.  Meanwhile  too  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of  the 
eccentric  circle  has  been  moved  forward  to  13°58'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 
Ptolemy  believed  it  to  be  fixed  in  the  same  way,  but  now  it  appears  to  move  ap¬ 
proximately  1°  per  100  years. 

8.  On  Determining  the  Positions  of  Saturn 
Now  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  to  the  20th  of  Hadrian  on 
the  24th  day  of  the  month  Mesori  at  1  hour  before  midday,  the  time  of  Ptolemy^s 
observation,  there  are  135  Egyptian  years  222  days  27  minutes  [of  a  day],  during 
which  time  Saturn's  movement  of  parallax  was  328°55'.  The  subtraction  of 
328°55'  from  174°44'  leaves  205°49'  [148^]  as  the  locus  of  distance  of  the  mean 
position  of  the  sun  from  the  mean  [position]  of  Saturn,  and  as  its  movement  of 
parallax  at  midnight  before  the  Kalends  of  January. 

From  the  first  Olympiad  to  this  locus  775  Egyptian  years  1234  days  compre¬ 
hend  a  movement  of  70°55'  besides  the  whole  revolutions.  The  subtraction  of 
70°55'  from  205°49'  leaves  134°54'  for  the  beginning  of  the  Olympiads  at  noon 
on  the  1st  day  of  the  month  Hekatombaion. 

Then  after  451  years  247  days  there  are  13°7'  besides  the  whole  revolutions: 
the  addition  of  13°7'  to  134°54'  puts  the  locus  [of  the  years]  of  Alexander  the 
Great  at  148°!'  on  noon  of  the  1st  day  of  the  month  Thoth  by  the  Egyptian 
calendar;  and  there  are  278  years  118J4  days  to  [years  of]  Caesar;  the  movement 
is  247°20',  and  it  sets  up  the  locus  at  35°21'  on  midnight  before  the  Kalends  of 
January. 

9.  On  the  Parallaxes  of  Saturn,  Which  Arise  from  the  Annual 
Orbital  Circle  of  the  Earth,  and  How  Great  the 
Distance  of  Saturn  Is  [from  the  Earth] 

In  this  way  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  regular  movements  of  Saturn 
in  longitude  are  at  one  with  the  apparent.  For  the  other  apparent  movements 


756 


COPERNICUS 


which  occur  in  the  case  of  Saturn  are,  as  we  said,  parallaxes  arising  from  the 
annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth,  since,  as  the  magnitude  of  the  Earth  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  distance  of  the  moon  causes  parallaxes,  so  too  its  orbital  circle,  in 
which  it  revolves  annually,  should  in  the  case  of  the  five  wandering  stars  cause 
[parallaxes]  which  are  far  more  evident  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
orbital  circle.  Now  such  parallaxes  cannot  be  determined,  unless  the  altitude  of 
the  planet — which,  however,  it  is  possible  to  apprehend  through  any  one  obser¬ 
vation  of  a  parallax — becomes  known  first. 

We  have  such  [an  observation]  in  the  case  of  Saturn  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord 
1514  on  the  sixth  day  before  the  Kalends  of  May  5  equatorial  hours  after  the 
preceding  midnight.  For  Saturn  was  seen  to  be  in  a  straight  line  with  the  stars 
in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio,  namely  with  the  second  and  third  stars,  which  have 
the  same  longitude  and  are  at  209*^  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  Accordingly 
the  position  of  Saturn  is  made  evident  through  them.  Now  there  are  1514  Egypt¬ 
ian  years  61  days  13  minutes  [of  a  day]  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our 
Lord  to  this  time;  and  according  to  [149^]  calculation  the  mean  position  of  the 
sun  was  at  315°41',  the  anomaly  of  parallax  of  Saturn  was  at  116°31',  and  for 
that  reason  the  mean  position  of  Saturn  was  199°10'  and  that  of  the  highest 
apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  at  approximately  2403^°. 

Now  in  accordance  with  our  problem,  let  ABC  be  the  eccentric  circle:  let  D  be 
its  centre,  and  on  the  diameter  BDC  let  B  be  the  apo¬ 
gee,  C  the  perigee,  and  E  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle 
of  the  Earth.  Let  AD  and  AE  be  joined,  and  with  A  as 
centre  and  }/z  DE  as  radius  let  the  epicycle  be  drawn. 

On  the  epicycle  let  F  be  the  position  of  the  planet;  and 

angle  i)AF  =  angle  ADB. 

And  through  E  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the 
Earth  let  HI  he  drawn,  as  if  in  the  same  plane  with  cir¬ 
cle  ABCy  and  as  a  diameter,  parallel  to  AD,  so  as  to 
have  it  understood  that  with  respect  to  the  planet  the 
apogee  of  the  orbital  circle  is  at  H  and  the  perigee  at  I. 

Now  on  the  orbital  circle  let 

arc  DL=116°31' 

in  accordance  with  the  computation  of  the  anomaly  of 
parallax;  let  FL  and  EL  be  joined,  and  let  FKEM  pro¬ 
duced  cut  both  arcs  of  the  orbital  circle. 

Accordingly  since  by  hypothesis 

angle  ADD  =  angle  DAF  =  41°10', 

and 

angle  ADD  =  180° -ADD  =  138^50'; 


and 

whence  in  triangle  ADD 
and 

therefore  by  addition 


DD  =  854 

where  AD  =  10,000: 

side  AD  =  10,667, 
angle  DDA=38°9', 

angle  DAD  =  3°1': 

angle  DAD  =  44°12'. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


757 


So  again  in  triangle  FAE 


and 


side  FA  =285 

where  AF  =  10,667, 
side  F/vF=  10,465, 


angle  AFF=lV: 

accordingly  it  is  manifest  that 

angle  AFF+angle  Z)AF  =  4°6', 

which  is  the  total  difference  or  additosubtraction  between  the  mean  and  the  true 

position  of  the  planet.  Wherefore  if  the  position  of  the  Earth  had  been  at  K  or 

M,  the  position  of  Saturn  would  have  been  apparent  as  if  from  centre  E  and 

would  have  been  seen  to  be  at  203°  16'  from  the  constellation  of  Aries.  But  with 

the  Earth  at  L,  Saturn  is  seen  to  be  at  209°.  The  difference  [149^]  of  5°44'  goes 

to  the  parallax  in  accord  with  angle  KFL.  But  by  calculation  of  the  regular 

movement  1 1^001^ 

arc  JTL  =  116  31  , 

arc  ML = arc  HL  -  add.  HM  =  1 12°25'. 

And  by  subtraction^ 


arc  L/K  =  67°35': 


hence 


angle  KEL  =  67^35', 

Wherefore  in  triangle  FEL  the  angles  are  given,  and  the  ratio  of  the  sides  is 
given  too:  Hence 


but 


FL=  1,090 

where  FF  =  10,465, 
and  AD  =  FD  =  10,000; 


FL  =  6p32', 

where  BD  =  60^, 

by  usage  of  the  ancients; 
and  there  is  very  little  difference  between  that  and  what  Ptolemy  gave. 

Accordingly  BDS- 10,854, 

and,  as  the  remainder  of  the  diameter 

CF  =  9,146. 

But  since  the  epicycle  when  at  B  always  subtracts  285  from  the  altitude  of  the 
planet,  but  adds  the  same  amount,  i.e.,  its  radius,  when  at  C;  on  that  account 
the  greatest  distance  of  Saturn  from  centre  E  will  be  10,569,  and  the  least  9,431, 
where  FD  =  10,000.  By  this  ratio  the  altitude  of  the  apogee  of  Saturn  is  9^42', 
where  the  radius  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  =  P;  and  the  altitude  of  the 
perigee  is  8^39':  hence  it  is  quite  evident  by  the  mode  set  forth  above  in  the  case 
of  the  small  parallaxes  of  the  moon  that  the  parallaxes  of  Saturn  can  be  greater. 
And  when  Saturn  is  at  the  apogee, 

greatest  parallax  =  5°45'; 

and  when  at  the  perigee, 

greatest  parallax  =  6°39'; 

and  they  differ  from  one  another  by  44' — measuring  the  angles  by  the  lines  com¬ 
ing  from  the  planet  and  tangent  to  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth.  In  this  way 
the  particular  differences  in  the  movement  of  Saturn  have  been  found,  and  we 
shall  afterwards  set  them  out  simultaneously  and  in  conjunction  with  those  of 
the  five  planets. 
lArc  i^/L/F=180^ 


758 


COPERNICUS 


10.  Demonstrations  of  the  Movement  of  Jupiter 

Having  solved  the  problems  concerning  Saturn,  we  shall  use  the  same  method 
and  order  of  demonstration  in  the  case  of  the  movement  of  Jupiter  too,  and  first 
we  shall  repeat  three  positions  reported  and  demonstrated  by  Ptolemy,  and  by 
the  foreshown  transformation  of  circles  we  shall  reconstitute  them  as  the  same 
or  as  very  little  different. 

The  first  of  the  solar  oppositions  was  in  the  17th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  1st 
day  of  the  month  Epiphi  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  1  hour  before  the  following 
midnight  [150^]  at  23^11'  of  Scorpio,  as  he  says,  but  after  deducting  the  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  equinoxes,  at  226'^33'. 

He  recorded  the  second  as  occurring  on  the  21st  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  13th 
day  of  the  month  Phaophi  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  2  hours  before  the  follow¬ 
ing  midnight,  at  7°54'  of  Pisces;  but  with  respect  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
it  was  331°16'. 

The  third  was  during  the  1st  year  of  Antoninus  in  the  month  Athyr  during  the 
night  following  the  20th  day  of  the  month  5  hours  after  midnight,  at  7®45'  in 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Accordingly  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  second  there  were  3  Egyptian 
years  106  days  23  hours,  and  the  apparent  movement  of  the  planet  was  104°43'. 
From  the  second  to  the  third  opposition  there  was  1  year  37  days  7  hours,  and 
the  apparent  movement  of  the  planet  was  36°29'.  During  the  first  interval  of 
time  the  mean  movement  was  99°55';  during  the  second  it  was  33°26'. 

Now  he  found  that  the  arc  of  the  eccentric  circle  from  the  highest  apsis  to  the 
first  opposition  was  77°15';  and  next,  2^50'  from  the  second  opposition  to  the 
lowest  apsis;  and  from  that  to  the  third  opposition,  30°36'.  Now  the  eccen¬ 
tricity  of  the  whole  circle  was  53^p  whereof  the  radius  is  60^;  but  it  is  917,  where¬ 
of  the  radius  would  be  10,000;  and  all  that  corresponds  approximately  to  the 
observations. 

Now  let  ABC  be  the  cir¬ 
cle;  and  from  the  first  op¬ 
position  to  the  second  let 
arc  AS  =  99^55'; 
and  let 

arc  Ea=33W. 

Through  the  centre  D  let 
diameter  FDG  be  drawn,  so 
that  from  the  highest  apsis 

^  FA  =  mb', 

FAB  =  im0', 

(?C=30°36'. 

Now  let  E  be  taken  as  the 
centre  of  the  orbital  circle 
of  the  Earth.  Let  the  dis¬ 
tance  between  the  centres 
be  equal  to  three-quarters 
917,  z.e.,  let 

DE  =  687; 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


759 


^  rad.  ep.  =  229, 

which  is  one-quarter  distance,  and  let  the  epicycle  be  described  at  points  A, 
and  C.  Let  AZ),  BD^  CD^  AEy  BE,  and  CE  be  joined;  and  in  the  epicycles  let 
AKj  BLf  and  BM  be  joined  in  such  a  way  that 

angle  DAK  =  Single  ADF, 
angle  DBL  =  angle  FDB, 

angle  DCM  =  angle  FDC. 

Finally  let  iv,  L,  and  M  be  joined  to  E  by  straight  lines. 

Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  ADE 

angle  ADE  =102^4^5', 
because  angle  ADF  is  given;  and 

side  DE  =  Q87y 

where  AD  =  10,000; 
side  A£’=  10,174, 
angle  EAD  =  3°4S'y 


and 

and  by  addition 


angle  DEA  =73°27'; 


angle  EAK  =  SV3\ 

Accordingly  in  [150^]  triangle  AEK  two  sides  have  been  given: 

£A  =  10,174 


and 

and 

it  will  be  clear  that 
Hence,  by  subtraction. 


AK  =  229 y 
angle  EAK  =  8VS'; 
Single  AEK  =ri7\ 
angle  KEO  =  72^  W. 


Something  similar  will  be  shown  in  triangle  BED.  For  the  sides  BD  and  DE 
always  remain  equal  to  the  corresponding  sides  in  the  first  triangle;  but 

For  that  reason  ^ng\e  BDE  =  2°50'. 

base  515^  =  9,314, 

j  where  DB  =  10,000  ; 

angle  DBE  =  12'. 

So  once  more,  in  triangle  ELB  two  sides  are  given;  and 

angle  55L=  177^22'; 

moreover 

But  angle  L£;B  =  4'. 

,  ,  angle  FEE  =  angle  FDB  — 16'  =  176°54'. 

■Anci  as 

angle  KED  =  72^10'; 

angle  K5L  =  angle  F5L— angle  =  104°44', 
which  is  the  angle  of  apparent  movement  between  the  first  and  the  second  ter¬ 
mini  observed;  and  there  is  approximate  agreement. 

Similarly  at  the  third  opposition,  in  triangle  CDE  two  sides  CD  and  DE  have 
been  given,  and  ^  SO^SG'  ; 

base  FC:'= 9,410 
angle  DCE =2'^8'. 


and 


760 

Whence  in  triangle  ECM 


COPERNICUS 


hence 


angle  =  147^49'; 


angle  CEM  =  39'; 

and  because  the  exterior  angle  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  interior  and  opposite 
angles 


and 


angle  i)Xi7  =  angle  i/CX+angle  CEX ^2^4:7' 


angle  FDC  — angle  DEM  =  2°47'. 

Hence 


angle  GEM  =  180°  -  angle  DEM  =  33°23' ; 

and,  by  addition, 

angle  LJ5M  =  [15H]  36°29', 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  second  opposition  to  the  third;  and  that  agrees 
with  the  observations.  But  since  this  third  solar  opposition  was  found  to  be  at 
7°45'  [in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars]  and  33°23'  to  the  east  of  the  lowest  apsis; 
the  remainder  of  the  semicircle  gives  us  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  as 
154°22'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Now  around  E  let  there  be  drawn  RST  the  annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth 
with  diameter  SET  parallel  to  line  DC,  Now  it 
has  been  made  clear  that 

angle  GDC  =  angle  GER  =  30°36' ; 

and 

angle'Z)ZE  =  angle  /?£'5  =  arc  i25  =  2'47', 
the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  mean  perigee 
of  the  orbital  circle.  Hence  by  addition 
arc  !r5:jR  =  182°47', 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  highest  apsis  of 
the  orbital  circle. 

And  by  this  we  have  confirmation  of  the  fact 
that  at  the  time  of  the  third  opposition  of  Jupiter 
during  the  first  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  20th 
day  of  the  month  Athyr  by  the  Egyptian  calen¬ 
dar  5  hours  after  the  following  midnight  the 
planet  Jupiter  by  its  anomaly  of  parallax  was  at  182°47'.  Its  regular  position  in 
longitude  was  at  4°58',  and  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric 
circle  was  at  154°22'.  All  these  things  are  in  perfect  agreement  with  our  hypo¬ 
thesis  of  the  mobility  of  the  Earth  and  absolute  regularity  [of  movement]. 


II.  On  Three  Other  Oppositions  op  Jupiter  Recently  Observed 

Having  recorded  three  positions  of  the  planet  Jupiter  and  evaluated  them  in 
this  way,  we  shall  set  up  three  others  in  their  place,  which  we  observed  with 
greatest  care  at  the  solar  oppositions  of  Jupiter. 

The  first  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1520  on  the  day  before  the  Kalends  of 
May  II  hours  after  the  preceding  midnight,  at  220°I8'  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars. 

The  second  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1526  on  the  fourth  day  before  the 
Kalends  of  December  3  hours  after  midnight,  at  48°34'. 

But  the  third  opposition  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1529  on  the  Kalends  of 
February  18  hours  after  midnight,  at  II3°44'. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  761 

From  the  first  [151*^]  to  the  second  there  are  6  years  212  days  40  minutes  [of 
a  day],  during  which  time  the  apparent  movement  of  Jupiter  was  208°6'.  From 
the  second  to  the  third  opposition  there  are  2  Egyptian  years  G6  days  39  min¬ 
utes  [of  a  day],  and  the  apparent  movement  of  the  planet  is  65°10'.  But  the 
regular  movement  of  the  planet  during  the  first  interval  is  199^40',  and  during 
the  second  66°10'. 

With  this  as  a  paradigm  let  eccentric  circle  ABC  be  described,  in  which  the 

planet  is  assumed  to  move  simply  and  regu¬ 
larly.  And  let  the  three  positions  observed  be 
designated  in  the  order  of  the  letters  A,  By  and 
C  in  such  a  way  that 

arc  AB  =  199°40'‘ 

and 

arc  BC  =  m^Wy 
on  that  account 

arc  AC  =  360°-(A^+R(7)=94n0'. 
Moreover  let  D  be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the 
annual  orbit  of  the  Earth.  Let  ADy  BD  and  CD 
be  joined;  and  let  any  of  them,  say  DB,  be  ex¬ 
tended  in  a  straight  line  BDE  to  both  arcs  of 
the  circle;  and  let  ACy  AE  and  CE  be  joined. 
Accordingly,  since 

angle  BDC  =  (55^10', 
where  4  rt.  angles  at  centre  =  360°; 
and  that  is  the  angle  of  apparent  movement,  and  since 

angle  CDE=  180°-65°10'  =  114°50', 
but 

angle  =  229°40', 

where  2  rt.  angles  at  circumference  =  360°; 
and  since,  as  standing  on  arc  BC  of  circumference, 

angle  =  66°10', 

and  accordingly 

angle  Z>C£'  =  64°10'; 

therefore,  as  triangle  CDE  has  its  angles  given,  it  has  its  sides  given  too: 

,  (?£;  =  18,150 

and 

£'£)  =  10,918 

where  diameter  of  circle 
circumscribing  triangle  =  20,000. 

Similarly,  in  triangle  ADEy  since 

angle  ADB  =  151°54', 

which  is  the  remainder  of  the  circle  after  the  subtraction  of  the  given  distance 
between  the  first  opposition  and  the  second;  accordingly 
angle  AZ)^=  180°-151°54'  =  28°6', 
as  at  the  centre,  but  as  on  the  circumference 

angle  AZ)£'  =  56°12'; 
and,  as  on  arc  BCA  of  the  circumference 

angle  A^i>  =  160°20'; 


and 


angle  i;Ai)  =  143°28'. 


762 

COPERNICUS 

Hence 

Tin 

side  AjE  =  9,420 

side  ED  =  18,992 

where  diameter  of  circle 

But 

circumscribing  triangle  ADE  = 

=  5,415 

whore  £?£)  =  10,918 
and  =  18,150 

Again  therefore  we  shall  have  triangle  EAC,  of  which  the  two  sides  EA  and  EC 
are  given;  and,  as  standing  on  arc  AC  of  the  circumference 

angle  Ai;C'  =  94°10'. 

[152“]  Hence  it  will  be  shown  that,  as  standing  on  arc  AE, 

angle  AC£;  =  30°40', 

,  angle  ACE+&rc  AC=  124°50', 

and 

CE =ch.  EAC  =  11,721 

where  diameter  of  eccentric  circle  =  20,000. 

And  by  the  ratio  given  before, 

£>£  =  10,665, 


and 

It  follows  that 
and 

and  by  subtraction 


&vcBCAE=m°. 
arc  ££=360° -191°  =  169°, 
BZ)£=ch.  ££  =  19,908 


BD  =  9,243. 

Accordingly,  since  BCAE  is  the  greater  segment,  it  will  contain  F  the  centre 
of  the  circle.  Now  let  the  diameter  GFDH  be  drawn.  It  is  manifest  that 

rect.  ED,  £)£  =  rect.  GD,  DH, 
which  is  therefore  also  given.  But 

rect.  GD,  £)£+sq.  £Z)  =  sq.  FDH. 

Now 

sq.  FDH  -  rect.  GD,  DH  =  sq.  FD. 

Therefore 

££>  =  1,193, 

where  £(?  =  10,000, 

but 

£Z)  =  7P9', 

where  ££'=60”. 

Now  let  BE  be  bisected  at  K,  and  let  FKL  be  extended;  accordingly  FKL 
will  be  at  rt.  angles  to  BE.  And  since 

££>£  =  >^££=9,954 

and 

£>£  =  9,243, 

then,  by  subtraction, 

££  =  711. 

Accordingly  in  triangle  £££,  which  has  its  sides  given, 

angle  £££=36°35', 

and  similarly 

arc  ££=36°35'. 

But 


763 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


arc  L^jB  =  843^°; 


and,  by  subtraction, 


arc  =  47^55', 

which  is  the  distance  of  the  second  position  from  the  perigee. 
And 


arc  J5C(?=  180°  -  47^55' =  132°5', 
which  is  the  distance  of  the  apogee  from  the  second  position. 
And 

arc  BCG- arc  BC=  132°5'-66°10'  =  65°55', 
which  is  the  distance  from  the  third  position  to  the  apogee  G. 
Now 


99°10'-65°55'  =  28°15', 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  apogee  to  the  first  position  of  the  epicycle.  That 
harmonizes  too  little  with  the  appearances,  as  the  planet  does  not  run  through 
the  proposed  eccentric  circle:  hence  this  method  of  demonstration  which  is 
based  upon  an  uncertain  principle  cannot  give  us  any  certainty.  One  sign  of 
this  among  others  is  that  Ptolemy  in  the  case  of  Saturn  recorded  a  too  great 
distance  between  the  centres  and  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  a  too  small  distance; 
but  the  same  thing  seemed  a  great  enough  distance  to  us,  so  that  evidently 
upon  the  assumption  of  different  arcs  of  circles  for  the  same  planet  [152^] 
that  which  is  sought  does  not  come  about  in  the  same  way.  Not  otherwise 
was  it  possible  to  compound  the  apparent  and  the  regular  movements  at  the 
three  proposed  termini  and  then  at  all  the  termini,  unless  we  kept  the  total 
egression  of  eccentricity  of  the  centres  which  was  recorded  by  Ptolemy  as 
5^30',  whereof  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  60^,  but  which  is  917  parts, 
whereof  the  radius  is  10,000.  And  let  the  arc  from  the  highest  apsis  to  the  first 
opposition  be  45°2';  from  the  lowest  apsis  to  the  second  opposition  64°42'; 
and  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  highest  apsis  49°8'. 

For  let  the  above  figure  of 
the  eccentric  circle  carrying 
an  epicycle  be  repeated,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  it  fits  this  example. 
So  by  our  hypothesis 
DE  =  6S7, 

which  is  three-quarters  of  the 
total  distance  between  the 
centres.  And 

radius  of  epicycle  =  229, 
where  FD  =  10,000, 
which  is  the  remaining  quar¬ 
ter  of  the  distance.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  since 

angle  AZ)F  =  45°2', 
triangle  ADE  will  have  the 
two  sides  AD  and  DE  given, 
together  with  angle  ADE: 
hence  it  is  shown  that 
side  =  10,496, 
where  AD  =  10,000; 


764 

and 


COPERNICUS 


angle  =  2^39'. 

And  since 

angle  Z)AA^  =  angle  ADFy 

by  addition 

angle  £'AK  =  47®41'. 

Also  in  triangle  AEK  the  two  sides  AK  and  AE  are  given.  Hence 

angle  AEK  =  67\ 

Now 


angle  KED  =  single  (angle  AjBA'+angle  DAE')  =41°26', 

as  the  angle  of  apparent  movement  at  the  first  solar  opposition. 

[153^]  In  triangle  BDE  a  similar  thing  Avill  be  shown.  Since  the  two  sides 
BD  and  DE  are  given,  and 

angle  DDD  =  64°42'; 
side  BE  =  9,725 

where  BD  =  10,000 

and 


angle  DDE  =  3°40'. 

Furthermore,  in  triangle  BEL  the  two  sides  BE  and  BL  are  also  given,  and 

angle  DDL  =  118^58': 
angle  DEL=  1®10'; 

and  hence 


angle  DEL  =110°28'. 
But  it  has  already  been  made  clear  that 

angle  AED  =  41°26', 

therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  KEL  =151%^\ 

Hence 


360° -15r54'  =  208^6', 

the  angle  of  apparent  movement  between  the  first  and  the  second  solar  op¬ 
positions;  and  that  agrees  with  the  observations. 

Finally,  at  the  third  opposition,  in  triangle  CDE,  sides  DC  and  DE  are 
given  in  the  same  way;  and 

angle  CDE=130°52'. 

On  account  of  angle  FDC  being  given, 

side  CE  =  10,463, 

where  CD  =  10,000, 

and 


angle  DCE  =  2°51'. 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  ECM  =  5V59\ 

Now  in  triangle  ECM  the  two  sides  CM  and  CE  are  given  together  with  angle 
MCE: 


angle  MEC  =  V, 

and 

angle  MEC+angle  D(7E  =  angle  FDC  — angle  DEM, 
and  angles  FDC  and  DEM  are  the  angles  of  regular  and  apparent  movement. 
And  hence,  at  the  third  solar  opposition, 

angle  DEM  =  45°17'. 


765 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 

But  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

angle  i)^L  =  90^28'; 

accordingly 

angle  =  65°10', 
which  is  the  distance  between  the  second  and  the  third  solar  oppositions  ob¬ 
served;  and  that  agrees  with  the  observations.  But  since  the  third  position  of 
Jupiter  was  viewed  at  113°44'  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  it  shows  that  the 
position  of  the  highest  Jovial  apsis  is  at  approximately  159°. 

But  if  around  centre  E  we  now  describe  RST  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth,  of 
which  the  diameter  RES  is  parallel  to  DC,  then  it  will  be  manifest  that  at  the 
third  opposition  of  Jupiter 

angle  FDX  =  angle  DES  =  49°8', 
and  that  the  apogee  of  the  regular  movement  in  parallax  is  at  R. 

But  now  that  the  Earth  has  passed  through  180°  plus  arc  ST,  it  is  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  Jupiter  at  its  solar  opposition;  and 

arc  ASr  =  3°51', 

according  as  angle  SET  has  been  shown  to  be  of  the  same  magnitude. 

And  so  it  is  clear  from  this  that  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord,  1529,  on  the  Kalends 
of  February  19  hours  after  midnight,  [153  the  regular  movement  of  anomaly 
of  parallax  of  Jupiter  was  at  183°51',  but  by  its  proper  movement  Jupiter  was 
at  109°52';  and  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  approximately  159°  from  the 
horn  of  the  constellation  of  the  Ram,  as  was  to  be  investigated. 

12.  Confirmation  of  the  Regular  Movement  of  Jupiter 

But  it  has  already  been  seen  above  that  at  the  last  of  the  three  solar  opposi¬ 
tions  observed  by  Ptolemy  the  planet  Jupiter  by  its  proper  movement  was  at 
4°58'  with  an  anomaly  of  parallax  of  182°47'.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  during  the 
time  between  the  two  observations  the  movement  of  parallax  of  Jupiter  was 
1°5'  besides  the  full  revolutions  and  its  proper  movement  was  approximately 
104°54'.  The  time,  however,  which  flowed  between  the  1st  year  of  Antoninus  on 
the  20th  day  of  the  month  Athyr  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  at  5  hours  after  the 
following  midnight  and  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1529  on  the  Kalends  of  February 
18  hours  after  the  preceding  midnight  was  1392  Egyptian  years  99  days  37 
minutes  of  a  day,  to  which  time  there  similarly  corresponds  according  to  the 
above  calculation  1°5'  besides  the  whole  revolutions,  by  which  the  regular 
revolutions  of  the  Earth  has  anticipated  Jupiter  12G7  times;  and  so  the  number 
is  seen  to  harmonize  with  the  observations  and  is  held  as  certain  and  exact. 

And  it  is  also  manifest  that  during  this  time  the  highest  and  lowest  apsides  of 
the  eccentric  circle  moved  43^^°  to  the  east.  The  equal  distribution  [of  the  move¬ 
ment]  yields  approximately  1°  per  300  years. 

13.  Positions  to  Be  Assigned  to  the  Movement  of  Jupiter 

But  the  time  from  the  last  of  the  three  observations,  in  the  1st  year  of  An¬ 
toninus  on  the  20th  day  of  the  month  Athyr  at  4  hours  after  the  following  mid¬ 
night,  going  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord,  amounts  to  136 
Egyptian  years  314  days  10  minutes  [of  a  day],  during  which  time  the  mean 
movement  of  [154®]  parallax  was  84°31'.  The  subtraction  of  84°31'  from  182°47' 
leaves  98°16'  for  the  movement  up  to  midnight  on  the  Kalends  of  January  at 
the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord. 


766  COPERNICUS 

Backward  to  the  first  Olympiad  there  were  775  Egyptian  years  12}/^  days, 
during  which  time  a  movement  of  70°58'  was  reckoned  besides  the  whole  revo¬ 
lutions.  The  subtraction  of  70°58'  from  98°16'  leaves  27°18'  as  the  position  for 
the  Olympiad. 

Coming  down  from  there  for  451  years  247  days,  there  are  110°52',  which  to¬ 
gether  with  the  movement  for  the  first  Olympiad  amount  to  138°10'  for  the 
position  of  the  years  of  Alexander  at  noon  of  the  1st  day  of  the  month  Thoth  by 
the  Egyptian  calendar.  And  so  for  any  others. 

14.  On  Investigating  the  Parallaxes  of  Jupiter  and  Its  Altitude 
IN  Relation  to  the  Orbital  Circle  of  Terrestrial  Revolution 

In  order  to  investigate  the  remaining  apparent  movements  of  parallax  in  the 
case  of  Jupiter,  we  carefully  observed  its  position  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1520 
on  the  12th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  March  6  hours  before  noon,  and  we  per¬ 
ceived  through  the  instrument  that  Jupiter  was  4°31'  to  the  west  of  the  first 
bright  star  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio;  and  since  the  position  of  the  fixed  star 
was  at  209°40',  it  is  clear  that  the  position  of  Jupiter  was  at  205^9'  in  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars. 

Accordingly  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Christ  to  the  time  of  this  ob¬ 
servation  there  were  1520  equal  years  62  days  15  minutes  [of  a  day],  during 
which  time  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun  is  calculated  to  have  been  309°  16', 
and  the  anomaly  of  parallax  111°15',  whereby  the  mean  position  of  the  planet 
Jupiter  is  put  at  198°!'.  And  since  at  this  our  time  the  position  of  the  highest 
apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  found  to  be  at  159°,  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric 
circle  of  Jupiter  was  39°1'. 

Following  this  example,  let  eccentric  circle  ABC  be  described  with  centre  D 
and  diameter  AZ)C.  Let  A  be  the  apogee,  and  C  the  perigee;  and  for  that  reason 
let  E  the  centre  of  the  annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  on  DC,  Now  let 
arc  AR  =  39°1'; 

and  with  B  as  centre  let  the  epicycle  be  described  with 
BF  as  radius  equal  to  one  third  of  distance  DE.  Let 
angle  DBF  =  Single  [154^]  ADB; 
and  let  the  straight  lines  BE,  and  FE  be  joined. 

Accordingly  since  in  triangle  BDE  two  sides  are  given: 

DE  =  687, 

where  BD  =  10,000 ; 

and  since  these  two  sides  comprehend  the  given  angle 
BDE,  and 

angle  5Z>E  =  140°59': 
it  will  be  shown  that 

base  10,543 

and 

angle  =  angle  ADR  — angle  BED  =  2°2l', 
which  is  the  difference  between  angle  BED  and  angle 
ADB,  Therefore,  by  addition, 

angle  DRF  =  41°22'. 

Accordingly  in  triangle  EBF  angle  EBF  is  given 
together  with  the  two  sides  comprehending  it: 

DR  =  10,543 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


767 


It  follows  from  this  that 
and 


BF  =  }4DE  =  229, 

where  BD  =  10,000. 

side  fa;  =10, 373 


angle  BEF  =  50\ 

Now  as  lines  BD  and  FE  cut  one  another  in  point  JV, 

angle  Z)XF  =  angle  BDA  —  angle  FED 
and  angles  FED  and  BDA  are  the  angles  of  mean  and  true  movement ; 
and 

angle  DXF  =  angle  DFF+angle  BEF  =  * 

Now 

angle  FFZ)=  39°!' -3°11'  =  35°50' 
from  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  to  the  planet. 

But  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  was  at  159°;  and 

159°+35°50'  =  194°50', 


which  was  the  true  position  of  Jupiter  with  respect  to  centre  F,  but  the  apparent 
position  was  at  205°9'.  Accordingly,  the  difference  of  10°19'  is  due  to  the  paral¬ 
lax. 

Now  let  RST  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  described  around  centre  F;  and 
let  its  diameter  RET  be  parallel  to  FF,  so  that  R  is  the  apogee  of  parallax.  More¬ 
over,  in  accordance  with  the  measure  of  the  mean  anomaly  of  parallax,  let 

arc  FaS=111°15'; 

and  let  FEV  be  extended  in  a  straight  line  to  both  arcs  of  the  orbital  circle  of 
the  Earth.  The  true  apogee  of  the  planet  will  be  at  V;  angle  REV  is  equal  to  the 
difference  between  regular  and  apparent  movement;  and 

angle  REV  =  angle  DXE. 

Hence,  by  addition, 


and  by  subtraction 


arc  FFF=114°26', 


angle  FFF  =  65°34'. 

[155®]  But  since 

angle  FFF=10°19'; 
angle  FSE  =  104°7'. 

Hence,  as  in  triangle  EFS  the  angles  are  given,  the  ratio  of  the  sides  will  be 
given  too: 


Accordingly 


FF:FaS  =  9,698:  1,791. 


and 


FF=  10,373 


FF  =  1,916, 

where  BD  =  10,000. 

For  Ptolemy  however 

FF=  11^30', 

where  radius  of  eccentric  circle  =  60^; 
and  that  is  approximately  the  same  ratio  as 

1,916  :  10,000; 


768  COPERNICUS 

and  therein  we  do  not  seem  to  differ  from  Ptolemy  at  all. 

Accordingly 

dmtr.  ADC  :  dmtr.  RET  =  bm'  :  Ip. 

Similarly 

AD  :ES= AD:  22JS;  =  5p13'9"  :  Ip 

thus 

i)J5  =  21'9" 

and 

5F  =  7'10". 

Accordingly,  when  Jupiter  is  at  apogee, 

{ADF — BF)  :  radius  of  orbital  circle  of  Earth  =  5p27'29"  :  Ip. 

And  when  Jupiter  is  at  perigee; 

{EC+BF)  :  radius  of  orbital  circle  of  Earth  =  4p58'49"  :  1p; 
and  when  in  the  mean  positions,  as  is  proportional.  Hence  it  is  gathered  that 
Jupiter  at  apogee  has  a  greatest  parallax  of  10°35',  and  at  perigee  11°35':  there 
is  a  difference  of  1°  between  them.  So  the  regular  movements  of  Jupiter  have 
been  demonstrated  to  be  at  one  with  the  apparent. 

15.  On  the  Planet  Mars 

We  must  now  inspect  the  revolutions  of  Mars  by  taking  three  ancient  solar 
oppositions,  with  which  we  shall  connect  the  mobility  of  the  Earth  in  antiquity. 
Accordingly  of  those  oppositions  which  Ptolemy  recorded,  the  first  was  in  the 
15th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  26th  day  of  Tybi  the  5th  month  by  the  Egyptian 
calendar  1  equatorial  hour  after  the  midnight  following.  And  he  says  that  it  was 
at  21^^  of  Gemini,  but  in  relation  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  was  at  84°20'. 

He  noted  the  second  opposition  [155^]  as  occurring  in  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian 
on  the  6th  day  of  Pharmuthi  the  8th  month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  3  hours 
before  the  following  midnight  at  28°50'  of  Leo  but  at  142°  10'  in  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars. 

The  third  was  in  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  12th  day  of  Epiphi  the  11th 
month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  2  equatorial  hours  before  the  following  mid¬ 
night  at  2°34'  of  Sagittarius  but  at  235°54'  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Accordingly,  between  the  first  and  second  oppositions  there  are  4  Egyptian 
years  69  days  20  hours  or  50  minutes  of  a  day,  and  the  apparent  movement  of 
the  planet  was  67°50'  besides  the  whole  revolutions.  From  the  second  opposition 
to  the  third  there  were  4  years  96  days  and  1  hour,  and  the  apparent  movement 
of  the  star  was  93°44'.  Now  during  the  first  interval  the  mean  movement  was 
81°44'  besides  the  complete  revolutions;  during  the  second  interval  it  was  95°28'. 
Then  he  found  that  the  total  distance  between  the  centres  was  12^,  whereof  the 
radius  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  60^;  but  it  w’as  2,000  whereof  the  radius  w^as 
10,000.  And  the  mean  movement  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  highest  apsis 
was  41°33';  and  then  it  was  40°11'  from  the  highest  apsis  to  the  second  opposi¬ 
tion;  and  from  the  third  opposition  to  the  low^est  apsis  it  was  44°21':  But  by  our 
hypothesis  of  regular  movements  there  will  be  three-quarters  of  that  distance, 
i.e.,  1,500  between  the  centres  of  the  eccentric  circle  and  the  orbital  circle  of  the 
Earth,  and  the  remaining  quarter  of  500  wdll  be  the  radius  of  the  epicycle. 
Now  thus  let  eccentric  circle  ABC  be  described  with  centre  D,  and  wdth  FDG 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  769 

as  the  diameter  through  both 
apsides;  and  let  E  the  centre  of 
the  orbital  circle  of  annual  rev¬ 
olution  be  on  the  diameter.  Let 
A,  and  C  be  the  points  of 
solar  opposition,  in  that  order; 
and  let 

arc  ^F  =  41®34', 
arc  F5  =  40^11', 

and 

arc  CG  =  44°21'. 

At  the  separate  points  A, 
and  C  let  the  epicycle  be  de¬ 
scribed  with  one-third  of  dis¬ 
tance  DE  as  radius.  And  let 
AD,  BD,  CD,  AE,  BE,  and  CE 
be  joined.  On  the  epicycle  let 
AL,  BM,  and  CN  be  joined, 
but  in  such  a  way  that 
angle  DAL  =  angle  ADF, 
angle  DLil/  =  angle  DDF, 


angle  DCN  =  angle  CDF. 

Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  ADE 

angle  ADL=138°26', 

because  angle  FDA  was  given  and  also  the  two  sides,  viz., 

DL  =  1,500 

where  AD  =  10,000; 

it  follows  from  this  that 

side  AL=  11,172, 

and 

angle  DAL  =  5°7'. 

[156^]  Hence,  by  addition, 

angle  DAL  =  46°41'. 

So  also  in  triangle  EAL  angle  EAL  is  given,  together  with  the  two  sides: 

AL=11,172 

and 

AL  =  500, 

where  AD  =  10,000. 

Moreover, 

angle  ALL  =  1°56'; 

and 

angle  ALL+angle  DAL  =  7°3', 

which  is  the  total  difference  between  angles  ADF  and  LED]  and  hence 

angle  DLL  =  343^°. 

Similarly  at  the  second  opposition:  in  triangle  BDE 

angle  DDF=  139°49' 


COPERNICUS 

side  Z)i57  =  1,500 

where  BD  =  10,000. 

side  BE  =11, ISS, 
angle  BED  =  35°13\ 

angle  DBE  =  4:%8', 


770 
and 

Hence 

and 
Therefore 

angle  =  45^13' 

and  is  comprehended  by  the  given  sides  BE  and  BM,  from  which  it  follows  that 

angle  BEM  =  r53', 

and  by  subtraction 

angle  DEM  =  33^20'. 

Accordingly 

angle  LEM  =  47°50', 

whereby  the  movement  of  the  planet  from  the  first  solar  opposition  to  the 
second  is  apparent;  and  the  number  is  consonant  with  experience. 

Again  at  the  third  solar  opposition:  triangle  CDE  has  the  two  sides  CD  and 
DE  given,  which  comprehend  angle  CDE.  And 

angle  CjD£7  =  44°21'; 

hence 

base  CE  =  8,988, 

where  CD  =  10,000 
and  1,500; 

and 

angle  CE^Z>  =  135^39', 

and 

angle  DC E  =  6^42'. 

This  again  in  triangle  CEN 

angle  £'CAr=  142^21' 

and  is  comprehended  by  the  known  sides  EC  and  CN:  hence  too 

angle  CEN  =V52'. 

[156^]  Therefore  by  subtraction 

angle  NED  =  127%' 

at  the  third  solar  opposition.  But  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

angle  i)£ilf  =  33°20'. 

Hence  by  subtraction 

angle  MEN  =  93%d', 

and  is  the  angle  of  apparent  movement  between  the  second  and  the  third 
solar  oppositions,  wherein  the  calculation  agrees  sufficiently  with  the  observa¬ 
tions.  But  at  this  last  observed  opposition  of  Mars  the  planet  was  seen  at 
235°54',  being  127°5'  distant  from  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle,  as  was 
shown:  therefore  the  position  of  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  Mars 
was  at  108^50'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Now  let  RST  the  annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  described  around 
centre  E  with  diameter  RET  parallel  to  DC,  so  that  R  is  the  apogee  of  parallax 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  771 


and  T  the  perigee.  Accordingly  the  planet  was  seen  on  EX  at  235°54',  in  longi¬ 
tude,  and  it  was  shown  that 

angle  Z)X^  =  8°34', 

the  difference  between  the  regular  and  the  apparent  movement;  and  on  that 
account 


mean  movement  =  2443^°; 


but,  at  the  centre, 

angle  =  angle  DXE  = 


Accordingly 

arc  i?iS  =  arc  RT-sltc  aST=  180®-8°34'  =  17r26', 
the  mean  movement  of  parallax  of  the  planet.  Furthermore  among  other 
things  we  have  demonstrated  by  this  hypothesis  of  the  mobility  of  the  Earth 
that  in  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  12th  day  of  the  month  Epiphi  by 
the  Egyptian  calendar  10  equal  hours  after  midday  the  planet  Mars  by  its 
mean  movement  in  longitude  was  at  2443^°,  and  the  anomaly  of  parallax 
was  at  171°26'. 


16.  On  Three  Other  Solar  Oppositions  of  Mars  Which 
Have  Been  Observed  Recently 


We  have  compared  these  three  of  Ptolemy^s  observations  of  Mars  with  three 
other  observations,  which  we  did  not  take  carelessly.  The  first  was  in  the  year 
of  Our  Lord  1512  on  the  Nones  of  June,  1  hour  after  midnight,  and  the  position 
of  Mars  was  found  to  be  at  235°33',  according  as  the  sun  was  opposite  [157®] 
at  55^33'  from  the  first  star  of  Aries  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  as  a  starting- 
point. 

The  second  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1518  on  the  day  before  the  Ides  of 
December  8  hours  after  midday;  and  the  planet  was  apparent  at  63®2'. 

The  third  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1523  on  the  8th  day  before  the  Ka¬ 
lends  of  March  8  hours  before  noon,  at  183^20'. 

Accordingly  from  the  first  to  the  second  opposition  there  were  6  Egyptian 
years  191  days  45  minutes  [of  a  day];  from  the  second  to  the  third  4  years 
72  days  23  minutes. 

During  the  first  interval  of  time  the  apparent  movement  was  187°29',  and 
the  regular  movement  was  168°7'.  During  the  second  interval  of  time  the 
apparent  movement  was  80^18',  and  the  regular  was  83°. 

Now  let  the  eccentric  circle  of  Mars  be  repeated  again,  except  that  here 

arc  AR  =  168°7' 


and 


arc  RC  =  83°. 

Accordingly,  by  the  same  method  which  we  employed  in  the  case  of  Saturn 
and  Jupiter — let  us  pass  over  in  silence  the  multitude,  complication,  and  bore¬ 
dom  of  the  calculations — we  finally  find  that  the  apogee  of  Mars  is  on  arc  BC, 
For  it  is  manifest  that  the  apogee  cannot  be  in  arc  AB  because  there  the  ap¬ 
parent  movement  is  19°22'  greater  than  the  mean.  Again  the  apogee  cannot 
be  in  arc  CA,  because  even  if  BC  the  arc  preceding  CA  is  the  lesser,  never¬ 
theless  arc  BC  exceeds  the  apparent  movement  by  a  greater  difference  than 
arc  CA  does.  But  it  was  shown  above  that  in  the  eccentric  circle  the  lesser  and 
decreased  movement  takes  place  around  the  apogee.  Accordingly  the  apogee 
will  be  held  correctly  to  be  in  arc  BC. 


COPERNICUS 


772 

Let  the  apogee  be  F\  and 
let  FDG  be  the  diameter  of 
the  circle.  And  let  the  centre 
of  the  orbital  circle  of  the 
Earth  be  on  the  diameter. 

Accordingly,  we  find  that 
arc  FCA  =  125°29', 
arc  SE  =  66°18', 

and 

arc  FC=16W; 

but 

Z)^;=  1,460, 

where  radius  DE  =  10,000, 
which  is  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  centres;  and 
semi-diameter  of 
epicycle  =  500: 
whence  the  apparent  and 
regular  movements  are 
shown  to  be  consonant  with 
one  another  and  to  agree 
with  experiments. 

Therefore  let  the  figure  be  filled  out,  as  before.  For  it  will  be  shown  that, 
since  in  triangle  ADE  two  sides  AD  and  DE  are  known  and 

angle  AZ)J5  =  54°31' 
from  the  first  opposition  of  Mars  to  the  perigee; 

angle  DA^  =  7°24', 

and  by  subtraction 

angle  AED  =  118^5'; 

and 

side  AE  =  9,229, 

Now  by  hypothesis 

angle  DAL  =  angle  FDA, 

Accordingly  by  addition 

angle  LAL  =  132°53'. 

So  too  in  triangle  EAL  the  two  sides  EA  and  AL  comprehending  the  given 
angle  at  A  are  themselves  given:  [157^]  accordingly 

angle  ALL  =  2°12', 

and 

angle  LED  =  1 15^53'. 

Similarly  it  will  be  shown  in  the  case  of  the  second  opposition  that,  since 
in  triangle  BDE  the  two  given  sides  DB  and  BE  comprehend  angle  BDE,  and 

angle  LDL=113°35', 

then  by  what  we  have  shown  concerning  plane  triangles 

angle  DBE  =  VlV , 
angle  DLL  =  59°13', 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


773 


base  =  10,668, 

where  DB  — 10,000 
and  BM  =  m. 


And  by  addition 


angle  EBM  =  iyZQ>', 

So  too  in  triangle  EBM,  since  the  sides  comprehending  the  given  angle  are 
given,  it  will  be  shown  that 

angle  R^M  =  2°36'; 


and  by  subtraction 


angle  Z)^A/ =  56°38'. 


Then 

angle  MEG=  180°-angle  DEM  =  m°22'. 
But  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

angle  Li^D  =  115^53'; 


hence 

angle  =  64^7' ; 

and 

angle  L£(?+angle  GEM  =  187^29', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360°. 

And  that  agrees  with  the  apparent  distance  from  the  first  opposition  to  the  sec¬ 
ond. 

A  similar  thing  can  be  seen  at  the  third  opposition.  For  it  has  been  shown  that 

angle  DCE  =  2%\ 

and 


Accordingly,  as 


side  EC  =  11,407, 

where  CD  =  10,000. 


angle  j57CiV  =  18°42', 

and  as  sides  CE  and  CN  of  triangle  ECN  have  already  been  given,  it  will  be  clear 
[158^]  that 

angle  CEN  =  50\ 


And 


angle  CEiV+angle  DCE  =  2%6\ 

which  is  the  difference  by  which  angle  DEN  of  apparent  movement  is  exceeded 
by  angle  FDC  of  regular  movement.  Therefore 

angle  Z)jE;iV  =  13°40', 

which  agrees  approximately  with  the  apparent  movement  observed  between  the 
second  and  the  third  oppositions. 

Accordingly,  since  the  planet  Mars,  as  w'e  told  you,  was  apparent  in  this  posi¬ 
tion  at  133°20'  from  the  head  of  the  constellation  of  Aries ;  and  it  has  been  shown 
that 


angle  FEiV=13°40'; 

it  is  manifest  upon  calculation  backward  that  the  position  of  the  apogee  of  the 
eccentric  circle  at  this  last  observation  was  at  119°40'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars. 

At  the  time  of  Antoninus,  Ptolemy  found  it  at  108°50',  and  so  during  the  time 
between  then  and  now  it  has  moved  10  eastward.  Moreover  we  have  found 


774  COPERNICUS 

a  lesser  distance  between  the  centres,  z.e.,  40,  whereof  the  radius  of  the  eccentric 
circle  is  given  as  10,000 — not  because  either  Ptolemy  or  ourselves  made  a  slip, 
but  manifestly  because  the  centre  of  this  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  has  ap¬ 
proached  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  Mars,  while  the  sun  has  remained 
immobile.  For  these  things  correspond  approximately  to  one  another,  as  will  be 
shown  below  clearer  than  day. 

Now  let  the  annual  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  described  around  the  centre 
E)  and  let  its  diameter  SER  be  parallel  to  CD  on 
account  of  the  equality  of  revolutions.  Let  R  be 
the  regular  apogee  with  respect  to  the  planet,  S 
the  perigee,  and  T  the  Earth.  Now  let  ET  be  ex¬ 
tended;  the  line  of  sight  of  the  planet  will  thus 
cut  CD  at  point  X.  Now  the  line  of  sight  along 
ETXy  as  was  said  at  the  last  opposition,  is  at 
133°20'  of  longitude. 

Moreover,  it  has  been  shown  that 
angle  DXE  =  2%&, 

for  angle  DXE  is  the  difference  by  which  angle 
XDF  of  mean  movement  exceeds  angle  XED  of 
apparent  movement.  But  angle  SET  is  equal  to 
its  alternate  angle  DXE,  and  is  the  additosub- 
traction  arising  from  the  parallax.  Now 

180° -2°56'  =  177^4', 
which  is  the  regular  movement  of  the  anomaly  of  parallax  from  R  the  apogee 
of  the  regular  movement — and  hence  we  have  shown  here  that  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  1523  on  the  8th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  March,  7  equatorial  hours 
before  noon,  the  planet  Mars  by  its  mean  movement  in  longitude  was  at  136°16',* 
and  its  regular  anomaly  of  parallax  was  at  177°4',  and  the  highest  apsis  of  the 
eccentric  circle  was  at  119°40',  as  was  to  be  shown. 

17.  Confirmation  of  the  Movement  of  mars 

[158^]  Now  it  was  made  clear  above  that  in  the  last  of  Ptolemy^s  three  obser¬ 
vations  Mars  by  its  mean  movement  was  at  244J^°,  and  its  anomaly  of  parallax 
was  at  171°26'.  Accordingly  during  the  year  between  there  was  a  movement  of 
5°38'besides  the  complete  revolutions.  Now  for  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus  on  the 
12th  day  of  Epiphi  the  11  month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  9  hours  after  mid¬ 
day,  i.e.y  3  equatorial  hours  before  the  following  midnight,  with  respect  to  the 
Cracow  meridian,  to  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1523  on  the  8th  day  before  the  Ka¬ 
lends  of  March  7  hours  before  noon,  there  were  1384  Egyptian  years  251  days 
19  minutes  [of  a  day].  During  that  time  there  were  by  the  above  calculation 
5°38'  and  648  complete  revolutions  of  anomaly  of  parallax.  Now  the  regular 
movement  of  the  sun  was  held  to  be  2573^°.  The  subtraction  from  257J^°  of  the 
5°38'  of  the  movement  of  parallax  leaves  251°52'  as  the  mean  movement  of 
Mars  in  longitude.  And  all  that  agrees  approximately  with  what  was  set  down 
just  now. 

18.  Determination  of  the  Position  of  Mars 

Now  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  to  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus 
on  the  12th  day  of  the  month  Epiphi  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  at  3  hours  before 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  776 

midnight  there  were  138  Egyptian  years  180  days  52  minutes  [of  a  day],  and  dur¬ 
ing  that  time  the  movement  of  parallax  was  293®4'.  And  when  293°4'  is  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  171°26'  of  Ptolemy's  last  observation — a  complete  revolution 
being  borrowed — there  remain  238^22'  at  the  [beginning  of]  the  first  year  of  Our 
Lord  on  midnight  of  the  Kalends  of  January. 

From  the  first  Olympiad  to  this  time  there  were  775  Egyptian  years  123^^  days, 
during  which  the  movement  of  parallax  was  254®!'.  W'hen  254®!'  has  similarly 
been  subtracted  from  238®22'  and  a  revolution  borrowed,  its  [!59^]  position  at 
the  first  Olympiad  remains  as  344®2!'. 

Similarly  by  calculating  the  movements  according  to  the  other  intervals  of 
time  we  shall  have  its  position  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander  as 
!20®39'  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Caesar  as  2!1®25'. 


!9.  How  Great  the  Orbital  Circle  of  Mars  Is  in  Terms  of 
THE  Parts  of  Which  the  Annual  Orbital  Circle  of  the 
Earth  Is  the  Unit 


Moreover  we  took  observations  of  the  conjunction  of  Mars  with  the  first 
bright  star  of  the  Chelae — called  the  southern  Claw — which  occurred  in  15 !2 
on  the  Kalends  of  January.  For  on  the  morning  of  that  day  6  equatorial  hours 
before  noon  we  saw  Mars  J^®  distant  from  the  fixed  star  but  deflected  towards 
the  solstitial  rising,  by  which  it  was  signified  that  Mars  was  already  in  longitude 
J/^®  to  the  east  of  the  star  but  distant  in  northern  latitude.  Now  it  was 
established  that  the  position  of  the  star  was  !9!®20'  with  a  northern  latitude  of 
40'.  So  it  was  clear  that  the  position  of  Mars  was  at  !9!®28'  with  a  northern 
latitude  of  5!'.  But  at  this  time  the  anomaly  of  parallax  by  calculation  was 
98®28';  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  at  262®,  and  the  mean  position  of  Mars 
at  !63®32',  and  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  43®52'. 

With  that  before  us  let  the  eccentric  circle  ABC  be  described.  Let  D  be  its 

centre,  ADC  its  diameter,  A  the  apogee,  C  the  peri¬ 
gee,  and  let 

ecc.  Z)£:=  1,460, 

where  AD  =  10,000. 

Now  let 

arc  A5  =  43®52'. 

Now  with  B  as  centre  and  radius  BF  of  500,  whereof 
AD  is  10,000,  let  the  epicycle  be  described.  Let 
angle  DBF  =  angle  ADB] 

and  let  BD^BEj  BF,  and  FE  be  joined.  Moreover, 
let  RST  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  be  de¬ 
scribed  around  centre  E  with  its  diameter  RET  par¬ 
allel  to  BD ;  and  on  the  diameter  let  R  be  the  apogee 
of  the  planet's  regular  movement  of  parallax,  and  T 
the  perigee.  Now  let  the  Earth  be  at  and  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  regular  anomaly  of  parallax  as 
computed,  let 


arc  B>S  =  98®28'. 

Let  FE  be  extended  in  the  straight  line  FEV,  which 
will  cut  BD  at  point  X  and  the  convex  arc  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  at  F, 
where  the  true  apogee  of  parallax  is. 


776 


COPERNICUS 


Accordingly,  in  triangle  BDE  [159^]  two  sides  are  given: 
/)£’=  1,460, 

where  BD  =  10,000; 

and  they  comprehend  angle  BDE.  And 

angle  AD5  =  43°52'; 


now 

angle  BDE  =  180°  -  43°52'  =  136°8'. 

Hence  it  will  be  shown  that 

base  11,097 

and 

angle  DBE  =  5m\ 

But  by  hypothesis 

angle  DBF  =  angle  ABD; 

by  addition 

angle  FBF  =  49°5', 

and  is  comprehended  by  the  given  sides  EB  and  BF.  On  that  account 

angle  BEF  =  2^ 


side  FB  =  10,776, 

where  DB  =  10,000. 

angle  BZF  =  7°13', 


and 

Accordingly 
because 

angle  Z>ZF  =  angle  ZBF+angle  XEB, 

the  interior  and  opposite  angles.  Angle  DXE  is  the  subtractive  additosubtrac- 
tion,  the  difference  by  which  angle  ADB  exceeds  angle  XED,  and  by  which  the 
mean  position  of  Mars  exceeds  the  true.  Now  the  mean  position  is  reckoned  as 
163°32';  therefore  the  true  position  is  to  the  west  at  156°19'.  But  its  position  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  at  191°28'  to  those  viewing  it  from  S.  Therefore  its  parallax,  or  com¬ 
mutation,  is  35°9'  eastward.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that 

angle  FF>S  =  35°9'. 

Now  as  72  T  is  parallel  to  BD, 

angle  i)ZF  =  angle  REV, 

and  similarly 

arc  72F  =  7°13'. 


Thus,  by  addition, 

arc  7i2>S  =  105°41', 

which  is  the  corrected  anomaly  of  parallax,  and  hence  angle  VE^  exterior  to 
triangle  FES  is  given.  Hence,  as  being  interior  and  opposite 
angle  FaSF  =  70°32', 

where  2  rt.  angles  =  180°. 

But  as  the  angles  of  the  triangle  are  given,  the  ratio  of  the  sides  is  given  too: 
therefore 

FF  =  9,428 

and 

ES  =  5,727 

where  diameter  of  circle 
circumscribing  triangle  =  10,000. 


Accordingly 


[160"]  FS  =  6,580, 


777 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAATENLY  SPHERES,  V 


where  10,776 
and  .RZ)  =  10,000; 

and  that  is  approximately  the  same  as  Ptolemy’s  findings.  But  by  addition 

AZ)£J=  11,460, 


and  by  subtraction 


£C  =  8,540. 

And  at  the  lowest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  the  epicycle  adds  the  500  which  it 
subtracts  at  A  the  highest  apsis,  so  that  the  remainder  at  the  highest  apsis  is 
10,960,  and  the  sum  at  the  lowest  apsis  is  9,040.  Accordingly,  in  so  far  as  the 
radius  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  is  P,  Mars  will  have  a  greatest  distance 
of  1p39'57"  at  its  apogee,  a  least  distance  of  1p22'26",  and  a  mean  distance  of 
1p31'11".  So  too  in  the  case  of  Alars  the  movements,  magnitudes,  and  distances 
have  been  explicated  in  a  fixed  ratio  by  means  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth. 


20.  On  the  Planet  Venus 

Now  that  we  have  set  out  the  movements  of  the  three  higher  planets  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  and  Alars  which  circle  around  the  Earth,  it  is  time  to  speak  of  the  plan¬ 
ets  which  the  Earth  circles  around.  And  first  of  Venus,  which  admits  an  easier 
and  clearer  demonstration  of  its  movement  than  does  Mercury,  if  only  the  neces¬ 
sary  observations  of  some  positions  are  not  wanting;  since  if  its  greatest  dis¬ 
tances,  z.e.,  at  morning  and  at  evening,  in  either  direction  from  the  mean  position 
of  the  sun  are  found  equal  to  one  another,  then  we  have  as  certain  that  the 
highest  or  lowest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  Venus  is  at  the  midpoint  be¬ 
tween  these  two  positions  of  the  sun.  The  apsides  are  distinguished  from  one 
another  by  the  fact  that  such  equal  [angular]  elongations  are  smaller  when  they 
take  place  around  the  apogee  and  greater  when  they  take  place  around  the  peri¬ 
gee.  Finally  at  its  other  positions  we  perceive  through  the  differences  by  which 
the  angular  elongations  exceed  one  another  how  far  distant  the  orb  of  Venus  is 
from  the  highest  or  lowest  apsis  and  also  what  its  eccentricity  is,  according  as 
these  things  have  been  passed  on  to  us  by  Ptolemy  with  great  clarity,  so  that 
there  is  no  need  to  repeat  them  separately,  except  in  so  far  as  things  from 
Ptolemy’s  observations  are  applicable  to  our  hypothesis  of  terrestrial  mobility. 

He  took  as  his  first  observation  one  made  by  the  mathematician  Theo  of  Alex¬ 
andria  in  the  1 6th  year  of  Hadrian,  he  tells  us,  on  the  21st  day  of  the  month 
Pharmuthi,  at  the  first  hour  of  the  following  night;  and  that  was  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  132  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  day  before  the  Ides  of  Alarch.  And  Venus 
was  seen  at  its  greatest  evening  distance  of  47^°  from  the  mean  position  of  the 
sun,  [160^]  while  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  by  calculation  at  337°41'  in 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  With  this  observation  he  compared  one  of  his  own 
which  he  said  he  made  in  the  4th  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  12th  day  of  the  month 
Thoth  at  daybreak,  z.e.,  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  142  on  the  early  morning  of  the 
third  day  before  the  Kalends  of  August.  He  says  that  at  this  time  the  greatest 
morning  elongation  of  Venus  was  equal  to  the  previous  elongation  and  was  47° 
15'  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  which  was  at  119°  in  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  and  which  on  the  previous  date  had  been  at  337°41'.  Now  it  is  mani¬ 
fest  that  midway  between  these  mean  positions  are  the  apsides  diametrically  op¬ 
posite  one  another  at  48J^°  and  228J^°.  When  the  6^^°  of  the  precession  of  the 
equinoxes  has  been  added  to  both  of  them,  they  will  fall  upon  25°  of  Taurus  and 


778 


COPERNICUS 

of  Scorpio  according  to  Ptolemy,  and  the  diametrically  opposite  highest  and 
lowest  apsides  of  Venus  must  be  at  those  positions. 

Once  more  for  the  further  confirmation  of  the  thing,  he  assumed  another  ob¬ 
servation  made  by  Theo  in  the  4th  year  of  Hadrian  at  morning  twilight  on  the 
20th  day  of  the  month  Athyr,  which  was  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  119  on  the 
morning  of  the  fourth  day  before  the  Ides  of  October,  at  which  time  Venus  was 
again  found  at  a  great  distance  of  47°32'  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  at 
181°  13'.  With  that  he  connected  his  own  observation  made  in  the  21st  year  of 
Hadrian,  which  was  the  year  of  Our  Lord  136,  on  the  9th  day  of  the  month 
Mechyr  by  the  Egyptian  calendar  but  by  the  Roman  calendar  the  8th  day  be¬ 
fore  the  Kalends  of  January,  at  the  first  hour  of  the  following  night,  and  the 
evening  distance  was  found  to  be  47°32'  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  at 
265°25'.  But  in  the  preceding  observation  made  by  Theo  the  mean  position  of 
the  sun  was  at  191°13'.  Again  the  apsides  fall  midway  between  these  positions, 
at  48°20'  and  at  228°20'  approximately,  where  the  apogee  and  the  perigee  must 
be.  And  they  are  distant  from  the  equinoxes  at  25°  of  Taurus  and  at  25°  of 
Scorpio,  and  Ptolemy  separated  them  by  two  other  observations  as  follows. 

The  first  observation  was  made  by  Theo  in  the  13th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the 
3rd  day  of  the  month  Epiphi,  but  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  129  at  early  morning 
on  the  12th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  January,  and  he  found  the  farthest  morn¬ 
ing  elongation  of  Venus  to  be  44°48',  while  the  sun  by  its  mean  movement  was 
at  481%2°j  Venus  was  apparent  at  4°  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 
Ptolemy  himself  made  the  other  observation  in  the  21st  year  of  Hadrian  on  the 
2nd  day  of  the  month  [16P]  Tybi  by  the  Egyptian  calenda,r,  which  was  by  the 
Roman  calendar  the  year  of  Our  Lord  136  on  the  5th  day  before  the  Kalends  of 
January  at  the  1st  hour  of  the  following  night,  while  the  sun  by  its  mean  move¬ 
ment  was  at  228°54',  from  which  Venus  had  a  greatest  evening  elongation  of 
47°16'  and  was  itself  apparent  at  2763^°.  Hence  the  apsides  are  distinguished 
from  one  another,  that  is  to  say,  the  highest  is  put  at  483^°,  where  the  shorter 
wanderings  of  Venus  are,  and  the  lowest  at  2283^°,  where  the  greater  wander¬ 
ings  are — as  was  to  be  demonstrated. 

21.  What  the  Ratio  of  the  Diameters  of  the  Orbital 
Circle  of  the  Earth  and  of  Venus  Is 

Furthermore  from  these  last  two  observations  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the 
orbital  circles  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  will  be  ap¬ 
parent.  For  let  AB  the  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth 
be  described  around  centre  C.  Let  ACB  be  its  di¬ 
ameter  through  both  apsides;  and  on  ACB  let  D 
be  taken  as  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  Ve¬ 
nus  which  is  eccentric  to  circle  AB.  Now  let  A  be 
the  position  of  the  apogee;  and  when  the  Earth 
is  there,  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus 
is  at  its  greatest  distance,  while  AB  is  the  line  of 
mean  movement  of  the  sun — 483^°  at  A  and 
2283^°  at  B.  Now  let  the  straight  lines  AE  and 
BF  be  drawn  touching  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus 
at  points  E  and  F,  and  let  DE  and  DF  be  joined. 

Accordingly,  since  as  at  the  centre 


B 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 
angle  JDA£;  =  44^^ 


779 


angle  i4i/Z)  =  90°, 

then  triangle  DAE  will  have  its  angles  given  and  hence  its  sides: 

DE  =  }^ch.  2  2)A£'  =  7,046, 

where  AD  =  10,000. 

In  the  same  way  in  the  right  triangle  BDF 

angle  DBF  =  47 

and 

Accordingly 

Hence  by  addition 
and 

and  by  subtraction 


ch.  i)F  =  7,346, 

where  BD  =  10,000. 

RZ)  =  9,582, 

where  DF = DE  =  7,046. 
=  19,582 

AC  =  =  9,791; 

CD  =  209. 


Accordingly,  in  so  far  as 


and 

and 

and 


[161^]  AC=1P, 

DD  =  43K', 
CDm^'; 

DE=DF  =  7,m 


CD  =  213, 

where  AC=  10,000. 

And  that  was  to  be  demonstrated. 

22.  On  the  Twofold  Movement  of  Venus 


But  by  the  argument  from  two  of  Ptolemy's  observations,  Venus  does  not 
have  a  simple  regular  movement  around  D.  He  made  the  first  observation  in  the 
18th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  2nd  day  of  the  month  Pharmuthi  by  the  Egyptian 
calendar,  but  by  the  Roman  calendar  it  was  the  year  of  Our  Lord  134  at  early 
morning  on  the  12th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  March.  For  at  that  time  the  sun 
by  its  mean  movement  was  at  3181^2'^;  and  Venus,  which  was  apparent  in  the 
morning  at  275J4°  of  the  ecliptic,  had  reached  a  farthest  limit  of  elongation  of 
43°35'. 

He  made  the  second  in  the  3rd  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  4th  day  of  the  month 
Pharmuthi  by  the  Egyptian  calendar,  which  by  the  Roman  calendar  was  in 
the  year  of  Our  Lord  140  on  the  evening  of  the  12th  day  before  the  Kalends 
of  March.  And  at  that  time  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  at  318i%2°J 
Venus  was  at  a  greatest  evening  elongation  of  483^°  and  was  visible  at 
in  longitude. 

With  that  set  out,  let  point  G  be  taken  as  the  position  of  the  Earth  in  the 


COPERNICUS 


780 


same  terrestrial  orbital  circle,  so 
that  arc  is  a  quadrant  of  a 
circle — the  quadrant  which 
measures  how  far  the  sun  dia¬ 
metrically  opposite  at  both  ob¬ 
servations  according  to  its  mean 
movement  was  seen  to  be  west 
of  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric 
circle  of  Venus.  Let  GC  be 
joined,  and  let  DK  be  drawn 
parallel  to  GC.  Let  GE  and  GF 
be  drawn  touching  the  orbital 
circle  of  Venus;  and  let  DE,  DF, 
and  DG  be  joined.  Accordingly,  since, 

angle  £^GG= 43^35', 

which  w’as  the  morning  elongation  at  the  time  of  the  first  observation,  and  since 

angle  CGF  =  48 

which  was  the  evening  elongation  at  the  time  of  the  second  observation; 

angle  £'6F  =  angle  £^GG+angle  GGF  =  91i3d^2°J 
and  accordingly 

angle  Z)GF  =  H^^GF  =  45^473^'; 

and  by  subtraction 

angle  CGD  =  2°23'. 

But 


angle  DCG  =  90°. 

Accordingly,  as  the  angles  of  triangle  CGD  are  given,  the  ratios  of  the  sides 
are  given  too;  and 

CD  =  416, 

where  CG  =  10,000. 

Now  it  has  already  been  shown  that  the  distance  between  the  centres  was  208; 
and  now  the  distance  has  become  approximately  twice  as  great.  Accordingly,  if 
CD  is  bisected  at  point  ilf,  similarly 

[162-]  DM  =  208, 

the  total  variation  in  this  approach  and  withdrawal.  Again  if  DM  is  bisected  at 
Nj  it  will  be  seen  to  be  the  mean  and  regular  point  in  this  movement. 

Hence,  as  in  the  case  of  the  three  higher  planets,  the  movement  of  Venus  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  compounded  of  two  regular  movements,  either  by  reason  of  the 
epicycle  of  an  eccentric  circle,  as  above,  or  by  any  other  of  the  aforesaid  modes. 
This  planet  however  is  somewhat  different  from  the  others  in  the  order  and  com- 
mensurability  of  its  movements;  and,  as  I  opine,  there  will  be  an  easier  and  more 
convenient  demonstration  by  means  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  an  eccentric  circle. 
In  this  way  let  us  take  N  as  centre  and  DN  as  radius  and  describe  a  small  circle, 
on  which  [the  centre  of]  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus  is  borne  and  moved  around 
according  to  the  law  that  whenever  the  Earth  falls  upon  diameter  ACB,  on 
which  the  highest  and  lowest  apsides  of  the  eccentric  circle  are,  the  centre  of 
orbital  circle  of  the  planet  will  always  be  at  least  distance,  i.c.,  at  point  M ;  and 
when  the  Earth  is  at  its  mean  apsis,  Le.,  at  G,  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  781 

the  planet  will  reach  point  D  and  the  greatest  distance  CD.  Hence  you  are  given 
to  understand  that  at  the  time  when  the  Earth  has  made  one  orbital  circuit,  the 
centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  has  made  two  revolutions  around  centre 
N  in  the  same  direction  as  the  Earth,  Le.,  eastward.  For  according  to  such  an 
hypothesis  in  the  case  of  Venus,  all  the  regular  and  apparent  movements  agree 
with  the  observations,  as  will  be  shown  later.  Now  all  this  which  has  so  far 
been  demonstrated  concerning  Venus  is  found  to  be  consonant  with  our  times, 
except  that  the  eccentricity  has  decreased  approximately  one  sixth,  so  that  what 
before  was  416  is  now  350,  as  many  observations  teach  us. 

23.  On  the  Examination  of  the  Movement  of  Venus 

In  this  connection  I  have  taken  two  positions  observed  very  accurately,  the 
first  by  Timochares  in  the  13th  year  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  the  52nd  year 
after  the  death  of  Alexander  in  the  early  morning  [162^]  of  the  18th  day  of  Mesori 
the  eight  month  by  the  Egyptian  calendar;  and  it  was  recorded  that  Venus  was 
seen  to  have  occupied  the  position  of  the  fixed  star  which  is  westernmost  of  the 
four  stars  in  the  left  wing  of  Virgo  and  is  sixth  in  the  description  of  the  sign;  its 
longitude  1513^°,  its  northern  latitude  1K°;  and  it  is  of  third  magnitude.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  the  position  of  Venus  was  made  manifest  in  this  way;  and  the  mean 
position  of  the  sun  was  by  calculation  at  194®23'. 
liVith  this  as  an  example,  let  the  figure  be  drawn  with  point  A  still  at  48®20': 

arc  AE=  146^3', 
and  by  subtraction 

arc  BE==S3%7'. 
Angle  CE(?  =  42°53', 
which  is  the  angular  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  planet  from  the 
mean  position  of  the  sun. 
Accordingly,  since 
line  CD  =  312, 

where  CD  =10,000, 

and 

angle  DCE  =  33°57'; 
in  triangle  CDE 

angle  CED  =  l°l\ 

and 

base  DE  =  9,743. 

But 

angle  CDF  =  2BCE=^ 
67^54'; 

and 

angle  BDF=  180® — 
67®54'  =  112°6'. 

And,  as  the  exterior  angle  of  triangle  CDEy 

angle  BDE  =  3S%7'. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that 

angle  DDF  =  144®4', 


782 

and 


COPERNICUS 


Z)F=104, 

where  DJ^  =  9,743. 

So  in  triangle  DEF 

angle  DEF  =  20', 

and  by  addition 

angle  C£JF  =  r21', 

and 

side  =  9,831. 

But  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

angle  CE(?  =  42^53'; 

accordingly,  by  subtraction, 

angle  FEG  =  4.1^32'; 
and,  as  radius  of  the  orbital  circle, 

F(?  =  7,193, 

where  £F  =  9,831 

Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  EFG  angle  FEG  and  the  ratios  of  the  sides  are 
given,  the  remaining  angles  are  given  too.  And 

[163"]  angle  £'FG  =  72°5'. 

Arc  ALG=180°+angle  EFG-=252%\ 

measured  from  the  highest  apsis  of  the  orbital  circle.  And  so  we  have  shown  that 
in  the  13th  year  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  on  the  18th  day  of  the  month  Mesori 
the  anomaly  of  parallax  of  Venus  was  252°5'. 

We  ourselves  made  observations  of  a  second  position  of  Venus  in  the  year  of 
Our  Lord  1529  on  the  4th  day  before  the  Ides  of  March,  1  hour  after  sunset  and 
at  the  beginning  of  the  8th  hour  after  midday.  We  saw  the  moon  begin  to  occult 
Venus  at  the  midpoint  of  the  dark  part  between  the  horns,  and  the  occultation 
lasted  till  the  end  of  the  hour  or  a  little  later,  until  the  planet  was  seen  to  emerge 
towards  the  west  on  the  other  side  at  the  midpoint  of  the  gibbosity  of  the  horns. 
Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  at  the  middle  of  the  hour  or  thereabouts,  the  centres 
of  the  moon  and  Venus  were  in  conjunction,  and  we  had  a  full  view  at  Frauen- 
burg.  Venus  was  still  in  her  evening  increase  [of  elongation]  and  this  side  of  the 
point  of  tangency  of  the  orbital  circle  with  a  line  from  the  Earth.  Accordingly 
from  the  birth  of  Christ  there  have  been  1529  Egyptian  years  87  days  7}/2  hours 
by  apparent  time  but  by  equal  time  7  hours  34  minutes,  and  the  mean  position 
of  the  sun  considered  simply  had  reached  332°11';  and  the  precession  of  the 
equinoxes  was  27°24'.  The  regular  movement  of  the  moon  was  33°57'  away  from 
the  sun,  the  regular  movement  of  anomaly  was  205°!',  and  the  movement  in 
latitude  was  71°59'.  Hence  it  is  reckoned  that  the  true  position  of  the  moon  was 
at  10°,  but  measured  from  the  equinox  it  was  at  7°24'  of  Taurus  with  a  northern 
latitude  of  1°13'.  But  since  the  15°  of  Libra  were  rising,  on  that  account  the 
lunar  parallax  in  longitude  was  48°32',  and  so  the  apparent  position  [of  the 
moon]  was  at  6°26'  of  Taurus;  but  its  longitude  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
was  9°11'  with  a  northern  latitude  of  41';  and  the  apparent  position  of  Venus 
was  at  an  evening  distance  of  37°!'  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  and  the 
distance  of  the  Earth  from  the  highest  apsis  of  Venus  was  76°9'  to  the  west. 
Now  let  the  figure  be  drawn  again  according  to  the  previous  mode  of  con- 


783 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


struction,  except  that 
angle  EC  A  =76^9', 

and 

angle  CDF  =  2^CA=: 
152°18'; 

and 

ecc.  CD  =  246, 
as  it  is  found  today;  and 
DF  =  104, 

where  CE  =  10,000. 
Therefore  in  triangle  CDF, 
by  subtraction 

angle  DCF=103°51' 
and  is  comprehended  by 
the  given  sides.  From  that 
it  will  be  shown  that 
angle  CFD  =  1®15', 

and 

base  DF=  10,056, 

and 


angle  [163b]  CDE  = 
74°54'. 


angle  CDF  =  2ACF  =  152^8'. 


But 
And 

angle  DDF  =  angle  CDF— angle  CDF  =  77°24'. 
So  again  in  triangle  DEF  two  sides  are  given; 

DF=104, 

where  DF=  10,056; 

and  they  comprehend  the  given  angle  EDF.  Moreover, 

angle  DEF  =  35', 

and 


base  EF=  10,034. 
angle  CFF=r50'. 


Hence  by  addition 
Furthermore, 

angle  CFC  =  37°1', 

which  measures  the  apparent  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  mean  position  of 
the  sun. 

Now 


angle  FFG  =  angle  CFG— angle  CFF  =  35°11'. 

Similarly  in  triangle  FFG  two  sides  are  given: 

FF=  10,034, 

where  FG  =  7,193 

and  the  angle  at  F  is  given:  hence  too  the  remaining  angles  are  calculable: 

angle  FGF  =  533^° 


784 

and 


COPERNICUS 


angle  EFG  =  9ri9', 

which  is  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  true  perigee  of  its  orbital  circle. 

But  since  diameter  KFL  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  CE,  so  that  K  is  the 
apogee  of  the  regular  movement  and  L  is  the  perigee,  and  since 

angle  £’FL  =  angle  CEF) 

then 

angle  LFG  =  angle  EFG — angle  EFL  =  89°29' ; 

and 

arc  i^G=180°-89°29'  =  90°31', 

w^hich  is  the  planet's  anomaly  of  parallax  as  measured  from  the  highest  apsis  of 
regular  movement  of  the  orbital  circle — and  that  is  what  we  were  investigating 
at  the  time  of  this  observation  of  ours. 

But  at  the  time  of  the  observation  made  by  Timochares  the  anomaly  was 
252°5';  accordingly  during  the  years  between  there  was  a  movement  of  198°26' 
besides  the  1115  complete  revolutions.  Now  the  time  from  the  13th  year  of 
Ptolemy  [164®^]  Philadelphus  at  early  morning  on  the  18th  day  of  the  month 
Mesori  to  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1529  on  the  4th  day  before  the  Ides  of  March 
73^  hours  after  midday  was  1800  Egyptian  years  236  days  40  minutes  [of  a  day] 
approximately. 

Accordingly  when  we  have  multiplied  the  movement  of  1115  revolutions  and 
198°26'  by  365  days,  and  divided  the  product  by  1800  years  226  days  40  minutes, 
we  shall  have  an  annual  movement  of  225°1'45"3"'40"". 

Once  more  the  distribution  of  this  through  365  days  leaves  a  daily  movement 
of  36'59"28"',  which  were  added  to  the  table  which  we  set  out  above. 

24.  On  the  Positions  of  the  Anomaly  of  Venus 

Now  from  the  first  Olympiad  to  the  13th  year  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  at 
early  morning  of  the  18th  day  of  the  month  Mesori  there  are  503  Egyptian 
years  228  days  40  minutes  [of  a  day],  during  which  time  the  movement  was 
reckoned  to  be  290°39'.  But  if  290°39'  is  subtracted  from  252°5'  and  360°  is 
borrowed,  the  remainder  will  be  321°26',  the  position  of  the  movement  at  the 
beginning  of  the  first  Olympiad. 

The  remaining  positions  are  in  proportion  to  the  movement  and  time  so  often 
spoken  of:  81°52'  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Alexander;  70°26'  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  years  of  Caesar;  and  126°45'  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our 
Lord.  ^ 

25.  On  Mercury 

It  has  been  shown  how  Venus  is  bound  up  with  the  movement  of  the  Earth 
and  in  what  ratio  of  circles  the  regularity  of  its  movement  is  concealed.  Mercury 
remains,  and  without  fail  will  also  submit  to  the  principle  assumed,  although 
it  has  more  complicated  wanderings  than  Venus  or  any  of  the  aforesaid  planets. 
It  has  been  established  experimentally  by  ancient  observations  that  in  the  sign 
of  Libra,  Mercury  has  its  least  angular  elongations  from  the  sun  and  has  greater 
elongations  in  the  opposite  sign,  as  is  right.  But  Mercury  does  not  have  its 
greatest  elongations  in  this  position  but  in  some  other  positions  higher  and  be¬ 
yond,  as  in  Gemini  and  Aquarius,  particularly  at  the  time  of  Antoninus  accord¬ 
ing  to  Ptolemy ;  and  that  occurs  in  the  case  of  no  other  planet.  When  the  ancient 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  785 

mathematicians,  who  supposed  the  reason  for  this  [164 *"]  to  be  the  immobility 
of  the  Earth  and  the  movement  of  Mercury  in  its  great  epicycle  along  an  eccen¬ 
tric  circle,  had  noticed  that  one  simple  eccentric  circle  could  not  account  satis¬ 
factorily  for  these  appearances,  not  only  did  they  grant  that  the  movement  on 
the  eccentric  circle  was  not  around  its  own  centre  but  around  a  foreign  centre, 
but  they  were  also  compelled  to  admit  that  this  same  eccentric  circle  carrying 
the  epicycle  moved  along  another  small  circle,  as  they  admitted  the  moon’s  ec¬ 
centric  circle  did.  And  so  there  were  three  centres,  namely  that  of  the  eccentric 
circle  carrying  the  epicycle,  that  of  the  small  circle,  and  that  of  the  circle  which 
the  moderns  call  the  equant.  They  passed  over  the  first  two  circles  and  acknowl¬ 
edged  that  the  epicycle  did  not  move  regularly  except  around  the  centre  of  the 
equant,  which  was  the  most  foreign  to  the  true  centre,  to  its  ratio,  and  to  both 
the  centres  already  extant.  But  they  judged  that  the  appearances  of  this  planet 
could  be  saved  by  no  other  scheme,  as  Ptolemy  declares  at  great  length  in  his 
Composition, 

But  in  order  that  this  last  planet  may  be  freed  from  the  liability  to  injury  and 
disparagement  and  that  the  regularity  of  its  movement  in  relation  to  the  mo¬ 
bility  of  the  Earth  may  be  no  less  clear  than  in  the  case  of  the  other  preceding 
planets;  we  shall  assign  to  it  too  a  circle  eccentric  to  an  eccentric  circle  instead 
of  the  epicycle  which  the  ancients  assumed,  but  in  a  way  different  from  that  of 
Venus.  And  nevertheless  an  epicycle  does  move  on  the  eccentric  circle,  but  the 
planet  is  not  borne  on  its  circumference  but  up  and  down  along  its  diameter: 
that  can  take  place  through  regular  circular  movements,  as  was  set  forth  above 
in  connection  with  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  And  it  is  not  surprising, 
since  Proclus  in  his  commentary  on  the  Elements  of  Euclid  admits  that  a  straight 
line  can  be  described  by  many  movements,  by  all  of  which  movements  its  ap¬ 
pearance  will  be  demonstrable. 

But  in  order  that  the  hypothesis  may  be  grasped  more  perfectly,  let  AB  be 

the  great  orbital  circle  of  the 
Earth  with  centre  C  and  diam¬ 
eter  ACB.  And  on  AC B  between 
points  B  and  C  let  D  be  taken  as 
a  centre  and  with  one-third  CD 
as  radius  let  the  small  circle  EF 
be  described,  so  that  F  is  its 
greatest  distance  from  (7,  and  E 
its  least.  Let  HI  the  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  of  Mercury  be  described 
around  centre  F;  and  then  with 
I  the  highest  apsis  as  centre  let 
the  epicycle  which  the  planet 
traverses  be  added.  Let  HI  be 
the  orbital  circle  which  is  eccen¬ 
tric  to  an  eccentric  circle  and 
carries  the  epicycle.  When  the 
figure  has  been  drawn  in  this 
way,  all  those  things  will  fall  in 
order  on  the  straight  line 
AHCEDFKILB, 


786  COPERNICUS 

Meanwhile  let  the  planet  be  set  up  at  i.e.,  at  the  least  distance  KF  from 
centre  F,  [165^]  Now  with  that  point  established  as  the  starting-point  of  the 
revolutions  of  Mercury,  let  it  be  understood  that  the  centre  F  makes  two  revo¬ 
lutions  for  every  one  of  the  Earth,  and  in  the  same  direction  too,  f.e.,  eastward; 
similarly  too  the  planet  on  LKy  but  along  the  diameter,  up  and  down  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  centre  of  circle  HI. 

For  it  follows  from  this  that  whenever  the  Earth  is  at  A  or  By  the  centre  of 
the  orbital  circle  of  Mercury  is  at  E,  which  is  the  position  farthest  away  from  C ; 
but  whenever  the  Earth  is  at  the  middle  quadrants,  the  centre  is  at  E  which  is 
the  position  nearest  [to  (7],  and  this  in  a  manner  contrary  to  that  of  Venus. 
Moreover,  according  to  this  law  Mercury  traversing  the  diameter  of  epicycle 
KL  is  nearest  to  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  carrying  the  epicycle,  i.e.y  is  at 
Ky  when  the  Earth  falls  upon  the  diameter  AB]  and  when  the  Earth  is  at  its 
mean  positions,  the  planet  will  be  at  L  the  most  distant  position.  In  this  way 
there  take  place  the  two  twin  revolutions  of  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  on  the 
circumference  of  the  small  circle  EF  and  of  the  planet  along  the  diameter  LK 
which  are  equal  to  one  another  and  commensurable  with  the  annual  movement 
of  the  Earth. 

But  meanwhile  let  the  epicycle  or  line  FI  be  moved  by  its  own  proper  move¬ 
ment  along  orbital  circle  Hly  and  let  its  centre  move  regularly,  completing  one 
revolution  simply  and  with  respect  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  in  approxi¬ 
mately  88  days.  But  by  that  movement,  whereby  it  outruns  the  movement  of 
the  Earth  and  which  we  call  the  movement  of  parallax,  it  has  with  respect  to  the 
Earth  one  revolution  in  1 16  days,  as  can  be  derived  more  exactly  [165  from  the 
table  of  mean  movements.  Hence  it  follows  that  Mercury  by  its  own  proper 
movement  does  not  always  describe  the  same  circumference  of  a  circle,  but  in 
proportion  to  its  distance  from  the  centre  of  its  orbital  circle  it  describes  a  cir¬ 
cumference  of  greatly  varying  magnitude,  least  at  point  Ky  greatest  at  L,  and 
middling  around  /,  in  practically  the  same  way  as  was  viewed  in  the  case  of  the 
lunar  epicycle  on  an  epicycle.  But  what  the  moon  did  on  the  circumference.  Mer¬ 
cury  does  on  the  diameter  by  means  of  a  reciprocal  movement  which  is  neverthe¬ 
less  compounded  of  regular  movements.  We  showed  above  in  connection  with  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  how  that  takes  place.  But  we  shall  bring  to  bear  some 
other  things  concerning  this,  farther  down  in  connection  with  latitudes.  And 
this  hypothesis  is  sufficient  for  all  the  appearances  which  are  seen  to  be  Mer- 
cury^s,  as  is  manifest  from  the  history  of  the  observations  of  Ptolemy  and  others. 

26.  On  the  Positions  of  the  Highest  and  Lowest  Apsides 

OP  Mercury 

For  Ptolemy  observed  Mercury  inthe  1st  year  of  Antoninus  after  sunset  on  the 
20th  day  of  the  month  Epiphi,  while  the  planet  in  the  evening  was  at  its  greatest 
angular  distance  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun.  Now  at  this  time  there  had 
been  137  Christian  years  188  days  42J^  minutes  [of  a  day]  at  Cracow,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  according  to  our  calculation  was  at  63°50', 
and  the  planet  observed  through  the  instrument  was  at  7°  of  Cancer,  he  says. 
But  after  the  subtraction  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  which  at  that  time 
was  6^40',  it  was  shown  that  the  position  of  Mercury  was  at  90^20'  from  the 
beginning  of  Aries  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  its  greatest  angular  elon¬ 
gation  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  263^°. 


787 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 

He  made  a  second  observation  in  the  4th  year  of  Antoninus  on  the  early  morn¬ 
ing  of  the  19th  day  of  the  month  Phamenoth  when  140  yesiYS  67  days  12  minutes 
[of  a  day]  approximately  had  passed  since  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Christ, 
and  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  at  303°19'.  Now  Mercury  was  apparent 
through  the  instrument  at  133^°  of  Capricorn,  but  it  was  at  approximately 
276°49'  from  the  fixed  beginning  of  Aries,  and  accordingly  the  greatest  morning 
distance  was  similarly  263^°.  Accordingly  since  the  limits  of  elongation  on  either 
side  of  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  are  equal,  it  is  necessary  that  the  apsides  of 
Mercury  be  either  way  at  the  midpoint  between  these  positions,  i.e.j  between 
226°49'  and  90°20'.  And  they  are  3°34'  and  183°34'  diametrically  opposite,  where 
the  highest  and  the  lowest  apsides  [166®^]  of  Mercury  must  be. 

As  in  the  case  of  Venus,  the  apsides  are  distinguished  through  two  observa¬ 
tions.  He  made  the  first  in  the  19th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  early  morning  of  the 
15th  day  of  the  month  Athyr,  while  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  at  182^38'. 
The  greatest  morning  distance  of  Mercury  from  the  sun  was  19°3',  since  the 
apparent  position  of  Mercury  was  at  163°35'.  And  in  the  same  19th  year  of 
Hadrian,  which  was  the  year  of  Our  Lord  135,  at  dusk  of  the  19th  day  of  the 
month  Pachon  by  the  Egyptian  calendar,  Mercury  was  found  by  the  aid  of  the 
instrument  at  27°43'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  while  the  sun  by  its  mean 
movement  was  at  4°28'.  Again  it  was  shown  that  the  greatest  evening  distance 
of  the  planet  was  23^^15' — which  is  greater  than  the  previous  distance — whence 
it  was  clear  enough  that  the  apogee  of  Mercury  at  that  time  could  be  only  at 
approximately  1833^° — as  was  to  be  taken  note  of. 


27.  How  Great  the  Eccentricity  of  Mercury  Is  and  What 

THE  COMMENSURABILITY  OF  ItS  CIRCLES  Is 

Moreover  through  this  the  distance  between  the  centres  and  the  magnitudes 
of  the  orbital  circles  are  demonstrated  simultaneously.  For 
let  AB  be  the  straight  line  passing  through  A  the  highest 
and  B  the  lowest  apsis  of  Mercury,  and  also  the  diameter  of 
the  great  circle,  whose  centre  is  D.  And  with  D  taken  as 
centre  let  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  be  described.  There¬ 
fore  let  lines  AE  and  BF  be  drawn  touching  the  orbital  cir¬ 
cle,  and  let  DE  and  DF  be  joined. 

Accordingly,  since  at  the  first  of  the  two  preceding  obser¬ 
vations  the  greatest  morning  distance  of  the  planet  was  seen 
to  be  19°3', 

angle  CAE  =  ir3\ 

But  at  the  second  observation  the  greatest  evening  distance 
was  seen  to  be  23)^°.  Accordingly,  as  both  of  the  right  tri¬ 
angles  AED  and  BFD  have  their  angles  given,  [166^]  the 
ratios  of  their  sides  will  be  given  too,  so  that,  as  radius  of  the 
orbital  circle, 

£;£)  =  32,639, 

where  AD  =  100,000. 


But 


F£)= 39,474, 

where  BD  =  100,000. 


788 


COPERNICUS 


But  according  as 


FD=^ED 


as  radius  of  the  orbital  circle, 


and  by  subtraction 
Hence 


EZ)  =  32,639, 

where  ^Z)  =  100,000; 

DB  =  82,685 


AC  =  J^4B  =  91,342; 

and  by  subtraction 

CD  =  8,658, 

which  is  the  distance  between  the  centres.  And  the  radius  of  the  orbital  circle 

of  Mercury  will  be  21'26",  where  AC=  1^  =  60'; 

and 

CD  =  5'4"; 

and 

DE  =  35,733 

and 

CD  =  9,479, 

where  AC  =  100,000 

as  was  to  be  demonstrated. 

But  these  magnitudes  also  do  not  stay  everywhere  the  same;  but  are  quite 
different  from  those  found  in  connection  with  the  mean  apsides,  as  the  apparent 
morning  and  evening  longitudes  observed  at  those  positions  and  recorded  by 
Theo  and  Ptolemy  teach  us.  For  Theo  observed  the  evening  limit  of  Mercurj^ 
in  the  14th  year  of  Hadrian  on  the  18th  day  of  the  month  Mesori  after  sunset; 
and  at  129  years  216  days  45  minutes  [of  a  day]  after  the  birth  of  Christ,  while 
the  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  93)^°,  z.e.,  approximately  at  the  mean  apsis 
of  Mercury.  Now  the  planet  was  seen  through  the  instrument  to  be  3i%2° 
the  Avest  of  Basiliscus  in  Leo;  and  on  that  account  its  position  was  119^°,  and 
its  greatest  evening  distance  was  26}^°.  __ 

Ptolemy  reported  that  the  second  limit  was  A 
observed  by  him  in  the  2nd  year  of  Antoninus  on 
the  21st  day  of  the  month  Mesori  at  early  morn¬ 
ing,  at  which  time  there  had  been  138  Christian 
years  219  days  12  minutes,  and  the  mean  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  sun  was  similarly  93°39';  [167^]  and  the 
greatest  morning  distance  of  Mercury  from  that 
was  found  to  be  2034°*  For  Mercury  was  visible 
at  73^°  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Therefore  let  ACDB  which  is  the  diameter  of 
the  great  orbital  circle  [of  the  Earth]  and  which 
passes  through  the  apsides  of  Mercury,  be  again 
drawn,  as  before;  and  at  point  C  let  CE  the  line 
of  mean  movement  of  the  sun  be  erected  at  right 
angles.  Let  point  F  be  taken  between  C  and  D ;  and 
let  the  orbital  circle  of  Mercury  be  described  around 
F.  Let  the  straight  lines  EH  and  EG  touch  this 
small  circle;  and  let  FG,  FH,  and  EF  be  joined. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  789 


Now  once  more  our  problem  is  to  find  point  F,  and  what  ratio  radius  FG 
has  to  u4C.  For  since 

angle  CFG  =  2634^ 


and 

accordingly  by  addition 


angle  C EH  =  20}4''; 
angle  //F(?  =  463^^ 


And 

angle  HEF  =  y2HEG  =  2Z}i\ 

And  so  by  subtraction 

angle  CEF  =  S''. 

For  that  reason  the  sides  of  the  right  triangle  CEF  are  given: 

CF  =  524 

and 

FF=  10,014, 

where  CE  =  AC  =  10,000. 

But  it  has  been  sho\vn  already  that 

Ci)  =  948, 

while  the  Earth  is  at  the  highest  or  lowest  apsis  of  the  planet.  Hence  DF  will  be 
the  excess  [of  CD  over  CF]  and  the  diameter  of  the  small  circle  which  the  centre 
of  the  orbital  circle  of  Mercury  describes. 

i)F  =  424, 

and 

radius  IF  =  212. 


Hence  by  addition 

CF/  =  736. 

Similarly,  as  in  triangle  HEF 

angle  FT  =  90°, 

and 

angle  HEF  =  2Zy^: 

hence 

FH  =  3,947, 

where  FF  =  10,000. 

But 


FH= 3,953, 

where  FF=  10,014 
and  CF=  10,000. 

Now  it  has  been  shown  above  that 

FZ  =  3,573. 

Therefore  by  subtraction 


HiiC  =  380, 

which  is  the  greatest  difference  in  the  planet’s  distance  from  F  the  centre  of 
its  orbital  circle;  and  this  greatest  difference  is  found  when  the  planet  is  be¬ 
tween  its  highest  or  lowest  apsis  and  its  mean  apsis.  On  account  of  this  varying 
distance  from  F  the  centre  of  its  orbital  circle,  the  planet  describes  unequal 
circles  in  proportion  to  the  varying  distances — the  least  distance  being  3,573, 
the  greatest  3,953,  and  the  mean  3,763 — as  was  to  be  demonstrated. 


790 


COPERNICUS 


28.  Why  the  Angular  Digressions  of  Mercury  at  Around  60®  from  the 
Perigee  Appear  Greater  Than  Those  at  the  Perigee 

Hence  too  it  will  seem  less  surprising  that  Mercury  has  greater  angular 
digressions  at  a  distance  of  60®  from  the  perigee  than  when  at  the  perigee, 
since  they  are  also  greater  than  the  ones  which  we  have  already  demonstrated; 
consequently  it  was  held  by  the  ancients  that  in  one  revolution  [167^]  of  the 
Earth,  Mercury^s  orb  was  twice  very  near  to  the  Earth. 

For  let  the  construction  be  made  such  that 
angle  BCE  —  60®. 

On  that  account 

angle  BIF 

For  F  is  put  down  as  making  two  revolutions 
for  one  of  E  the  Earth.  Therefore  let  EF  and  El 
be  joined.  Accordingly,  since  it  has  been  shown 
that 

C/  =  736, 

where  EC  =  10,000, 

and 

angle  i7C/=60®; 
hence  in  triangle  ECI 

base  =  9,655; 

and 

angle  C E 1  =  3^4:7', 

which  is  the  difference  between  angle  ACE  and 
angle  CIE.  But 

angle  ACE  =120^, 

Accordingly 

angle  C/^J==  116®13'. 

But  also 

angle  F/B  =  120®, 
since  by  construction 

angle  FIB  =  2  ECI; 


and 

[and 

hence  by  subtraction 
But  it  was  shown  that 


angle  CIF  =  180®  - 120®  =  60®; 
angle  B/E^  =  63®47'] 
angle  £;/F  =  56®13'. 


/F  =  212, 

where  El  =  9, 655 ; 

and  El  and  IF  comprehend  the  given  angle  EIF.  Hence  it  is  inferred  that 

angle  FEI  =  V4'] 

and  by  subtraction 

angle  CEF  =  2°44' , 

which  is  the  difference  between  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet 
and  the  mean  position  of  the  sun;  and 

side  =  9,540. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEA\T:NLY  SPHERES,  V  791 

Now  let  GH  the  orbital  circle  of  Mercury  be  described  around  centre  F\ 
and  from  E  let  EG  be  drawn  touching  the  orbital  circle,  and  let  EG  and  FH 
be  joined. 

We  must  first  examine  how  great  the  radius  FG  or  FH  is  under  these  cir¬ 
cumstances;  and  we  shall  do  that  as  follows' 

For  let  a  small  circle  be  taken,  whose 
diameter  =  380, 

where  AC—  10,000. 

And  let  it  be  understood  that  the  planet  on  straight  line  FG  or  FH  approaches 
and  recedes  from  centre  F  along  that  diameter  or  along  a  line  equal  to  it,  as 
we  set  forth  above  in  connection  with  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  And 
in  accordance  with  our  hypothesis,  wherein  angle  BCE  intercepts  60°  of  the 
circumference,  let 

arc  AM  =120°; 

and  let  MN  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  KL.  And  since 
MN  =  y2  ch.  2ML  =  i^  ch.  2  KM, 

then 


LA  =  95, 

which  is  one  quarter  of  the  diameter — as  is  shown  by  [168*]  Euclid’s  Elements, 
XIII,  12  and  v,  15.  Accordingly, 

KN  =  HKL  =  2S5. 

Line  KN  and  the  least  distance  of  the  planet  added  together  make  the  distance 
sought  for  this  position,  i.e., 

FG  =  FA  =  3,858, 

where  AC  =  10,000 
and  FF  =  9,540. 

Wherefore  two  sides  of  right  triangle  FEG  or  FEH  have  been  given:  so  angle 
FEG  or  FEH  will  also  be  given.  For 

FG  =  FH  =  ^,0U, 

where  FF  =  10,000; 

and 

FG  =  FH  =  ch.  23°52', 

so  that  by  addition 

angle  GFA  =  47°44'. 

But  at  the  lowest  apsis  only  463^°  is  seen,  and  at  the  mean  apsis  similarly 
463^°.  Accordingly  the  elongation  here  becomes  1°14'  greater,  not  because 
the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  is  nearer  to  the  Earth  than  it  was  at  the  perigee, 
but  because  the  planet  is  here  describing  a  greater  circle  than  there.  All  these 
things  are  consonant  with  both  present  and  past  observations,  and  follow  from 
the  regular  movements. 


29.  Examination  of  the  Mean  Movements  of  Mercury 

For  it  is  found  by  the  ancient  observations  that  in  the  21st  year  of  Ptolemy 
Philadelphus  in  the  morning  twilight  of  the  19th  day  of  the  month  Thoth  by 
the  Egyptian  calendar.  Mercury  was  apparent  on  the  straight  line  passing 
through  the  first  and  second  of  the  stars  in  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  and  was  two 
lunar  diameters  distant  to  the  east  but  was  separated  from  the  first  star  by  one 
lunar  diameter  to  the  north.  Now  it  is  known  that  the  position  of  the  first  star  is 


792  COPERNICUS 

2093^®  in  longitude  and  in  northern  latitude;  and  the  position  of  the  second 
is  209°  in  longitude  and  in  southern  latitude.  From  that  it  was  concluded 
that  the  position  of  IMercury  was  1103^°  in  longitude  and  approximately 
in  northern  latitude.  Now  there  were  59  years  17  days  45  minutes  [of  a  day]  since 
the  death  of  Alexander;  and  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  according  to  our  calcu¬ 
lation  was  228°8';  and  the  morning  distance  of  the  star  was  17°28'  and  was  still 
increasing,  as  was  noted  during  the  four  following  days.  Hence  it  was  certain 
that  the  planet  had  not  yet  arrived  at  the  farthest  morning  limit  or  at  the  point 
of  tangency  of  its  orbital  circle,  but  was  still  moving  in  the  lower  part  of  the  cir¬ 
cumference  nearer  to  the  Earth.  But  since  the  highest  apsis  was  at  183°20',  there 
were  44°48'  to  the  mean  position  of  the  sun. 

[168^]  Therefore  again  let  ACB  be  the  diameter  of  the  great  orbital  circle,  as 
above ;  and  from  centre  C  let  CE  the  line 
of  mean  movement  of  the  sun  be  dravm, 
in  such  fashion  that 

angle  ACE  =  44°48'. 

And  let  there  be  described  around  centre 
I  the  small  circle  on  which  the  centre  F 
of  the  eccentric  circle  is  borne.  And  since 
by  hypothesis 

angle  BIF  =  2  angle  ACE, 
let 

angle  BIF  =  SrS6'. 

And  let  EF  and  El  be  joined. 

Accordingly,  in  triangle  ECI  two  sides 
have  been  given: 

C/  =  736M, 

where  C£7  =  10,000. 

And  sides  Cl  and  CE  comprehend  the  l 
given  angle  ECL  And 

angle  EC/  =  180°~angleACE  = 

135°12';  side  E/=  10,534; 

and 

angle  CEI  =  2°49', 
which  is  the  excess  of  angle  ACE  over  angle  EIC, 

Therefore  too 

angle  C/E  =  4r59'. 

But 

angle  C/E  =  180° -angle  E/E  =  90°24'. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  E/E  =132°23'; 

and  angle  EIF  is  comprehended  by  the  given  sides  El  and  IF  of  triangle  EE/, 
and 

side  E/=  10,534 

and 

side  /E  =  2113^, 

where  AC  =  10,000. 


Hence 


angle  FEI  =  50'; 


and 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


793 


side  £'jP  =  10,678 

Ajid  by  subtraction 

angle  CEF=l%<^'. 

Now  let  the  small  circle  LM  be  taken;  and  let 

diameter  LM  =  380, 

where  AC  =  10,000. 

And  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  let 

arc  LA  =  89°36'. 

Let  chord  LN  also  be  drawn;  and  let  NR  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  LM,  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  since 

sq.  LiV  =  rect.  LMjLR; 

that  ratio  being  given. 


side  LR  =  189, 

where  diameter  LM  =  380. 

That  straight  line,  z.e.,  LR,  measures  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  F  the  centre 
of  its  orbital  circle  at  the  time  when  line  EC  has  completed  angle  ACE.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  by  the  addition  of  this  [169^]  line  to  the  least  distance 

189+3,573  =  3,672, 
which  is  the  distance  at  this  position. 

Accordingly,  with  the  centre  F  and  radius  3,762,  let  a  circle  be  described;  and 
let  EG  be  drawn  cutting  the  convex  circumference  at  point  G,  in  such  a  way  that 

angle  CEG=17°28', 

which  is  the  apparent  angular  elongation  of  the  planet  from  the  mean  position 
of  the  sun.  Let  FG  be  joined;  and  let  FK  be  drawn  parallel  to  CE.  Now 
angle  F£'G  =  angle  angle  CEF  =  lo°29'. 

Hence  in  triangle  EFG  two  sides  have  been  given; 

£F=  10,678, 

and 


and 


FG =3,762, 


angle  F£:G=15°29': 

whence  it  will  be  clear  that 


angle  EFG  =  33%6'. 

Now,  since 

angle  EFK  =  angle  CEF, 
angle  KFG  =  angle  EFG — angle  RFK  =  31  °48' ; 

and 

arc  AG  =  3^48', 

which  is  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  K  the  mean  perigee  of  its  orbital  circle. 

Arc  AG+180°  =  2ir48', 

which  was  the  mean  movement  of  the  anomaly  of  parallax  at  the  time  of  this 
observation — as  was  to  be  shown. 


30.  On  Three  Modern  Observations  of  the  Movements  of  Mercury 

The  ancients  have  directed  us  to  this  method  of  examining  the  movement  of 
this  planet,  but  they  were  favoured  by  a  clearer  atmosphere  at  a  place,  where 
the  Nile — so  they  say — does  not  give  out  vapours  as  the  Vistula  does  among 


794  COPERNICUS 

us.  For  nature  has  denied  that  convenience  to  us  who  inhabit  a  colder  region  > 
where  fair  weather  is  rarer;  and  furthermore  on  account  of  the  great  obliquity 
of  the  sphere  it  is  less  frequently  possible  to  see  Mercury,  as  its  rising  does  not 
fall  within  our  vision  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the  sun  when  it  is  in  Aries 
or  Pisces,  and  its  setting  in  Virgo  and  Libra  is  not  visible;  and  it  is  not  apparent 
in  Cancer  or  Gemini  at  evening  or  early  morning,  and  never  at  night,  except 
when  the  sun  has  receded  through  the  greater  part  of  Leo.  On  this  account  the 
planet  has  made  us  take  many  detours  and  undergo  much  labour  in  order  to 
examine  its  wanderings.  On  this  account  we  have  borrowed  three  positions  from 
those  which  have  been  carefully  observed  at  Nuremburg. 

The  first  observation  was  taken  by  Bernhard  Walther,  a  pupil  of  Regio¬ 
montanus,  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1491  on  the  9th  of  September,  the  fifth  day 
before  the  Ides,  5  equal  hours  after  midnight,  by  means  of  an  astrolabe  brought 
into  relation  with  the  Hyades.  And  he  saw  Mercury  at  [169^]  of  Virgo 

with  a  northern  latitude  of  15^°;  and  at  that  time  the  planet  was  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  its  morning  occultation,  while  during  the  preceding  days  its  morning 
[elongation]  had  decreased  continuously.  Accordingly  there  were  1491  Egyptian 
years  258  days  123^  minutes  [of  a  day]  since  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our 
Lord;  the  simple  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  at  149°48'  from  the  spring  equi¬ 
nox  but  in  26°47'  of  Virgo,  wherein  the  position  of  Mercury  was  approximately 

133^°. 

The  second  was  taken  by  Johann  Schoner  in  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1504  on  the 
6th  day  before  the  Ides  of  January  63^  hours  after  midnight,  when  10°  of  Scor¬ 
pio  was  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  over  Nuremburg;  and  the  planet  was  ap¬ 
parent  at  33^°  of  Capricorn  with  a  northern  latitude  of  45'.  Now  by  our  calcula¬ 
tion  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  away  from  the  spring  equinox  was  at  27°7'  of 
Capricorn  and  a  morning  Mercury  was  23°42'  to  the  west  of  that. 

The  third  observation  was  taken  by  this  same  Johann  Schoner  in  the  same 
year  1504  on  the  15th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  April,  at  which  time  he  found 
Mercury  at  263^o°  Aries  with  a  northern  latitude  of  approximately  3°,  while 
25°  of  Cancer  was  in  the  middle  of  the  heavens  over  Nuremburg — as  seen 
through  an  astrolabe  brought  into  relation  with  the  Hyades,  at  123^  hours  after 
midday,  at  which  time  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  away  from  the  spring  equi¬ 
nox  was  at  5°39'  of  Aries,  and  an  evening  Mercury  was  21°17'away  from  the  sun. 

Accordingly  from  the  first  position  to  the  second,  there  are  12  Egyptian  years 
125  days  3  minutes  [of  a  day]  45  seconds,  during  which  time  the  simple  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun  was  120°14',  and  Mercury’s  movement  of  anomaly  of  parallax 
was  316°!'.  During  the  second  interval  there  were  69  days  31  minutes  45  seconds 
the  simple  mean  position  of  the  sun  was  68°32',  and  Mercury’s  mean  anomaly 
of  parallax  was  216°. 

Accordingly  we  wish  to  examine  the  movements  of  Mercury  during  our  time 
by  means  of  these  three  observations,  and  I  think  we  must  grant  that  the  com- 
mensurability  of  the  circles  has  remained  from  Ptolemy’s  time  to  now,  since  in 
the  case  of  the  other  planets  the  good  authorities  who  preceded  us  are  not  found 
to  have  been  mistaken  here.  If  we  have  the  position  of  the  apsis  of  the  eccentric 
circle  together  with  these  observations,  nothing  further  should  be  desired  in  the 
case  of  the  apparent  movement  of  this  planet.  Now  we  have  taken  the  position 
of  the  highest  apsis  as  2113/^°,  z.e.,  at  283^°  of  Scorpio;  for  it  was  not  possible  to 
take  it  as  less  without  prejudice  to  the  observations.  And  so  we  shall  have  the 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  795 

anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle — I  mean  [170^]  the  distance  of  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun  from  the  apogee — as  298°15'  at  the  first  terminus,  as  58°29'  at 
the  second,  and  as  127°!'  at  the  third. 

Therefore  let  the  figure  be  constructed  as  before,  except  that 

angle  AC^  =  61°45', 

which  measures  the  westward  distance  of 
the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun  from 
the  apogee  at  the  time  of  the  first  observa¬ 
tion;  and  then  the  rest  according  to  the 
hypothesis.  And  since 
7(7  =  7363^, 

where  AC  — 10,000; 

and  angle  EC  I  in  triangle  EC  I  is  also  given; 
then 

angle  CEI  =  3°35\ 

and 

side /£:  =  10,369, 

where  EC  =  10,000; 

and 

IF  =  2ny2. 

So  in  triangle  EFI  also  there  are  two  sides 
having  a  given  ratio;  and  since  by  con¬ 
struction 

angle  BIF  =  2  angle  ACE] 
angle  5/F=  1233^°, 


angle  CIF  =  180°  - 1233^°  =  563^^°. 

angle  114°40'. 
angle  /£^F  =  1°5', 

side  SF=  10,371. 


and 

Therefore  by  addition 
Accordingly 

and 

Hence 

angle  CEF  =  2y\ 

But  in  order  that  we  may  know  how  greatly  the  orbital  circle,  whose  centre  is 
F,  is  increased  by  the  movement  of  approach  and  withdrawal  from  the  apogee 
or  perigee,  let  a  small  circle  be  drawn  and  quadrisected  by  the  diameters  LM, 
NR  at  centre  0.  And  let 

angle  POM  =  2  angle  ACE  =  1233^°; 

and  from  point  P  let  PS  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  LM.  Accordingly  by 
the  ratio  given, 

OP  :  OS  =  LO:  05  =  10,000  :  8,349  =  190  :  105. 

Whence 

where  [170^]  AO  =10,000; 

and  LS  measures  the  farther  removal  of  the  planet  from  centre  F, 

As  the  least  distance  is  3,573, 

05+3,573  =  3,868, 


which  is  the  present  distance. 


796 


COPERNICUS 


And  with  3,868  as  radius  and  F  as  centre,  let  circle  HG  be  drawn.  Let  EG  be 
joined;  and  let  EF  be  extended  in  the  straight  line  EFH,  Accordingly,  it  hag 
been  shown  that 

angle  CEF  =  2}^^, 
and  by  observation 

angle  GEC  =  1S}4^, 

which  is  the  morning  distance  of  the 
planet  from  the  mean  sun. 

Therefore  by  addition 

angle  FEG—15^°, 

But  in  triangle  EFG 

EF  :EG=10, 371  ;  3,868; 
and  angle  EFG  is  also  given ;  that  shows 
us  that 

angle  EGF=-4:9°8'. 

Wp-nop 

angle  GFH  =  6^53', 
as  it  is  the  exterior  angle;  and 
360° -angle  GFH  =  295V \ 
which  is  the  true  anomaly  of  parallax. 

And 

295°7'+angle  CEF  =  297^37\ 
the  mean  and  regular  anomaly  of  paral¬ 
lax — which  is  what  we  were  looking  for. 

And 

297°37'+316°l'  =  253°38', 

which  is  the  regular  anomaly  of  parallax  at  the  second  observation — and  we 
shall  show  that  this  number  is  certain  and  is  consonant  with  the  observations. 
For  let  us  make 

angle  ACE  =  58V9' 

in  accordance  with  the  second  movement  of  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle. 
Then  also  in  triangle  CEI  two  sides  are  given: 

IC  =  736, 

where  £'(7=  10,000; 

and  IC  and  EC  comprehend  angle  ECI,  and 

angle  ECI  ^121^31'; 

accordingly 

side  £7=10,404 

and 

angle  C£7  =  3°28'. 

Similarly,  since  in  triangle  EIF 

angle  £7£  =  118°3', 

and 

side  7£  =  21l3/^°, 

where  IE  =  10,404:: 
side  ££  =  10,505, 


and 

And  so  by  subtraction 


angle  7££  =  61'. 
angle  ££C  =  2°27', 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  797 

which  is  the  additive  additosubtraction  of  the  eccentric  circle;  and  the  addition 
of  angle  FEC  to  the  mean  movement  of  parallax  makes  the  true  movement  to 
be  256°5'. 

Now  also  in  the  epicycle  of  approach  [171*^]  and  withdrawal  let  us  take 
angle  LOP  =  2  angle  =  116°58'. 

Then  too,  as  in  right  triangle  OPS 

OP:  05  =  1,000:  455; 

05  =  85, 

where  OP  =  OL  =  190. 

And  by  addition  ^  ^75 

The  addition  of  LOS  to  the  least  distance  of  3,573  makes  3,849. 

With  3,849  as  radius  let  circle  HG  be  described  around  centre  P,  so  that  the 
apogee  of  parallax  is  at  point  H  from  which  the  planet  has  the  westward  dis¬ 
tance  of  103°55'  of  arc  PG,  which  measures  the  difference  between  a  full  revo¬ 
lution  and  the  256°5'  of  the  movement  of  corrected  parallax.  And  on  that 
account 

angle  EFG  =  180®  - 103®55'  =  76®5'. 

So  again  in  triangle  EFG  two  sides  are  given: 

PG  =  3,849, 

where  EF  =  10,505. 

On  that  account 

and  angle  F£?(?  =  21°19'; 

angle  CPG  =  angle  PPG-f  angle  GPP  =  23®46'. 

That  is  the  apparent  distance  between  C  the  centre  of  the  great  orbital  circle 
and  G  the  planet;  and  it  differs  very  little  from  the  observation. 

All  this  will  be  further  confirmed  by  the  third  example,  wherein  we  have  set 

down  that 

angle  AGP  =  127®!', 
or 

angle  BCE  =  180®  - 127®!'  =  52®59'. 

Hence  it  is  shown  that 

angle  GP/  =  3®31', 

and 

side  /P  =  9,575, 

where  PG  =  10,000. 
And  since  by  construction 

angle  P/P  =  49®28', 

and  the  sides  comprehending  angle  P/P  are 
given: 

P/  =  2113^, 

where  P/  =  9,575; 
side  PP  =  9,440, 

and 

angle  lEF  =  59'. 

Angle  PPG  =  angle  /PG-59'  =  2®32', 
which  is  the  subtractive  additosubtraction  of  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle.  When  the  2®32' 
has  been  added  to  the  mean  anomaly  of  parallax. 


798 


COPERNICUS 


which  we  reckoned  as  109°38'  after  adding  the  216°  of  the  second  [movement  of 
anomaly],  the  sum  will  be  the  112°10'  of  the  true  anomaly  of  parallax. 

Now  in  the  epicycle  let 

angle  LOP  =  2  angle  EC  I  =  105°58'; 
here  too  by  the  ratio  PO  :  0>S, 

so  that  by  addition  ~ 

LOS  =  242. 


Now  the  least  distance  is  3,573;  and 

3,573+242  =  3,815, 
which  is  the  corrected  distance. 

With  3,815  as  radius  and  F  as  centre,  let  the  circle  be  described,  in  which  the 
highest  apsis  of  parallax  is  LT,  which  is  on  the  straight  line  made  by  extending 
line  EFH.  And  in  proportion  to  the  true  anomaly  of  parallax  [171^]  let 

arc  /7O=112°10'; 
and  let  GF  be  joined.  Therefore 

angle  OFL  =  180°~112°10'  =  67°50', 
which  is  comprehended  by  the  given  sides: 

GE  =  3,815 


and 


Hence 


LL  =  9,440. 


angle  FLO  =  23°50'. 

Now  angle  CEF  is  the  additosubtraction;  and 

angle  CLG  =  angle  LLG-angle  CLF  =  21°18', 
which  is  the  apparent  angular  distance  between  the  evening  planet  and  the 
centre  of  the  great  orbital  circle.  And  that  is  approximately  the  distance  found 
by  observation. 

Therefore  these  three  positions  which  are  in  agreement  with  observations 
testify  indubitably  that  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle 
is  the  one  which  we  assumed  at  2113/^°  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  for  our 
time;  and  that  what  follows  is  also  certain,  namely,  that  the  regular  anomaly  of 
parallax  was  297°37'  at  the  first  position,  253°38'  at  the  second,  and  109°38'  at 
the  third  position;  and  that  is  what  we  were  looking  for. 

But  at  the  ancient  observation  made  in  the  21st  year  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus 
in  the  early  morning  of  the  19th  day  of  Thoth,  the  1st  month  of  the  Egyptian 
calendar  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  was  182°20' 
according  to  Ptolemy,  and  the  position  of  regular  anomaly  of  parallax  was 
211°47'.  Now  the  time  between  this  latest  and  that  ancient  observation  amounts 
to  1768  Egyptian  years  200  days  33  minutes  [of  a  day],  during  which  time  the 
highest  apsis  of  the  eccentric  circle  moved  28°10'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars, 
and  the  movement  of  parallax  was  257°51'  besides  the  5,570  complete  [172^] 
revolutions — as  approximately  63  periods  are  completed  in  20  years  and  that 
amounts  to  5,544  periods  in  1,760  years  and  26  revolutions  in  the  remaining  8 
years  200  days.  Similarly  in  the  1,768  years  200  days  33  minutes  there  are  in 
addition  to  the  5,570  revolutions  257°51',  which  is  the  distance  between  the  posi¬ 
tion  observed  in  ancient  times  and  the  one  observed  by  us.  That  agrees  with  the 
numbers  which  we  set  out  in  the  tables.  Now  when  we  have  compared  the  28°10' 
with  the  time  during  which  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  has  moved,  it  will 
be  seen  to  have  moved  1°  per  63  years,  if  only  the  movement  were  regular. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


799 


31.  On  Determining  the  Former  Positions  of  Mercury 

Accordingly  there  have  been  1504  Egyptian  years  87  days  48  minutes  [of  a 
day]  from  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord  to  the  hour  of  the  last  observa¬ 
tion,  during  which  time  Mercury’s  movement  of  anomaly  of  parallax  was  63°14' 
— not  counting  the  complete  revolutions.  When  63°14'  has  been  subtracted  from 
109^38',  it  will  leave  46°24'  as  the  position  of  the  movement  of  anomaly  at  the 
beginning  of  the  years  of  Our  Lord. 

Again  between  that  time  and  the  beginning  of  the  first  Olympiad  there  are 
775  Egyptian  years  12^2  days,  during  which  the  movement  was  calculated  to 
be  95^3'  besides  the  whole  revolutions. 

If  95®3'  is  subtracted  from  the  position  at  the  beginning  of  the  years  of  our 
Lord  and  one  revolution  is  borrowed,  311^21'  will  be  left  as  the  position  at  the 
time  of  the  first  Olympiad. 

Moreover  between  this  and  the  death  of  Alexander  there  are  451  years  247 
days,  and  by  computation  the  position  is  213°3'. 

32.  On  Another  Explanation  of  Approach  and  Withdrawal 

But  before  we  leave  Mercury,  let  us  survey  another  method  no  less  credible 
than  the  former,  by  which  that  approach  and  withdrawal  can  take  place  and 
can  be  understood. 

For  let  GHKP  be  a  circle  quadrisected  at  centre  F,  and  around  centre  F  let 

LM  a  small  homocentric  circle  be  inscribed. 
And  again,  with  L  as  centre  and  radius  LFO 
equal  to  FG  or  FHj  let  another  circle  OR  be 
described. 

Now  let  it  be  postulated  that  this  whole  con¬ 
figuration  of  circles  [172^]  together  with  its  sec¬ 
tions  GFR  and  HFP  moves  eastward  around 
centre  F  in  a  daily  movement  of  approximately 
2°7' — namely,  a  movement  as  great  as  that 
whereby  the  movement  of  parallax  of  the  planet 
exceeds  the  movement  of  the  Earth  in  the  eclip¬ 
tic — away  from  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric 
circle. of  the  planet;  and  the  planet  meanwhile 
furnishes  the  remaining  movement  away  from 
G  along  OR  the  proper  circle  of  parallax;  and 
this  movement  is  approximately  equal  to  the 
terrestrial  movement.  Let  it  also  be  assumed  that  in  this  same  annual  revolution 
the  centre  of  OF,  the  orbital  circle  which  carries  the  planet,  is  borne  by  a  move¬ 
ment  of  libration  along  a  diameter  LFM  which  is  twice  as  great  as  the  one  which 
we  laid  down  at  first;  and  let  it  move  back  and  forth,  as  was  said  above. 

With  this  as  the  set-up,  we  have  placed  the  Earth  by  its  mean  movement  in 
a  position  corresponding  to  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  the  planet;  and 
at  that  time  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  carrying  the  planet,  at  L;  and  the 
planet  itself,  at  point  0.  The  planet  then  being  at  its  least  distance  from  F  will 
describe  by  its  whole  movement  its  least  circle,  whose  radius  is  FO.  Conse¬ 
quently,  when  the  Earth  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mean  apsis,  the  planet 
falling  upon  point  H  at  its  greatest  distance  from  F  will  describe  its  greatest 


800 


COPERNICUS 

arcs,  namely  in  proportion  to  the  circle  having  F  as  centre.  For  at  that  time  OR 
the  deferent  coincides  with  circle  GH  on  account  of  the  unity  of  centre  at  F, 
Hence  as  the  Earth  advances  in  the  direction  of  the  perigee  and  the  centre  of  the 
orbital  circle  OR  towards  M  the  other  extreme,  the  orbital  circle  itself  is  placed 
beyond  GK,  and  the  planet  at  R  again  is  at  its  least  distance  from  F,  and  the 
same  things  occur  as  in  the  beginning.  For  here  the  three  revolutions — namely, 
that  of  the  Earth  through  the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  orbital  circle  of  Mercury, 
the  libration  of  the  centre  along  diameter  LM,  and  the  movement  of  the  planet 
in  the  same  direction  away  from  line  FG — are  equal  to  one  another,  and  only 
the  movement  of  the  sections  GH  and  KP  away  from  the  apsis  of  the  eccentric 
circle  is  different  from  those  revolutions,  as  we  said. 

And  so  in  the  case  of  this  planet  nature  has  sported  a  wonderful  variety,  but 
one  which  she  has  confirmed  by  a  perpetual,  certain,  and  unchanging  order. 
And  we  should  note  here  that  the  planet  does  not  traverse  the  middle  spaces  of 
quadrants  GH  and  KP  without  any  irregularity  in  longitude,  provided  that 
the  diversity  of  the  centres,  which  comes  into  play,  necessarily  makes  some 
additosub traction;  but  the  instability  of  that  centre  prevents  that.  For  if,  for 
example,  the  centre  abided  at  L  and  the  planet  proceeded  from  0,  then  it  would 
admit  greatest  irregularity  at  H  in  proportion  [173^]  to  the  eccentricity  FL.  But 
it  follows  from  the  assumptions  that  the  planet  proceeding  from  0  begins  and 
promises  to  cause  the  irregularity  which  is  due  to  FL  the  distance  between  the 
centres;  but  as  the  mobile  centre  approaches  the  midpoint  F,  more  and  more 
is  taken  away  from  the  promised  irregularity,  and  it  is  made  void  to  such  an 
extent  that  it  wholly  vanishes  at  the  mean  sections  H  and  P,  where  you  would 
expect  it  to  be  greatest.  And  nevertheless,  as  we  acknowledge,  when  the  planet 
is  made  small  beneath  the  rays  of  the  sun^  it  undergoes  occultation;  and  when 
the  planet  is  rising  or  setting  in  the  morning  or  evening,  it  is  not  discernible  on 
the  curves  of  the  circle.  And  we  are  unwilling  to  pass  over  this  method  which  is 
no  less  rationable  than  the  former,  and  which  will  come  into  open  use  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  movements  in  latitude. 

33.  On  the  Tables  of  the  Additosubtractions  of  the 
Five  Wandering  Stars 

These  things  have  been  demonstrated  concerning  the  regular  and  apparent 
movements  of  Mercury  and  the  other  planets  and  set  out  in  numbers.  And  by 
their  example  the  way  to  calculating  differences  of  movement  for  certain  other 
positions  will  be  clear.  And  for  this  use  we  have  made  ready  separate  tables  for 
each  planet:  six  columns,  thirty  rows,  ascending  by  triads  of  3°,  as  is  usual.  The 
first  two  columns  will  contain  the  common  numbers — both  of  the  anomaly  of 
the  eccentric  circle  and  of  the  parallax.  The  third,  the  sums  of  the  additosub¬ 
tractions  of  the  eccentric  circle — I  mean  the  total  differences  occurring  between 
the  regular  and  irregular  movements  of  the  orbital  circles.  The  fourth,  the  pro¬ 
portional  minutes — and  they  go  up  to  60' — by  which  the  parallaxes  are  increased 
or  diminished  on  account  of  the  greater  or  lesser  distance  of  the  Earth.  The  fifth, 
the  additosubtractions  which  are  the  parallaxes  occurring  at  the  highest  apsis 
of  the  eccentric  circle  and  which  arise  from  the  great  orbital  circle.  The  sixth 
and  last,  their  excesses  over  the  parallaxes  which  take  place  at  the  lowest  apsis 
of  the  eccentric  circle.  And  the  tables  are  as  follows: 

H.e.j  when  the  planet  is  in  conjunction  with  the  sun. 


L/ey. 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


801 


VOLUTIONS 


»NS-AND-SUBTRACTI0NS  OF  SaTURN 


Addito- 

Parallaxes 

Excesses 

subtractions 

Proportional 

of  the 

over  the 

of  the 

orbital 

parallax 

eccentric 

Minutes 

circle  of 

of  the  lowest 

circle 

the  Earth 

apsis 

Deg. 

Min. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min, 

0 

20 

0 

0 

17 

0 

2 

0 

40 

0 

0 

34 

0 

4 

0 

58 

0 

0 

51 

0 

6 

1 

17 

0 

1 

3 

0 

8 

1 

36 

1 

1 

23 

0 

10 

1 

55 

1 

1 

40 

0 

12 

2 

13 

1 

1 

56 

0 

14 

2 

31 

2 

2 

11 

0 

16 

2 

49 

2 

2 

26 

0 

18 

3 

6 

3 

2 

42 

0 

19 

3 

33 

3 

2 

56 

0 

21 

3 

39 

4 

3 

10 

0 

23 

3 

55 

4 

3 

25 

0 

24 

4 

10 

5 

3 

38 

0 

26 

4 

25 

6 

3 

52 

0 

27 

4 

39 

7 

4 

5 

0 

29 

4 

52 

8 

4 

17 

0 

31 

5 

5 

9 

4 

28 

0 

33 

5 

17 

10 

4 

38 

0 

34 

5 

29 

11 

4 

49 

0 

35 

5 

41 

12 

4 

59 

0 

36 

5 

50 

13 

5 

8 

0 

37 

5 

59 

14 

5 

17 

0 

38 

6 

7 

16 

5 

24 

0 

38 

6 

14 

17 

5 

31 

0 

39 

6 

19 

18 

5 

37 

0 

39 

6 

23 

19 

5 

42 

0 

40 

6 

27 

21 

5 

46 

0 

41 

6 

29 

22 

5 

50 

0 

42 

6 

31 

23 

5 

52 

0 

42 

6 

31 

25 

5 

52 

0 

43 

6 

30 

27 

5 

53 

0 

44 

6 

28 

29 

5 

53 

0 

45 

6 

26 

31 

5 

51 

0 

46 

6 

22 

32 

5 

48 

0 

46 

6 

17 

34 

5 

45 

0 

45 

6 

12 

35 

5 

40 

0 

45 

6 

6 

36 

5 

36 

0 

44 

5 

58 

38 

6 

29 

0 

43 

5 

49 

39 

5 

22 

0 

42 

5 

40 

41 

6 

13 

0 

41 

5 

28 

42 

6 

3 

0 

40 

5 

16 

44 

4 

52 

0 

39 

5 

3 

46 

4 

41 

0 

37 

4 

48 

47 

4 

29 

0 

35 

4 

33 

48 

4 

15 

0 

34 

4 

17 

50 

4 

1 

0 

32 

4 

0 

51 

3 

46 

0 

30 

3 

42 

52 

3 

30 

0 

28 

3 

24 

53 

3 

13 

0 

26 

3 

6 

54 

2 

56 

0 

24 

2 

46 

55 

2 

38 

0 

22 

2 

27 

56 

2 

21 

0 

19 

2 

7 

57 

2 

2 

0 

17 

1 

46 

58 

1 

42 

0 

14 

1 

25 

59 

1 

22 

0 

12 

1 

4 

59 

1 

2 

0 

9 

0 

43 

60 

0 

42 

0 

7 

0 

22 

60 

0 

21 

0 

4 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


(in. 

2 

4 

6 

8 

10 

13 

15 

17 

19 

21 

23 

25 

27 

29 

31 

34 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

0 

1 

1 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

0 

59 

58 

57 

55 

53 

50 

47 

43 

39 

35 

31 

27 

23 

19 

15 

11 

6 

0 


COPERNICUS 


;-AND-SUBTRACTIONS  OF  JuPITER 


Addito 

_ 

Parallaxes 

subtractions 

Proportioned 

of  the 

of  trie 

orbital 

eccentric 

Minutes 

circle  of 

circle 

the  Earth 

Deg.  Min. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Deg. 

Min. 

0 

16 

0 

3 

0 

28 

0 

31 

0 

12 

0 

56 

0 

47 

0 

18 

1 

25 

1 

2 

0 

30 

1 

53 

1 

18 

0 

45 

2 

19 

1 

33 

1 

3 

2 

46 

1 

48 

1 

23 

3 

13 

2 

2 

1 

48 

3 

40 

2 

17 

2 

18 

4 

6 

2 

31 

2 

50 

4 

32 

2 

44 

3 

26 

4 

57 

2 

58 

4 

10 

5 

22 

3 

11 

5 

40 

5 

47 

3 

23 

6 

43 

6 

11 

3 

35 

7 

48 

6 

34 

3 

47 

8 

50 

6 

56 

3 

58 

9 

53 

7 

18 

4 

8 

10 

57 

7 

39 

4 

17 

12 

0 

7 

58 

4 

26 

13 

10 

8 

17 

4 

35 

14 

20 

8 

35 

4 

42 

15 

30 

8 

52 

4 

50 

16 

50 

9 

8 

4 

56 

18 

10 

9 

22 

5 

1 

19 

17 

9 

35 

5 

5 

20 

40 

9 

47 

5 

9 

22 

20 

9 

59 

5 

12 

23 

50 

10 

8 

5 

14 

25 

23 

10 

17 

5 

15 

26 

57 

10 

24 

5 

15 

28 

33 

10 

25 

5 

15 

30 

12 

10 

33 

5 

14 

31 

43 

10 

34 

5 

12 

33 

17 

10 

34 

5 

10 

34 

50 

10 

33 

5 

6 

36 

21 

10 

29 

5 

1 

37 

47 

10 

23 

4 

55 

39 

0 

10 

15 

4 

49 

40 

25 

10 

5 

4 

41 

41 

50 

9 

54 

4 

32 

43 

18 

9 

41 

4 

23 

44 

46 

9 

25 

4 

13 

46 

11 

9 

8 

4 

2 

47 

37 

8 

56 

3 

50 

49 

2 

8 

27 

3 

38 

50 

22 

8 

5 

3 

25 

51 

46 

7 

39 

3 

13 

53 

6 

7 

12 

2 

59 

54 

10 

6 

43 

2 

45 

55 

15 

6 

13 

2 

30 

56 

12 

5 

41 

2 

15 

57 

0 

5 

7 

1 

59 

57 

37 

4 

32 

1 

43 

58 

6 

3 

56 

1 

27 

58 

34 

3 

18 

1 

11 

59 

3 

2 

40 

0 

53 

59 

36 

2 

0 

0 

35 

59 

58 

1 

20 

0 

17 

60 

0 

0 

40 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


803 


Additions-and-Subtractions  of  Mars 


Addito 

Parallaxes 

Excesses 

subtractions 

Proportional 

of  the 

over  the 

of  the 

orbital 

parallax 

eccentric 

Minutes 

circle  of 

of  the  lowest 

circle 

the  Earth 

apsis 

Deg.  Min. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

0 

32 

0 

0 

1 

8 

0 

8 

1 

5 

0 

2 

2 

16 

0 

17 

1 

37 

0 

7 

3 

24 

0 

25 

2 

8 

0 

15 

4 

31 

0 

33 

2 

39 

0 

28 

5 

38 

0 

41 

3 

10 

0 

42 

6 

45 

0 

50 

3 

41 

0 

57 

7 

52 

0 

59 

4 

11 

1 

13 

8 

58 

1 

8 

4 

41 

1 

34 

10 

5 

,  1 

16 

5 

10 

2 

1 

11 

11 

1 

25 

5 

38 

2 

31 

12 

16 

1 

34 

6 

6 

3 

2 

13 

22 

1 

43 

6 

32 

3 

32 

14 

26 

1 

52 

6 

58 

4 

3 

15 

31 

2 

2 

7 

23 

4 

37 

16 

35 

2 

11 

7 

47 

5 

16 

17 

39 

2 

20 

8 

10 

6 

2 

18 

42 

2 

30 

8 

32 

6 

50 

19 

45 

2 

40 

8 

53 

7 

39 

20 

47 

2 

50 

9 

12 

8 

30 

21 

49 

3 

0 

9 

30 

9 

27 

22 

50 

3 

11 

9 

47 

10 

25 

23 

48 

3 

22 

10 

3 

11 

28 

24 

47 

3 

34 

10 

19 

12 

33 

25 

44 

3 

46 

10 

32 

13 

38 

26 

40 

3 

59 

10 

42 

14 

46 

27 

35 

4 

11 

10 

50 

16 

4 

28 

29 

4 

24 

10 

56 

17 

24 

29 

21 

4 

36 

11 

1 

18 

45 

30 

12 

4 

50 

11 

5 

20 

8 

31 

0 

5 

5 

11 

7 

21 

32 

31 

45 

5 

20 

11 

8 

22 

58 

32 

30 

5 

35 

11 

7 

24 

32 

33 

13 

5 

51 

11 

5 

26 

7 

33 

53 

6 

7 

11 

1 

27 

43 

34 

30 

6 

25 

10 

56 

29 

21 

35 

3 

6 

45 

10 

45 

31 

2 

35 

34 

7 

4 

10 

33 

32 

46 

35 

59 

7 

25 

10 

11 

34 

41 

36 

21 

7 

46 

10 

7 

36 

16 

36 

37 

8 

11 

9 

51 

38 

1 

36 

49 

8 

34 

9 

33 

39 

46 

36 

54 

8 

59 

9 

13 

41 

30 

36 

53 

9 

24 

8 

50 

43 

12 

36 

45 

9 

49 

8 

27 

44 

50 

36 

25 

10 

17 

8 

2 

46 

26 

35 

59 

10 

47 

7 

36 

48 

1 

35 

25 

11 

15 

7 

7 

49 

35 

34 

30 

11 

45 

6 

37 

51 

2 

33 

24 

12 

12 

6 

7 

52 

22 

32 

3 

12 

35 

5 

34 

53 

38 

30 

26 

12 

54 

5 

0 

54 

50 

28 

5 

13 

28 

4 

25 

56 

0 

26 

8 

13 

7 

3 

49 

57 

6 

23 

28 

12 

47 

3 

12 

57 

54 

20 

21 

12 

12 

2 

35 

58 

22 

16 

51 

10 

59 

1 

57 

58 

50 

13 

1 

9 

1 

1 

18 

59 

11 

8 

51 

6 

40 

0 

39 

59 

44 

4 

32 

3 

28 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


Hn. 

1 

2 

3 

5 

6 

7 

9 

11 

12 

13 

14 

16 

17 

18 

20 

21 

22 

24 

26 

27 

28 

30 

32 

34 

36 

38 

41 

43 

45 

47 

50 

53 

55 

68 

0 

4 

8 

11 

14 

18 

22 

26 

50 

36 

41 

47 

53 

0 

6 

13 

19 

34 

27 

27 

27 

16 

66 

26 

46 

0 


COPERNICUS 


Additions-and-Subtractions  of  Venus 


Addito 

Parallaxes  ! 

subtractions 

Proportional 

of  the 

i 

of  the 

orbital 

eccentric 

Minutes 

circle  of 

circle 

the  Earth  I 

Deg.  M  in. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Deg.  Min.  1 

0 

6 

0 

0 

1 

15  1 

0 

13 

0 

0 

2 

30 

0 

19 

0 

10 

3 

45 

0 

25 

0 

39 

4 

59 

0 

31 

0 

58 

6 

13 

0 

36 

1 

20 

7 

28 

0 

42 

1 

39 

8 

42 

0 

48 

2 

23 

9 

56 

0 

53 

2 

59 

11 

10 

0 

59 

3 

38 

12 

24 

1 

4 

4 

18 

13 

37 

1 

10 

5 

3 

14 

50 

1 

15 

5 

45 

16 

3 

1 

20 

6 

32 

17 

16 

1 

25 

7 

22 

18 

28 

1 

29 

8 

18 

19 

40 

1 

33 

9 

31 

20 

52 

1 

36 

10 

48 

22 

3 

1 

40 

12 

8 

23 

14 

1 

43 

13 

32 

24 

24 

1 

46 

15 

8 

25 

34 

1 

49 

16 

35 

26 

43 

1 

52 

18 

0 

27 

52 

1 

54 

19 

33 

28 

57 

1 

56 

21 

8 

30 

4 

1 

58 

22 

32 

31 

9 

1 

59 

24 

7 

32 

13 

2 

0 

25 

30 

33 

17 

2 

0 

27 

5 

34 

20 

2 

0 

28 

28 

35 

21 

2 

0 

29 

58 

36 

20 

2 

0 

31 

28 

37 

17 

1 

59 

32 

57 

38 

13 

1 

58 

34 

26 

39 

7 

1 

57 

35 

55 

40 

0 

1 

55 

37 

23 

40 

49 

1 

53 

38 

52 

41 

36 

1 

51 

40 

19 

42 

18 

1 

48 

4] 

45 

42 

59 

1 

45 

43 

10 

43 

35 

1 

42 

44 

37 

44 

7 

1 

39 

46 

6 

44 

32 

1 

35 

47 

36 

44 

49 

1 

31 

49 

6 

45 

4 

1 

27 

50 

12 

45 

10 

1 

22 

51 

17 

45 

5 

1 

17 

52 

33 

44 

51 

1 

12 

53 

48 

44 

22 

1 

7 

54 

28 

43 

36 

1 

1 

55 

0 

42 

34 

0 

55 

55 

57 

41 

12 

0 

49 

56 

47 

39 

20 

0 

43 

57 

33 

36 

58 

0 

37 

58 

16 

33 

58 

0 

31 

58 

59 

30 

14 

0 

25 

59 

39 

25 

42 

0 

19 

59 

48 

20 

20 

0 

13 

59 

54 

14 

7 

0 

7 

59 

58 

7 

16 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

16 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

339 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

2SS 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


VOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


>XS-AND-SUBTRACTI0NS  OF  MeRCURY 


Addito- 

Parallaxes 

Excesses 

subtractions 

Proportional 

of  the 

over 

the 

of  the 

orbital 

parallax 

eccentric 

Minutes 

circle  of 

of  the  lowest 

circle 

the  Earth 

apsis 

Deg 

Min, 

Min. 

Sec. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

0 

8 

0 

3 

0 

44 

0 

8 

0 

17 

0 

12 

1 

28 

0 

15 

0 

26 

0 

24 

2 

12 

0 

23 

0 

34 

0 

50 

2 

56 

0 

31 

0 

43 

1 

43 

3 

41 

0 

38 

0 

51 

2 

42 

4 

25 

0 

45 

0 

59 

3 

51 

5 

8 

0 

63 

1 

8 

5 

10 

5 

51 

1 

1 

1 

16 

6 

41 

6 

34 

1 

8 

1 

24 

8 

29 

7 

15 

»  1 

16 

1 

32 

10 

35 

7 

57 

1 

24 

1 

39 

12 

50 

8 

38 

1 

32 

1 

46 

15 

7 

9 

18 

1 

40 

1 

53 

17 

26 

9 

59 

1 

47 

2 

0 

19 

47 

10 

38 

1 

55 

2 

6 

22 

8 

11 

17 

2 

2 

2 

12 

24 

31 

11 

54 

2 

10 

2 

18 

26 

17 

12 

31 

2 

18 

2 

24 

29 

17 

13 

7 

2 

26 

2 

29 

31 

39 

13 

41 

2 

34 

2 

34 

33 

59 

14 

14 

2 

42 

2 

38 

36 

12 

14 

46 

2 

51 

2 

43 

38 

29 

15 

17 

2 

59 

2 

47 

40 

45 

15 

46 

3 

8 

2 

50 

42 

58 

16 

14 

3 

16 

2 

53 

45 

6 

16 

40 

3 

24 

2 

56 

46 

59 

17 

4 

3 

32 

2 

58 

48 

50 

17 

27 

3 

40 

2 

59 

50 

36 

17 

48 

3 

48 

3 

0 

52 

2 

18 

6 

3 

56 

3 

0 

53 

43 

18 

23 

4 

3 

3 

1 

55 

4 

18 

37 

4 

11 

3 

0 

56 

14 

18 

48 

4 

19 

2 

59 

57 

14 

18 

56 

4 

27 

2 

58 

58 

1 

19 

2 

4 

34 

2 

56 

58 

40 

19 

3 

4 

42 

2 

55 

59 

14 

19 

3 

4 

49 

2 

53 

59 

40 

18 

59 

4 

64 

2 

49 

59 

57 

18 

53 

4 

58 

2 

44 

60 

0 

18 

42 

5 

2 

2 

39 

59 

49 

18 

27 

5 

4 

2 

34 

59 

35 

18 

8 

5 

6 

2 

28 

59 

19 

17 

44 

5 

9 

2 

22 

58 

59 

17 

17 

5 

9 

2 

16 

58 

32 

16 

44 

5 

6 

2 

10 

57 

56 

16 

7 

5 

3 

2 

3 

56 

41 

15 

25 

4 

59 

1 

55 

55 

27 

14 

38 

-  4 

52 

1 

47 

54 

55 

13 

47 

4 

41 

1 

38 

54 

25 

12 

52 

4 

26 

1 

29 

53 

54 

11 

51 

4 

10 

1 

19 

53 

23 

10 

44 

3 

53 

1 

10 

52 

54 

9 

34 

3 

33 

1 

0 

52 

33 

8 

20 

3 

10 

0 

51 

52 

18 

7 

4 

2 

43 

0 

41 

52 

8 

5 

43 

2 

14 

0 

31 

52 

3 

4 

19 

1 

43 

0 

21 

52 

2 

2 

54 

1 

9 

0 

10 

52 

2 

1 

27 

0 

35 

0 

0 

52 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

805 


806 


COPERNICUS 


34.  How  THE  POSITIOXS  IN  LONGITUDE  OF  THE  FiVE  PlANETS 
Are  Calculated 

[178^]  Therefore  by  means  of  the  tables  drawn  up  in  this  way  by  us  we  shall  cal¬ 
culate  without  any  difficulty  the  positions  in  longitude  of  the  five  ^vandering  stars. 
There  is  approximately  the  same  method  of  computation  in  all  of  them,  though 
the  three  outer  planets  differ  slightly  from  Venus  and  Alercury  in  this  respect. 

Therefore  let  us  speak  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  first.  In  their  case  the 
calculation  is  such  that  the  mean  movements — that  is,  the  simple  movement  of 
the  sun  and  the  movement  of  parallax  of  the  planet — are  sought  for  any  given 
time  by  the  method  described  above.  Next,  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis  of 
the  eccentric  circle  is  subtracted  from  the  simple  position  of  the  sun,  and  the 
movement  of  parallax  is  subtracted  from  the  remainder;  the  first  remainder  is 
the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  the  planet.  We  shall  look  it  up  among  the 
common  numbers  in  one  of  the  first  two  columns  of  the  table,  and  correspond¬ 
ingly  in  the  third  column  ^ye  shall  take  the  additosubtraction  of  the  eccentric 
circle,  and  the  proportional  minutes  in  the  following  column.  We  shall  add  this 
additosubtraction  to  the  movement  of  anomaly  of  parallax  and  subtract  it  from 
the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle,  if  the  number  wffiereby  w^e  entered  [the  table] 
was  found  in  the  first  column;  and  conversely  w^e  shall  subtract  it  from  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle — if  the  number  w^as  found  in  the  second  column. 
The  sum  or  remainder  will  be  the  corrected  anomaly  of  parallax  or  the  corrected 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle — the  proportional  minutes  being  reserved  for  a 
use  ^ve  shall  speak  of  soon.  Then  we  shall  look  up  this  corrected  anomaly  [of 
parallax]  in  the  first  two  columns  of  common  numbers;  and  from  the  corre¬ 
sponding  place  in  the  fifth  column  we  shall  take  the  additosubtraction  arising 
from  the  movement  of  parallax,  together  with  its  excess  found  in  the  last  col¬ 
umn;  and  of  that  excess  we  shall  take  the  proportional  part  in  accordance  wdth 
the  number  of  proportional  minutes ;  and  w^e  shall  always  add  this  proportional 
part  to  the  additosubtraction.  The  sum  wdll  be  the  true  parallax  of  the  planet; 
and  is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  corrected  anomaly  of  parallax,  if  the  [corrected 
anomaly]  is  less  than  a  semicircle,  or  added,  if  greater  than  a  semicircle.  For  in 
this  way  we  shall  have  the  true  and  apparent  distance  of  the  planet  w^estw^ard 
from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun;  and  wffien  we  have  subtracted  that  distance 
from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun,  the  remainder  wdll  be  the  sought  position  of 
the  planet  [179^]  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  the  addition  of  the  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  equinoxes  will  determine  the  position  of  the  planet  in  relation  to  the 
spring  equinox. 

In  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury  w^e  shall  use  the  distance  from  the  highest 
apsis  to  the  mean  position  of  the  sun  as  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle;  and 
by  means  of  this  anomaly  w^e  shall  correct  the  movement  of  parallax  and  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle,  as  was  said  already.  But  if  the  additosubtrac¬ 
tion  of  the  eccentric  circle  and  the  corrected  parallax  are  of  the  same  quality  or 
species  [i.e.,  are  both  additive  or  both  subtractive],  they  are  simultaneously  add¬ 
ed  to  or  subtracted  from  the  mean  position  of  the  sun.  But  if  they  are  of  different 
species,  the  lesser  is  subtracted  from  the  greater;  and  by  means  of  the  remainder 
there  will  take  place  that  which  \ve  have  just  mentioned,  according  to  the  ad¬ 
ditive  or  subtractive  property  of  the  greater  number;  and  the  final  result  will  be 
the  positloq  which  we  are  looking  for. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V 


807 


35.  On  the  Stations  and  Retrogradations  of  the 
Five  Wandering  Stars 

Moreover,  the  knowledge  of  where  and  when  the  stations,  retrogradations, 
and  returns  take  place  and  how  great  they  are  seems  also  to  pertain  to  the  ac¬ 
count  of  movement  in  longitude.  The  mathematicians,  especially  Apollonius  of 
Perga,  have  dealt  a  good  deal  with  them;  but  they  have  done  so  under  the  as¬ 
sumption  of  only  one  irregular  movement,  namely,  that  whereby  the  planets 
are  moved  with  respect  to  the  sun  and  which  we  have  called  the  parallax  due 
to  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth. 

For  if  the  circles  of  the  planets — whereon  all  the  planets  are  borne  with  un¬ 
equal  periods  of  revolution  but  in  the  same  direction,  z.e.,  towards  the  east — are 
homocentric  with  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth,  and  some  planet  on  its 
own  orbital  circle  and  within  the  great  orbital  circle,  such  as  Venus  or  Mercury, 
has  greater  velocity  than  the  movement  of  the  Earth  has;  and  if  a  straight  line 
drawn  from  the  Earth  cuts  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  in  such  a  way  that  half  the 
segment  comprised  within  the  orbital  circle  has  the  same  ratio  to  the  line  which  ex- 
tends  from  our  point  of  vision  the  Earth  to  the  lower  and  convex  arc  of  the  intersected 
orbital  circle ^  as  does  the  movement  of  the  Earth  to  the  velocity  of  the  planet  then,  if  a 
point  is  made  at  the  extremity  of  this  line  drawn  to  the  arc  which  is  at  the  perigee  of 
the  circle  of  the  planet,  the  point  will  separate  the  retrogradation  from  the  progres¬ 
sion,  so  that  when  the  planet  is  at  that  position,  it  will  have  the  appearance  of 
stopping. 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  three  outer  planets  which  have  a  movement  slower 
than  the  velocity  [179^]  of  the  Earth,  if  a  straight  line  drawn  through  our  point  of 
vision  cuts  the  great  orbital  circle  in  such  a  way  that  half  the  segment  comprised 
within  the  orbital  circle  has  the  same  ratio  to  the  line  which  extends  from  the  planet 
to  our  point  of  vision  located  on  the  nearer  and  convex  surface  of  the  orbital  circle,  as 
does  the  movement  of  the  planet  to  the  velocity  of  the  Earth]  then  the  planet  when  in 
that  position  will  present  to  our  vision  the  appearance  of  stopping. 

But  if  half  the  segment  comprised  within  the  circle,  as  was  said,  has  a  greater  ratio 
to  the  remaining  external  segment  than  the  velocity  of  the  Earth  has  to  the  velocity  of 
Venus  or  Mercury,  or  than  the  movement  of  any  of  the  three  upper  planets  has  to 
the  velocity  of  the  Earth]  then  the  planet  will  progress  eastward]  but  if  the  ratio  is  less, 
then  it  will  retrograde  westward. 

In  order  to  demonstrate  all  this,  Apollonius  took  a  certain  lemma,  which  was 
in  accord  with  the  hypothesis  of  the  immobility  of  the  Earth  but  ’which  none  the 
less  squares  with  our  principle  of  terrestrial  mobility  and  which  for  that  reason 
we  too  shall  employ.  And  we  can  enunciate  it  in  this  form:  if  the  greater  side  of  a 
triangle  is  so  cut  that  one  of  the  segments  is  not  less  than  the  adjoining  side,  then 
this  segment  will  have  a  greater  ratio  to  the  remaining  segment  than  the  angles  on 
the  side  cut,  taken  in  reverse  order,  will  have  to  one  another. 

For  let  BC  be  the  greater  side  of  triangle  ABC]  and  if  on  side  BC 

CD<AC, 

then  I  say  that 

CD  :  Ri)>angle  ABC  :  angle  BCA. 

Now  it  is  demonstrated  as  follows.  Let  the  parallelogram  ADCE  be  com¬ 
pleted;  and  BA  and  CE  extended  will  meet  at  point  E.  Accordingly  since 

AE<AC, 


808  COPERNICUS 

the  circle  described  with  centre  A  and  radius  AE  will 
pass  through  C  or  beyond  it.  Now  let  GEC  be  the  circle, 
and  let  it  pass  through  C.  Since 

trgl.  AEF  AEG, 

while 

trgl.  A£^C<sect.  AEG] 

then 

trgl.  AEF  :  trgl.  AjE'Osect.  AEG  :  sect.  AEG, 

But 

trgl.  AEF  :  trgl.  AjE'C^base  FE  :  base  EG. 

Therefore 

FE  :  £'C>angle  FAE  :  angle  EAG. 

But 

FE  :EG==GD  :DB. 

And 

angle  FAE  =  Single  ABG; 

and 

angle  EAG  =  Single  BGA. 

Accordingly 

[180^]  GD  :  DB  >single  ABG  :  angle  AGB. 

Now  it  is  manifest  that  the  ratio  will  be  much  greater  if  it  is  not  assumed  that 

GD=AG=AE 

but  that 

GD>AE. 

Now  let  ABG  be  the  circle  of  Venus  or  Mercury  around  centre  D;  and  let  the 
Earth  E  outside  the  circle  be  movable  around  the  same  centre  D.  From  E  our 
point  of  vision  let  the  straight  line  EGDA  be  drawn  through  the  centre  of  the 
circle;  and  let  A  be  the  position  farthest  from  the  Earth,  and  G  the  nearest.  And 
let  DG  be  put  down  as  having  a  greater  ratio  to  GE  than  the  movement  of  the 
point  of  vision  has  to  the  velocity  of  the  planet.  Accordingly  it  is  possible  to 
find  a  line  EFB  such  that  half  BF  has  the  same  ratio  to  FE  that  the  movement 
of  the  point  of  vision  has  to  the  movement  of  the  planet.  For  let  line  EFB  be 
moved  away  from  centre  D  and  be  decreased  along  FB  and  increased  along  EF, 
until  we  meet  with  what  is  demanded. 

I  say  that  when  the  planet  is  set  up  at  point  F,  it  will  present  to  us  the  appearance 
of  stopping]  and  that  whatever  size  of  the  arc  we  take  on  either  side  of  F,  we  shall  find 
the  planet  progressing,  if  the  arc  is  taken  in  the  direction  of  the  apogee,  and  retro¬ 
grading,  if  in  the  direction  of  the  perigee. 

For  first  let  the  arc  FG  be  taken  in  the  direction  of  the  apogee:  let  EGK  be 
extended,  and  let  F6,  DG,  and  DF  be  joined.  Accordingly  since  in  triangle  BGE 
segment  BF  of  the  greater  side  BE  is  greater  than  BG,  then 
BF  :  FF>angle  FEG  :  angle  GBF. 

Furthermore, 

:  FF>angle  FEG  :  2  angle  GBF, 

i.e, 

]/iBF  :  FE  >  angle  FEG  :  angle  GDF. 

But 

]/iBF  :  FE  =  movement  of  Earth  :  movement  of  planet. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  809 

Therefore 

angle  FEG  :  angle  GDE<  velocity  of 
Earth  :  velocity  of  planet. 

Now  let 

angle  FEL  :  angle  movement  of 

Earth  :  movement  of  planet. 

Therefore 

angle  FJ^L>  angle  FEG. 

Accordingly,  during  the  time  in  which  the  planet 
traverses  arc  GF  of  the  orbital  circle,  our  line  of  sight 
[180^]  will  be  thought  to  have  traversed  during  that 
time  the  contrary  space  between  line  EF  and  line  EL. 
It  is  manifest  that  in  the  same  time  in  which  to  our 
sight  arc  GF  transports  the  planet  westward  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  smaller  angle  FEG,  the  passage  of 
the  Earth  drags  it  back  eastward  in  accordance  with 
the  greater  angle  FEL,  so  that  the  planet  will  go  on 
increasing  its  angular  distance  eastward  by  angle  GEL 
and  will  not  seem  to  have  come  to  a  stop  yet. 

Now  it  is  manifest  that  the  opposite  of  this  can  be 
shown  by  the  same  means.  If  in  the  same  diagram  we  put  down  that 
}/^GK  :  G£  =  movement  of  Earth  :  velocity  of  planet; 
and  if  we  take  arc  GF  in  the  direction  of  the  perigee  and  away  from  straight 
line  EK,  and  join  KF  and  make  triangle  KEF,  where 

(?£>EF; 

then 


Thus  too 


%.e., 


KG  :  (?£;<angle  FEG  :  angle  FKG. 
}^KG  :  GE  <sing\e  FEG  :  2  angle  FKG, 


}4KG  :  GE:<angle  FEG  :  angle  GDF, 
conversely  to  what  was  shown  before.  And  it  is  inferred  by  the  same  means  that 
angle  GDF  :  angle  velocity  of  planet :  velocity  of  line  of  sight. 

Accordingly,  when  angle  GDF  has  been  made  greater,  so  that  the  angles  have 
the  same  ratio,  then  the  planet  will  complete  a  greater  movement  v/estwards 
than  progression  demands. 

Hence  it  is  also  manifest  that  if  we  make 

arc  FC  =  arc  CM 

the  second  station  will  be  at  point  M ;  and  if  line  EMN  is  drawn, 

}/^MN  :  ME  =  }/^BF  :  =  velocity  of  Earth  :  velocity  of  planet; 

and  accordingly  points  M  and  F  will  designate  the  two  stations  and  will  de¬ 
termine  the  whole  arc  FCM  as  retrogressive  and  the  remainder  of  the  circle  as 
progressive. 

Moreover,  it  follows  that  at  certain  distances 

DC  :  CJ^> velocity  of  Earth  :  velocity  of  planet; 
and  it  will  not  be  possible  to  draw  another  straight  line  in  the  ratio  [which  the 
velocity  of  the  Earth  has  to  the  velocity  of  the  planet];  and  the  planet  will 
not  seem  to  stop  or  to  retrograde.  For  since  it  was  assumed  that  in  triangle  DEG 

DC<EG; 

angle  CEG  :  angle  CDG<DC  :  CE- 


810 

but 


COPERNICUS 


DC  :  (7^>velocity  of  Earth  :  velocity  of  planet. 

Therefore  also 

angle  CEG  :  angle  CZ)G< velocity  of  Earth  :  velocity  of  planet. 
Where  that  occurs,  the  planet  will  progress;  [181^]  and  we  shall  not  find  any¬ 
where  in  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  an  arc  through  which  it  seems  to  retro¬ 
grade.  All  this  concerning  Venus  and  Mercury,  which  are  inside  the  great  or¬ 
bital  circle  [of  the  Earth]. 

We  can  demonstrate  this  concerning  the  three  outer  planets  by  the  same 
method  and  with  the  same  diagrams — merely  by  reversing  the  names,  so  that 
we  put  down  ABC  as  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  and  as  the  circuit  of 
our  point  of  vision  and  the  planet  at  E,  whose  movement  in  its  own  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  is  less  than  the  speed  of  our  point  of  vision  in  the  great  orbital  circle.  The 
rest  of  the  demonstration  will  proceed  as  before. 

36.  How  THE  Times,  Positions,  and  Arcs  of  the 
Retrogradations  are  Determined 

Now  if  the  orbital  circles  which  bear  the  wandering  stars  were  homocentric 
with  the  great  orbital  circle,  it  would  be  easy  to  establish  that  which  the  demon¬ 
strations  promise,  as  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  the  planet  to  the  velocity  of 
the  point  of  vision  would  always  be  the  same.  But  the  orbital  circles  are  eccen¬ 
tric,  and  hence  their  movements  appear  as  irregular.  For  that  reason  it  will  be 
necessary  for  us  to  assume  irregular  and  corrected  movements  everywhere  as  the 
differences  of  velocity  and  to  employ  them  in  the  demonstrations,  and  not  the 
simple  and  regular  movements,  except  when  the  planet  happens  to  be  at  its 
mean  longitudes,  the  only  place  where  it  seems  to  be  carried  in  its  orbital  circle 
with  a  mean  movement. 

Now  we  shall  show  this  in  the  case  of  Mars,  so  that  the  retrogradations  of  the 
other  planets  may  become  clearer  by  means  of  this  ex¬ 
ample.  For  let  ABC  be  the  great  orbital  circle,  on  which 
our  point  of  vision  revolves;  and  let  the  planet  be  at 
point  E,  From  the  planet  let  the  straight  line  ECDA  be 
drawn  through  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle;  and  let 
EFB  also  be  drawn.  Half  of  chord  BF — ^.6.,  chord 
GF — will  have  the  ratio  to  line  EF  which  the  varying 
velocity  of  the  planet  has  to  the  velocity  of  the  line  of 
sight,  whereby  it  exceeds  the  planet.  Our  problem  is  to 
find  arc  FC  of  half  the  retrogradation,  or  ABF,  so  as  to 
know  at  what  distance  from  its  farthest  position  from 
A  the  planet  becomes  stationary  and  what  the  angle 
comprehended  by  FEC  is.  For  by  means  of  this  we  shall 
foretell  the  time  and  position  of  such  an  affection  of 
the  planet. 

Now  let  the  planet  be  placed  at  the  mean  apsis  of  the 
eccentric  circle,  where  the  movements  of  longitude  and 
of  anomaly  differ  very  little  from  the  regular  move¬ 
ments.  Therefore  in  the  case  of  the  planet  IVIars,  since 
its  mean  movement  [that  is  half  of  the  line  BF]  [181^] 
is  1p8®7",  the  motion  of  parallax,  which  is  the  relation  of  our  vision  to  the  mean 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  V  811 

movement  of  the  star,  consists  of  one  part  and  is  the  straight  line  EF.  Hence 

EB  =  miS'U" 

and  likewise 

rect.  BE,  £’F  =  3p16'14". 

Now  we  have  shown  that 

DA  =6,580, 

where  DE  =  10,000, 

and  DA  is  the  radius  of  the  orbital  circle. 

But 

DA  =39^29', 

=  where  DE  =  60^ ; 

and 

AD:D(7  =  99P29'  :20p31'. 

And 

rect.  AD,  DC  =  rect.  BE,  DD  =  2,041p4'. 

Accordingly  by  reduction 

2,041P4'  -^3P16'14"  =  624P4', 

and  similarly 

side  DD  =  24p58'52", 

where  DE  =  60^. 

But 

Sir  =  4, 163 

where  DD=  10,000 
and  DD  =  6,580. 

Accordingly,  as  the  sides  of  triangle  DEF  are  given, 

angle  DDD  =  27°15', 

which  is  the  angular  retrogradation  of  the  planet,  and 

angle  CDD=16°50', 

which  is  the  angular  anomaly  of  parallax.  Accordingly,  since  the  planet,  when 
first  stationary,  appeared  on  line  DD;  and  the  planet,  when  opposite  the  sun,  on 
line  DC;  if  the  planet  is  not  moved  eastward,  the  16°15'  of  arc  CD  will  compre¬ 
hend  the  27°25'  of  angle  ADD  found  to  be  the  retrogradation;  but  according  to 
the  ratio  set  forth  of  the  velocity  of  the  planet  to  the  velocity  of  our  line  of 
sight,  16°5'  corresponds  to  the  section  of  the  anomaly  of  parallax  and  approxi¬ 
mately  19°6'39'^  corresponds  [to  the  section  of  the  anomaly]  of  longitude 
of  the  planet.  Now 

27°15'-19°6'39"  =  8°8', 

which  is  the  distance  from  the  other  station  to  the  solar  opposition — and  there 
are  approximately  36J^  days  during  which  the  anomaly  in  longitude  is  19°6'39" 
— and  hence  the  total  retrogradation  is  16°16'  in  73  days.  These  things  which 
have  been  demonstrated  for  the  mean  longitudes  of  the  eccentric  circle  can  be 
similarly  demonstrated  for  other  positions — the  planet  being  credited  with  an 
always  varying  velocity,  according  as  its  position  demands,  as  we  said. 

Hence  in  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  the  same  way  of  demonstration  is  open, 
provided  we  take  the  point  of  sight  instead  of  the  planet  and  the  planet  instead 
of  the  point  of  sight.  Now  the  reverse  of  what  occurs  in  the  orbital  circles  which 
the  Earth  encloses  occurs  in  the  orbital  circles  which  enclose  the  Earth;  and 
let  that  be  enough,  so  that  we  wonT  have  to  repeat  the  same  old  song.  Never¬ 
theless,  since  the  variable  movement  of  the  planet  with  respect  to  the  point  of 


812  COPERNICUS 

sight  and  to  the  ambiguity  of  the  stationary  points— of  which  the  theorem  of 
Apollonius  does  not  relieve  us— give  no  little  difficulty;  I  do  not  know  whether 
it  would  not  be  better  to  investigate  the  stations  simply  and  in  connection  with 
the  nearest  position,  by  the  method  whereby  we  investigate  by  means  of  the 
kno^vn  numbers  of  their  movements  the  conjunction  of  the  planet,  when  oppo¬ 
site  the  sun,  with  the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun,  or  the  conjunctions  of 
any  of  the  planets.  And  we  shall  leave  that  to  your  pleasure. 


BOOK  SIX 


[182'']  We  have  indicated  to  the  best  of  our  ability  what  power  and  effect  the 
assumption  of  the  revolution  of  the  Earth  has  in  the  case  of  the  apparent  move¬ 
ment  in  longitude  of  the  wandering  stars  and  in  what  a  sure  and  necessary  order 
it  places  all  the  appearances.  It  remains  for  us  to  occupy  ourselves  with  the 
movements  of  the  planets  by  which  they  digress  in  latitude  and  to  show  how 
in  this  case  too  the  selfsame  mobility  of  the  Earth  exercises  its  command  and 
prescribes  laws  for  them  here  also.  Moreover  this  is  a  necessary  part  of  the 
science,  as  the  digressions  of  these  planets  cause  no  little  variation  in  the  rising 
and  setting,  apparitions  and  occupations,  and  the  other  appearances  of  which 
there  has  been  a  general  exposition  above.  And  their  true  positions  are  said  to 
be  known  only  when  their  longitude  together  with  their  latitude  in  relation  to 
the  ecliptic  has  been  established.  Accordingly  by  means  of  the  assumption  of 
the  mobility  of  the  Earth  we  shall  do  with  perhaps  greater  compactness  and 
more  becomingly  what  the  ancient  mathematicians  thought  to  have  demon¬ 
strated  by  means  of  the  immobility  of  the  Earth. 

1.  General  Exposition  of  the  Digression  in  Latitude 
OF  THE  Five  Wandering  Stars 

The  ancients  found  in  all  the  planets  two  digressions  in  latitude  answering  to 
their  twofold  irregularity  in  longitude — one  digression  taking  place  by  reason 
of  the  eccentricity  of  the  orbital  circles,  and  the  other  in  accordance  with  the 
epicycles.  In  place  of  the  epicycles,  as  has  been  often  repeated,  we  have  taken  the 
single  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth — not  that  the  orbital  circle  has  some  in¬ 
clination  with  respect  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  fixed  once  and  forever,  since 
they  are  the  same,  but  that  the  orbital  circles  of  the  planets  are  inclined  to  this 
plane  [182^]  with  a  variable  obliquity,  and  this  variability  is  regulated  according 
to  the  movement  and  revolutions  of  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth. 

But  since  the  three  higher  planets,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  move  longi¬ 
tudinally  under  different  laws  from  those  under  which  the  remaining  two  do,  so 
also  they  differ  not  a  little  in  their  latitudinal  movement.  Accordingly,  the 
ancients  first  examined  where  and  how  great  their  farthest  northern  limits  in 
latitude  were.  Ptolemy  found  the  limits  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  around 
the  beginning  of  Libra,  but  in  the  case  of  Mars  around  the  end  of  Cancer  near 
the  apogee  of  the  eccentric  circle.  But  in  our  time  we  found  this  northern  limit 
in  the  case  of  Saturn  at  7®  of  Scorpio,  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  at  27°  of  Libra,  in 
the  case  of  Mars  at  27°  of  Leo,  according  as  the  apogees  have  been  changing 
around  down  to  our  time ;  for  the  inclinations  and  the  cardinal  points  of  latitude 
follow  upon  the  movement  of  those  orbital  circles.  At  corrected  or  apparent 
distances  of  90°  betTveen  these  limits,  they  seem  to  be  making  no  digression  in 
latitude,  wherever  the  Earth  happens  to  be  at  that  time.  Therefore,  when  they 
are  at  these  mean  longitudes,  they  are  understood  to  be  at  the  common  section 

813 


814  COPERNICUS 

of  their  orbital  circles  with  the  ecliptic,  just  as  the  moon  was  at  the  ecliptic 
sections.  Ptolemy  calls  these  points  the  nodes:  the  ascending  node,  after  which 
the  planet  enters  upon  northern  latitudes;  and  the  descending  node,  after  which 
the  planet  crosses  over  into  southern  latitudes — not  that  the  great  orbital  circle 
of  the  Earth,  which  always  remains  the  same  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  gives 
them  any  latitude;  but  every  digression  in  latitude  is  measured  from  the  nodes 
and  varies  greatly  in  positions  different  from  the  nodes.  And  according  as  the 
Earth  approaches  other  positions,  where  the  planets  are  seen  to  be  opposite  the 
sun  and  acronycti,  the  planets  always  move  with  a  greater  digression  than  in 
any  other  position  of  the  Earth:  in  the  northern  semicircle  to  the  north,  and  in 
the  southern  to  the  south,  and  with  greater  variation  than  the  approach  or  with¬ 
drawal  of  the  Earth  demands.  By  that  happening,  it  is  known  that  the  inclina¬ 
tion  of  their  orbital  circles  is  not  fixed,  but  that  it  changes  in  a  certain  move¬ 
ment  of  libration  commensurable  with  the  revolutions  of  the  great  circle  of  the 
Earth,  as  will  be  said  a  little  farther  on. 

Now  Venus  and  Mercury  seem  to  digress  somewhat  differently  but  under  a 
fixed  law  which  has  been  observed  to  hold  at  the  mean,  highest,  and  lowest  ap¬ 
sides.  For  at  the  mean  longitudes,  namely  when  the  line  of  the  mean  movement 
of  the  sun  is  at  a  quadrant’s  distance  from  their  highest  or  lowest  apsis,  and  the 
planets  as  evening  or  morning  stars  are  themselves  at  a  distance  of  a  quadrant 
of  their  orbital  circle  from  the  same  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun;  [183“] 
the  ancients  found  that  the  planets  had  not  digressed  from  the  ecliptic,  and 
hence  the  ancients  understood  them  to  be  at  that  time  the  common  section  of 
their  separate  orbital  circles  and  the  ecliptic.  This  section  passes  through  their 
apogees  and  perigees;  and  accordingly  when  they  are  higher  or  lower  than  the 
Earth,  they  then  make  manifest  digressions — the  greatest  digressions  at  their 
greatest  distances  from  the  Earth,  i.e.,  at  the  evening  apparition  or  at  the 
morning  occultation,  when  Venus  is  farthest  north,  and  Mercury  farthest  south. 
And  conversely  at  a  position  nearer  to  the  Earth,  when  they  undergo  occultation 
in  the  evening  or  emerge  in  the  morning,  Venus  is  to  the  south,  and  Mercury  to 
the  north.  Vice  versa,  when  the  Earth  is  at  the  position  opposite  to  this  and  at 
the  other  mean  apsis  namely,  when  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  270° — 
Venus  is  apparent  at  its  greater  southern  distance  from  the  Earth,  and  Mercury 
is  to  the  north,  and  at  a  nearer  position  of  the  Earth  Venus  is  to  the  north,  and 
Mercury  to  the  south.  At  the  solstice  of  the  Earth  at  the  apogee  of  these  planets, 
Ptolemy  found  that  the  latitude  of  Venus  the  morning  star  was  northern,  and 
of  Venus  the  evening  star,  southern;  and  inversely  in  the  case  of  Mercury: 
southern  when  the  morning  star,  and  northern  when  the  evening  star.  These  re¬ 
lations  are  similarly  reversed  at  the  opposite  position  of  the  perigee,  so  that 
Venus  Lucifer  is  seen  in  the  south,  and  Venus  Vesperugo  in  the  north;  but  Mer¬ 
cury  as  morning  star  in  the  north,  and  Mercury  as  evening  star  in  the  south. 
And  the  ancients  found  that  at  both  these  positions  the  northern  digression  of 
Venus  was  always  greater  than  the  southern,  and  that  the  southern  digression  of 
Mercury  was  greater  than  the  northern. 

Taking  this  as  an  occasion,  the  ancients  reasoned  out  a  twofold  latitude  for 
this  position,  and  a  threefold  latitude  universally.  They  called  the  first  latitude, 
which  occurs  at  the  mean  longitudes,  the  inclination;  the  second,  which  occurs 
at  the  highest  and  lowest  apsides,  the  obliquation;  and  the  third  one,  which 
occurs  in  conjunction  with  the  second,  the  deviation:  it  is  always  northern  in 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  815 

the  case  of  Venus  and  southern  in  the  case  of  Mercury.  Between  these  four  limits 
the  latitudes  are  mixed  with  one  another,  and  alternately  increase  and  decrease 
and  yield  mutually;  and  we  shall  give  the  right  causes  for  all  that. 

2.  Hypotheses  of  the  Circles  on  Which  the  Planets 
Are  Moved  in  Latitude 

Accordingly  in  the  case  of  these  five  planets  we  must  assume  that  their  orbital 
circles  are  inclined  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic — the  common  section  being 
through  the  diameter  of  the  ecliptic — by  a  variable  but  regular  inclination, 
[183^]  since  in  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  the  angle  of  section  receives  a  certain 
libration  around  that  section  as  around  an  axis,  like  the  libration  which  we  de¬ 
monstrated  in  the  case  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  but  simple  and  com¬ 
mensurable  with  the  movement  of  parallax.  The  angle  of  section  is  increased  and 
decreased  by  this  libration  within  a  fixed  period,  so  that,  whenever  the  Earth  is 
nearest  to  the  planet,  z.e.,  to  the  planet  in  opposition  to  the  sun,  the  greatest 
inclination  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the  planet  occurs;  at  the  contrary  position  the 
least  inclination;  at  the  mean  position,  the  mean  inclination:  consequently, 
when  the  planet  is  at  its  farthest  limit  of  northern  or  southern  latitude,  its  lati¬ 
tude  appears  much  greater  at  the  nearness  of  the  Earth  than  at  its  greatest  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  Earth.  And  although  this  irregularity  can  be  caused  only  by  the 
unequal  distances  of  the  Earth,  in  accordance  with  which  things  nearer  seem 
greater  than  things  farther  away;  nevertheless  there  is  a  rather  great  difference 
between  the  excess  and  the  deficiency  of  these  planetary  latitudes:  and  that 
cannot  take  place  unless  the  orbital  circles  too  have  a  movement  of  libration 
with  respect  to  their  obliquity.  But,  as  we  said  before,  in  the  case  of  things  which 
are  undergoing  a  libration,  we  must  take  a  certain  mean  between  the  extremes. 

In  order  that  this  may  be  clearer,  let  ABCD  be  the  Earth^s  great  orbital  circle 
in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  with  centre  E;  and  let  FGKL  the  orbital  circle  of  the 

planet  be  inclined  to  ABCD  in  a  mean  and  per¬ 
manent  declination  whereof  F  is  the  northern 
limit  in  latitude,  K  the  southern,  G  the  de¬ 
scending  node  of  section,  and  BED  the  com¬ 
mon  section,  which  is  extended  in  the  straight 
lines  GB  and  Z)L.  And  those  four  termini  do 
not  change,  except  along  with  the  movement 
of  the  apsides.  Let  it  be  understood  however 
that  the  movement  of  the  planet  in  longitude 
takes  place  not  on  the  plane  of  circle  FG  but 
on  OPy  another  circle  which  is  inclined  to  and 
homocentric  with  FG.  These  two  circles  cut 
one  another  in  that  same  [184^]  straight  line 
GBDL.  Therefore,  while  the  planet  is  being 
borne  on  orbital  circle  OP,  it  meanwhile  falls  upon  plane  FK  by  the  movement 
of  libration,  goes  beyond  plane  FK  in  either  direction,  and  on  that  account 
makes  the  latitude  appear  variable. 

For  first  let  the  planet  be  at  point  0  at  its  greatest  northern  latitude  and  at 
its  position  nearest  to  the  Earth  in  A ;  then  the  latitude  of  the  planet  will  in¬ 
crease  in  proportion  to  OGF  the  angle  of  greatest  inclination  of  orbital  circle 
OGP.  This  movement  [of  libration]  is  a  movement  of  approach  and  withdrawal. 


K 


816  COPERNICUS 

because  by  hypothesis  it  is  commensurable  with  the  movement  of  parallax:  if 
then  the  Earth  is  at  point  0  will  coincide  with  F,  and  the  latitude  of  the 
planet  will  appear  less  in  the  same  position  than  before;  and  it  will  be  much  less 
if  the  Earth  is  at  point  C.  For  0  will  cross  over  to  the  farthest  and  most  diverse 
part  of  its  libration,  and  will  leave  only  as  much  latitude  as  is  in  excess  over  the 
subtractive  libration  of  the  northern  latitude,  namely  over  the  angle  equal  to 
OGF,  Hence  the  latitude  of  the  planet  around  F  in  the  north  will  increase 
throughout  the  remaining  semicircle  CDAj  until  the  Earth  returns  to  the  first 
point  Aj  from  which  it  set  out.  There  will  be  the  same  way  of  progress  for  the 
meridian  planet  set  up  around  point  K — the  movement  of  the  Earth  starting 
from  (7.  But  if  the  planet,  in  opposition  to  the  sun  or  hidden  by  it,  is  at  one  of 
the  nodes  G  or  L,  even  though  at  that  time  the  orbital  circles  FK  and  OP  have 
their  greatest  inclination  to  one  another,  on  that  account  no  planetary  latitude 
is  perceptible,  namely  because  the  planet  is  at  the  common  section  of  the  orbital 
circles.  From  that,  I  judge,  it  is  easily  understood  how  the  northern  latitude  of 
the  planet  decreases  from  F  to  G;  and  the  southern  latitude  increases  from  G  to 
K,  but  vanishes  totally  at  L  and  becomes  northern.  And  this  is  the  way  with 
those  three  higher  planets. 

Venus  and  Mercury  differ  from  them  no  little  in  their  latitudes,  as  in  longi¬ 
tude,  because  they  have  the  common  sections  of  the  orbital  circles  located 
through  the  apogee  and  perigee.  Now  their  greatest  inclinations  at  the  mean 
apsides  become  changeable  by  a  movement  of  libration,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
higher  planets;  but  they  undergo  furthermore  a  libration  dissimilar  to  the  first. 
Nevertheless  both  librations  are  commensurable  with  the  revolutions  of  the 
Earth,  but  not  in  the  same  way.  For  the  first  libration  has  the  following  prop¬ 
erty;  when  there  has  been  one  revolution  of  the  Earth  with  respect  to  the  apsides 
of  the  planets,  there  have  been  two  revolutions  of  the  movement  of  libration 
having  as  an  immobile  axis  the  section  through  the  apogee  and  the  perigee, 
which  we  spoke  of ;  so  that  whenever  the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun  is 
at  the  perigee  or  apogee  of  the  planets,  the  greatest  angle  of  section  occurs;  while 
the  least  angle  occurs  at  the  mean  longitudes.  [184 But  the  second  libration 
supervening  upon  this  one  differs  from  it  in  that,  by  possessing  a  movable  axis, 
it  has  the  following  effect:  namely,  that  when  the  Earth  is  located  at  a  mean 
longitude,  the  planet  of  Venus  or  Mercury  is  always  on  the  axis,  i.e.,  at  the  com¬ 
mon  section  of  this  libration,  but  shows  its  greatest  deviation  when  the  Earth 
is  in  line  with  its  apogee  or  perigee — Venus  always  being  to  the  north,  as  was 
said,  and  Mercury  to  the  south;  although  on  account  of  the  former  simple  incli¬ 
nation  they  should  at  this  time  be  lacking  latitude. 

For  example,  when  the  mean  movement  of  the  sun  is  at  the  apogee  of  Venus 
and  Venus  is  in  the  same  position,  it  is  manifest  that,  in  accordance  with  the 
simple  inclination  and  the  first  libration,  Venus,  being  at  the  common  section  of 
its  orbital  circle  with  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  would  at  that  time  have  had  no 
latitude;  but  the  second  libration,  which  has  its  section  or  axis  along  the  trans¬ 
verse  diameter  of  the  eccentric  orbital  circle  and  cuts  at  right  angles  the  diam¬ 
eter  passing  through  the  highest  and  lowest  apsis,  adds  its  greatest  deviation  to 
the  planet.  But  if  at  this  time  Venus  is  in  one  of  the  other  quadrants  and  around 
the  mean  apsides  of  its  orbital  circle,  then  the  axis  of  this  libration  will  coincide 
with  the  line  of  mean  movement  of  the  sun,  and  Venus  itself  will  add  to  the 
northern  obliquity  the  greatest  deviation,  which  it  subtracts  from  the  southern 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  817 

obliquity  and  leaves  smaller.  In  this  way  the  libration  of  deviation  is  made  com¬ 
mensurate  with  the  movement  of  the  Earth. 

In  order  that  these  things  may  be  grasped  more  easily,  let  ABCD  be  drawn 

again  as  the  great  orbital  circle.  Let 
FGK  be  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus 
or  Mercur}^:  it  is  eccentric  to  circle 
ABC  and  inclined  to  it  in  accordance 
with  the  equal  inclination  FGK.  Let 
FG  be  the  common  section  of  these 
two  circles  through  F  the  apogee  of 
the  orbital  circle  and  G  the  perigee. 
First  for  the  sake  of  an  easier  demon¬ 
stration  let  us  put  down  GKF  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the  eccentric  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  as  simple  and  fixed,  or,  if  you 
prefer,  as  midway  between  the 
greatest  and  the  least  inclination, 
except  that  the  common  section  FG 
[185^]  changes  according  to  the 
movement  of  the  perigee  and  apogee. 
When  the  Earth  is  on  this  common 
section,  i.e.,  at  A  or  (7,  and  the 
planet  is  on  the  same  line,  it  is  manifest  that  at  that  time  the  planet  would  have 
no  latitude,  since  all  latitude  is  sideways  in  the  semicircles  GKF  and  FL(?,  where¬ 
on  the  planet  effects  its  northern  or  southern  approaches,  as  has  been  said,  in 
proportion  to  the  inclination  of  circle  FKG  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  Now 
some  call  this  digression  of  the  planet  the  obliquation ;  others,  the  reflexion.  But 
when  the  Earth  is  at  B  or  D,  i.e.,  at  the  mean  apsides  of  the  planet,  there  will 
be  the  same  latitudes  FKG  and  GFL  above  and  below;  and  they  call  them  the 
declinations.  And  so  these  latitudes  differ  nominally  rather  than  really  from  the 
former  latitudes,  and  even  the  names  are  interchanged  at  the  middle  positions. 
But  since  the  angle  of  inclination  of  these  circles  is  found  to  be  greater  in  the 
obliquation  than  in  the  declination,  the  ancients  understood  this  as  taking 
place  through  a  certain  libration,  curving  itself  around  section  FG  as  an  axis,  as 
was  said  above.  Accordingly  since  the  angle  of  section  is  known  in  both  cases,  it 
will  be  easy  to  understand  from  the  difference  between  them  how  great  the 
libration  from  least  to  greatest  inclination  is. 

Now  let  there  be  understood  another  circle,  the  circle  of  deviation,  which  is 
inclined  to  circle  GKFL  and  homocentric  in  the  case  of  Venus  but  eccentric  to 
the  eccentric  circle  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  as  will  be  said  later:  And  let  RS  be 
their  common  section  as  axis  of  libration,  an  axis  movable  in  a  circle,  in  such 
fashion  that  when  the  Earth  is  at  A  or  Bj  the  planet  is  at  the  farthest  limit  of 
deviation,  wherever  that  is,  as  at  point  T]  and  as  far  as  the  Earth  has  advanced 
from  A,  so  far  away  from  T  let  the  planet  be  understood  to  have  moved,  while 
the  inclination  of  the  circle  of  deviation  decreases,  so  that  when  the  Earth  has 
measured  the  quadrant  AB^  the  planet  should  be  understood  as  having  arrived 
at  the  node  of  this  latitude,  f.c.,  at  R.  But  as  at  this  time  the  planes  coincide  at 
the  mean  movement  of  libration  and  are  tending  in  different  directions,  the  re¬ 
maining  semicircle  of  the  deviation,  which  before  was  southerly,  becomes 


818  COPERNICUS 

northern;  and  as  Venus  passes  into  this  semicircle,  Venus  avoids  the  south  and 
seeks  the  north  again,  never  to  seek  the  south  by  this  libration,  just  as  Mercury, 
by  crossing  in  the  opposite  direction,  stays  in  the  south;  and  Mercury  also  dif¬ 
fers  from  Venus  in  that  its  libration  takes  place  not  in  a  circle  homocentric  with 
an  eccentric  circle  but  in  a  circle  eccentric  to  an  eccentric  circle. 

We  employed  an  epicycle  instead  of  this  eccentric  circle  in  demonstrating  the 
irregularity  in  the  movement  in  longitude.  But  since  there  we  were  considering 
longitude  without  latitude,  and  here  latitude  [185^]  without  longitude,  and  as 
one  and  the  same  revolution  comprehends  and  brings  them  to  pass  equally;  it  is 
clear  enough  that  it  is  one  and  the  same  movement  and  one  and  the  same  libra¬ 
tion  which  can  cause  both  irregularities  and  be  eccentric  and  have  an  inclination 
at  the  same  time ;  and  that  there  is  no  other  hypothesis  besides  this  which  we 
have  just  spoken  of  and  will  say  more  about  below. 

3.  How  Great  the  Inclinations  of  the  Orbital  Circles 
OF  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  Are 

After  setting  out  our  hypothesis  for  the  digressions  of  the  five  planets,  we 
must  descend  to  the  things  themselves  and  discern  singulars;  and  first  how  great 
the  inclinations  of  the  single  circles  are.  We  measure  these  inclinations  against 
the  great  circle  which  passes  through  the  poles  of  the  circle  having  the  inclina¬ 
tion  and  is  at  right  angles  to  the  ecliptic ;  the  transits  in  latitude  are  observed 
in  relation  to  this  great  circle.  For  when  we  have  apprehended  these  [inclina¬ 
tions],  the  way  of  learning  the  latitudes  of  each  planet  will  be  disclosed.  Be¬ 
ginning  once  more  with  the  three  higher  planets,  we  find  that  according  to 
Ptolemy  the  digression  of  Saturn  in  opposition  to  the  sun  at  the  farthest  limits 
of  southern  latitude  was  3°5',  the  digression  of  Jupiter  2°7',  that  of  Mars  7°;  but 
in  opposite  positions,  namely  when  they  were  in  conjunction  with  the  sun,  the 
digression  of  Saturn  was  2°2',  that  of  Jupiter  1°5',  and  that  of  Mars  only  5',  so 
that  it  almost  touched  the  ecliptic — according  as  it  is  possible  to  mark  the  lati¬ 
tudes  from  the  observations  which  he  took  in  the  neighbourhood  of  their  oc¬ 
cupations  and  apparitions. 

Let  that  be  kept  before  us;  and  in  the  plane  which  is  at  right  angles  to  the 
ecliptic  and  through  its  centre,  let  AB  be  the  common  section  [of  the  plane] 
with  the  ecliptic,  and  CD  the  common  section  [of  the  plane]  with  any  of  the  three 
eccentric  circles  through  the  greatest  northern  and  southern  limits.  Moreover, 


let  E  be  the  centre  of  the  ecliptic,  and  PEG  the  diameter  of  the  great  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  of  the  Earth.  Now  let  D  be  the  southern  latitude  and  C  the  northern;  and  let 
CFj  CGy  DF,  and  DG  be  joined. 

But  the  ratios  of  EG  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the  Earth  to  ED  the  eccentric 
circle  of  the  planet  at  any  of  their  given  positions  have  already  been  demon¬ 
strated  above  in  the  cases  of  the  single  [planets].  But  the  positions  of  greatest 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  819 


latitudes  have  been  given  by  the  observations.  Therefore,  since  angle  BGD^  the 
angle  of  greatest  southern  latitude  and  an  exterior  angle  of  triangle  EGD,  has 
been  given,  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  GED,  the  angle  of  greatest  southern 
inclination  of  the  eccentric  circle  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  will  also  be  given 
by  what  has  been  shown  concerning  plane  triangles. 

Similarly  we  shall  demonstrate  the  least  inclination  by  means  of  the  least 
southern  latitude,  namely  by  means  of  angle  [186^]  EFD.  Since  in  triangle  EFD 
the  ratio  of  side  EF  to  side  ED  is  given  together  with  angle  EFD^  we  shall  have 
GED  given,  the  exterior  angle  and  angle  of  least  southern  inclination:  hence 
from  the  difference  between  both  declinations  we  shall  have  the  total  libration 
of  the  eccentric  circle  in  relation  to  the  ecliptic.  Moreover  against  these  angles 
of  inclination  we  shall  measure  the  opposite  northern  latitudes,  that  is  to  say, 
angles  AFC  and  EGC ;  and  if  they  agree  with  the  observations,  it  will  be  a  sign 
that  we  have  not  erred  at  all. 

Now  as  our  example  we  shall  take  Mars,  which  has  a  greater  digression  in 
latitude  than  any  of  the  others.  Ptolemy  marked  the  greatest  southern  latitude 
as  being  approxim_ately  7°  in  the  case  of  the  perigee  of  Mars,  and  the  greatest 
northern  latitude  as  4°20'  at  the  apogee.  But  as  we  have  assumed  that 

angle  BGD  =  6°50', 
we  shall  find  that  correspondingly 

angle  AFC  =  4°30'. 

For  since 

EG  :ED  =  1P  :  1p22'26" 

and  since 

angle  BCD  =  &^bQ'] 
angle  DEG  =  1°51', 

which  is  the  angle  of  greatest  southern  inclination. 

And  since 

EF  :CE  =  l^ 

and 

angle  =  angle  DEG=VbV ] 

it  follows  that,  as  angle  CFA  is  the  exterior  angle  which  we  spoke  of, 

angle  CFA^^^A^, 

when  the  planet  is  in  opposition  to  the  sun. 

Similarly,  in  the  opposite  position  where  it  is  in  conjunction  with  the  sun,  if 
we  assume  that 


angle  DFE  =  5', 

then,  since  sides  DE  and  EF  and  angle  EFD  are  given, 

angle  EDF  =  4:\ 

and,  as  exterior  angle, 


angle  DEG  =  9\ 

which  is  the  angle  of  least  inclination.  And  that  will  show  us  that 

angle  CGE  =  6\ 

which  is  the  angle  of  northern  latitude.  Therefore,  by  the  subtraction  of  the  least 
inclination  from  the  greatest. 


r5'-9'  =  r42', 

which  is  the  libration  of  this  inclination,  and 

i^{r42')  =  50i^'. 


820  COPERNICUS 

In  the  case  of  the  other  two,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  there  is  a  similar  method  for 
discovering  the  angles  of  the  inclinations  together  with  the  latitudes;  for  the 
greatest  inclination  of  Jupiter  is  1°42',  and  the  least  [186^]  so  that  its  total 
libration  does  not  comprehend  more  than  24'.  Now  the  greatest  inclination  of 
Saturn  is  2°44',  and  the  least  2°16';  and  the  libration  between  them  is  19'.  Hence 
by  means  of  the  least  angles  of  inclination,  which  occur  at  the  opposite  position, 
when  the  planets  are  hidden  beneath  the  sun,  their  digressions  in  latitude  away 
from  the  ecliptic  will  be  exhibited:  that  of  Saturn  as  2°3'  and  that  of  Jupiter  as 
1^6' — as  were  to  be  shown  and  reserved  for  the  tables  to  be  drawn  up  below  ^ 

4.  On  the  Exposition  of  the  Other  Latitudes  in 
Particular  and  in  General 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  shown,  the  latitudes  of  these  three  planets 
will  be  made  clear  in  general  and  in  particular.  For  as  before,  let  AB  the  line 
through  the  farthest  limits  of  digression  be  the  common  section  of  the  plane 
perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic.  And  let  the  northern  limit  be  at  A ;  and  let  CD, 


which  cuts  AB  in  point  D,  be  the  perpendicular  common  section  of  the  orbital 
circle  of  the  planet.  And  with  D  as  centre  let  EF  the  great  orbital  circle  of  the 
Earth  be  described.  From  the  opposition,  which  is  at  D,  let  any  known  arc,  such 
as  EF,  be  measured,  and  from  F  and  from  C,  the  position  of  the  planet,  let  the 
perpendiculars  CA  and  FG  be  drawn  to  AB;  and  let  FA  and  FC  be  joined. 

We  are  first  looking  to  see  how  great  ADC  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  eccen¬ 
tric  circle  is,  with  this  set-up.  Now  it  has  been  shown  that  the  inclination  was 
greatest  when  the  Earth  was  at  point  E.  Moreover  it  has  been  made  clear  that 
the  total  libration  is  commensurate  with  the  revolution  of  the  Earth  on  circle  EF 
in  relation  to  the  diameter  BE,  as  the  nature  of  libration  demands.  Therefore 
on  account  of  arc  EF  being  given,  the  ratio  of  ED  to  EG  will  be  given;  and  that 
is  the  ratio  of  the  total  libration  to  which  angle  ADC  has  just  now  decreased. 
For  that  reason  angle  ADC  is  given  in  this  case.  Accordingly  triangle  ADC  has 
all  its  angles  given  together  with  its  sides.  But  since  by  the  foregoing,  CD  has 
a  given  ratio  to  ED,  the  ratio  of  CD  to  the  remainder  DG  is  given.  Accordingly 
the  ratios  of  CD  and  AD  to  GD  are  given.  And  hence  the  remainder  AG  is  given. 
Hence  too  FG  is  given;  for 

F(?  =  3^  ch.  2DF. 

Therefore  as  two  sides  of  the  right  triangle  AGF  have  been  given,  side  AF  is 
given,  and  the  ratio  of  A F  to  AC.  Finally  as  t^vo  sides  of  right  triangle  ACF 
[187^]  have  been  given,  angle  AFC  will  be  given;  and  that  is  the  angle  of  appar¬ 
ent  latitude,  which  we  were  looking  for. 
ip.  835. 


821 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI 


Once  more  we  shall  take  Mars  as  our  example  of  this.  Let  its  limit  of  greatest 
southern  latitude  be  around  A,  which  is  approximately  at  its  lowest  apsis.  Now 
let  the  position  of  the  planet  be  at  C,  where— as  has  been  demonstrated — the 
angle  of  inclination  was  greatest,  i.e.,  1°50',  when  the  Earth  was  at  point  E,  Now 
let  us  put  the  Earth  at  point  F  and  the  movement  of  parallax  at  45°  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  arc  EF:  therefore 

line  EG  =  7,071, 

where  ED  =  10,000, 

and 

GE  =  1 0,000  -  7,07 1  =  2,929, 

which  is  the  remainder  of  the  radius.  Now^  it  has  been  shown  that 
3^  libration  of  angle  ADC  =  503^'; 

and  half  of  the  libration  has  the  following  ratio  of  increase  and  decrease  in  this 
case, 

DD:GD  =  503^':15'. 

Now  at  present 

angle  ADC  =  1°50'  - 15'  =  1°35', 

which  is  the  angle  of  inclination.  On  that  account  triangle  ADC  will  have  its 
sides  and  angles  given;  and  since  it  has  been  shown  above  that 

CD  =  9,040, 

where  DD  =  6,580; 

EG  =  4,653, 

AD  =  9,036, 

and  by  subtraction 

AEG  =  4,383, 

and 

AC  =  2493/^. 

Accordingly,  in  right  triangle  AEG,  since 

perpendicular  AG  =  4,383 

and 


base  EG  =  4,653 
side  AE  =  6,392. 

Thus  finallv  in  triangle  ACE,  whereof 

angle  CAE  =  90° 
and  sides  AC  and  AE  are  given, 

angle  ACE  =  2°15', 

which  is  the  angle  of  apparent  latitude  in  relation  to  the  Earth  placed  at  E.  We 
shall  apply  similar  reasoning  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter. 


5.  On  the  Latitudes  of  Venus  and  Mercury 

Venus  and  Mercury  remain,  and  their  transits  in  latitude  will  be  demon¬ 
strated,  as  I  said,  by  means  of  three  simultaneous  and  complicated  latitudinal 
divagations.  [187^]  In  order  that  they  may  be  discerned  separately,  we  shall  be¬ 
gin  with  the  one  which  the  ancients  call  declination,  as  if  from  a  simpler  handling 
of  it.  And  it  happens  to  the  declination  alone  to  be  sometimes  separate  from  the 
others;  and  that  occurs  around  the  mean  longitudes  and  around  the  nodes  in 
accordance  with  the  exact  movements  in  longitude  when  the  Earth  has  moved 
through  a  quadrant  of  a  circle  from  the  apogee  or  perigee  of  the  planet.  For 
when  the  Earth  is  very  near,  a  northern  or  southern  latitude  of  6°22'  is  found 


822  COPERNICUS 

in  the  case  of  Venus,  and  4°5'  in  the  case  of  IVlercury ;  but  at  the  greatest  distance 
from  the  Earth,  1°2'  in  the  case  of  Venus;  and  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  1°45'. 
Thereby  the  angles  of  inclination  at  this  position  are  made  manifest  by  means 
of  the  tables  of  additosubtractions  which  have  been  drawn  up;  and  for  Venus 
in  that  position  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the  Earth  the  latitude  is  1°2',  and 
at  its  least  distance  G°22',  and  on  either  side  [of  the  mean  latitude]  the  arc  of 
the  circle  [through  the  poles  of  the  orbital  circle  and  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic]  is  approximately  23/^°;  but  in  the  case  of  Mercury  the  1®45'  at 
its  greatest  distance  and  the  4°5'  at  its  least  demand  634°  the  [total]  arc  of 
its  circle:  consequently  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  circles  of  Venus  is  2°30', 
and  that  of  Alercury  is  634°>  whereof  four  right  angles  are  equal  to  360°.  By 
means  of  these  [angles]  the  particular  latitudes  of  declination  can  be  unfolded, 
as  we  shall  demonstrate,  and  first  in  the  case  of  Venus. 

For  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  and  through  the  centre  of  the  perpendicular 
plane,  let  ABC  be  the  common  section  [of  the  two  planes]  and  DBE  the  common 
section  [of  the  perpendicular  plane]  with  the  plane  of  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus. 


H 


And  let  A  be  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  B  the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  of  the 
planet,  and  ABE  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  orbital  circle  to  the  ecliptic. 
Let  circle  DFEG  be  described  around  /?,  and  let  diameter  FBG  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  diameter  DE.  Now  let  it  be  understood  that  the  plane  of  the  circle 
is  so  related  to  the  assumed  perpendicular  plane  that  lines  in  the  plane  of  the 
circle  which  are  drawn  at  right  angles  to  DE  are  parallel  to  one  another  and  to 
the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  in  the  plane  of  the  circle  line  FBG  alone  has  been 
drawn. 

Now  our  problem  is  to  find  out,  by  means  of  the  given  straight  lines  AB  and 
BC  together  with  angle  ABE  the  given  angle  of  inclinations,  how  far  distant  in 
latitude  the  planet  is,  when,  for  example,  [ISS*']  it  is  45°  distant  from  E  the  point 
nearest  to  the  Earth;  and,  following  Ptolemy,  we  have  chosen  this  position  so 
that  it  may  become  apparent  whether  the  inclination  of  the  orbital  circle  adds 
any  difference  in  longitude  to  Venus  or  Mcrcurj^  For  such  differences  should  be 
most  visible  around  the  positions  midway  between  the  limits  Z>,  F,  F,  and  G, 
because  the  planet  when  situated  at  these  four  limits  has  the  same  longitude  as 
it  would  have  without  declination,  as  is  manifest  of  itself. 

Therefore,  as  was  said,  let  us  assume  that 

arc  F//  =  45°; 

and  let  HK  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  FF,  and  KL  and  HM  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  let  //F,  Lil/,  Ail/,  and  AH  be  joined.  We  shall 
have  the  right  parallelogram  LKHM,  as  HK  is  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic.  For  angle  LAM  comprehends  the  additosubtraction  in  longitude;  and  angle 
HAM  comprehends  the  transit  in  latitude,  since  HM  also  falls  perpendicular 
upon  the  same  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  Accordingly,  since 


823 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI 


angle 

///v=Hch.  2//£'  =  7,071, 
where  EB  =  10,000. 

Similarly  in  triangle  KBL 

angle  BKL  =  23^2° 

and 

angle  -6L/v=90®, 

and 


hence 

and 


side  RA"  =  7,071, 

where  10,000; 

side  AL  =  308 


side  AL  =  7,064. 

But  since,  by  what  was  shown  above, 

AA  :RA=  10,000  :  7,193; 


then 


and 

and 


///v  =5,086, 
HM  =  KL  =  221, 


j^L  =  5,081; 

hence,  by  subtraction, 

LA  =4,919. 

Moreover,  as  in  triangle  ALM  side  AL  is  given,  and 

LM  =  IIK, 

and 

angle  ALM  =  90°; 

then 

side  Ai1/  =7,075 

and 

angle  il/AL  =  45°57', 

which  is  the  additosubtraction  or  great  parallax  of  Venus  according  to  calcula¬ 
tion.  Similarly,  as  in  triangle  MAH 

side  Ail/ =  7,075 

and 

side  MH  =  KL; 
angle  MAH  =  1°47', 

which  is  the  angular  declination  in  latitude. 

And  if  it  is  not  boring  to  examine  what  difference  in  the  longitude  of  Venus  is 
caused  by  this  inclination,  let  us  take  triangle  ALH,  as  we  understand  side  LH 
to  be  the  diagonal  of  parallelogram  LKHM.  For 

L//  =  5,091, 

where  AL  =  4,919 

and 

angle  ALH  =  90"^: 

hence 

side  A// =  7,079. 


824 


COPERNICUS 


Accordingly,  as  the  ratio  of  the  sides  is  given, 

angle  ^AL  =  45°59'. 

But  it  has  been  shown  that 

angle  ikrAL  =  45°57'; 

therefore  there  is  a  difference  of  only  2',  as  was  to  be  shown. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  [188^]  with  a  similar  scheme  of  declination  we 
shall  demonstrate  the  latitudes  with  the  help  of  a  diagram  similar  to  the  fore¬ 
going:  wherein 

arc  EH  =  45®, 

so  that  again 


HK--KB  =  7fi71, 

where  side  AJ5  =  10,000. 

Accordingly,  as  can  be  gathered  from  the  differences  in  longitude  which  have 

already  been  demonstrated,  in  this  case 

BK  =  KH  =  2,Q7b, 

where  radius  BH  =  3,953 
and  AB  =  9,964, 

And  since  it  has  been  shown  that 

angle  of  inclination  ABE  =  6^15', 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360®; 

accordingly,  as  the  angles  of  right  triangle  BKL  are  given, 

base  KL  =  304 


and 


And  so  by  subtraction 
But  also 


perpendicular  BL  — 2,773. 
AL  =  7,186. 


LM  =  i7/C  =  2,795; 
accordingly,  as  in  triangle  ALM 

angle  L  =  90® 

and  sides  AL  and  LM  have  been  given; 

side  Ailf  =  7,710 

and 

angle  LAM  =  21®16', 

which  is  the  additosub traction  calculated. 

Similarly,  since  in  triangle  AMH  side  AM  has  been  given, 

side  MH  =  KL 

and 


angle  M  =  90®, 

which  is  comprehended  by  sides  AM  and  MH; 

angle  AfAi?  =  2®16', 

which  is  the  latitude  sought  for.  But  if  we  wish  to  inquire  how  much  is  due  to 
the  true  and  the  apparent  additosubtraction,  let  us  take  LH  the  diagonal  of  the 
parallelogram:  we  deduce  from  the  sides  [of  the  parallelogram]  that 

LH  =  2,SU. 


And 


Hence 


AL  =  7,186. 
angle  LA^  =  21®23', 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEA\T:NLY  SPHERES,  VI  825 

which  is  the  additosubt Faction  of  apparent  movement  and  has  an  excess  of  ap¬ 
proximately  7'  over  the  previously  reckoned  difference,  [angle  LAM],  as  was 
to  be  shown. 

6.  Ox  THE  Second  Transit  in  Latitude  of  Venus  and  Mercchy 
According  to  the  Obliquation  of  Their  Orbital 
Circles  in  the  Apogee  and  the  Perigee 

That  is  enough  on  the  transit  in  latitude  of  these  planets,  which  occurs  around 
the  mean  longitudes  of  their  orbital  circles:  we  have  said  that  these  latitudes  are 
called  the  declinations.  Now  we  must  speak  of  those  latitudes  which  occur  at 
the  perigee  and  apogee  and  to  which  the  third  digression,  the  de\’iation,  Ls  con¬ 
joined — not  as  the  latitudes  occur  in  the  three  higher  planets,  but  as  follows,  in 
order  that  the  third  digression  may  be  more  easily  separated  and  discerned  by 
reason.  For  Ptolemy  obser\"ed  that  these  latitudes  appeared  greatest  at  the  tune 
when  the  planets  were  on  the  straight  lines  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  which 
touch  the  orbital  circles;  and  that  occurs,  [189^]  as  we  said,  at  their  greatest 
morning  and  evening  distances  from  the  sun.  He  found  that  the  northern  lati¬ 
tudes  of  Venus  were  greater  than  the  southern,  but  that  the  southern 
latitudes  of  Mercury  were  approximately  greater  than  the  northern.  But, 
wishing  to  reduce  the  difficulty  and  labour  of  calculations,  he  took  in  accordance 
with  a  certain  mean  ratio  23^°  in  different  directious  of  latitude;  the  latitude 
themselves  subtend  these  degrees  in  the  circle  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic  and 
around  the  Earth,  against  w^hich  circle  the  latitudes  are  measured — especially 
as  he  did  not  think  the  error  w’ould  on  that  account  be  very  great,  as  w’e  shall 
soon  show’.  But  if  we  take  only  23^°  as  the  equal  digression  on  each  side  of  the 
ecliptic  and  exclude  the  deviation  for  the  time  being,  until  we  have  determined 
the  latitudes  of  the  obliquaf ions,  our  demonstrations  will  be  simpler  and  easier. 
Accordingly  we  must  first  show  that  this  latitudinal  digression  is  greatest  around 
the  point  of  tangency  of  the  eccentric  circle,  where  the  additosubtractions  in 
longitude  are  also  greatest. 

For  let  there  be  drawn  the  common  section  of  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  and  the 
plane  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  Venus  or  VIercury — the  common  section  through 


the  apogee  and  the  perigee;  and  on  it  let  A  be  taken  as  the  position  of  the  Earth 
and  B  as  the  centre  of  eccentric  circle  CDEFG  w’hich  is  inclined  to  the  ecliptic, 
so  that  straight  lines  drawn  anjwvhere  at  right  angles  to  CG  comprehend  angles 
equal  to  the  obliquation;  and  let  AE  be  drawm  tangent  to  the  circle,  and  AD  as 
cutting  it  somew’here.  VIoreover,  from  points  D,  E,  and  E  let  DH,  EK,  and  FL 
be  drawm  perpendicular  to  line  CG,  and  DM,  EN,  and  FO  perpendicular  to  the 


826 


COPERNICUS 


underlying  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  let  MH,  NK,  and  OL  be  joined,  and  also 
AN  and  AOM;  for  AOM  is  a  straight  line,  since  its  three  points  are  each  in  two 
planes — namely,  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  and  in  the  plane  ADM  perpendi¬ 
cular  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

Accordingly  since  in  the  present  obliquation  the  angles  HAM  and  KAN  com¬ 
prehend  the  additosub tractions  of  these  planets;  and  the  angles  DAM  and  EAN 
are  the  digressions  in  latitude:  [189^]  I  say,  first,  that  angle  EAN,  the  angle  situ¬ 
ated  at  the  point  of  tangency,  where  the  additosubtraction  in  longitude  is  also 
approximately  greatest,  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  angles  of  latitude. 

For  since  angle  EAK  is  greater  than  any  of  the  others, 

KE  :  EA  >HD  :  DA 

and 


But 


KE  :  EA  >LF  :  FA. 


For,  as  we  said, 
and 

Therefore 


EK  :  EN^HD  :  DM  =  LF  :  FO. 
angle  E KN  =  Q.ng\e  H DM  =  single  LFO; 
angle  M  =  angle  N  =  angle  0  =  90°. 


and 


NE  :  EA  >MD  :  DA 


and  again 
Accordingly 


NE  :EA>DF  :FA; 

angle  DMA  =  angle  ENA  =  angle  OFA  =90°. 


angle  EAN  >angle  DAM, 

and  angle  EAN  is  greater  than  each  of  the  other  angles  constructed  in  this  way. 
Whence  it  is  manifest  that  among  the  differences  occurring  between  the  addito- 
subtractions  and  arising  from  the  obliquation  in  longitude,  the  difference  which 
is  determined  at  point  E  in  the  greatest  transit  is  the  greatest.  For 
HD  :  HM  =  KE  :  KN  =  LF  :  FO, 

on  account  of  their  subtending  equal  angles  [in  similar  triangles].  And  since 
these  lines  are  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  differences  between  them, 


and 


EK-KN  :  EA  >HD-HM  :  AD 


EK-KN  :  EA  >LF-FO  :  AF. 

Hence  it  is  also  clear  that  the  additosubtractions  in  longitude  of  the  segments 
of  the  eccentric  circle  will  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  transits  in  latitude  as  the 
greatest  additosubtraction  in  longitude  has  to  the  greatest  transit  in  latitude, 
since 


KE  :  EN  =  LF  :  FO^HD  :  DM, 
— as  was  set  before  us  to  be  demonstrated. 


7.  How  Great  the  Angles  of  Obliquation  of  Venus 
AND  Mercury  Are 

Having  first  noted  all  that,  let  us  see  how  great  an  angle  is  comprehended  by 
the  obliquation  of  the  planes  of  either  planet;  and  let  us  repeat  what  was  said 
before:  each  planet  has  5°  between  its  greatest  and  least  distance  [in  latitude], 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  827 

so  that  for  the  most  part  they  become  more  northern  or  southern  at  contrary 
times  and  in  accordance  with  their  position  on  the  orbital  circle,  for  when  the 
transit  or  manifest  difference  of  Venus  makes  a  digression  greater  or  less  than  5° 
through  the  apogee  or  perigee  of  the  eccentric  circle,  the  transit  of  Mercury 
however  is  more  or  less  at  3^°. 

[I90“]  Accordingly  as  before,  let  ABC  be  the  common  section  of  the  ecliptic 

and  the  eccentric 
circle ;  and  let  the 
orbital  circle  of 
the  planet  be  de¬ 
scribed  around 
centre  B  oblique 
to  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic 
in  the  way  set 
forth.  Now  from 
the  centre  of 
the  Earth  let 
straight  line  AD 

be  dravm  touching  the  orbital  circle  at  point  D ;  and  from  D  let  DF  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  CBE  and  DG  perpendicular  to  the  underlying  plane  of  the 
ecliptic;  and  let  BD,  FG,  and  AG  be  joined.  Moreover,  let  it  be  assumed  that 
angle  DAG  =  2}^^, 

where  4  rt.  angles  =  360®, 

which  is  half  the  difference  in  latitude  set  forth  for  each  planet. 

Our  problem  is  to  find  how  great  the  angle  of  obliquation  between  the  planes 
is,  i.e.j  to  find  angle  DFG. 

Accordingly,  since  in  the  case  of  the  planet  Venus  it  has  been  shown  that 
the  greater  distance,  at  the  apogee  =  10,208, 
where  radius  =  7, 193, 

and 

the  lesser,  at  the  perigee  =  9,792, 

and 

the  mean  distance  =  10,000, 

which  Ptolemy  decided  to  assume  in  this  demonstration,  as  he  vdshed  to  avoid 
labour  and  difficulty  and  to  make  an  epitome;  for  where  the  extremes  do  not 
cause  any  great  difference,  it  is  better  to  use  the  mean.  Accordingly, 

AB  :  Fi)  =  10,000  :  7,193, 

and 

angle  ADB  =  90^, 

Therefore 

side  AD  =  6,947. 

Again,  since 

angle  DAG  =  2}/^° 

and 

angle  AG2)  =  90®; 

accordingly,  the  angles  of  triangle  AGD  are  given,  and 

side  i)G  =  303, 

where  AD  =  6,947. 


828  COPERNICUS 

Thus  also,  two  sides  DF  and  DG  have  been  given,  and 

angle  Z)(?F  =  90°; 

hence 

angle  Z)FG  =  3°29', 

which  is  the  angle  of  inclination  or  obliquation.  But  since  the  excess  of  angle 
DAF  over  angle  FAG  comprehends  the  difference  made  by  the  parallax  in  lon¬ 
gitude,  hence  that  difference  is  to  be  determined  by  the  measurement  of  those 
magnitudes.  For  it  has  been  shown  that 

AZ)  =  6,947 


and 

DF= 4,997, 

where  D(?=303. 

Now 

sq.  AZ)— sq.  DG=sq,  AG, 

and 

sq.  FZ)— sq.  Z)G=sq.  GF; 

therefore 

AG  =  6,940 

and 

FG  =  4,988. 

But 

FG=7,187, 

where  AG=  10,000, 

and 

angle  FAG=45°57'; 

and 

Z)F  =  7,193, 

where  AD  =  10,000, 

and 

angle  Z).4F  =  46°. 

Therefore  at  the  greatest  obliquation  the  additosubtraction  of  the  parallax  is 
deficient  by  approximately  3'.  [190^]  Now  it  was  made  clear  that  at  the  mean 
apsis  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  orbital  circles  was  23^°;  but  here  it  has  in¬ 
creased  by  approximately  1°,  which  the  first  movement  of  libration — of  which 
we  have  spoken — has  added  to  it. 

There  is  a  similar  demonstration  in  the  case  of  Mercury.  For  the  greatest 
distance  of  the  orbital  circle  from  the  Earth  is  10,948,  where  the  radius  of  the 
orbital  circle  is  3,573;  the  least  is  9,052;  and  the  mean  between  these  is  10,000. 
Moreover 

=  10,000:  3,573. 

Therefore 

side  AZ)  =  9,340; 

and  since 

ED  :BF=^AB:  AD] 

therefore 

=  3,337. 

angle  DAG= 23^®, 


And  since 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  829 

which  is  the  angle  of  latitude; 

Z>(?  =  407, 

where  DF  =  3^337, 

And  so  in  triangle  DFG  the  ratio  of  these  two  sides  is  given, 
and 

angle  G  =  90°; 

hence 

angle  DF(?=7°. 

And  that  is  the  angle  of  inclination  or  obliquation  between  the  orbital  circle  of 
Mercury  and  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  But  it  has  been  shown  that  around  the 
mean  longitudes  or  quadrants  the  angle  of  inclination  was  6°  15'.  Therefore  45' 
have  now  been  added  to  it  by  the  movement  of  libration. 

There  is  a  similar  argument  in  picking  out  the  additosubtractions  and  their 
differences,  after  it  has  been  shown  that 

DG  =  407, 

where  AD  =  9,340 
and  DF  =  3,337, 


Accordingly, 

and 

Therefore 

and 

hence  it  is  inferred  that 


sq.  AD— sq.  DG  =  sq.  AG, 
sq.  DF— sq.  DG  =  sq.  FG. 
AG  =  9,331 
FG  =  3,314; 


angle  GAF  =  20%S', 
which  is  the  additosubtraction,  and 

angle  DAD  =  20°56', 

which  is  approximately  8'  greater  than  the  angle  proportionate  to  the  obliqua¬ 
tion.  It  still  remains  for  us  to  see  if  such  angles  of  obliquation  and  the  latitudes 
in  accordance  with  the  greatest  and  least  distance  of  the  orbital  circle  are  found 
to  be  in  conformity  with  those  gathered  from  observation. 

Wherefore  once  more  with  the  same  diagram;  and  first  at  the  greatest  distance 
of  the  orbital  circle  of  Venus,  let 

AB  :  DD  =  10,208  :  7,193. 

And  since 

angle  ADD  =  90°; 

DF  =  5,102. 

[19U]  But  it  has  been  found  that 

angle  DFG  =  3°29',» 

which  is  the  angle  of  obliquation;  hence 

side  D(?  =  309, 

where  AD  =  7,238. 

Accordingly, 

DD=427, 

where  AD  =  10,000; 

whence  it  is  concluded  that  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the  Earth 

angle  DAG  =  2°27'. 


830 

But  at  the  least  distance 


COPERNICUS 


And 


AS  =  9,792, 

where  radius  of  orbital  circle  =  7, 193. 


AS  =  6,644, 

which  is  perpendicular  to  the  radius;  and  similarly,  since 

BD:DF  =  AB:AD, 

SS  =  4,883. 

But 

angle  SF(?  =  3°28'; 

therefore 


S(?  =  297, 

where  AS  =  6,644. 

And  as  the  sides  of  the  triangle  have  been  given, 

angle  SAG  =  2°34'. 

But  neither  3'  nor  4'  is  large  enough  to  be  measured  by  means  of  an  astrolabe; 
therefore  that  which  was  considered  to  be  the  greatest  latitude  of  obliquation 
of  the  planet  Venus  is  correct. 

Again,  let  the  greatest  distance  of  the  orbital  circle  of  Mercury  be  taken, 
i.e.j  let 

AS  :  AS  =  10,948  :  3,573; 

consequently,  by  demonstrations  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we  still  infer  that 

AS  =  9,452 

and 

SS  =  3,085. 

But  here  too  we  have  it  recorded  that 

angle  SS(?  =  7°, 

which  is  the  angle  of  obliquation;  hence 

S(?  =  376, 

where  SS  =  3,085 
and  SA  =9,452. 

Accordingly,  as  the  sides  of  right  triangle  DAG  are  given, 

angle  SA(?=2°17', 

which  is  the  greatest  digression  in  latitude.  But  at  the  least  distance 

AS  :SS  =  9,052  :  3,573  ; 

therefore 

AS  =  8,317 

and 

SS  =  3,283. 

Now  since  by  reason  of  this  same  [obliquation] 

SF  :SG  =  3,283  :  400, 

where  AS  =  8,3 17; 

whence 


angle  SAG  =  2®45'. 

Accordingly  there  is  a  difference  of  at  least  13'  between  the  23^®  of  the  digres¬ 
sion  in  latitude  according  to  the  mean  ratio  and  the  digression  at  the  apogee; 
and  at  the  most  a  difference  of  15'  between  the  mean  digression  and  that  at  the 
perigee.  And  in  making  our  calculations  according  to  the  mean  ratio  we  shall 
use  34°  as  the  difference;  for  it  is  not  sensibly  diverse  from  the  observed  differ¬ 
ences. 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI  831 

Having  demonstrated  these  things  and  also  that  the  greatest  additosub- 
tractions  in  longitude  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  greatest  transit  in  latitude  as 
the  additosubtractions  in  the  remaining  sections  of  the  orbital  circle  have  to  the 
particular  transits  in  latitude,  we  shall  have  at  hand  the  numbers  of  all  the 
latitudes,  which  occur  on  account  of  the  obliquation  of  the  orbital  circle  of 
Venus  and  Mercury.  But  we  have  calculated  only  those  latitudes  which  occur 
midway  between  the  apogee  and  the  perigee,  as  we  said ;  and  it  was  sho’wn  that 
the  greatest  of  these  latitudes  is  23^°,  and  the  greatest  [191^]  additosubtraction 
in  the  case  of  Venus  is  46°  and  that  in  the  case  of  Mercury  about  22°.  And  in 
the  tables  of  irregular  movements  we  have  already  placed  the  additosubtrac¬ 
tions  opposite  the  particular  sections  of  the  orbital  circles.  Accordingly  in  the 
case  of  each  of  the  two  planets  we  shall  take  from  the  23^°  a  part  proportionate 
to  the  excess  of  the  greatest  additosubtraction  over  each  of  the  lesser  additosub¬ 
tractions;  we  shall  inscribe  it  in  the  table  to  be  drawn  up  below  with  all  its  num¬ 
bers;  and  in  this  way  we  shall  have  unfolded  all  the  particular  latitudes  of  the 
obliquations  which  occur  when  the  Earth  is  at  their  highest  apsis  and  at  their 
lowest — just  as  we  set  forth  the  latitudes  of  the  declinations  in  the  case  of  the 
mean  quadrants  and  mean  longitudes.  The  latitudes  which  occur  between  these 
four  limits  can  be  unfolded  by  the  subtle  art  of  mathematics  with  the  help  of 
the  proposed  hypothesis  of  circles  but  not  without  labour.  Now  Ptolemy — who 
is  compendious  wherever  he  can  be  so — seeing  that  each  of  these  aspects  of  lati¬ 
tude  as  a  whole  and  in  all  its  parts  increased  and  decreased  proportionally,  like 
the  latitude  of  the  moon,  accordingly  took  twelve  parts  of  it,  since  their  greatest 
latitude  is  5°  and  that  number  is  a  twelfth  part  of  60,  and  made  proportional 
minutes  out  of  them,  to  be  used  not  only  in  the  case  of  these  two  planets  but 
also  in  that  of  the  three  higher  planets,  as  will  be  made  clear  below. 

8.  On  the  Third  Aspect  of  the  Latitude  of  Venus 
AND  IMercury,  Which  They  Call  the  Deviation 

Now  that  these  things  have  been  set  forth,  it  still  remains  to  say  something 
about  the  third  movement  in  latitude,  which  is  the  deviation.  The  ancients,  who 
held  the  Earth  down  at  the  centre  of  the  world,  believed  that  the  deviation  took 
place  by  reason  of  the  inclination  of  an  eccentric  circle  which  has  an  epicycle 
and  which  revolves  around  the  centre  of  the  Earth — the  deviation  occurring 
most  greatly  when  the  epicycle  is  at  the  apogee  or  perigee  and  being  always 
to  the  north  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  3€°  to  the  south  in  the  case  of  Mercury,  as 
we  said  before.  It  is  not  however  sufficiently  clear  whether  they  meant  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the  orbital  circles  to  be  equal  and  always  the  same:  for  their  num¬ 
bers  indicate  that,  when  they  order  a  sixth  part  of  the  proportional  minutes  to 
be  taken  as  the  deviation  of  Venus,  and  three  parts  out  of  four  as  that  of  Mer¬ 
cury.  That  does  not  hold,  unless  the  angle  of  inclination  always  remains  [192^] 
the  same,  as  is  demanded  by  the  ratio  of  the  minutes,  which  they  take  as  their 
base.  But  if  the  angle  remains  the  same,  it  is  impossible  to  understand  how  the 
latitude  of  the  planets  suddenly  springs  back  from  the  common  section  into  the 
same  latitude  which  it  had  just  left,  unless  you  say  that  takes  place  in  the 
manner  of  refraction  of  light,  as  in  optics.  But  here  we  are  dealing  with  move¬ 
ment,  which  is  not  instantaneous  but  is  by  its  own  nature  measured  by  time. 
Accordingly  we  must  acknowledge  that  a  libration  such  as  we  have  expounded 
is  present  in  those  [circles]  and  makes  the  parts  of  the  circle  move  over  in  differ- 


832  COPERNICUS 

ent  directions:  And  that  necessarily  follows,  as  the  numbers  differ  in  the  case 
of  Mercury.  That  should  seem  less  surprising,  if  in  accordance  with  our  hypothe¬ 
sis  this  latitude  is  variable  and  not  wholly  simple  but  does  not  produce  any  ap¬ 
parent  error,  as  is  to  be  seen  in  the  case  of  all  differences,  as  follows: 

For  in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic  let  [ABC]  be  the  common  sec¬ 
tion  [of  the  two 
planes],  and  in  the 
common  section 
let  A  be  the  centre 
of  the  Earth  and 
B  the  centre  of 
the  circle  CDF  at 
greatest  or  least 
distance  from  the 

Earth  and  as  it  were  through  the  poles  of  the  inclined  orbital  circle.  And  when 
the  centre  of  the  orbital  circle  is  at  the  apogee  or  the  perigee,  z.e.,  on  line  AB^  the 
planet,  wherever  it  is,  is  at  its  greatest  deviation,  in  accordance  with  the  circle 
parallel  to  the  orbital  circle;  and  DF  is  the  diameter  parallel  to  CBE^  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  orbital  circle.  And  DF  and  CBE  are  put  down  as  the  common  sections 
of  the  planes  perpendicular  to’plane  CDF,  Now  let  DF  be  bisected  at  G,  which 
will  be  the  centre  of  the  parallel  circle;  and  let  BG,  AG,  AD,  and  AF  be  joined. 
Let  us  put  down  that 

angle  BAG  =  W, 

as  in  the  greatest  deviation  of  Venus.  Accordingly,  in  triangle  ABG 

angle  ^  =  90°; 

and  we  have  the  following  ratio  for  the  sides: 

AB:fiG=10,000:29. 

But 

line  ABC  =  17, 193; 

and  by  subtraction 

AB  =  2,807; 

and 

ch.  2  CD  =  y2  ch.  2  EF=BG. 

Accordingly 

angle  CAB  =  6' 

and 

angle  EAF  =15\ 

Now 

angle  BAG— angle  CAB =4', 

while 

angle  B A F— angle  BAG  =  5'; 

and  those  differences  can  be  neglected  on  account  of  their  smallness.  According¬ 
ly,  when  the  Earth  is  situated  at  its  apogee  or  perigee,  the  apparent  deviation  of 
Venus  will  be  slightly  more  or  less  than  10',  [192^]  in  whatever  part  of  its  orbital 
circle  the  planet  is. 

But  in  the  case  of  Mercury  when 

angle  BAG  =  45', 


and 


AB  :BG=  10,000  :  131, 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI 


833 


and 

and  by  subtraction 

then 

and 


ABC  =13,573, 
AB  =  6,827  ; 
angle  CAB  =  33' 
angle  BAB  =  70'. 


Accordingly,  angle  CAD  has  a  deficienc}^  of  12',  and  angle  EAF  has  an  excess 
of  25'.  But  these  differences  are  practically  obliterated  beneath  the  rays  of  the 
sun  before  Mercury  emerges  into  our  sight,  wherefore  the  ancients  considered 
only  its  apparent  and  as  it  were  simple  deviation.  But  if  anyone  wishes  to  ex¬ 
amine  with  least  labour  the  precise  ratio  of  their  passages  when  hidden  beneath 
the  sun,  we  shall  show  how  that  takes  place,  as  follows.  We  shall  take  Mercury 
as  our  example,  because  it  makes  a  more  considerable  deviation  than  Venus. 

For  let  AB  be  the  straight  line  in  the  common  section  of  the  orbital  circle  of 

the  planet  and  the 
ecliptic,  while  the 
Earth  —  which  is 
at  A — ^is  at  the 
apogee  or  the  per¬ 
igee  of  the  planet's 
orbital  circle.  Now 
let  us  put  down 
that 

indifferently,  as  if  the  mean  between  greatest  and  least  distance,  as  we  did  in 
the  case  of  the  obliquation.  Now  around  centre  C  let  there  be  described  circle 
BBB,  which  is  parallel  to  the  eccentric  orbital  circle  at  a  distance  CB]  and  the 
planet  on  this  parallel  circle  be  understood  as  being  at  this  time  at  its  greatest 
deviation.  Let  DCF  be  the  diameter  of  this  circle,  which  is  also  necessarily  pa¬ 
rallel  to  AB]  and  DCF  and  AB  are  in  the  same  plane  perpendicular  to  the  or¬ 
bital  circle  of  the  planet.  Therefore,  for  example,  let 

arc  BB  =  45®, 

in  relation  to  which  we  shall  examine  the  deviation  of  the  planet.  And  let  EG 
be  drawn  perpendicular  to  CB,  and  EK  and  GH  perpendicular  to  the  underlying 
plane  of  the  orbital  circle.  Let  the  right  parallelogram  be  completed  by  joining 
HK]  and  let  AB,  AB,  and  EG  also  be  joined. 

Now  in  the  greatest  deviation  of  Mercury 

BC=  131, 

where  AB  =  10,000. 

And 

CB  =  3,573; 

and  the  angles  of  the  right  triangle  EGC  are  given;  hence 

side  EG  =  KH  —  2526. 

And  since 

BH  =  EG  =  CG, 

AB  =  BA  ~BB  =  7,474. 


834 


COPERNICUS 


Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  AHK 

angle  H  =  90° 

and  the  sides  of  comprehending  angle  H  are  given; 

side  =  7,889. 


But 


side  A£'  =  CR  =  =  131. 

Accordingly,  since  in  triangle  [193^]  AKE  the  two  sides  AK  and  KE  compre¬ 
hending  the  right  angle  K  have  been  given,  angle  KAE  is  given,  which  answers 
to  the  deviation  we  were  seeking  for  the  postulated  arc  EF  and  differs  very 
little  from  the  angle  observed.  We  shall  do  similarly  in  the  case  of  Venus  and 
the  other  planets;  and  we  shall  inscribe  our  findings  in  the  subjoined  table. 

Having  made  this  exposition,  we  shall  work  out  proportional  minutes  for  the 
deviations  between  these  limits.  For 
let  ABC  be  the  eccentric  orbital  cir¬ 
cle  of  Venus  or  Mercury;  and  let  A 
and  C  be  the  nodes  of  this  move¬ 
ment  in  latitude,  and  B  the  limit  of 
greatest  deviation.  And  with  B  as 
centre  let  there  be  described  the 
small  circle  DFG,  with  the  diameter 
DBF  across  it,  along  which  diameter 
the  libration  of  the  movement  of  de¬ 
viation  takes  place.  And  since  it  has 
been  laid  down  that  when  the  Earth 
is  at  the  apogee  or  the  perigee  of  the 
eccentric  orbital  circle  of  the  planet, 
the  planet  itself  is  at  its  greatest  deviation,  namely  in  point  F,  where  at  this  time 
the  circle  carrying  the  planet  touches  the  small  circle.  Now  let  the  Earth  be 
somewhere  removed  from  the  apogee  or  perigee  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  the 
planet;  and  in  accordance  with  this  movement  let  a  similar  arc  FG  be  taken  on 
the  small  circle.  Let  circle  AGC  be  described,  which  bears  the  planet  and  will  cut 
the  small  circle,  and  the  diameter  DF  at  point  E]  and  let  the  planet  be  taken  as 
being  on  this  circle  at  point  K  in  accordance  with  arc  EK  which  is  by  hypothesis 
similar  to  arc  FG\  and  let  KL  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  circle  ABC. 

Our  problem  is  to  find  by  means  of  FG,  EK,  and  BE  the  magnitude  of  KL, 
i.e.,  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  circle  ABC.  For  since  by  means  of  arc  FG 
arc  EG  will  be  given  as  a  straight  line  hardly  different  from  a  circular  or  convex 
line,  and  EF  will  similarly  be  given  in  terms  of  the  parts,  whereof  BF  and  the 
remainder  BE  will  be  given;  for 

BF  :  BE  =  (Ai.  2  CE  :  ch.  2  CK  =  BE  :  KL. 

Accordingly  if  we  put  down  BF  and  the  radius  of  circle  GE  in  terms  of  the  same 
number,  sixty,  we  shall  have  from  them  the  number  which  picks  out  BE.  When 
that  number  has  been  multiplied  by  itself  and  the  product  divided  by  sixty,  we 
shall  have  KL,  the  minutes  proportional  to  arc  EK ;  and  we  shall  inscribe  them 
similarly  in  the  fifth  and  last  column  of  the  table  which  follows: 


D 


L^cy. 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


or¬ 

al 

lies 

Min 

48 

36 

6 

36 

48 

0 

48 

36 

18 

0 

12 

24 

24 

24 

12 

0 

36 

12 

36 

0 

12 

24 

24 

24 

24 

24 

24 

24 

12 

0 

12 

24 

9 

12 

15 

18 

21 

24 

12 

0 

37 

12 

36 

6 

12 

24 

24 

24 

12 

0 

18 

36 

48 

0 

48 

36 

6 

36 

48 

0 


REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI 


Latitudes  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars 


SATURN 

JUPITER 

MARS 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern 

Northern 

Southern 

Deg. 

Min.  Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min.  Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min.  Deg. 

Min. 

2 

3 

2 

2 

1 

6 

1 

5 

0 

6 

0 

5 

2 

4 

2 

2 

1 

7 

1 

5 

0 

7 

0 

6 

2 

4 

2 

3 

1 

7 

1 

5 

0 

9 

0 

6 

2 

5 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

9 

0 

6 

2 

5 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

10 

0 

8 

2 

6 

2 

3 

1 

8 

1 

6 

0 

11 

0 

8 

2 

6 

2 

4 

1 

9 

1 

7 

0 

12 

0 

9 

2 

7 

2 

4 

1 

9 

1 

7 

0 

13 

0 

9 

2 

8 

2 

5 

1 

10 

1 

8 

0 

14 

0 

10 

2 

8 

2 

5 

1 

10 

1 

8 

0 

14 

0 

11 

2 

9 

2 

6 

1 

11 

1 

9 

0 

15 

0 

11 

2 

10 

2 

7 

1 

11 

1 

9 

0 

16 

0 

12 

2 

10 

2 

7 

1 

12 

1 

10 

0 

17 

0 

12 

2 

11 

2 

8 

1 

12 

1 

10 

0 

18 

0 

13 

2 

11 

2 

9 

1 

13 

1 

11 

0 

19 

0 

15 

2 

12 

2 

10 

1 

13 

1 

11 

0 

20 

0 

16 

2 

13 

2 

11 

1 

14 

1 

12 

0 

22 

0 

18 

2 

14 

2 

12 

1 

14 

1 

13 

0 

23 

0 

20 

2 

16 

2 

13 

1 

15 

1 

14 

0 

25 

0 

22 

2 

16 

2 

15 

1 

16 

1 

15 

0 

27 

0 

24 

2 

17 

2 

16 

1 

17 

1 

17 

0 

29 

0 

25 

2 

18 

2 

18 

1 

18 

1 

18 

0 

31 

0 

27 

2 

20 

2 

19 

1 

19 

1 

19 

0 

33 

0 

29 

2 

21 

2 

21 

1 

21 

1 

21 

0 

35 

0 

31 

2 

22 

2 

22 

1 

22 

1 

22 

0 

37 

0 

34 

2 

24 

2 

24 

1 

24 

1 

24 

0 

40 

0 

37 

2 

25 

2 

26 

1 

25 

1 

25 

0 

42 

0 

39 

2 

27 

2 

27 

1 

27 

1 

27 

0 

45 

0 

42 

2 

28 

2 

28 

1 

28 

1 

28 

0 

48 

0 

45 

2 

30 

2 

30 

1 

30 

1 

30 

0 

51 

0 

49 

2 

31 

2 

31 

1 

31 

1 

31 

0 

55 

0 

62 

2 

33 

2 

33 

1 

33 

1 

33 

0 

69 

0 

66 

2 

34 

2 

34 

1 

34 

1 

34 

1 

2 

1 

0 

2 

36 

2 

36 

1 

36 

1 

36 

1 

6 

1 

4 

2 

37 

2 

37 

1 

37 

1 

37 

1 

11 

1 

8 

2 

39 

2 

39 

1 

39 

1 

39 

1 

15 

1 

12 

2 

40 

2 

40 

1 

40 

1 

40 

1 

19 

1 

17 

2 

42 

2 

42 

1 

42 

1 

42 

1 

25 

1 

22 

2 

43 

2 

43 

1 

43 

1 

43 

1 

31 

1 

28 

2 

45 

2 

45 

1 

44 

1 

44 

1 

36 

1 

34 

2 

46 

2 

46 

1 

46 

1 

46 

1 

41 

1 

40 

2 

47 

2 

48 

1 

47 

1 

47 

1 

47 

1 

47 

2 

49 

2 

49 

1 

49 

1 

49 

1 

64 

1 

65 

2 

50 

2 

51 

1 

50 

1 

51 

2 

2 

2 

5 

2 

52 

2 

53 

1 

53 

1 

53 

2 

10 

2 

15 

2 

53 

2 

54 

1 

52 

1 

54 

2 

19 

2 

26 

2 

54 

2 

55 

1 

53 

1 

55 

2 

29 

2 

38 

2 

55 

2 

56 

1 

55 

1 

57 

2 

37 

2 

48 

2 

56 

2 

57 

1 

56 

1 

58 

2 

47 

3 

4 

2 

57 

2 

58 

1 

58 

1 

59 

2 

51 

3 

20 

2 

58 

2 

59 

1 

59 

2 

1 

3 

12 

3 

32 

2 

59 

3 

0 

2 

0 

2 

2 

3 

23 

3 

62 

2 

59 

3 

1 

2 

1 

2 

3 

3 

34 

4 

13 

3 

0 

3 

2 

2 

2 

2 

4 

3 

46 

4 

36 

3 

0 

3 

2 

2 

2 

2 

5 

3 

57 

5 

0 

3 

1 

3 

3 

2 

3 

2 

5 

4 

9 

5 

23 

3 

1 

3 

3 

2 

3 

2 

6 

4 

17 

5 

48 

3 

2 

3 

4 

2 

4 

2 

6 

4 

23 

6 

15 

3 

2 

3 

4 

2 

4 

2 

7 

4 

27 

6 

35 

3 

2 

3 

5 

2 

4 

2 

7 

4 

30 

6 

60 

357 

354 

351 

348 

345 

342 

339 

336 

333 

330 

327 

324 

321 

318 

315 

312 

309 

306 

303 

300 

297 

294 

291 

288 

285 

282 

279 

276 

273 

270 

267 

264 

261 

258 

255 

252 

249 

246 

243 

240 

237 

234 

231 

228 

225 

222 

219 

216 

213 

210 

207 

204 

201 

198 

195 

192 

189 

186 

183 

180 


Min 

59 

59 

58 

57 

55 

54 

52 

49 

47 

45 

42 

39 

35 

32 

29 

23 

26 

30 

17 

15 

12 

9 

7 

5 

3 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

2 

3 

5 

7 

9 

12 

15 

17 

20 

23 

26 

29 

32 

35 

39 

42 

45 

47 

49 

52 

54 

55 

57 

58 

59 

59 


COPERNICUS 


Latitudes  of  Venus  AxNd  Mercury 


VENUS 

MERCURY 

1 

Deviation 

Decli- 

Ohli- 

Dedi¬ 

Obli- 

Of 

Venus 

nation 

quation 

nation 

quation 

Deg. 

Min.  Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min.  Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

1 

2 

0 

4 

0 

7 

1 

45 

0 

5 

1 

2 

0 

8 

0 

7 

1 

45 

0 

11 

1 

1 

0 

12 

0 

7 

1 

45 

0 

16 

1 

1 

0 

16 

0 

7 

1 

44 

0 

22 

1 

0 

0 

21 

0 

7 

1 

44 

0 

27 

1 

0 

0 

25 

0 

7 

1 

43 

0 

33 

0 

59 

0 

29 

0 

7 

1 

42 

0 

38 

0 

59 

0 

33 

0 

7 

1 

40 

0 

44 

0 

58 

0 

37 

0 

7 

1 

38 

0 

49 

0 

57 

0 

41 

0 

8 

1 

36 

0 

55 

0 

56 

0 

45 

0 

8 

1 

34 

1 

0 

0 

55 

0 

49 

0 

8 

1 

30 

1 

6 

0 

53 

0 

53 

0 

8 

1 

27 

1 

11 

0 

51 

0 

57 

0 

8 

1 

23 

1 

16 

0 

49 

1 

1 

0 

8 

1 

19 

1 

21 

0 

46 

1 

5 

0 

8 

1 

15 

1 

26 

0 

44 

1 

9 

0 

8 

1 

11 

1 

31 

0 

41 

1 

13 

0 

8 

1 

8 

1 

35 

0 

38 

1 

17 

0 

8 

1 

4 

1 

40 

0 

35 

1 

20 

0 

8 

0 

59 

1 

44 

0 

32 

1 

24 

0 

8 

0 

54 

1 

48 

0 

29 

1 

28 

0 

9 

0 

49 

1 

52 

0 

26 

1 

32 

0 

9 

0 

44 

1 

56 

0 

23 

1 

35 

0 

9 

0 

38 

2 

0 

0 

20 

1 

38 

0 

9 

0 

32 

2 

3 

0 

16 

1 

42 

0 

9 

0 

26 

2 

7 

0 

12 

1 

46 

0 

9 

0 

21 

2 

10 

0 

8 

1 

50 

0 

10 

0 

16 

2 

14 

0 

4 

1 

54 

0 

10 

0 

8 

2 

17 

0 

0 

1 

57 

0 

10 

0 

0 

2 

20 

0 

5 

2 

0 

0 

10 

0 

8 

2 

23 

0 

10 

2 

3 

0 

10 

0 

15 

2 

25 

0 

15 

2 

6 

0 

10 

0 

23 

2 

27 

0 

20 

2 

9 

0 

11 

0 

31 

2 

2S 

0 

26 

2 

12 

0 

11 

0 

40 

2 

29 

0 

32 

2 

15 

0 

11 

0 

48 

2 

29 

0 

38 

2 

17 

0 

11 

0 

57 

2 

30 

0 

44 

2 

20 

0 

11 

1 

6 

2 

30 

0 

50 

2 

22 

0 

11 

1 

16 

2 

30 

0 

59 

2 

24 

0 

12 

1 

25 

2 

29 

1 

8 

2 

26 

0 

12 

1 

35 

2 

28 

1 

18 

2 

27 

0 

12 

1 

45 

2 

26 

1 

28 

2 

29 

0 

12 

1 

55 

2 

23 

1 

38 

2 

30 

0 

12 

2 

6 

2 

20 

1 

48 

2 

30 

0 

13 

2 

16 

2 

16 

1 

59 

2 

30 

0 

13 

2 

27 

2 

11 

2 

11 

2 

29 

0 

13 

2 

37 

2 

6 

2 

25 

2 

28 

0 

13 

2 

47 

2 

0 

2 

43 

2 

26 

0 

13 

2 

57 

1 

53 

3 

3 

2 

22 

0 

13 

3 

7 

1 

46 

3 

23 

2 

18 

0 

13 

3 

17 

1 

38 

3 

44 

2 

12 

0 

14 

3 

26 

1 

29 

4 

5 

2 

4 

0 

14 

3 

34 

1 

20 

4 

26 

1 

55 

0 

14 

3 

42 

1 

10 

4 

49 

1 

42 

0 

14 

3 

48 

0 

59 

5 

13 

1 

27 

0 

14 

3 

54 

0 

48 

5 

36 

1 

9 

0 

14 

3 

58 

0 

36 

5 

52 

0 

48 

0 

14 

4 

2 

0 

24 

6 

7 

0 

25 

0 

14 

4 

4 

0 

12 

6 

22 

0 

0 

0 

14 

4 

5 

0 

0 

REVOLUTIONS  OF  HEAVENLY  SPHERES,  VI 


837 


9.  On  the  Calculation  of  the  Latitudes  of  the  Five 
Wandering  Stars 

[195^]  Now  this  is  the  method  of  calculating  the  latitudes  of  the  five  wander¬ 
ing  stars  by  means  of  these  tables.  For  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars 
we  shall  take  the  discrete,  or  corrected,  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  among 
the  common  numbers:  in  the  case  of  Mars,  the  anomaly  as  is;  in  that  of  Jupiter, 
after  the  subtraction  of  20°;  and  in  that  of  Saturn,  after  the  addition  of  50°. 
Accordingly  we  shall  note  the  numbers  which  occur  in  the  region  of  the  60's,  in 
the  proportional  minutes  placed  in  the  last  column.  Similarly  by  means  of  the 
corrected  anomaly  of  parallax  we  shall  determine  the  proper  number  of  each 
planet,  corresponding  to  the  latitude:  the  first  and  northern  latitude,  if  the  pro¬ 
portional  minutes  are  in  the  first  half  of  the  column — which  happens  when  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  less  than  90°  or  more  than  270°;  the  second  and 
southern  latitude,  if  the  proportional  minutes  are  in  the  second  half  of  the  col¬ 
umn,  i.e.y  if  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle,  wherebj^  the  table  was  entered 
upon,  was  more  than  90°  or  less  than  270°.  Accordingly  if  we  adjust  one  of  these 
latitudes  to  its  60's,  the  result  will  be  the  distance  north  or  south  of  the  ecliptic 
in  accordance  with  the  denomination  of  the  circles  assumed. 

But  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury  the  three  latitudes  of  declination,  ob- 
liquation,  and  deviation,  which  are  marked  down  separately,  are  to  be  taken 
first  by  means  of  the  corrected  anomaly  of  parallax,  except  that  in  the  case 
of  Mercury  one  tenth  of  the  obliquation  is  to  be  subtracted,  if  the  anomaly  of 
the  eccentric  circle  and  its  number  are  found  in  the  first  column  of  the  table,  or 
merely  added,  if  in  the  second  column  of  the  table;  and  the  remainder  or  sum  is 
to  be  kept. 

And  we  must  discern  whether  their  denominations  are  northern  or  southern, 
since  if  the  corrected  anomaly  of  parallax  is  in  the  apogeal  semicircle,  i.e.y  is  less 
than  90°  or  more  than  270°  and  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  also  less 
than  a  semicircle;  or  again,  if  the  anomaly  of  parallax  is  in  the  perigeal  arc,  i.e.y 
is  more  than  90°  and  less  than  270°  and  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is 
greater  than  a  semicircle;  the  declination  of  Venus  will  be  northern  and  that 
of  Mercury  southern.  But  if  the  anomaly  of  parallax  is  in  the  perigeal  arc  and 
the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  less  than  a  semicircle;  [196^]  or  if  the 
anomaly  of  parallax  is  in  the  apogeal  arc  and  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle 
is  more  than  a  semicircle;  conversely  the  declination  of  Venus  will  be  southern 
and  that  of  Mercury  northern.  But  in  the  case  of  the  obliquation,  if  the  anomaly 
of  parallax  is  less  than  a  semicircle  and  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is 
apogeal ;  or  if  the  anomaly  of  parallax  is  greater  than  a  semicircle  and  the  anom¬ 
aly  of  the  eccentric  circle  is  perigeal;  the  obliquation  of  Venus  will  be  to  the 
north  and  that  of  Mercury  to  the  south ;  and  vice  versa.  But  the  deviations  of 
Venus  always  remain  northern  and  those  of  Mercury  southern. 

Then,  corresponding  to  the  corrected  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle,  the 
proportional  minutes  should  be  taken  which  are  common  to  all  the  five  planets, 
although  they  are  ascribed  to  the  three  higher  planets.  These  are  assigned  to 
the  obliquation  and  lastly  to  the  deviation.  After  this,  when  we  have  added  90° 
to  the  same  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle,  we  shall  once  more  take  the  sum 
and  find  the  common  proportional  minutes  which  correspond  to  it  and  assign 
them  to  the  latitude  of  declination.  Having  placed  these  things  in  this  order,  we 


838  COPERNICUS 

shall  adjust  each  of  the  three  particular  latitudes  set  forth  to  their  proportional 
minutes;  and  the  result  will  be  the  corrected  latitude  for  the  position  and  time, 
so  that  at  last  we  may  have  the  sum  of  the  three  latitudes  of  the  two  planets. 
If  all  the  latitudes  are  of  one  denomination,  they  are  added  together;  but  if  not, 
only  the  two  are  added  which  have  the  same  denomination;  and  according  as 
the  sum  is  greater  or  less  than  the  third  latitude,  which  is  different  from  them, 
there  will  be  a  subtraction;  and  the  remainder  will  be  the  predominant  latitude 
sought  for. 


Johannes  Kepler 

EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN 
ASTRONOMY 


s>vi'i  aditait  cftcb  of  the  three  ^.nrtjciilar  lfttitU'’J<»  9i*t  forth  to  their  propo-'  iona! 
minutes;  and  the  re^ltiriil  be  tho  corrected  IfttJtiide  for  the  prisition  hi.  i  tiiiie. 
so*  Ujii*.  at  last  wf  may  I'ave  tbdfwni  of  tb-  three  <itf  the  two  pinwto, 

U  frlriiic  aiti  of  one  don'>tnination,  they  are  added  together  •  but  if  not, 

ordy  the  two  «ie  r.  which  have  the  same  denonu nation j  aad  aecordmg  as 
the  ,  *1111  if'  greutcr  vir  icse  tiian  third  lailttide,  which  i»  dififerenf^rom  them, 
(i'e»4j  'A  ill  be  a  subtrAcUon;  and  the  r^masixier  v.iJl  be  the  predominant  latitulb 
sought  tor.  ’  i$.- 


'.n 


•'  ;i  ’i/f 


lalcpX  83imxifIo{. 

TLADmiia^oo  ao  aMoxna 


f-^  :■ 

Id : 

•i,t 

YMOHOflT8A 

..  .  '  ’  * 

y  '  » 

.  -1 

ii-'  • 

'» 4  ■ 

,.  i-  t 

v-  .... 

'■  'i  ‘ 

K'*'  * 

,1.  ^t| 

h  ■ 

•J  ‘ 

C'*i  U*  : 

•  .J  *  •*- 


:  '  V 

■'  .  'l 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Johannes  Kepler,  1571-1630 


EPLER  was  born  December  27,  1571,  at  Weil 
the  Duchy  of  Wurttemberg.  He  came  from 
noble  but  poverty-stricken  family,  and,  as  he 
ter  noted,  was  himself  a  premature  and  sick- 
son  such  as  the  planets  had  foretold.  His 
ther  was  a  soldier  of  fortune  and  frequently 
vay  from  home  until  he  acquired  a  tavern  in 
)77.  Kepler,  in  the  periods  when  he  was  not 
orking  in  the  tavern,  attended  a  German  ele- 
entary  school  at  Leonberg,  but  domestic 
mkruptcy  after  three  years  led  to  his  being 
ithdrawn  and  sent  to  labor  in  the  fields. 
Kepler's  intellectual  gifts  were  considered  to 
dicate  that  he  had  a  theological  vocation, 
id  in  1584  he  was  sent  as  a  charity  student  to 
le  Protestant  seminary  at  Adelberg.  Two 
jars  later  he  transferred  to  the  college  at 
[aulbronn.  A  brilliant  examination  for  the 
ichelor's  degree  in  1588  enabled  Kepler  to  go 
»  the  University  of  Tubingen,  where  he  pre- 
ired  for  the  master's  degree  in  philosophy, 
s  a  part  of  the  regular  course  of  studies,  he 
arned  astronomy  with  Mastlin,  who  intro- 
iced  him  to  the  work  of  Copernicus.  He 
rote  a  paper  on  the  reconciliation  of  the  Co- 
jrnican  view  with  Sacred  Scripture,  but  his 
dncipal  desire  was  to  enter  the  ministry.  It 
as  with  considerable  reluctance  that  he  was 
lally  persuaded  in  1594  to  accept  the  first 
ist  offered  to  him,  the  chair  of  astronomy  at 
le  Lutheran  school  of  Graz, 

While  filling  his  office  as  astronomer  at 
raz,  Kepler  began  to  speculate  on  the  order 
id  distances  of  the  planets.  On  July  19,  1595, 
j  carefully  noted  down  his  “discovery"  that 
3rod  in  creating  the  universe  and  regulating 
le  order  of  the  cosmos  had  in  view  the  five 
igular  bodies  of  geometry  as  known  since  the 
lys  of  Pythagoras  and  Plato."  He  embodied 
.s  theory  on  these  relations  in  his  first  pub- 
jhed  work  on  astronomy,  entitled  the  Precur- 
•r  of  Cosmographic  Dissertations  or  the  Cosmo- 
'aphic  Mystery^  which  appeared  late  in  1596. 
he  book  brought  its  author  much  fame  and  a 
iendly  correspondence  with  the  two  most 


eminent  astronomers  of  the  time,  Tycho  Brahe 
and  Galileo. 

In  1598  the  Catholic  archduke  of  Styria  is¬ 
sued  an  edict  of  banishment  against  Protestant 
preachers  and  professors,  and  Kepler  fled  to 
the  Hungarian  border.  Although  reinstated  in 
his  post  by  the  favor  of  the  Jesuits,  Kepler 
gladly  accepted  an  offer  from  Tycho  Brahe  in 
1600  to  serve  as  his  assistant  at  the  observa¬ 
tory  near  Prague.  A  year  later,  upon  the  death 
of  Tycho,  Kepler  was  appointed  his  successor 
as  imperial  mathematician. 

In  his  new  post  Kepler  inherited  the  records 
of  Tycho's  observations.  Utilizing  these  rec¬ 
ords  and  the  results  of  his  own  observations  at 
the  Prague  observatory,  Kepler  published  a 
series  of  works  which  soon  gained  him  a  Euro¬ 
pean  reputation.  To  satisfy  the  astrological 
proclivities  of  the  emperor,  he  first  wTote  a 
treatise  On  the  More  Certain  Foundations  of 
Astrology  (1602).  His  prognostications  were 
highly  successful;  commenting  on  this  fact,  he 
remarked  that  “Nature,  which  has  conferred 
upon  every  animal  the  means  of  subsistence, 
has  given  astrology  as  an  adjunct  and  ally  to 
astronomy."  A  preliminary  study  of  optics  re¬ 
sulted  in  the  publication  of  his  Optical  Part  of 
Astronomy  (1604),  which,  as  completed  by  the 
Dioptrics  (1611),  contained  important  dis¬ 
coveries  in  the  theory  of  vision.  But  Kepler's 
great  work  during  these  years  was  the  elabora¬ 
tion  of  a  new  theory  of  the  planets.  Inspired  by 
Gilbert’s  book  on  the  magnet  and  his  own  in¬ 
vestigations  of  the  orbit  of  Mars,  which  he  had 
been  studying  since  his  first  meeting  with 
Tycho,  Kepler  published  in  1609  his  New  Aeti- 
ologicol  Astronomy  or  Celestial  Physics  together 
with  Commentaries  on  the  Movements  of  the 
Planet  M ars,  in  which  he  enunciated  the  laws 
of  elliptical  orbits  and  of  equal  areas. 

Meanwhile  in  his  personal  life  Kepler  was 
harassed  upon  every  side.  His  salary  was  con¬ 
tinually  in  arrears;  his  wife  “fell  a  prey  to  de¬ 
spondent  melancholy,  .  .  .  became  seriously  ill 
with  Hungarian  fever,  epilepsy,  and  fits,"  and 


841 


842 


KEPLER 


finally  died;  his  three  children  succumbed  to 
smallpox;  and  Prague  itself  became  a  battle¬ 
field,  After  ^^the  terrible  year  of  1611/^  Kepler, 
while  still  retaining  the  position  of  court  as¬ 
tronomer,  gratefully  accepted  the  offer  to  be¬ 
come  mathematician  to  Upper  Austria.  He 
moved  to  Linz,  re-married  in  1613,  and  re¬ 
sumed  his  astronomical  investigations ;  but  his 
personal  fortunes  showed  little  improvement. 

The  twelve  years  of  Kepler’s  residence  at 
Linz  saw  the  publication  of  many  of  his  most 
important  astronomical  works.  The  Harmonies 
of  the  World  appeared  in  1619.  Its  dedication  to 
James  I  of  England  was  acknowledged  with  an 
invitation  to  that  country,  but  Kepler,  despite 
his  distraught  circumstances,  refused  to  leave, 
as  two  years  previously  he  had  declined  the 
chair  of  mathematics  at  Bologna.  For  some 
time  he  had  been  working  upon  the  project  of 
comprehending  the  whole  scheme  of  the  heav¬ 
ens  in  one  great  treatise  to  be  called  Hip¬ 
parchus,  The  difficulties  presented  by  the  lunar 
theory  finally  compelled  him  to  abandon  his 
intention,  and  he  recast  a  portion  of  his  mate¬ 
rials  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  intended  for  the 


general  public,  which  was  published  as  the 
Epitome  of  Astronomy  (1618-21).  In  addition 
to  these  works  and  many  essays  dealing  with 
chronology,  Kepler  devoted  years  to  preparing 
for  publication  the  astronomical  tables  com¬ 
piled  from  his  own  observations  and  those  oJ 
Tycho.  In  spite  of  financial  difficulties  and 
civil  and  religious  conflict,  they  finally  ap¬ 
peared  in  1627  under  the  title  of  the  Rudolphim 
Tables, 

By  this  time  Kepler’s  claims  upon  the  insol¬ 
vent  imperial  treasury  amounted  to  twelve 
thousand  florins.  In  1628,  under  an  arrange¬ 
ment  with  the  emperor,  the  debt  was  trans¬ 
ferred  to  Duke  Wallenstein  of  Friedland,  anc 
Kepler  moved  with  his  family  to  Sagan  ir 
Silesia.  Wallenstein’s  promises  were  only  par¬ 
tially  fulfilled,  and  in  1630  Kepler  went  tc 
Ratisbon  to  present  his  case  to  the  Diet 
Shortly  after  his  arrival  he  was  taken  ill  with  £ 
fever  and  died  on  November  15.  He  was  buriec 
at  Ratisbon.  The  epitaph,  of  his  own  composi¬ 
tion,  reads:  had  measured  the  heavens;  nov 
I  measure  earth’s  shadows.  Mind  came  fron 
the  heavens,  Body’s  shadow  has  fallen.” 


CONTENTS 


OGRAPHICAL  NOTE  841 

BOOK  FOUR 

)  THE  Reader  845 

^  THE  Position,  Order,  and  Move¬ 
ment  OF  THE  Parts  of  the  World; 

OR,  ON  the  System  of  the  World  851 

Part  I 

.  On  the  Principal  Parts  of  the  World  853 
.  On  the  Place  of  the  Sun  at  the  Centre 
of  the  World  857 

.  On  the  Order  of  the  Movable  Spheres  860 
.  On  the  Ratios  of  the  Principal  Bodies 
of  the  World  to  One  Another  873 

i.RT  II.  On  the  Movement  of  the 
Bodies  of  the  World 
.  How  Many  and  of  What  Sort  are  the 
Movements?  887 

.  Concerning  the  Causes  of  the  Move¬ 
ment  of  the  Planets  888 

.  On  the  Revolution  of  the  Solar  Body 
Body  Around  its  Axis  and  its  Effect 
in  the  Movement  of  the  Planets  895 

.  On  the  Causes  of  the  Ratio  of  the 
Periodic  Times  905 

.  On  the  Annual  Movement  of  the 
Earth  907 

.  On  the  Diurnal  Revolution  of  the 
Terrestrial  Body  Around  its  Axis  and 
its  Effect  in  Moving  the  Moon,  and  on 
the  Mutual  Proportions  of  the  Year, 
Month  and  Day  916 

Part  HI.  On  the  Real  and  True 
Irregularity  of  the  Planets 
AND  ITS  Causes 

.  On  the  Causes  of  the  True  Irregu¬ 
larities  928 


For  the  information  of  the  reader^  the  trans- 
or  here  appends  a  table  of  contents  of  the 
st  and  untranslated  part  of  the  work: 

)OK  I.  Concerning  the  Principles  of  Astron¬ 
omy  in  General  and  Those  of  the  Doctrine 
on  the  Sphere  Specifically. 


2.  On  the  Causes  of  Irregularity  in 

Longitude  933 

3.  Causes  of  Irregularity  in  Altitude  934 

4.  On  the  Movement  in  Latitude  946 

5.  On  the  Twofold  Irregularities  of  the 

Moon  and  their  Causes  952 

BOOK  FIVE 

Letter  of  Dedication  961 

Part  I.  On  the  Eccentric  Circles,  or 

Schemata  of  the  Planets  964 

1.  Concerning  the  Increment  of  Libra- 

tion  968 

2.  On  the  Sum  of  the  Libra tion  Gone 

Through  With  973 

3.  On  the  Figure  of  the  Orbit  975 

4.  On  the  Measure  of  Time,  or  of  the 

Delay  made  by  the  Planet  in  any 
Arc  of  its  Orbit  979 

5.  On  the  Equivalence  of  the  Circular 
Plane  and  the  Plane  of  the  Ellipse  in 
Measuring  the  Delays  in  the  Arcs  983 

6.  On  the  Regularity  of  the  Digressions 

in  Latitude  985 


Part  IL  On  the  Astronomical  Terms 
Arising  from  Calculations  and 
the  Eccentric  Orbit 


1.  Concerning  Designation  989 

2.  Concerning  Libration  990 

3.  Concerning  the  Delay  of  the  Planet 

in  any  Arc  991 

4.  Concerning  the  Angle  at  the  Sun  994 

5.  On  the  Digression  of  the  Planets 

Away  from  the  Ecliptic  999 

6.  On  the  Movement  of  the  Apsides  and 

Nodes  1002 


Part  I.  Concerning  the  shape  of  the  Earth, 
its  magnitude,  and  the  method  of  measuring 
it. 

Part  II.  Concerning  the  shape  of  the  heavens. 

Part  III.  Concerning  the  nature  and  altitude 
of  the  air,  which  envelopes  the  land  and 


843 


CONTENTS 


844 

ocean  and  its  distinction  from  the  ether, 
which  is  diffused  throughout  all  the  heavens. 

Part  IV.  Concerning  the  place  of  the  Earth  in 
the  world  and  its  proportionality  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  world. 

Part  V.  Concerning  the  daily  movement  of 
the  Earth. 

Book  II.  Concerning  the  Sphere  and  its 
Circles. 

Book  III.  Concerning  the  Doctrine  of  the 
First  Movement — called  the  Doctrine  on 
the  Sphere. 


Part  I.  Concerning  the  rising  and  setting  o 
the  stars. 

Part  II.  Concerning  the  ascensions  and  de 
clination  of  the  signs  or  points  on  th» 
ecliptic. 

Part  III.  Concerning  the  year  and  its  parts 
and  concerning  the  days  and  their  increase 
or  decreases  in  length. 

Part  IV.  Concerning  the  seasons  of  the  yea 
and  the  magnitudes  of  the  zones. 

Part  V.  On  the  apparition  and  occultation  o 
the  stars  at  different  times  of  the  year. 


BOOK  FOUR 


Herein  the  natural  and  archetypal  causes  of  Celestial  Physics  that  iSj 
of  all  the  magnitudes,  movements,  and  proportions  in  the  heavens  are 
explained  and  thus  the  Principles  of  the  Doctrine  on  the  Schemata  are 
demonstrated. 

This  hook  is  designed  to  serve  as  a  supplement  to  Aristotle* s.  On  the 
Heavens. 


TO  THE  READER 

It  has  been  ten  years  since  I  published  my  Commentaries  on  the  Movements  of 
the  Planet  Mars.  As  only  a  few  copies  of  the  book  were  printed,  and  as  it  had 
so  to  speak  hidden  the  teaching  about  celestial  causes  in  thickets  of  calcula¬ 
tions  and  the  rest  of  the  astronomical  apparatus,  and  since  the  more  delicate 
readers  were  frightened  away  by  the  price  of  the  book  too;  it  seemed  to  my 
friends  that  I  should  be  doing  right  and  fulfilling  my  responsibilities,  if  I  should 
write  an  epitome,  wherein  a  summary  of  both  the  physical  and  astronomical 
teaching  concerning  the  heavens  would  be  set  forth  in  plain  and  simple  speech 
and  with  the  boredom  of  the  demonstrations  alleviated.  I  did  that  before  many 
years  had  passed.  But  meanwhile  various  delays  came  between  the  book  and 
publication:  the  little  book  itself  was  not  up  to  date  in  spots,  and,  unless  I 
am  mistaken,  it  was  also  incomplete  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  given,  and 
even  the  plan  of  publication  began  to  totter.  For  in  the  ‘‘doctrine  concerning 
the  sphere’ ' — published  before  three  years  were  up — I  seemed  to  certain  people 
to  be  more  diffuse  in  arguing  about  the  diurnal  movement  or  repose  of  the 
earth  than  befitted  the  form  of  an  epitome.  Accordingly  I  reflected  that  if 
the  readers  had  not  digested  that  part,  which  was  however  absent  from  no 
epitome  of  astronomy,  all  the  more  strange  to  them  would  be  this  Fourth 
Book,  which  airs  so  many  new  and  unthought-of  things  concerning  the  whole 
nature  of  the  heavens — so  that  you  might  doubt  whether  you  were  doing  a 
part  of  physics  or  astronomy,  unless  you  recognized  that  speculative  astronomy 
is  one  whole  part  of  physics. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  considered  that  this  was  a  matter  for  the  sake  of  my 
amplifying  which  and  impressing  it  upon  the  public,  i.e.,  for  the  sake  of  my 
writing  this  little  book,  many  men  of  letters  had  become  my  friends:  that 
these  speculations  could  not  be  omitted,  unless  I  spent  my  devotion  in  giving 
attention  to  the  darkness  of  a  doctrine  of  schemata  which  was  robbed  of  its 
proper  principles.  At  least,  necessity — how  I  wish  she  were  sometimes  less 
importunate! — cut  short  this  disputation:  for  necessity  makes  that  which 
cannot  be  done  otherwise  seem  to  be  undertaken  as  if  by  design.  The  press 

845 


846 


KEPLER 


groaned  and  the  work  on  the  doctrine  of  schemata  was  being  struck  off,  when 
its  lawful  godfather,  whom  I  mentioned  in  the  foreword  to  the  Spherical 
Doctrine,  attained  his  former  state,  and  was  sleeping,  or  perhaps  giving  up 
the  ghost,  and  as  the  liberality  of  this  most  eminent  patron  was  paying  for 
the  parts  of  this  book,  it  became  necessary  for  me  suddenly  to  set  out  and  to 
break  off  the  work.  At  that  same  time  the  printers  had  reached  the  end  of  the 
Fourth  Book  and  the  Frankfort  market-day  was  at  hand.  I  decided  that  it 
would  be  best  if  the  Fourth  Book,  the  subject-matter  of  which  includes  both 
physics  and  astronomy,  were  also  published  separately;  whence,  according 
to  the  choice  of  the  astronomer  buying,  it  could  be  passed  over,  or  inserted 
into  the  rest  of  the  epitome.  Kind  reader,  you  have  the  reasons  for  this  pub¬ 
lication,  and  I  hope  you  will  find  them  satisfactory. 

But  as  regards  this  branch  of  philosophizing:  it  will  not  be  out  of  keeping 
with  the  job  at  hand  if  I  here  set  down  in  advance  some  things  from  the  recent 
letter  which  I  wrote  to  a  man  who  is  intimate  with  a  great  Prince  and  is  him¬ 
self  also  a  great  man.  In  this  letter  a  comparison  was  undertaken  between 
this  book — or  the  related  work  On  the  Harmonies,  published  in  the  previous 
year — and  Aristotle^s  books  On  the  Heavens  and  Metaphysics]  and  this  phil¬ 
osophy  [ix.,  modern  astronomy]  was  cleared  of  the  worn-out  charges  of  being 
esoteric  and  seeking  after  novelty. 

Accordingly,  these  are  the  excerpts  from  the  aforesaid  letter  which  have 
to  do  with  the  present  undertaking: 

It  seems  to  me  I  have  nothing  to  worry  about  in  the  case  of  Aristotle:  His 
Most  Serene  Highness  is  a  Platonist  in  philosophy  and  a  Christian  in  religion: 
His  Most  Serene  Highness  cannot  dislike  whatever  is  the  more  convincing, 
whether  it  be  that  the  world  was  first  made  at  a  fixed  beginning  in  time  as  was 
my  work  On  the  Harmonies,  or  will  be  destroyed  at  some  time,  or  is  merely  liable 
to  destruction,  like  the  alterations  of  the  ether  and  the  celestial  atmosphere; 
nor  will  he  ever  prefer  the  Master  Aristotle  to  the  truth  of  which  Aristotle 
was  ignorant. 

But  if  His  Most  Serene  Highness  has  a  high  opinion  of  Aristotle,  where¬ 
soever  he  reveals  the  mysteries  of  philosophy,  if  he  makes  any  serious  remark 
or  any  praiseworthy  attempt;  for  indeed  he  is  the  man  who  in  On  the  Heavens 
(Book  II,  Chapter  5)  asks:  “For  what  reason  are  there  many  movements?” 
So  I  ask:  “What  are  the  reasons  for  the  number  of  the  planets?”  He  asks  in 
the  following  chapter:  “For  what  reason  are  the  heavens  borne  from  east  to 
west  rather  than  from  west  to  east?”  So  I  ask:  “Why  is  any  planet  moved 
with  so  much  speed,  no  more,  no  less?”  In  Chapter  9  he  asks:  “Do  the  stars 
give  forth  sounds  which  are  modulated  [contemperatos]  harmonically?”  and 
answers  no:  I  split  up  his  judgment,  for  I  grant  that  no  sounds  are  given  forth 
but  I  affirm  and  demonstrate  that  the  movements  are  modulated  according 
to  harmonic  proportions.  In  Chapter  10  he  asks  “about  the  order  of  the  spheres, 
the  intervals,  and  the  ratio  of  the  movements  to  the  orbital  circles”;  but  he 
merely  asks  and  fails  in  the  attempt.  Not  only  do  I  answer  these  questions 
with  most  luminous  demonstrations  by  means  of  the  five  regular  solids,  but 
also  I  add  the  number  of  the  planets,  which  has  been  deduced  from  the  Arche¬ 
type,  so  that  it  may  be  clear  that  the  world  is  created.  In  Chapter  12  he  asks: 
“Why  in  the  descent  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  planets  are  not  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  single  planets  found  to  be  more  manifold?”  and  he  pronounces  a 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  847 

judgment  most  elegantly  tempered  by  the  modesty  of  confession  and  the 
wisdom  of  assertion.  ^^Let  us  try,”  he  says,  ^^to  say  only  that  which  appears 
as  true;  for  we  judge  that  the  readiness”  even  to  put  forward  what  is  probable 
^‘is  worthy  of  being  characterized  as  modesty  rather  than  presumption,  if 
anyone,  in  things  concerning  which  there  are  very  great  difficulties,  is  con¬ 
tent — in  order  to  satisfy  his  thirst  for  philosophy — with  even  slight  discussions 
such  as  these.”  But  I  myself,  led  on  by  this  same  praiseworthy  thirst  for  phil¬ 
osophy,  first  wiped  away  from  the  eyes  of  astronomy  those  mists  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplicity  of  movements  in  the  single  planets:  then  I  gave  a  demonstration  of 
the  following:  that  the  movement  of  the  planet  is  not  uniform  throughout  its 
whole  circuit — as  Aristotle  argued  in  Chapters  6  and  7 ;  but  that  in  reality  the 
movement  is  increased  and  decreased  at  places  in  its  period  which  are  fixed 
and  are  opposite  to  one  another;  and  I  explained  the  efficient  or  intsrumental 
causes  of  this  increase  as  the  lessening  of  the  interval  between  the  planet  and 
the  sun,  from  which  as  from  a  source  that  movement  arises.  Then,  as  in  each 
and  every  planet  there  is  a  very  fast  movement  and  a  very  slow  movement 
and  in  a  fixed  proportion,  I  did  not  merely  raise  the  question  as  to  the  reason 
for  this  proportion  in  the  single  planets  separately  and  in  all  the  planets  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  one  another;  and  why  Saturn  and  Jupiter  have  middling  eccentricities. 
Mars  a  great  eccentricity,  the  Sun  and  Venus  slight  eccentricities,  and  Mercury 
a  very  great  eccentricity;  but  I  also  brought  forward  a  solution  of  this  very  great 
difficulty,  and  not  a  trifling  discussion  but  one  wholly  legitimate;  and  I  took 
my  solution  from  the  Archetype  of  the  harmonic  cosmos:  whence  it  is  estab¬ 
lished  that  this  cosmos  cannot  be  better  than  it  is  and  that  it  is  impossible 
that  the  world  should  not  have  been  created  at  a  fixed  beginning  in  time. 

This  attempt  of  mine  ought  not  to  have  been  checked  by  shyness,  but  should 
have  been  brought  forth  into  the  light  with  strength  of  mind,  namely,  with  the 
highest  confidence  in  the  visible  works  of  God — if  one  has  leisure  for  knowledge 
of  them — or  at  the  exhortation  of  Aristotle  himself,  who  judged  that  in  these 
questions  you  should  not  suppress  or  be  silent  about  probabilities  any  more 
than  about  fully  explored  certainties.  Then  he  is  that  same  Aristotle  who,  in 
the  Metaphysics,  Book  xii.  Chapter  8,  in  which  place  he  built  up  the  most 
sublime  part  of  his  philosophy,  the  part  concerning  the  gods  and  the  number 
of  them;  who,  I  say,  sends  his  students  to  the  astronomers  and  who  defers 
to  the  astronomers  in  respect  to  their  authority  and  the  weight  of  their  testi- 
timony;  indeed  he  would  never  have  scorned  Tycho  Brahe  or  even  myself, 
if  that  fatal  necessity  of  the  generations  had  made  us  contemporaries.  For 
he  orders  his  students  ^To  read  through  both,”  that  is  to  say,  Eudoxus  and 
Callippus,  for  the  one  had  corrected  the  errors  of  the  other;  and  today  that 
would  be  to  read  both  Ptolemy  and  Tycho:  ‘ffiut  to  follow”  not,  he  says,  the 
more  ancient,  but  ^‘the  more  accurate.”  And  so,  if  Aristotle  is  dear  to  that 
most  just  Prince,  I  call  Aristotle  to  witness  that  he  has  suffered  no  injury, 
if  the  astronomer,  using  the  arguments  which  modern  times  have  put  forward 
concerning  the  heavens,  has  indicated  that  creatures  arose  in  the  heavens  and 
will  disappear  once  more — in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  him  who  alleges  ex¬ 
perience,  but  experience  not  sufficiently  long. 

As  regards  the  academies,  they  are  established  in  order  to  regulate  the  studies 
of  the  pupils  and  are  concerned  not  to  have  the  program  of  teaching  change 
very  often:  in  such  places,  because  it  is  a  question  of  the  progress  of  the  stu- 


848 


KEPLER 


dents,  it  frequently  happens  that  the  things  which  have  to  be  chosen  are  not 
those  which  are  most  true  but  those  which  are  most  easy.  And  by  that  division 
in  things  which  makes  different  people  form  different  judgements,  it  so  happens 
that  certain  people  are  in  error  contrary  to  their  own  opinion.  It  seems  to  me 
that  the  truth  concerning  the  mutable  nature  of  the  heavens  can  be  taught 
conveniently;  but  someone  else  judges  that  students  and  teachers  equally 
are  thrown  into  confusion  by  this  doctrine.  But  it  is  not  without  its  use  in  ex¬ 
plaining  even  those  parts  of  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle  which  are  clearly  false, 
as  Book  VIII  of  the  Physics  concerning  celestial  movement  and  Book  ii  of 
On  the  Heavens  concerning  the  eternity  of  the  heavens — so  that  a  comparison 
could  be  made  between  the  philosophy  of  the  gentiles  and  the  truth  of  Christian 
dogma.  Accordingly,  if  certain  subtleties  which  are  difficult  to  grasp  should 
not  be  laid  before  beginners,  or  if  they  should  not  be  preferred  to  the  accepted 
and  necessary  teachings,  it  does  not  follow  that  therefore  those  things  should 
neither  be  written  nor  read  privately.  You  can  count  few  academies  in  which 
it  is  a  part  of  the  program  to  explain  the  Metaphysics  of  Aristotle:  yet  Aristotle 
wrote  the  Metaphysics  too,  a  very  useful  work  in  the  judgement  of  the  pro¬ 
fessors  on  all  the  faculties.  Therefore,  in  order  that  no  one  should  consider 
His  Most  Serene  Highness  blameworthy,  if  he  observes  the  rules  of  the  acad¬ 
emies,  and  if  he  believes  that  the  honour  of  the  academics — even  if  they  have 
sinned  greatly  in  judgement — should  be  defended  against  presumptuous  critics, 
against  untimely  quarrellers:  so  in  turn  I  do  not  let  myself  be  easily  persuaded 
that  this  most  wise  Prince  will  seek  to  have  all  people  remain  publicly  and 
privately  inside  the  boundaries  of  academic  philosophy;  and  to  have  no  one 
labour  privately  in  bringing  forward  these  things,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  the  works  of  God. 

But  His  Most  Supreme  Highness  will  not  pick  a  fight  concerning  the  heavens; 
for  he  knows  that  the  philosophers  speak  of  the  visible  heavens;  and  Christ  of 
the  invisible  heavens,  or,  as  the  schools  say,  of  the  empyrean,  or,  as  the  simple 
Christians  take  it,  of  the  blessed  seats,  which  no  corruption  will  ever  touch: 
since  not  Tycho,  not  I,  but  Christ  Himself  pronounces  concerning  this  visible 
world:  ^ ^Heaven  and  Earth  shall  pass  away,^^  and  the  Psalmist,  “they  shall 
groAv  old  like  a  garment'^;  and  Peter,  “They  shall  be  destroyed  root  and  all, 
and  be  consumed  by  burning  in  the  fire.”  And  that  will  occur  in  order  that  the 
alterations  in  the  heavens  should  not  destroy  their  eternity,  if  there  should 
be  such  an  eternity,  just  as  the  terrestrial  alterations,  which  are  perrennial 
and  return  in  a  circle,  destroy  the  Earth^s  eternity  which  was  equally  believed 
by  Aristotle.  But  this  kind  of  argument  against  Aristotle  will  perhaps  seem 
too  contentious.  Therefore  let  us  use  his  own  testimony  instead;  for  he  is  not 
everywhere  consistent:  in  the  Metaphysics  he  attributes  movement  to  the 
celestial  bodies  for  its  own  sake  and  teaches  “that  they  are  moved  in  order 
that  they  may  be  moved”;  but  in  On  the  Heavens^  being  admonished  by  the 
things  themselves,  he  attributes  something  or  other  like  the  terrestrial,  some¬ 
thing  multiplex  and  turbulent  to  the  stars  or  rather  to  their  movers,  who  by 
means  of  these  mechanisms  and  movements  seek  another  end  outside  of  the 
movement  itself,  and  one  mover  attains  this  end  with  more  difficulty  than 
another:  in  this  way,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  adduces  the  fewness  of  movements 
in  the  moon  as  witness  of  the  inferior  condition  of  the  moon  and  its  closer 
kinship  to  the  Earth.  For  he  means  to  say  that  the  celestial  bodies  which  can- 


849 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

not  wholly  attain  the  highest  end  by  their  own  nature  do  not  employ  many 
motions;  and  that  it  would  have  been  wholly  useless  for  the  Earth  to  have  a 
movement  to  attain  that  end,  but  that  the  Earth  is  absolutely  at  rest  there; 
that  the  moon  progresses  somewhere  and  stretches  out  towards  that  end;  the 
the  higher  bodies  attain  the  end,  but  by  many  movements;  and  the  highest 
heaven,  by  the  one  simple  movement.  And  so  he  compares  the  actions,  the 
Trpdjets  of  the  moon — that  is  the  word  he  uses — to  the  uniform  life  of  plants, 
but  the  Trpdfets  of  the  higher  bodies,  to  the  more  varied  life  of  animals.  Yet 
he  makes  all  those  bodies  to  be  in  need  of  these  actions  because  they  have  their 
end  and  their  blessedness  outside  of  themselves.  Accordingly,  in  the  epilogue 
to  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  Harmonies^  I  wish  for  Aristotle  as  my  reader  and 
critic;  as  it  is  not  right  that  I  should  wish  to  take  up  any  more  of  the  time  of 
His  Most  Serene  Highness,  the  highest  judgement  of  the  Prince.  I  am  sure  of 
one  thing  at  least,  that  if  he  would  direct  the  cultivated  power  of  his  mind 
toward  those  things  which  Aristotle  wrote  and  toward  my  epilogue,  every¬ 
thing  would  be  agreed  between  us,  and  he  would  by  his  own  judgement  har¬ 
monize  the  discord  which  now,  as  you  predict,  he  might  feel  between  us. 

In  order  to  counter  the  envious  charge  of  novelty-hunting,  it  would  be  first 
in  my  program,  even  though  His  Most  Serene  Highness  can  easily  see  all  things 
for  himself,  to  warn  him  fully  of  the  distinction  between  the  love — or  thirst, 
to  use  the  Aristotelian  word — for  the  knowledge  of  natural  things  and  the 
lust  for  contradicting  and  holding  the  opposite  opinion.  All  philosophers, 
whether  Greek  or  Latin,  and  all  the  poets  too,  recognize  a  divine  ravishment 
in  investigating  the  works  of  God:  and  not  merely  in  investigating  them 
privately  but  even  in  teaching  them  publicly:  and  it  can  be  inferred  that  the 
false  charge  of  esoteric  novelty-hunting  cannot  cling  to  this  ravishment. 
There  is  God  in  us^  and  our  warmth  comes  from  His  move- 
ments:  This  Spirit  has  descended  from  the  heavenly  seats. 

There  is  no  need  of  this  declamation  before  you,  or  before  His  Most  Supreme 
Highness:  only  I  must  make  some  further  mention  of  the  boundary  posts. 
For  the  boundary  posts  of  investigation  should  not  be  set  up  in  the  narrow 
minds  of  a  few  men.  ‘The  world  is  a  petty  thing,  unless  everyone  finds  the 
whole  world  in  that  which  he  is  seeking,'^  as  Seneca  says.  But  the  boundary 
posts  of  true  speculation  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  fabric  of  the  world;  but 
the  Christian  religion  has  put  up  some  fences  around  false  speculation  which 
is  on  the  wrong  track,  in  order  that  error  may  not  rush  headlong  but  may  be¬ 
come  in  other  respects  harmless  in  itself.  Antiquity  teaches  us  by  examples 
how  vainly  man  sets  up  boundary  posts  where  God  has  not  set  them  up:  how 
severely  all  the  astronomers  were  blamed  by  the  first  Christians.  Did  not 
Eusebius  write  of  an  astronomer  that  he  preferred  to  desert  Christianity — I 
suppose  because  he  was  excommunicated — rather  than  his  profession?  Who 
today  would  opine  that  Eusebius  is  to  be  imitated?  Did  not  those  who  taught 
that  there  were  antipodes  seem  to  Tertullian  and  to  Augustine  to  be  over¬ 
wise?  And,  indeed,  there  was  a  Virgil  Bishop  of  Salisbury  who  was  removed 
from  his  office  because  he  dared  to  assert  this  same  fact.  How  many  times  were 
the  Roman  philosophers  exiled  from  the  city?  And  at  that,  under  the  ancient 
manners,  wherewith  the  Roman  State  was  established.  Yet  today  we  set  up 
academies  everywhere:  we  order  that  philosophy  be  taught,  that  astronomy 
be  taught,  that  the  antipodes  be  taught. 


850 


KEPLER 

But  I  even  in  private  free  myself  from  the  blame  of  seeking  after  novelty 
by  suitable  proofs:  let  my  doctrines  say  whether  there  is  love  of  truth  in  me 
or  love  of  glory:  for  most  of  the  ones  I  hold  have  been  taken  from  other  writers: 
I  build  my  whole  astronomy  upon  Copernicus'  hypotheses  concerning  the 
world,  upon  the  observations  of  Tycho  Brahe,  and  lastly  upon  the  Englishman, 
William  Gilbert's  philosophy  of  magnetism.  If  I  rejoiced  in  novelty,  I  could 
have  devised  something  like  the  Fracastorian  or  Patrician  systems.  Just  as 
one  who  rejoices  in  occupations  but  rarely  in  companions,  never  of  himself 
descends  to  dice  or  to  a  game  of  chess;  similarly  for  me  there  is  so  much  im¬ 
portance  in  the  true  doctrine  of  others  or  even  in  correcting  the  doctrines 
which  are  not  in  every  respect  well  established,  that  my  mind  is  never  at 
leisure  for  the  game  of  inventing  new  doctrines  that  are  contrary  to  the  true. 
Whatever  I  profess  outwardly,  that  I  believe  inwardly:  nothing  is  a  worse 
cross  for  me  than — I  do  not  say,  to  speak  what  is  contrary  to  my  thought — to 
be  unable  to  utter  my  inmost  sentiments.  I  know  that  many  innovators  are 
produced  by  the  same  affect;  but  they  are  easily  argued  out  of  the  error  which 
seduces  them.  No  one  shows  that  I  have  committed  an  error.  But  because 
certain  people  cannot  grasp  the  subtleties  of  things,  they  lay  the  charge  of 
novelty-hunting  upon  me. 

I  now  descend  to  the  work  itself,  the  Harmonies:  I  do  not  doubt  that  he  who 
condemns  the  itch  to  devise  new  things  and  the  presumption  to  profess  new 
and  grandiose  things  wdll  find  in  the  epilogue  to  the  Fifth  Book^  that  which  he 
will  mark  critically.  For  here  the  sun-spots  and  little  flames  are  brought  for¬ 
ward  as  evidence  of  there  being  exhalations  from  the  sun  which  are  analogous 
to  exhalations  from  the  Earth:  here  things  corresponding  to  the  generation  of 
animals  are  established  as  occurring  in  the  planets — here  the  confines  of  the 
mysteries  of  Christian  religion  are  touched:  we  knock  at  the  doors  of  the  science 
of  the  Magi,  of  theurgy,  of  the  idolatry  of  the  Persians,  and  of  those  who 
worship  the  sun  as  god — as  the  interjection  of  frequent  warnings  does  not 
dissimulate. 

Accordingly,  if  what  has  been  said  so  far  concerning  these  esoteric  things 
is  not  satisfactory:  at  any  rate  let  this  be  impressed  upon  His  Most  Serene 
Highness:  that  this  chapter  contributes  nothing  in  its  own  right  except  con¬ 
jectures;  and  although  it  adds  a  good  deal  to  the  form  of  the  work:  because — as 
the  opening  of  the  chapter  has  it — reason  itself  leads  “from  the  Muses  to 
Apollo":  nevertheless,  since  the  other  parts  of  the  work  are  established  by 
means  of  their  proper  demonstrations,  the  chapter,  or  epilogue,  can  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  cut  off  from  the  rest.  For  even  without  the  epilogue,  the  following 
thesis  is  upheld  by  incontrovertible  demonstrations:  that  in  the  farthest  move¬ 
ments  of  any  two  planets^  the  universe  was  stamped  with  the  adornment  of  harmonic 
proportions;  andj  accordingly ^  in  order  that  this  adornment  might  he  brought  into 
concord  with  the  movements^  the  eccentricities  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  each  planet 
had  to  be  brought  into  concord.  The  most  wise  Prince  will  easily  reckon  how 
great  an  addition  this  makes  in  illustrating  the  glory  of  the  fabric  of  the  world, 
and  of  God  the  Architect. 

But  if,  however,  even  this  inquiry  is  accused  of  being  esoteric:  I  indeed  con¬ 
fess  that  the  head  of  astronomy  is  struck  off.  And  since  astronomy  is  studied 
either  for  its  own  sake  as  a  philosophy  or  for  the  sake  of  making  astronomical 

^Siee  Harmonies  of  the  World,  pp.  1080-1085. 


851 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

predictions;  then,  if  I  am  to  cast  my  ballot  in  the  question  of  future  contin¬ 
gencies,  His  Most  Serene  Highness  repudiates  any  secondary  end  for  this  exact 
and  subtle  investigation  of  physical  causes  which  does  not  offer  itself  for  the 
uses  of  daily  life:  therefore  the  taking  away  from  me  of  the  primary  end  slays 
this  whole  subtle  astronomy  and  plainly  makes  it  useless. 

Nevertheless,  in  order  that  I  may  arm  myself  against  this  eventuality  also: 
I  will  grant  that  this  work  of  mine,  the  Harmonies^  is  nothing  except  as  it  were 
a  certain  picture  of  the  edifice  of  astronomy;  and  though  it  may  be  erased  at 
the  pleasure  of  him  who  spits  upon  it,  nevertheless  the  house  called  astronomy 
stands  by  itself:  and  I  know  that  astronomy  is  not  condemned  by  His  Most 
Serene  Highness  but  is  held  of  great  value  on  account  of  its  certitude  in  pre¬ 
dicting  movements:  perhaps,  therefore,  he  will  judge  its  architect — who  is 
almost  the  only  renovator  after  the  Master  Tycho  and  who  thought  it  worth 
while  to  devote  his  life  to  this  work — to  be  not  unworthy  of  his  favour. 

These  extracts  from  the  letter,  most  of  which  have  to  do  with  the  investi¬ 
gation  of  very  hidden  causes  which  is  to  be  viewed  in  this  little  book,  should 
be  spoken  and  understood.  And  now  it  is  time  for  the  reader  to  pass  on  to  the 
little  book. 


FIRST  BOOK  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  SCHEMATA 

On  the  Position,  Order,  and  Movement  of  the  Parts  of  the  World; 

OR,  ON  THE  System  of  the  World 

[433]  What  is  the  subject  of  the  doctrine  of  the  schemata? 

The  proper  movements  of  the  planets;  we  call  them  the  secondary  move¬ 
ments;  and  the  planets,  the  secondary  movables. 

Why  do  you  call  them  the  proper  movements  of  the  planets? 

1.  Because  the  apparent  daily  movement — with  which  the  doctrine  on  the 
sphere  is  concerned — and  which  is  common  to  both  the  planets  and  the  fixed 
stars,  and  so  to  the  whole  world,  is  seen  to  travel  from  the  east  to  the  west; 
but  the  far  slower  single  movements  of  the  single  planets  travel  in  the  opposite 
direction  from  west  to  east;  and  therefore  it  is  certain  that  these  movements 
cannot  depend  upon  that  common  movement  of  the  world — which  we  have 
discussed  so  far — but  should  be  assigned  to  the  planets  themselves,  and  thus 
they  are  generically  proper  to  the  planets. 

2.  But  even  if  in  these  proper  movements  of  the  single  [434]  planets  from 
west  to  east  there  is  also  present  something  common,  not  diurnal  but  annual, 
which  is  extrinsic  and  betrays  that  its  cause  lies  in  eyesight  alone,  outside 
the  truth  of  the  thing;  and  which  meanwhile  makes  the  planet  in  its  proper 
movement  have  the  appearance  of  retrograding,  that  is,  from  east  to  west, 
nevertheless  because  this  common  movement  is  so  woven  into  the  single  periods 
of  the  single  planets,  and  so  variously  transformed,  that  at  first  glance  you 
cannot  discern  what  is  common  to  all  the  planets  and  what  is  proper  to  each: 
accordingly  this  whole  composite  movement  of  each  planet,  as  it  meets  the 
eyes,  is  said  to  be  proper  to  each  planet  specifically;  especially  since  this 
movement  which  is  common  to  many  does  not  have  its  origin  in  that  first 


852  KEPLER 

common  movement  of  the  whole  world,  but  in  the  proper  movement  of  each 
planet. 

How  many  parts  are  there  to  the  doctrine  of  the  schemata? 

Above  (in  Book  i,  page  15),  the  whole  doctrine  was  divided  into  its  three 
proper  parts:  the  first,  concerning  the  principles  wherewith  Copernicus  demon¬ 
strates  the  secondary  movements — the  material  of  Book  iv;  the  second,  con¬ 
cerning  the  machinery  whereby  these  movements  are  laid  before  the  eyes, 
viz.j  concerning  the  eccentric  and  similar  circles — the  material  of  Book  v; 
and  the  third,  concerning  the  apparent  movements  of  the  single  planets  and 
the  common  accidents  of  the  planets  taken  together — the  material  of  Book  vi; 
and  the  fourth  part,  which  is  common  to  the  doctrines  on  the  sphere  and 
on  the  schemata,  concerns  the  apparent  movement  of  the  eighth  sphere — the 
material  of  Book  vii. 

What  are  the  hypotheses  or  principles  wherewith  Copemican  astronomy  saves 
the  appearances  in  the  proper  movements  of  the  planets? 

They  are  principally:  (1)  that  the  sun  is  located  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars — or  approximately  at  the  centre — and  is  immovable  in  place; 
(2)  that  the  single  planets  move  really  around  the  sun  in  their  single  systems, 
which  are  compounded  of  many  perfect  circles  [435]  revolved  in  an  abso¬ 
lutely  uniform  movement;  (3)  that  the  Earth  is  one  of  the  planets,  so  that 
by  its  mean  annual  movement  around  the  sun  it  describes  its  orbital  circle 
between  the  orbital  circles  of  Mars  and  of  Venus;  (4)  that  the  ratio  of  its 
orbital  circle  to  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  imperceptible 
to  sense  and  therefore,  as  it  were,  exceeds  measurements;  (5)  that  the  sphere 
of  the  moon  is  arranged  around  the  Earth  as  its  centre,  so  that  the  annual 
movement  around  the  sun — and  so  the  movement  from  place  to  place — is 
common  to  the  whole  sphere  of  the  moon  and  to  the  Earth. 

Do  you  judge  that  these  principles  should  be  held  to  in  this  Epitome? 

Since  astronomy  has  two  ends,  to  save  the  appearances  and  to  contemplate 
the  true  form  of  the  edifice  of  the  world — of  which  I  have  treated  in  Book  i, 
folia  4  and  5 — there  is  no  need  of  all  these  principles  in  order  to  attain  the 
first  end:  but  some  can  be  changed  and  others  can  be  omitted;  however,  the 
second  principle  must  necessarily  be  corrected:  and  even  though  most  of  these 
principles  are  necessary  for  the  second  end,  nevertheless  they  are  not  yet 
sufficient. 

Which  of  these  principles  can  he  changed  or  omitted  and  the  appearances  still 
he  saved? 

Tycho  Brahe  demonstrates  the  appearances  with  the  first  and  third  prin¬ 
ciples  changed:  for  he,  like  the  ancients,  places  the  Earth  immobile,  at  the 
centre  of  the  world;  but  the  sun — which  even  for  him  is  the  centre  of  the 
orbital  circles  of  the  five  planets — and  the  system  of  all  the  spheres  he  makes 
to  go  around  the  Earth  in  the  common  annual  movement,  while  at  the  same 
time  in  this  common  system  any  planet  completes  its  proper  movements. 
Moreover,  he  omits  the  fourth  principle  altogether  and  exhibits  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars  as  not  much  greater  than  the  sphere  of  Saturn. 


853 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

[436]  What  in  turn  do  you  substitute  for  the  second  principle  and  what  else  do  you 
add  to  the  true  form  of  the  dwelling  of  the  world  or  to  what  belongs  to  the  nature  of 
the  heavens? 

Even  though  the  true  movements  are  to  be  left  singly  to  the  single  planets, 
nevertheless  these  movements  do  not  move  by  themselves  nor  by  the  revolu¬ 
tions  of  spheres — for  there  are  no  solid  spheres — but  the  sun  in  the  centre 
of  the  world,  revolving  around  the  centre  of  its  body  and  around  its  axis,  by 
this  revolution  becomes  the  cause  of  the  single  planets  going  around. 

Further,  even  though  the  planets  are  really  eccentric  to  the  centre  of  the 
sun:  nevertheless  there  are  no  other  smaller  circles  called  epicycles,  which 
by  their  revolution  vary  the  intervals  between  the  planet  and  the  sun;  but  the 
bodies  themselves  of  the  planets,  by  an  inborn  force  [vi  insite],  furnish  the 
occasion  for  this  variation. 

What,  then,  will  the  material  of  Book  IV  be? 

Book  IV  will  contain  celestial  physics  itself,  or  the  form  and  proportions  of 
the  fabric  of  the  world  and  the  true  causes  of  the  movements.  This  will  be 
the  primary  function  of  the  astronomer — as  we  said  in  Book  i,  folium  5,  namely, 
the  demonstration  of  his  hypotheses. 

Review  the  principal  parts  of  Book  IV, 

There  will  be  three  principal  parts  of  Book  iv. 

The  first  is  on  the  bodies  themselves;  the  second,  on  the  movements  of  those 
bodies;  the  third,  on  the  real  accidents  of  the  movements. 

For  the  first  part  will  teach  the  conformation  of  the  whole  universe,  its 
division  into  parts  or  principal  regions;  the  place  of  the  sun  at  its  centre;  the 
number,  magnitude,  and  order  or  position  of  the  planetary  spheres;  and  lastly, 
the  ratios  of  all  the  bodies  of  the  world  to  one  another. 

The  second  part  will  teach  the  revolution  of  the  sun  around  its  axis,  and  its 
effect  in  making  the  planets  revolve;  the  causes  of  the  proportionality  of  the 
movements  among  themselves,  i,e.,  of  the  periodic  [437]  times;  the  immobility 
of  the  centre  of  the  sun  and  the  annual  movement  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth 
around  the  sun;  the  revolution  of  the  Earth  around  its  axis  and  its  effect  in 
making  the  moon  revolve;  the  additional  help  in  moving  the  moon  given  by 
the  light  of  the  sun;  and  what  the  causes  of  the  proportions  between  the  day, 
month,  and  year  are. 

The  third  part  will  disclose  the  causes  of  the  threefold  irregularity  of  the 
altitude,  longitude,  and  latitude  in  the  single  planets — and  how  these  ir¬ 
regularities  are  doubled  in  the  moon  by  the  force  of  the  illumination  from  the 
sun. 

PART  I 

1.  On  the  Principal  Parts  of  the  World 
[438]  What  do  you  judge  to  be  the  lay-out  of  the  principal  parts  of  the  world? 

The  Philosophy  of  Copernicus  reckons  up  the  principal  parts  of  the  world 
by  dividing  the  figure  of  the  world  into  regions.  For  in  the  sphere,  which  is 
the  image  of  God  the  Creator  and  the  Archetype  of  the  world — as  was  proved 
in  Book  i — there  are  three  regions,  symbols  of  the  three  persons  of  the  Holy 


854 


KEPLER 


Trinity — the  centre,  a  symbol  of  the  Father; 
the  surface,  of  the  Son;  and  the  intermediate 
space,  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  So,  too,  just  as 
many  principal  parts  of  the  world  have  been 
made — the  different  parts  in  the  different  re¬ 
gions  of  the  sphere:  the  sun  in  the  centre,  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  on  the  surface,  and 
lastly  the  planetary  system  in  the  region  in¬ 
termediate  between  the  sun  and  the  fixed 
stars. 

I  thought  the  principal  parts  of  the  world  are 
reckoned  to  he  the  heavens  and  the  earth? 

Of  course,  our  uncultivated  eyesight  from 
the  Earth  cannot  show  us  any  other  more  notable  parts — as  was  said  in  Book 
I,  folia  8,  9,  10 — since  we  tread  upon  the  one  with  our  feet  and  are  roofed 
over  by  the  other,  and  since  both  parts  seem  to  be  commingled  and  cemented 
together  in  the  common  limbo  of  the  horizon — like  a  globe  in  which  stars, 
clouds,  birds,  man,  and  the  various  kinds  of  terrestrial  animals  are  enclosed. 

But  we  are  practised  in  the  discipline  which  discloses  the  causes  of  things, 
shakes  off  the  deceptions  of  eyesight,  and  carries  the  mind  higher  and  farther, 
outside  of  the  boundaries  of  eyesight.  Hence  it  should  not  be  surprising  to 
anyone  that  eyesight  should  learn  from  reason,  that  the  pupil  should  learn 
something  new  from  his  master  which  he  did  not  know  before — namely,  that 
the  Earth,  considered  alone  and  by  itself,  should  not  be  reckoned  among  the 
primary  parts  of  the  great  world  but  should  be  added  to  one  of  the  primary 
parts,  i.e.,  to  the  planetary  region,  the  movable  world,  and  that  the  Earth 
has  the  proportionality  of  a  beginning  in  that  part;  and  that  the  sun  in  turn 
should  be  separated  from  the  number  of  stars  and  set  up  as  one  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  parts  of  the  whole  universe.  But  I  am  speaking  now  of  the  Earth  in  so  far 
as  it  is  a  part  of  the  edifice  of  the  world,  and  not  of  the  dignity  of  the  governing 
creatures  which  inhabit  it. 

By  what  properties  do  you  distinguish  these  members  of  the  great  world  from  one 
another? 

The  perfection  of  the  world  consists  in  light,  heat,  movement,  and  the 
harmony  of  movements.  These  are  analogous  to  the  faculties  of  the  soul: 
light,  to  the  sensitive;  heat,  to  the  vital  and  the  natural;  movement,  to  the 
animal;  harmony,  to  the  rational.  And  indeed  the  adornment  [ornatus]  of 
the  world  consists  in  light;  its  life  and  growth,  in  heat;  and,  so  to  speak,  its 
action,  in  movement;  and  its  contemplation — wherein  Aristotle  places  blessed¬ 
ness — in  harmonies.  Now  since  three  things  necessarily  come  together  for 
every  affection,  namely,  the  cause  a  qua^  the  subject  in  quOy  and  the  form  suh 
qua — therefore,  in  respect  to  all  the  aforesaid  affections  of  the  world,  the  sun 
exercises  the  function  of  the  efficient  cause;  the  region  of  the  fixed  stars  that 
of  the  thing  forming,  containing,  and  terminating;  and  the  intermediate 
space,  that  of  the  subject — in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  each  affection. 
Accordingly,  in  all  these  ways  the  sun  is  the  principal  body  of  the  whole  world. 

For  as  regards  light:  since  the  sun  is  very  beautiful  with  light  and  is  as  if  the 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  855 

eye  of  the  world,  like  a  source  of  light  or  very  brilliant  torch,  the  sun  illum¬ 
inates,  paints,  and  adorns  the  bodies  of  the  rest  of  the  world;  the  intermediate 
space  is  not  itself  light-giving,  but  light-filled  and  transparent  and  the  channel 
through  which  light  is  conducted  from  its  source,  and  there  exist  in  this  region 
the  globes  and  the  creatures  upon  which  the  light  of  the  sun  is  poured  and 
which  make  use  of  this  light.  The  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  plays  the  role  of  the 
river-bed  in  which  this  river  of  light  runs,  and  is  as  it  were  an  opaque  and 
illuminated  wall,  reflecting  and  doubling  the  light  of  the  sun:  you  have  very 
properly  likened  it  to  a  lantern,  which  shuts  out  the  winds. 

Thus  in  animals  the  cerebrum,  the  seat  of  the  sensitive  faculty  imparts 
to  the  whole  animal  all  its  senses,  and  by  the  act  of  common  sense  causes  the 
presence  of  all  those  senses  as  if  arousing  them  and  ordering  them  to  keep  watch. 
And  in  another  way,  in  this  simile,  the  sun  is  the  image  of  common  sense; 
the  globes  in  the  intermediate  space  of  [440]  the  sense-organs;  and  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars  of  the  sensible  objects. 

As  regards  heat:  the  sun  is  the  fireplace  [focus]  of  the  world;  the  globes  in 
the  intermediate  space  warm  themselves  at  this  fireplace,  and  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars  keeps  the  heat  from  flowing  out,  like  a  wall  of  the  world,  or  a 
skin  or  garment — to  use  the  metaphor  of  the  Psalm  of  David.  The  sun  is  fire, 
as  the  Pythagoreans  said,  or  a  red-hot  stone  or  mass,  as  Democritus  said — and 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  ice,  or  a  crystalline  sphere,  comparatively  speak¬ 
ing.  But  if  there  is  a  certain  vegetative  faculty  not  only  in  terrestrial  creatures 
but  also  in  the  w^hole  ether  throughout  the  universal  amplitude  of  the  world — 
and  both  the  manifest  energy  of  the  sun  in  warming  and  physical  considerations 
concerning  the  origin  of  comets  lead  us  to  draw  this  inference — it  is  believable 
that  this  faculty  is  rooted  in  the  sun  as  in  the  heart  of  the  world,  and  that 
thence  by  the  oarage  of  light  and  heat  it  spreads  out  into  this  most  wide  space 
of  the  world— in  the  w^ay  that  in  animals  the  seat  of  heat  and  of  the  vital 
faculty  is  in  the  heart  and  the  seat  of  the  vegetative  faculty  in  the  liver,  whence 
these  faculties  by  the  intermingling  of  the  spirits  spread  out  into  the  remaining 
members  of  the  body.  The  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  situated  diametrically 
opposite  on  every  side,  helps  this  vegetative  faculty  by  concentrating  heat, 
as  they  say;  as  it  w^ere  a  kind  of  skin  of  the  world. 

As  regards  movement:  the  sun  is  the  first  cause  of  the  movement  of  the 
planets  and  the  first  mover  of  the  universe,  even  by  reason  of  its  own  body. 
In  the  intermediate  space  the  movables,  i.e.,  the  globes  of  the  planets,  are 
laid  out.  The  region  of  the  fixed  stars  supplies  the  movables  wdth  a  place  and  a 
base  upon  which  the  movables  are,  as  it  were,  supported;  and  movement  is 
understood  as  taking  place  relative  to  its  absolute  immobility.  So  in  animals 
the  cerebellum  is  the  seat  of  the  motor  faculty,  and  the  body  and  its  members 
are  that  w^hich  is  moved.  The  Earth  is  the  base  of  an  animal  body;  the  body, 
the  base  of  the  arm  or  head,  and  the  arm,  the  base  of  the  finger.  And  the 
movement  of  each  part  takes  place  upon  this  base  as  upon  something  immovable. 

Finally,  as  regards  the  harmony  of  the  movements:  the  sun  occupies  that 
place  in  w^hich  alone  the  movements  of  the  planets  [441]  give  the  appearance 
of  magnitudes  harmonically  proportioned  [contemperatarum].  The  planets 
themselves,  moving  in  the  intermediate  space,  exhibit  the  subject  or  terms, 
wherein  the  harmonies  are  found;  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  or  the  circle 
of  the  zodiac,  exhibits  the  measures  whereby  the  magnitude  of  the  apparent 


856 


KEPLER 


movements  is  known.  So  too  in  man  there  is  the  intellect,  which  abstracts 
universals  and  forms  numbers  and  proportions,  as  things  which  are  not  outside 
of  intellect;  but  individuals  [individua]^  received  inwardly  through  the  senses 
are  the  foundation  of  universals;  and  indivisible  [individuae]  and  discrete 
unities,  of  numbers;  and  real  terms  of  proportions.  Finally,  memory,  divided 
as  it  were  into  compartments  of  quantities  and  times,  like  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars,  is  the  storehouse  and  repository  of  sensations.  And  further,  there 
is  never  judgment  of  sensations  except  in  the  cerebrum;  and  the  effect  of  joy 
never  arises  from  a  sense-perception  except  in  the  heart. 

Accordingly,  the  aforesaid  vegetating  corresponds  to  the  nutritive  faculty 
of  animals  and  plants;  heating  corresponds  to  the  vital  faculty;  movement, 
to  the  animal  faculty;  light,  to  the  sensitive;  and  harmony,  to  the  rational. 
Wherefore  most  rightly  is  the  sun  held  to  be  the  heart  of  the  world  and  the 
seat  of  reason  and  life,  and  the  principal  one  among  three  primary  members 
of  the  world;  and  these  praises  are  true  in  the  philosophic  sense,  since  the 
poets  honour  the  sun  as  the  king  of  the  stars,  but  the  Sidonians,  Chaldees, 
and  Persians — by  an  idiom  of  language  observed  in  German  too — as  the  queen 
of  the  heavens,  and  the  Platonists,  as  the  king  of  intellectual  fire. 

These  three  members  of  the  world  do  not  seem  to  correspond  with  sufficient  neatness 
to  the  three  regions  of  a  sphere:  for  the  centre  is  a  pointy  hut  the  sun  is  a  body;  and 
the  outer  surface  is  understood  to  he  continuous y  yet  the  region  of  fixed  stars  does 
not  shine  as  a  totality j  but  is  everywhere  sown  with  shining  points  discrete  from 
one  another;  and  finally y  the  intermediate  part  in  a  sphere  fills  the  whole  expanse, 
but  in  the  world  the  space  between  the  sun  [442]  and  the  fixed  stars  is  not  seen  to 
be  set  in  motion  as  a  whole. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  question  indicates  the  neatest  answer  concerning 
the  three  parts  of  the  world.  For  since  a  point  could  not  be  clothed  or  ex¬ 
pressed  except  by  some  body — and  thus  the  body  which  is  in  the  centre  would 
fail  of  the  indivisibility  of  the  centre — it  was  proper  that  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  should  fail  of  the  continuity  of  a  spherical  surface,  and  should  burst 
open  in  the  very  minute  points  of  the  innumerable  fixed  stars;  and  that  finally 
the  middle  space  should  not  be  wholly  occupied  by  movement  and  the  other 
affections,  nor  be  completely  transparent,  but  slightly  more  dense,  since  it 
could  not  be  altogether  empty  but  had  to  be  filled  by  some  body. 

Are  there  solid  spheres  [orbes]  whereon  the  planets  are  carried?  And  are  there 
empty  spaces  between  the  spheres?  ^ 

Tycho  Brahe  disproved  the  solidity  of  the  spheres  by  three  reasons:  the 
first  from  the  movement  of  comets;  the  second  from  the  fact  that  light  is  not 
refracted;  the  third  from  the  ratio  of  the  spheres. 

For  if  spheres  were  solid,  the  comets  would  not  be  seen  to  cross  from  one 
sphere  into  another,  for  they  would  be  prevented  by  the  solidity;  but  they 
cross  from  one  sphere  into  another,  as  Brahe  shows. 

From  light  thus:  since  the  spheres  are  eccentric,  and  since  the  Earth  and  its 
surface — where  the  eye  is — are  not  situated  at  the  center  of  each  sphere;  there¬ 
fore  if  the  spheres  were  solid,  that  is  to  say  far  more  dense  than  that  very 
limpid  ether,  then  the  rays  of  the  stars  would  be  refracted  before  they  reached 
our  air,  as  optics  teaches;  and  so  the  planet  would  appear  irregularly  and  in 


857 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

places  far  different  from  those  which  could  be  predicted  by  the  astronomer. 

The  third  reason  comes  from  the  principles  of  Brahe  himself;  for  they  bear 
witness,  as  do  the  Copernican,  that  Mars  is  sometimes  nearer  the  Earth  than 
the  sun  is.  But  Brahe  could  not  believe  this  interchange  to  be  possible  [443]  if 
the  spheres  were  solid,  since  the  sphere  of  Mars  would  have  to  intersect  the 
sphere  of  the  sun. 

Then  what  is  there  in  the  'planetary  regions  besides  the  planets? 

Nothing  except  the  ether  which  is  common  to  the  spheres  and  to  the  inter¬ 
vals:  it  is  very  limpid  and  yields  to  the  movable  bodies  no  less  readily  than  it 
yields  to  the  lights  of  the  sun  and  stars,  so  that  the  lights  can  come  down  to  us. 

If  it  is  ether ^  then  it  will  be  a  material  body  having  density.  Therefore  will  not  Us 
matter  resist  the  movable  bodies  somewhat? 

On  the  contrary,  the  ether  is  more  rarefied  than  our  air,  since  it  is  very 
pure,  being  spread  over  a  space  which  is  practically  immense. 

How  do  you  prove  this? 

In  optics,  by  refractions.  For  our  air,  which  is  contiguous  to  the  ether, 
causes  a  refraction  of  approximately  30'.  But  water  contiguous  to  air  causes 
a  refraction  of  approximately  48°,  whence  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  water 
to  air,  and  of  air  to  ether  is  somehow  established  by  taking  the  cubes  of  the 
numbers.  For  30'  is  contained  approximately  100  times  in  48°;  and  in  squares, 
that  is  10,000  times,  and  in  cubes  1,000,000  times.  Therefore  air  is  that  many 
times  more  rarefied  than  water,  and  ether  than  air. 

Nevertheless  the  matter  of  the  ether  is  not  absolutely  null:  are  the  stars  therefore  still 
impeded  by  it? 

We  can  without  any  inconvenience  grant  such  a  small  impediment  of  move¬ 
ment  and  such  a  small  resistance  of  the  ether  to  the  movable  bodies,  just  as  even 
before  this  it  must  be  granted  that  they  offer  some  resistance  on  account  of  the 
proper  matter  of  their  bodies,  as  will  be  made  clear  below.  And  what  if  no  re¬ 
sistance  should  be  granted  to  the  ether,  [444]  since  it  is  fairly  credible  that  the 
ether  which  surrounds  the  movable  globe  the  most  closely  accompanies  the 
globe  on  account  of  the  very  great  limpidity  [of  the  ether]? 

2.  On  the  Place  of  the  Sun  at  the  Centre  of  the  World 
By  what  arguments  do  you  affirm  that  the  sun  is  situated  at  the  centre  of  the  world? 

The  very  ancient  Pythagoreans  and  the  Italian  philosophers  supply  us  mth 
some  of  those  arguments  in  Aristotle  (fin  the  Heavens^  Book,  ii.  Chapter  13) ;  and 
these  arguments  are  drawn  from  the  dignity  of  the  sun  and  that  of  the  place, 
and  from  the  sun^s  ofi5ce  of  vivification  and  illumination  in  the  world. 

State  the  first  argument  from  dignity. 

This  is  the  reasoning  of  the  Pythagoreans  according  to  Aristotle:  the  more 
worthy  place  is  due  to  the  most  worthy  and  most  precious  body.  Now  the  sun — 
for  which  they  used  the  word  “fire,”  as  sects  purposely  hiding  their  teachings — 
is  worthier  than  the  Earth  and  is  the  most  worthy  and  most  precious  body  in 
the  whole  world,  as  was  shown  a  little  before.  But  the  surface  and  centre,  or  mid¬ 
point,  are  the  two  extremities  of  a  sphere.  Therefore  one  of  these  places  is  due 


858 


KEPLER 

to  the  sun.  But  not  the  surface;  for  that  which  is  the  principal  body  in  the  whole 
world  should  watch  over  all  the  bodies;  but  the  centre  is  suited  for  this  function, 
and  so  they  used  to  call  it  the  Watchtower  of  Jupiter.  And  so  it  is  not  proper 
that  the  Earth  should  be  in  the  middle.  For  this  place  belongs  to  the  sun,  while 
the  Earth  is  borne  around  the  centre  of  its  yearly  movement. 

What  answer  does  Aristotle  make  to  this  argument? 

1.  He  says  that  they  assume  something  which  is  not  granted,  namely,  that 
the  centre  [445]  of  magnitude,  Le.,  of  the  sphere,  and  the  centre  of  the  things, 
i.e.j  of  the  body  of  the  world,  and  so  of  nature,  i.e.,  of  informing  or  vivifying,  are 
the  same.  But  just  as  in  animals  the  centre  of  vivification  and  the  centre  of  the 
body  are  not  the  same — for  the  heart  is  inside  but  is  not  equally  distant  from 
the  surface — we  should  think  in  the  same  way  about  the  heavens,  and  we  should 
not  fear  for  the  safety  of  the  wKole  universe  or  place  a  guard  at  the  centre; 
rather,  we  should  ask  what  sort  of  body  the  heart  of  the  world  of  the  centre  or 
vivification  is  and  in  what  place  in  the  world  it  is  situated. 

2.  He  tries  to  show  the  dissimilarity  between  the  midpart  of  the  nature  and 
the  midpart  of  place.  For  the  midpart  of  nature,  or  the  most  worthy  and  pre¬ 
cious  body,  has  the  proportionality  of  a  beginning.  But  in  the  midpart  of  place  is 
the  last,  in  quantity  considered  metaphysically,  rather  than  the  first  or  the  be¬ 
ginning.  F or  that  which  is  the  midpart  of  quantity,  i.e.,  is  the  farthest  in,  is  bound¬ 
ed  or  circumscribed.  But  the  limits  are  that  which  bounds  or  circumscribes.  Now 
that  which  goes  around  on  the  outside,  and  limits  and  encloses,  is  of  greater  ex¬ 
cellence  and  worth  than  that  which  is  on  the  inside  and  is  bounded:  for  matter  is 
among  those  things  which  are  bounded,  limited,  and  contained ;  but  form,  or  the 
essence  of  any  creature,  is  of  the  number  of  those  things  which  limit,  circum¬ 
scribe,  and  comprehend.  He  thinks  that  he  has  proved  in  this  way  that  not  so 
much  the  midpart  of  the  world  as  the  extremity  belongs  to  the  sun,  or  as  he 
understood  it,  to  the  fire  of  the  Pythagoreans. 

How  do  you  rebut  this  refutation  of  Aristotle^ s? 

1.  Even  if  it  be  true  that  not  in  all  creatures  and  least  in  animals  is  the  prin¬ 
cipal  part  of  the  whole  creature  at  the  centre  of  the  whole  mass:  however,  since 
we  are  arguing  about  the  world,  nothing  is  more  probable  than  this.  For  the 
figure  of  the  world  is  spherical,  and  that  of  an  animal  is  not.  For  animals  need 
organs  extending  outside  themselves,  with  which  they  stand  upon  the  ground, 
and  upon  which  they  may  move,  and  with  which  they  may  take  within  them¬ 
selves  the  food,  drink,  [446]  forms  of  things,  and  sounds  received  from  outside. 
The  world  on  the  contrary,  is  alone,  having  nothing  outside,  resting  on  itself 
immobile  as  a  wKole;  and  it  alone  is  all  things.  And  so  there  is  no  reason  why  the 
heart  of  the  world  should  be  elsewhere  than  in  the  centre  in  order  that  what  it 
is,  viz.,  the  heart,  might  be  equally  distant  from  all  the  farthest  parts  of  the 
world,  that  is  to  say,  by  an  interval  everywhere  equal. 

2.  Furthermore,  as  regards  his  telling  us  to  ask  what  sort  of  body  the  prin¬ 
cipal  part  of  the  whole  universe  is:  he  is  confused  by  that  riddle  of  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  and  believes  that  they  claim  that  this  element  is  principal.  He  is  not 
wrong  however  in  telling  us  to  do  that.  And  accordingly  we,  following  the  advice 
of  Aristotle,  have  picked  out  the  sun;  and  neither  the  Pythagoreans  in  their  mys¬ 
tical  sense  nor  Aristotle  himself  are  against  us.  And  when  we  ask  in  what  place 


859 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

in  the  world  the  sun  is  situated,  Copernicus,  as  being  skilled  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  heavens,  shows  us  that  the  sun  is  in  the  midpart.  The  others  who  exhibit 
its  place  as  elsewhere  are  not  forced  to  do  this  by  astronomical  arguments  but 
by  certain  others  of  a  metaphysical  character  drawn  from  the  consideration  of 
the  Earth  and  its  place.  Both  we  and  they  set  a  value  upon  these  arguments; 
and  they  themselves  too  by  means  of  these  arguments  do  not  show  but  seek  the 
place  of  the  sun.  So  if  when  seeking  the  place  of  the  sun  in  the  world,  we  find 
that  it  is  the  centre  of  the  world;  we  are  doing  just  as  Aristotle;  and  his  refuta¬ 
tion  does  not  apply  to  us. 

3.  As  regards  the  fact  that  Aristotle,  directly  contradicting  the  Pythagoreans 
ascribes  vileness  to  the  centre,  he  does  that  contrary  to  the  nature  of  figures  and 
contrary  to  their  geometrical  or  metaphysical  consideration. 

For  above  in  Book  i,  the  centre  was  absolutely  not  last  in  the  sphere,  but 
wholly  its  most  regular  beginning  of  generation  in  the  mind,  and  it  manifests  the 
likeness  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  in  shadowing  forth  God  the  Father,  who  is  the 
First  Person. 

4.  Finally  it  can  be  seen  by  anyone  that  he  who  judges  as  a  physicist  of  those 
things  which  are  geometrical  does  not  do  rightly,  unless  what  he  questions  con¬ 
cerning  matter  and  form  [447]  had  been  taken  over  by  analogy  from  a  con¬ 
sideration  of  geometrical  figures.  For  indeed,  in  solid  quantities  the  inward  cor¬ 
poreality,  everywhere  spread  out  equally  and  not  by  itself  partaking  of  any 
figure,  is  a  true  image  of  matter  in  physical  things;  but  the  outward  figure  of  the 
corporeality,  composed  of  fixed  surfaces  which  bound  the  solidity,  represent  the 

form  in  physical  things.  And  so  this  com¬ 
parison  is  permitted  to  him  simply;  but  it  ap¬ 
pears  from  that  that  he  plays  equivocally 
with  ‘ ‘midpart [medium].  For  though  the 
Pythagoreans  spoke  of  the  inmost  point  of  the 
sphere  [as  the  midpart  or  centre];  he  under¬ 
stood  the  whole  space  within  the  surface  as 
comprehended  by  the  word  “midpart.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  we  must  grant  him  the  victory  as 
regards  the  space,  but  it  is  a  useless  victory; 
for  the  Pythagoreans  and  Copernicus  win  as 
regards  the  midpart  of  all  this  space.  For  even 
if  the  midpart  as  a  space  does  not  deserve  the 
name  of  limit;  nevertheless  as  centre  it  does 
deserve  this  name.  And  in  this  respect  [448] 
it  must  be  added  to  the  forms  and  boundaries:  since  above  (in  Book  i)  the  centre 
was  the  origin  of  generation  of  the  sphere,  metaphysically  considered. 

Prove  by  means  of  the  office  of  the  sun  that  the  centre  is  due  to  it. 

That  has  already  been  partly  done  in  rebutting  the  Aristotelian  refutation. 
For  (1)  if  the  whole  world,  which  is  spherical,  is  equally  in  need  of  the  light  of 
the  sun  and  its  heat,  then  it  would  be  best  for  the  sun  to  be  at  the  midpart, 
whence  light  and  heat  may  be  distributed  to  all  the  regions  of  the  world.  And 
that  takes  place  more  uniformly  and  rightly,  with  the  sun  resting  at  the  centre 
than  with  the  sun  moving  around  the  centre.  For  if  the  sun  approached  certain 
regions  for  the  sake  of  warming  them,  it  would  draw  away  from  the  opposite 


860 


KEPLER 

regions  and  would  cause  alternations  while  it  itself  remained  perfectly  simple. 
And  it  is  surprising  that  some  people  use  jokingly  the  similitude  of  light  at  the 
centre  of  the  lamp,  as  it  is  a  very  apt  similitude,  least  fitted  to  satirize  this 
opinion  but  suited  rather  to  painting  the  power  of  this  argument. 

(2)  But  a  special  argument  is  woven  together  concerning  light,  which  pre¬ 
supposes  fitness,  not  necessity.  Imagine  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  as  a  concave 
mirror:  you  know  that  the  eye  placed  at  the  centre  of  such  a  mirror  gazes  upon 
itself  everjrvvhere:  and  if  there  is  a  light  at  the  centre,  it  is  everywhere  reflected 
at  right  angles  from  the  concave  surface  and  the  reflected  rays  come  together 
again  at  the  centre.  And  in  fact  that  can  occur  at  no  other  point  in  the  concave 
mirror  except  at  the  centre.  Therefore,  since  the  sun  is  the  source  of  light  and 
eye  of  the  world,  the  centre  is  due  to  it  in  order  that  the  sun — as  the  Father  in 
the  divine  symbolizing — may  contemplate  itself  in  the  whole  concave  surface — 
which  is  the  symbol  of  God  the  Son — and  take  pleasure  in  the  image  of  itself, 
and  illuminate  itself  by  shining  and  inflame  itself  by  warming.  These  melodious 
little  verses  apply  to  the  sun: 

Thou  who  dost  gaze  at  thy  face 
and  dost  everywhere  leap  hack 
from  the  navel  of  the  upper  air 
0  gushing  up  of  the  gleams  flowing 
through  the  glass  emptinessy  Sun, 
who  dost  again  swallow  thy  reflections. 

Nevertheless  Copernicus  did  not  place  the  sun  exactly  at  the  center  of  the  world? 

It  was  the  intention  of  Copernicus  to  show  that  this  node  common  to  all  the 
planetary  systems — of  which  node  we  shall  speak  below — is  as  far  distant  from 
the  centre  of  the  sun  as  the  ancients  made  the  eccentricity  of  the  sun  to  be.  He 
established  this  node  as  the  centre  of  the  world,  and  was  compelled  to  do  so  by 
no  astronomical  demonstration  but  on  account  of  fitness  alone,  in  order  that 
this  node  and,  as  it  were,  the  common  centre  of  the  mobile  spheres  would  not 
differ  from  the  very  centre  of  the  world.  But  if  anyone  else,  in  applying  this 
same  fitness,  wished  to  contend  that  we  should  rather  fear  to  make  the  sun  differ 
from  the  centre  of  the  world,  and  that  it  was  sufficient  that  this  node  of  the 
region  of  the  moving  planets  should  be  situated  very  near,  even  if  not  exactly  at 
the  centre — anyone  who  wished  to  make  this  contention,  I  say,  would  have 
raised  no  disturbance  in  Copernican  astronomy.  So,  firstly,  the  last  arguments 
concerning  the  place  of  the  sun  at  the  centre  are  nevertheless  unaffected  by  this 
opinion  of  Copernicus  concerning  the  distance  of  this  node  from  the  sun.  But 
secondly  we  must  not  agree  to  the  opinion  of  Copernicus  that  this  node  is  distant 
from  the  centre  of  the  sun.  For  the  common  node  of  the  region  of  the  mobile 
planets  is  in  the  sun,  as  will  be  proved  below;  and  so  by  some  probable  arguments 
either  the  one  or  the  other  point  is  set  down  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars,  and  by  the  same  arguments  the  other  point  is  brought  to  the  same 
place,  even  with  the  approval  of  Copernicus. 

3.  On  the  Order  of  the  Movable  Spheres 

How  are  the  planets  divided  among  themselves? 

Into  the  primary  and  the  secondary.  The  primary  planets  are  those  whose 
bodies  are  borne  around  the  sun,  as  will  be  shown  below;  the  secondary  planets 


861 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

are  those  whose  own  circles  are  arranged  not  around  the  sun  but  around  one  of 
the  primary  planets  and  who  also  share  in  the  movement  of  the  primary  planet 
around  the  sun.  Saturn  is  believed  to  have  two  such  secondary  planets  and  to 
draw  them  around  with  itself:  they  come  into  sight  now  and  then  with  the  help 
of  a  telescope.  Jupiter  has  four  such  planets  around  itself:  Z),  Fj  H.  The  Earth 
{B)  has  one  (C)  called  the  moon.  It  is  not  yet  clear  in  the  case  of  Mars,  Venus, 
and  Mercury  whether  they  too  have  such  a  companion  or  satellite. 

Then  how  many  planets  are  to  be  considered  in  the  doctrine  on  schemata? 

No  more  than  seven:  the  six  so-called  primary  planets:  (1)  Saturn,  (2) 
Jupiter,  (3)  Mars,  (4)  the  Earth — the  sun  to  eyesight,  (5)  Venus,  (6)  Mercury, 

and  (7)  only  one  of  the  secondary  planets,  the 
moon,  because  it  alone  revolves  around  our 
home,  the  Earth;  the  other  secondary  planets 
do  not  concern  us  who  inhabit  the  Earth,  [451] 
and  we  cannot  behold  them  without  excel¬ 
lent  telescopes. 

In  what  order  are  the  planets  laid  out:  are  they 
in  the  same  heaven  or  in  different  heavens? 

Eyesight  places  them  all  in  that  farthest 
and  highest  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and 
opines  that  they  move  among  the  fixed  stars. 
But  reason  persuades  men  of  all  times  and 
of  all  sects  that  the  case  is  different.  For  if  the 
centres  of  all  the  planets  were  in  the  same 
sphere  and  since  we  see  that  to  sight  they 
are  fairly  often  in  conjunction  with  one  an¬ 
other:  accordingly  one  planet  would  impede  the  other,  and  their  movements 
could  not  be  regular  and  perpetual. 

But  the  reasoning  of  Copernicus  and  ancient  Aristarchus,  which  relies  upon 
observations,  proves  that  the  regions  of  the  single  planets  are  separated  by  very 
great  intervals  from  one  another  and  from  the  fixed  stars. 

What  is  the  difference  here  between  the  reasoning  of  Copernicus  and  that  of  the 
ancients? 

1.  The  reasoning  of  the  ancients  is  merely  probable,  but  the  demonstration 
of  Copernicus,  arising  from  his  principles,  brings  necessity. 

2.  They  teach  only  that  there  is  not  more  than  one  planet  in  any  one  sphere: 
Copernicus  further  adds  how  great  a  distance  any  planet  must  necessarily 
be  above  another. 

3.  Now  the  ancients  built  up  one  heaven  upon  another,  like  layers  in  a  wall, 
or,  to  use  a  closer  analogy,  like  onion  skins:  the  inner  supports  the  outer; 
for  they  thought  that  all  intervals  had  to  be  filled  by  spheres  and  that  the 
higher  sphere  must  be  set  down  as  being  only  as  great  as  the  lower  sphere  of  a 
known  magnitude  allows;  and  that  is  only  a  material  conformation.  Copernicus, 
having  measured  by  his  observation  the  intervals  between  the  single  spheres, 
showed  that  there  is  such  a  great  distance  between  two  planetary  spheres, 
that  it  is  unbehevable  that  it  should  be  filled  with  spheres.  And  so  this  lay-out 


862  KEPLER 

of  his  urges  the  speculative  mind  to  spurn  matter  and  the  contiguity  of  spheres 
and  to  look  towards  the  investigation  of  the  formal  lay-out  or  archetype,  with 
reference  to  which  the  intervals  were  made. 

4.  The  ancients,  with  their  material  structure,  were  forced  to  make  the 
planetary  or  mobile  world  many  parts  greater  than  Copernicus  was  forced 
to  do  with  his  formal  lay-out.  But  Copernicus,  on  the  contrary,  made  the 
region  of  the  mobile  planets  not  very  large,  while  he  made  the  motionless 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  immense.  The  ancients  do  not  make  it  much  greater 
than  the  sphere  of  Saturn. 

5.  The  ancients  do  not  explain  and  confirm  as  they  desire  the  reason  for 
their  lay-out;  Copernicus  establishes  his  lay-out  excellently  by  reasons. 

What  do  you  mean  by  the  reasons  for  the  lay-out  of  the  spheres ^  and  how  is  Coper¬ 
nicus  outstanding  in  this  respect? 

Aristotle  teaches  in  On  the  Heavens  (Book  ii.  Chapter  10)  that  nothing  is  more 
consonant  with  reason  than  that  the  times  of  revolution  of  each  planet  should 
correspond  to  the  altitude  or  amplitude  of  its  sphere.  Now  for  the  ancients, 
the  highest  planet  was  the  same  as  the  slowest,  namely,  Saturn,  because  it 
takes  30  years.  Jupiter  follows  it  in  place  and  in  time,  and  takes  2  years; 
Mars,  which  takes  less  than  2  years,  follows  Jupiter.  But  for  the  ancients,  this 
proportionality  was  changed  in  the  remaining  planets.  For  unless  you  grant 
to  the  Earth  an  annual  movement  around  the  sun,  then  the  sun,  Venus,  and 
Mercury — three  distinct  planets — have  the  same  time  of  revolution  of  a  year, 
nevertheless  they  give  them  different  spheres:  the  upper  to  the  sun,  the  middle 
to  Venus,  and  the  third  to  Mercury.  Finally  they  give  the  lowest  place  to  the 
moon,  as  it  takes  the  shortest  time,  namely  a  month. 

But  Copernicus,  postulating  that  the  Earth  moves  around  the  sun,  keeps 
the  same  proportion  of  movement  and  time  in  all  the  planets.  For  him  the  sun 


Schema  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  and 
the  Earth 


[454]  Schema  of  the  Earth,  Venus,  and 
Mercury,  with  orbit  of  the  Earth  en¬ 
larged 


is  at  the  centre  of  the  world  and  is  thus  the  farthest  in;  it  is  without  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  centre,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  motionless  with  respect  to  the  centre 
and  the  axis.  But  a  few  years  after  this,  the  body  [453]  of  the  sun  was  per- 


863 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

ceived  to  move  around  its  motionless  axis  more  quickly  than  the  space  of  one 
month.  Mercury,  the  nearest,  circles  around  the  sun  in  the  smallest  sphere 
and  completes  its  revolution  in  3  months;  around  this  sphere  moves  Venus 
in  a  larger  sphere  and  in  a  longer  period  of  time,  viz.^  7}/^  months.  Around  the 
heaven  of  Venus  moves  the  Earth  with  its  satellite  the  moon — for  the  moon 
is  a  secondary  planet,  whose  proportionality  is  not  counted  among  the  primary 
planets — and  it  revolves  in  a  period  of  12  months.  After,  follow  Mars,  Jupiter, 
and  Saturn,  as  with  the  ancients,  each  with  its  satellite.  After  Saturn,  comes 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars — and  it  is  distant  by  such  an  immense  interval 
that  it  is  absolutely  at  rest. 

What  measure  does  Copernicus  use  in  measuring  the  intervals  of  the  single  planets? 

We  must  use  a  measure  so  proportioned  that  the  other  spheres  can  be  com¬ 
pared,  a  measure  very  closely  related  to  us  and  thus  somehow  known  to  us: 
such  is  the  amplitude  of  the  sphere  whereon  the  centre  of  the  Earth  and  the 
little  sphere  of  the  moon  revolve — or  its  semidiameter,  the  distance  of  the  Earth 
from  the  sun.  This  distance,  like  a  measuring  rod,  is  suitable  for  the  business. 
For  the  Earth  is  our  home;  and  from  it  we  measure  the  distances  of  the  heavens; 
and  it  occupies  the  middle  position  among  the  planets  and  for  many  reasons — 
on  which  below — it  obtains  the  proportionality  of  a  beginning  among  them. 
[455]  But  the  sun,  by  the  evidence  and  judgment  of  our  sight,  is  the  principal 
planet.  But  by  the  vote  of  reason  cast  above,  the  sun  is  the  heart  of  the  region 
of  moving  planets  proposed  for  measurement.  And  so  our  measuring  rod  has 
two  very  signal  termini,  the  Earth  and  the  sun. 

How  great  therefore  are  the  intervals  between  the  single  spheres? 

The  Copernican  demonstrations  show  that  the  distance  of  Saturn  is  a  little 
less  than  ten  times  the  Earth's  from  the  sun;  that  of  Jupiter,  five  times;  that 
of  Mars,  one  and  one-half  times;  that  of  Venus,  three-quarters;  and  that  of 
Mercury,  approximately  one-third. 

And  so  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  of  Saturn  is  less  than  twice  the  length 
of  its  neighbour  Jupiter's;  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  is  three  times  that  of  the 
lower  planet  Mars;  the  diameter  of  Mars  is  one  and  one-half  times  that  of  the 
terrestrial  sphere  placed  around  the  sun;  the  diameter  of  the  Earth's  sphere 
is  more  than  one  and  one-third  that  of  Venus;  and  that  of  Venus  is  approxi¬ 
mately  five-thirds  or  eight-fifths  that  of  IMercury.  However,  it  should  be  noted 
that  the  ratios  of  the  distances  are  different  in  other  parts  of  the  orbits,  es¬ 
pecially  in  the  case  of  Mars  and  Mercury. 

What  is  the  cause  of  the  planetary  intervals  upon  which  the  times  of  the  periods 
follow? 

The  archetypal  cause  of  the  intervals  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  number  of 
the  primary  planets,  being  six. 

I  implore  you^  you  do  not  hope  to  be  able  to  give  the  reasons  for  the  number  of  the 
planets,  do  you? 

This  worry  has  been  resolved,  with  the  help  of  God,  not  badly.  Geometrical 
reasons  are  co-eternal  with  God — and  in  them  there  is  first  the  difference 
between  the  curved  and  the  straight  line.  Above  (in  Book  i)  it  was  said  that 


864  KEPLER 

the  curved  somehow  bears  a  likeness  to  God;  the  straight  line  represents 
creatures.  And  first  in  the  adornment  of  the  world,  the  farthest  region  of  the 
fixed  stars  has  been  made  spherical,  in  that  geometrical  likeness  of  God, 
because  as  a  corporeal  God — worshipped  by  the  gentiles  under  the  name  of 
Jupiter — it  had  to  contain  all  the  remaining  things  in  itself.  Accordingly, 
rectilinear  [456]  magnitudes  pertained  to  the  inmost  contents  of  the  farthest 
sphere;  and  the  first  and  most  beautiful  magnitudes  to  the  primary  contents. 
But  among  rectilinear  magnitudes  the  first,  the  most  perfect,  the  most  beauti¬ 
ful,  and  most  simple  are  those  which  are  called  the  five  regular  solids.  [457] 
More  than  2,000  years  ago  Pythagoreans  said  that  these  five  were  the  figures 
of  the  world,  as  they  believed  that  the  four  elements  and  the  heavens — the 
fifth  essence — were  conformed  to  the  archetype  for  these  five  figures. 

But  the  truer  reason  for  these  figures  including  one  another  mutually  is  in 
order  that  these  five  figures  may  conform  to  the  intervals  of  the  spheres.  There¬ 
fore,  if  there  are  five  spherical  intervals,  it  is  necessary  that  there  be  six  spheres: 
just  as  with  four  linear  intervals,  there  must  necessarily  be  five  digits. 

What  are  these  five  regular  figures? 

The  cube,  tetrahedron,  dodecahedron,  icosahedron,  and  octahedron. 


How  are  these  figures  divided^  and  into  what  classes? 

The  cube,  tetrahedron,  and  dodecahedron  are  primary;  the  octahedron  and 
the  icosahedron  are  secondary. 


Why  do  you  make  the  former  primary  and  the  latter  secondary? 

The  three  former  figures  have  a  prior  origin, 
and  the  most  simple  angle  (f.e.,  trilinear),  and 
their  own  proper  planes.  The  two  latter  have 
their  origin  in  the  primary  figures,  and  a  more 
composite  angle  made  from  many  lines,  and 
borrowed  planes. 

What  is  the  order  of  the  primary  figures? 

They  are  said  to  be  primary  merely  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  secondary;  but  even  among  them¬ 
selves  they  have  this  order  of  priority:  cube, 
tetrahedron,  dodecahedron.  For  in  those  fig- 
gures  there  appears  the  first  of  all  metaphysical 
oppositions,  that  between  the  same  and  the 
other,  or  the  different.  Sameness  is  seen  in  the 
cube,  and  difference  in  the  remaining  two  fig¬ 
ures;  and  between  these  figures  there  is  also 
the  first  geometrical  contrariety,  namely,  the 
contrariety  between  the  greater-than  and  less- 
than.  For  the  cube  is  [458]  the  thing  itself 
[res  ipsa]y  the  tetrahedron  is  less  than  the  cube, 
and  the  dodecahedron  is  greater  than  the 
cube;  or,  the  cube  is  the  first  solid  figure  gener¬ 
ated,  the  tetrahedron  is  the  first  of  the  solid  figures  cut  out  of  the  cube,  and  the 
dodecahedron  is  the  first  of  the  composite  figures  made  by  adding  to,  and  cover- 


865 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

ing  over,  the  cube.  This  same  idea  is  dominant  in  their  planes:  the  tetragon,  the 
triangle,  and  the  pentagon.  For  the  tetragon  is  generated  first  of  all  by  drawing 
the  most  simple  and  regular  lines,  as  was  said  in  Book  i;  and  it  is  broken  up  into 
two  triangles;  but  the  pentagon  is  composed  of  three  suitable  triangles. 

Explain  the  generation,  primacy,  and  form  of  the  cube. 

Rectilinear  magnitudes  have  an  origin  visible  to  the  mind;  the  spherical,  as 
was  said  above,  brings  a  certain  character  of  eternity  or  of  eternal  generation. 
For  with  a  sphere  postulated,  the  point  at  its  centre  is  postulated,  and  so  are  the 
infinite  points  on  its  surface.  Therefore,  line  arises  from  the  flowing  of  point  to 
point;  surface  arises  from  the  sideways  flowing  of  the  line;  and  body,  from  the 
sideways  flowing  of  the  surface.  If  the  flowing  of  the  point  is  straight  and  also 
the  shortest,  there  arises  a  straight  line  bounded  by  two  points.  If  the  flowing 
of  the  straight  line  is  such  that  all  its  points  flow  equally,  a  parallelogram  arises 
bounded  by  four  lines ;  and  if  the  parallelogram  flows  in  the  same  way,  the  paral¬ 
lelepiped  arises,  bounded  by  six  planes.  Again,  if  the  flowing  of  the  line  is  equal 
to  the  flowing  straight  line,  and  the  line  along  which  the  flowing  takes  place 
makes  any  angle  with  the  flowing  line  except  a  right  angle,  there  arises  the  plane 
called  the  rhomboid,  whose  sides  are  equal.  But  if  the  line  makes  a  right  angle, 
it  is  a  square  which  arises.  And  if  the  square  also  flows,  there  arises  the  cube, 
the  six  planes  of  which  are  all  squares  and  are  thus  equal  to  one  another.  Now 
the  shortest  is  prior  to  the  crooked;  and  the  equal  and  similar  is  prior  to  the  un¬ 
equal  and  dissimilar,  and  the  straight,  or  right,  to  the  olbique.  Therefore,  in  this 
way  among  the  lines  generated,  the  straight  line  is  prior — for  the  circle  is  pos¬ 
terior  to  the  plane,  and  the  plane  to  the  straight  line;  and  among  surfaces  the 
square  is  prior.  Thus  among  magnitudes,  that  which  exists  perfectly  [459]  {i.e., 
with  three  dimensions),  that  is  to  say,  the  cube,  is  shown  to  be  first  among 
bodies. 

Explain  the  primacy  of  the  tetrahedron  among  the  segments,  and  the  mode  of  section 
of  the  cube,  and  its  form. 

By  subtracting  from  the  bodies,  so  that  something  lesser  exists,  the  other  solid 

figures  usually  come  to  be.  We 
must  judge  that  the  first  of  them 
is  the  solid  figure  which  exists  if 
the  first  figure  generated  {viz., 
the  cube)  is  cut  most  simply  and 
most  equally.  But  the  section — 
among  the  sections  which  desig¬ 
nate  a  new  plane  figure — is  not 
equal  or  more  simple  than  when 
you  cut  through  four  angles  of 
the  cube  completely.  For  you 
are  cutting  out  the  same  number 
of  equilateral  tetrahedrons — and  the  single  tetrahedrons  A,  C,  and  D  have  a 
solid  right  angle  B  above  the  triangular  base.  There  remains  as  it  were  the 
bowels  of  the  cube,  namely,  the  fifth  tetrahedron,  similar  to  itself  in  all  respects, 
and  bounded  by  four  equilateral  triangles.  But  if  you  make  the  section  of  the 
cube  of  which  I  have  spoken  in  Book  i,  there  will  not  be  five  but  six  irregular 


866 


KEPLER 


tetrahedrons.  So  the  tetrahedron  is  the  first  figure  coming  from  the  decreasing 
of  the  bodies.  But  it  is  a  third  part  of  the  body  of  the  cube  cut,  and  any  angle 
cut  away,  such  as  BACD,  is  the  skth  part  of  the  same  whole. 

[460]  Explain  the  origin  of  the  dodecahedron  by  addition,  and  give  the  reasons  for 
its  posteriority  among  the  three  primary  bodies,  and  its  priority  among  the  bodies 
generated  by  addition. 

As  in  subtracting  from  the  cube,  four  planes  are  constructed  in  place  of  the 
four  angles  of  the  cube  which  have  been  cut  off; 
four  angles  remain  to  the  tetrahedron,  but  the  an¬ 
gles  are  decreased  and  are  still  of  the  same  spe- 
ies  {i.e,,  trilinear),  so  too,  if  we  wish  to  construct 
the  first  of  the  increased  bodies,  or  of  those  which 
are  greater  than  the  cube,  in  place  of  the  planes  of 
the  cube  we  construct  angles,  but  we  transmit 
the  angles  of  the  cube  as  clothed  and  increased, 
though  they  also  remain  trilinear;  or,  what  leads  to 
the  same  thing,  upon  the  twelve  sides  of  the  cube 
the  same  numbers  of  planes  are  to  be  built,  just  as, 
in  the  former  case,  upon  the  six  sides  of  the  tetrahe¬ 
dron  the  same  number  of  squares  were  built.  For 
as  the  cube  roofs  over  the  tetrahedron,  so  this  in¬ 
creased  solid  figure  which  we  are  investigating  roofs 
over  the  cube. 

[461]  But  if  instead  of  the  single  planes  of  the  cube 
we  set  up  single  angles — if  we  set  up  six  quadrili- 
near  angles,  because  the  six  planes  of  the  cube  are 
quadrilaterals — the  eight  trilinear  angles  of  the  cube 

remain.  Therefore  the  fig¬ 
ure  would  be  mixed. 

Therefore  in  order  that 
the  trilinear  angle  may 
remain  in  the  augmented 
figure,  two  angles  are  to 
be  constructed  upon  the 

single  planes  of  the  cube — and  not  one  angle  alone; 
that  is  to  say,  six  prisms,  such  as  the  former  one 
BCAED,  not  six  pyramids,  such  as  the  one  here, 
BADC.  And  in  order  that  there  may  always  be  one 
plane  common  to  two  contiguous  prisms,  let  this 
plane  be  constructed  across  one  side  of  the  cube.  And 
these  six  prisms  are  slightly  less  than  the  cube  upon 
which  they  are  placed.  And  so  by  the  augmentation 
twelve  angles  are  made — and  by  the  addition  of  the 
eight  angles  of  the  cube,  the  sum  of  the  angles  is 
twenty. 

How  do  you  infer  the  form  of  the  plane  of  the  dodecahedron? 

The  angles  of  the  figure,  as  was  said  already,  should  be  twenty;  and  each 
single  angle  is  bounded  by  three  lines,  any  one  of  which  adjoins  two  angles;  and 


Here  AE,  ED,  and  the  re¬ 
maining  dotted  lines  are  the 
sides  of  the  roofed-over  cube, 
AED  is  the  plane  of  the  cube; 
and  the  two  angles  B  and  C 
come  to  be  instead  of  it;  and 
A  and  E  the  angles  of  the  cube 
remain.  But  upon  the  side  of 
the  cube  AE,  the  pentagon 
ABCE  is  constructed,  as  up¬ 
on  the  side  ED,  the  pentagon 
BCD. 


867 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

so  there  are  twenty  times  three  or  sixty  points.  But  two  points  determine  one 
line.  Therefore  there  are  thirty  lines  or  sides  to  the  figure,  and  there  are  poten¬ 
tially  sixty  with  respect  to  the  planes  of  the  figure.  For  any  [462]  side  of  the 
figure  adjoins  two  planes.  But  the  division  of  the  sixty  lines  or  plane  sides  by 
the  twelve  planes — which  are  necessary  for  this  solid  figure — gives  a  quotient 
of  five.  Therefore  the  planes  are  quinquelateral.  So  among  the  augmented  fig¬ 
ures  the  dodecahedron,  having  pentagonal  planes,  is  again  first. 

What  is  the  origin  of  the  secondary  figures  and  why  are  there  only  two? 

Three  other  figures  correspond  to  the  cube,  the  tetrahedron,  and  the  dode¬ 
cahedron;  but  one  of  them  coincides  with  its  primary  figure.  And  these  second¬ 
ary  figures  are  generated  by  subtracting  from  the  three  primary  figures,  but  by 
subtraction  of  a  different  kind,  where  a  line  is  not  left  in  the  place  of  the  plane, 
but  an  angle,  2.e.,  in  the  place  of  the  surface  of  the  primary  figure,  there  is — not 
a  line  of  the  secondary  figure,  but — a  point;  while  the  number  of  lines  remains. 
But  at  the  same  time — as  before — a  plane  of  the  secondary  figure  is  generated 
in  place  of  the  angle  of  the  primary  figure.  And  the  plane  is  triangular,  because 
the  angle  of  the  primary  figure  is  trilinear,  and  by  joining  together  the  centres 
of  three  planes  of  the  primary  figure  a  solid  angle  is  constructed.  So  these  figures 
are  generated  secondly  as  if  the  bowels  of  the  first  figures. 

For  whatever  appears  outwardly  falls  away  from  the  cube,  and  there  remain 
of  the  cube  only  six  centres,  as  it  were  the  navels  of  six  planes.  And  there  are  six 
angles  to  the  new  figure.  And  [463]  because  the  cube  has  eight  angles,  the  figure 
gets  eight  plane  equilateral  triangles  in  their  place.  Hence  it  is  called  an  octa¬ 
hedron;  and  it  is  the  sixth  part  of  its  cube. 

As  regards  the  tetrahedron:  in  place  of  its  plane  tri¬ 
angles  four  angles  are  constructed;  and  in  place  of  its 
four  angles  four  triangles  are  constructed;  and  a  figure 
arises  which  is  the  same  as  its  primary  figure.  And  so  it 
is  not  judged  to  be  new.  However,  it  is  the  twenty-sev¬ 
enth  part  of  the  tetrahedron  in  which  it  is  inscribed. 

As  regards  the  dodecahedron:  [464]  in  place  of  the 
twelve  bases  it  gives  the  twelve  angles  of  the  new  figure; 
and  in  place  of  its  twenty  angles  it  gives  twenty  triangular 
bases:  whence  the  figure  is  called  an  icosahedron.  And  it  is 
slightly  less  than  half  the  size  of  its  original  dodecahedron. 

One  of  the  primary  figures  was  produced  by  subtracting  from 
the  cube;  and  one  by  adding  to  the  cube.  And  now  the  second- 
^ry  figures  are  generated  by  subtracting  from  these  two  pri¬ 
mary  figures.  Is  nothing  produced  by  adding  to  the  secondary 
figures? 

To  this  second  subtraction  there  also  corresponds  a  sec¬ 
ond  addition  to  those  three  primary  figures — an  angle 
arising  in  place  of  the  plane,  and  a  plane  in  place  of  the 
angle.  But  the  figures  are  the  same  as  those  produced  by  former  subtraction. 
For  just  as  formerly  the  octahedron  was  inscribed  in  the  cube,  and  the  icosa¬ 
hedron  in  the  dodecahedron:  so  now  in  turn  the  cube  is  made  to  be  inscribed  in 


868  KEPLER 

the  octahedron,  and  the  dodecahedron  in 
the  icosahedron.  Accordingly,  when  all  these 
operations  have  been  performed,  the  first 
five  figures  are  found. 

Why  do  you  call  them  the  most  simple  figures? 

Because  each  of  them  is  bounded  by  planes 
of  one  species  alone,  viz.y  triangles  or  quadri¬ 
laterals  or  pentagons,  and  by  solid  angles  of 
one  species  alone — the  three  primary  fibres 
by  the  trilinear  angle,  the  octahedron  by  the 
quadrilinear  angle,  and  the  icosahedron  by 
the  quinquelinear  angle.  The  other  figures 
vary  [465]  either  with  respect  to  the  angle  or 
with  respect  to  the  plane.  For  there  are  some  which  have  one  genus  of  planes, 
as  the  rhombus  in  this  diagram,  but  no  one  genus  of  solid  angles.  For  the 
dodecahedral  rhombus  has  six  quadrilinear  angles  and  [467]  eight  trilinear  angles ; 
and  the  thirty-sided  rhombus  has  twelve  quinquelinear  angles  and  twenty  tri¬ 
linear  angles.  There  are  other  figures  which  mingle  diverse  planes  having  uni¬ 
form  solid  angles,  as  the  thirteen  species  of  the  Archimedean  solids. 

Why  do  you  call  those  five  figures  the  most  beautiful  and  the  most  perfect? 

Because  they  imitate  the  sphere — which  is  an  image  of  God — as  much  as  a 
rectilinear  figure  possibly  can,  arranging  all  their  angles  in  the  same  sphere.  And 
they  can  all  be  inscribed  in  a  sphere.  And  as  the  sphere  is  ever3rvvhere  similar  to 
itself,  so  in  this  case  the  planes  of  any  one  figure  are  all  similar  to  one  another, 
and  can  be  inscribed  in  one  and  the  same  circle ;  and  the  angles  are  equal. 

Is  there  not  some  other  method  by  which  more  figures  similar  to  these  can  be  con- 
structed? 

None  at  all.  For  a  solid  angle  of  any  figure  is  constructed  from  at  least  three 
planes.  Accordingly,  equilateral  triangles  can  join  with  triangles,  quadrilaterals, 
and  pentagons  in  order  to  form  a  solid  angle;  quadrilaterals,  with  triangles;  and 
pentagons,  similarly  with  triangles.  But  six  triangles,  or  three  hexagons,  com¬ 
plete  a  surface,  and  cannot  form  a  solid  angle.  But  magnitudes  larger  than  these, 
as  three  heptagons,  or  three  of  any  other  figure,  exceed  the  sum  of  four  right 
angles  which  are  laid  around  the  same  point  in  a  plane.  See  the  scholium  to  the 
last  proposition  in  Book  xiii  of  Euclid  and  Book  ii  of  my  Harmonies. 

Then  how  are  the  number  of  the  primary  spheres  and  the  intervals  of  the  planetary 
orbits  taken  from  these  figures? 

Any  solid  figure  is  understood  to  have  two  spheres,  one  circumscribed  around 
it  and  the  other  touching  the  centres  of  its  planes;  whence  the  first  view  of  the 
solid  figure  [468]  as  it  were  invites  some  architect  to  circumscribe  and  to  inscribe 
spheres.  So  whatever  the  ratio  of  the  outer  sphere  to  the  inner  sphere  is,  that 
has  been  made  to  be  the  ratio  of  the  sphere  of  the  upper  planet  to  the  nearest 
lower  sphere,  between  which  spheres  there  is  the  aforesaid  interval. 


869 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 


What  are  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  in  the  single  figures? 

Let  the  semidiameter  of  the  circumscribed  sphere  be  100,000.  The  ratio  of  the 
semidiameter  of  the  inscribed  sphere  is  as  follows: 

In  the  cube  57,735  The  square  is  equal  to  one-third  of  the  square  on  the 

radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere. 

One-third  of  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere. 
An  irrational  part,  the  square  on  which  is  between 
two-thirds  and  three -fifths  of  the  square  on  the  radius 
of  the  circumscribed  sphere:  namely,  by  the  subtrac¬ 
tion  of  the  square  on  the  apotome  from  eleven- 
fifteenths  of  the  square  on  the  radius. 

The  square  is  equal  to  one-third  of  the  square  on  the 
radius  of  the  circumscribed  sphere. 


In  the  tetrahedron  33,333 
In  the  dodecahedron  79,465 
In  the  icosahedron  79,465 


In  the  octahedron  57,735 


But  the  octahedron  has  at  the  middle  section  of  itself  a  square  formed  by  the 
four  lines  bounding  it  in  the  middle,  and  if  a  circle  is  inscribed  in  this  square,  its 
radius  will  be  70,711,  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  half  the  square  on  the 
radius  of  the  circumscribed  circle. 


Show  now  what  the  place  of  the  sphere  of  the  Earth  is  among  these  figures. 

The  five  bodies  were  distributed  into  two  classes  above:  into  those  generated 
first,  and  those  generated  second.  The  former  had  a  trilinear  angle,  and  the 
latter  a  plurilinear.  For  as  Adam  was  the  first-born,  and  Eve  was  not  his 
daughter  but  a  part  of  him — and  they  are  both  called  the  first-made,  [469]  but 
Cain  and  Abel  and  their  sisters  are  their  offspring;  so  the  cube  is  in  the  first 
place,  'wherefrom  have  arisen,  differently  and  more  simply,  the  tetrahedron — 
as  it  were  a  rib  of  the  cube — and  the  dodecahedron,  but  in  such  a  way  that  all 
three  remain  among  the  primary  figures.  The  octahedron  and  the  icosahedron, 
with  their  triangular  planes,  are  as  it  were  the  offspring  born  of  the  cube  and 
dodecahedron  as  fathers  and  from  the  tetrahedron  as  mother;  and  each  of  them 
bears  a  likeness  to  its  parent. 

So  the  three  first  figures  of  the  same  class  had  to  enclose  the  circuit  of  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  and  the  two  figures  generated  second,  as  the  other  class, 
should  be  enclosed  by  the  sphere  in  which  the  Earth  revolves,  and  so  this  sphere 
had  to  be  made  a  boundary  common  to  both  orders,  because  the  Earth,  the 
home  of  the  image  of  God,  was  going  to  be  chief  among  the  moving  globes.  For 
in  this  way  the  nature  of  being  inscribed  is  kept  in  the  second  class  and  that  of 
circumscribing  in  the  first  class.  For  it  is  more  natural  and  more  fitting  that  the 
octahedron  should  be  inscribed  in  the  cube,  and  the  icosahedron  in  the  dode¬ 
cahedron,  than  the  cube  in  the  octahedron,  and  the  dodecahedron  in  the  icosa¬ 
hedron. 

And  so  in  this  way  the  circuit  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  was  placed  in  the 
middle  between  the  planets;  for  three  planets  had  to  be  placed  outside,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  three  primary  figures;  and  two  had  to  be  placed  inside  its  circuit — 
on  account  of  the  two  figures  of  the  second  class — to  which  the  sun  is  added  as 
a  third  in  the  inmost  embrace  of  the  centre  of  the  mobile  spheres.  And  so  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  and  Mars  were  made  the  higher  planets,  and  Venus,  Mercury,  and  the 
sun,  the  lower.  But  the  moon,  which  has  a  private  movement  around  the  Earth 
during  the  same  common  circuit  of  the  Earth,  is  among  the  secondary  planets, 
as  was  said  above. 


870  KEPLER 

What  is  the  order  among  the  three  outer  figures  and  what  place  among  the  planets 
does  each  hold? 

The  cube  is  the  first  of  the  figures,  and  therefore  it  was  placed  between  the 
two  farthest  spheres,  those  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  In  the  generation  of  the  fig¬ 
ures  the  tetrahedron  follows:  therefore,  it  got  [470]  the  place  between  Jupiter 
and  Mars.  The  dodecahedron  was  the  last  of  the  three:  therefore,  the  last  place 
was  assigned  to  it  between  the  orbital  regions  of  Mars  and  of  the  Earth. 

How  do  you  place  the  two  inner  figures? 

Although  the  octahedron  has  the  nature  of  the  cube,  of  which  it  is  the  first 
parts,  and  the  icosahedron  that  of  the  dodecahedron,  of  which  it  is  the  last 
parts;  nevertheless  the  next  place  after  the  dodecahedron  did  not  belong  to  the 
octahedron,  for  two  reasons.  For,  first,  the  two  classes  of  figures  are  somehow 
opposed  to  one  another:  therefore  it  was  fitting  that  the  beginning  of  the  placing 
should  be  at  the  opposite  termini.  But  since  the  first  place  of  the  outer  figures 
was  judged  to  be  the  place  which  tended  the  more  outward;  consequently  the 
first  place  of  the  inner  figures  was  judged  to  be  the  place  which  tended  the  more 
to  the  interior  towards  the  centre.  Secondly,  it  was  more  becoming  to  the  nature 
of  the  similar  figures;  the  dodecahedron  and  the  icosahedron,  and  better  suited 
to  their  being  inscribed  within  one  another,  that  they  should  succeed  one 
another  very  closely,  with  the  circuit  or  sphere  of  the  Earth  coming  in  between, 
at  which  as  at  a  common  boundary  both  classes  of  figures  stop. 

Therefore  it  was  caused  that  the  icosahedron  should  be  placed  between  the 
orbits  of  the  Earth  and  of  Venus,  but  the  octahedron  between  the  inmost  orbits, 
those  of  Venus  and  Mercury.  But  the  sun  does  not  have  a  sphere  in  which  its 
centre  is  carried  around;  and  therefore  it  is  outside  the  number  of  the  primary 
moving  bodies,  but  it  has  in  itself  the  source  of  the  movement  outside,  the  fixed 
stars  have  stillness  in  themselves,  and  they  furnish  a  place  for  the  moving  bodies 
and  contain  them. 

Is  there  found  between  these  spheres  which  you  have  given  to  each  figure  the  ratio 
of  the  figures? 

There  is  found  so  much  the  same  ratio  that,  although  there  is  some  very 
small  deficiency,  nevertheless  no  interval  between  two  planets  approaches 
nearer  to  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  of  another  figure  [471]  than  those  intervals 
which  have  been  ascribed  with  the  best  of  reasons  to  the  two  planets. 

For  you  see  that  as  Saturn^s  sphere  had  less  than  twice  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  of  Jupiter,  and  Venus^  similarly  had  less  than  twice  the  diameter  of 
Mercury^s,  namely,  five-thirds  or  eight-fifths;  so  also  in  the  cube  and  in  the 
octahedron  100,000  is  less  than  twice  57,775.  For  if  you  take  three-fifths  of 
100,000  you  will  have  60,000;  but  if  you  take  five-eighths,  then  62,500  will 
be  the  result.  Again,  as  the  sphere  of  Mars  had  a  very  small  ratio  to  the  sphere 
which  carries  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  and  one  nearly  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the 
sphere  of  the  Earth  to  that  of  Venus;  so  too  you  will  see  between  the  spheres 
of  the  dodecahedron  and  of  the  icosahedron  a  very  small  ratio,  namely,  that 
of  100,000  to  79,465.  You  see,  thirdly,  that,  just  as  the  sphere  of  Jupiter  has  a 
very  great  ratio  to  the  sphere  of  Mars,  namely  triple;  so  too,  in  the  case  of  the 
tetrahedron  the  diameter  of  the  circumscribed  sphere  is  three  times  the  diameter 
of  the  inscribed  sphere. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  871 

If  the  intervals  approach  so  nearly  to  the  ratios  of  the  figures j  why  then  does  some 
discrepancy  remain? 

1.  Because  the  archetype  of  the  movable  world  is  constituted  not  only 
of  the  five  regular  [solid]  figures — by  which  the  chariots  of  the  planets  and  the 
number  of  the  courses  were  determined — but  also  of  the  harmonic  proportions 
with  which  the  courses  themselves  were  attuned,  as  it  were,  to  the  idea  of 
celestial  music  or  of  a  harmonic  concord  of  six  voices.  Now  since  this  musical 
ornamentation  demanded  a  difference  of  movement  in  any  given  planet — a 
difference  between  the  slowest  and  the  fastest  movement;  and  this  difference 
is  made  by  the  variation  of  the  interval  between  the  planet  and  the  sun;  and 
since  the  magnitude  or  ratio  of  this  variation  was  required  to  be  different  in 
different  planets;  hence  it  was  necessary  that  some  very  small  amount  should 
be  taken  away  from  the  intervals  which  are  exhibited  by  the  figures  as  uniform 
and  without  variation,  and  that  it  should  be  left  to  the  freedom  of  the  com¬ 
poser  to  represent  the  harmonies  of  movement. 

[472]  2.  And  nevertheless  that  which  the  regular  solids  have  of  their  very 
own  was  not  neglected  in  this  very  small  discrepancy.  For  just  as  the  ratio 
of  the  spheres  of  the  tetrahedron  is  perfect,  z.e.,  rational  simply,  that  of  the 
cube  and  the  octahedron,  half-perfect,  f.e.,  rational  in  square  but  irrational 
in  length,  but  that  of  the  dodecahedron  and  of  the  icosahedron  are  wholly 
imperfect,  f.e,,  absolutely  irrational;  so  also  the  ratio  of  the  tetrahedral  planets 
imitates  the  figure  almost  exactly,  ^.e.,  in  approximately  the  extremities  of 
the  intervals.  But  the  ratios  of  the  cubic  and  octahedral  planets  are  less  exactly 
like  the  figures,  because  the  extreme  intervals  recede  from  the  figures  while 
the  intermediate  intervals  square  with  them.  But  the  whole  intervals  of  the 
dodecahedral  and  icosahedral  planets  abandon  the  ratios  of  their  figures, 
although  they  approach  no  others  more  nearly.  Now  see  how  the  longest  in¬ 
terval  of  Mars  is  almost  exactly  a  third  part  of  the  least  interval  of  Jupiter, 
as  in  the  tetrahedron  the  [diameter  of  the]  inside  sphere  is  one-third  [of  the 
diameter]  of  the  outer  sphere:  so  that  in  this  way  if  the  angles  of  the  tetra¬ 
hedron  are  placed  in  the  inmost  sphere  of  Jupiter,  the  tetrahedral  planes 
somehow  touch  the  farthest  sphere  of  Mars.  See  again  how  if  the  angles  of  the 
cube  are  placed  in  the  sphere  of  Saturn  and  the  angles  of  the  octahedron  in 
the  inmost  sphere  of  Venus,  the  planes  of  the  figures  sink  into  the  regions 
[i.e.j  spheres]  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  and  do  not  pass  above  the  total  regions 
but  enter  in  approximately  as  far  as  the  middle.  Finally,  see  how,  if  the  angles 
of  the  dodecahedron  are  placed  in  the  inmost  sphere  of  Mars  and  the  angles 
of  the  icosahedron  in  the  inmost  sphere  of  the  Earth,  the  planes  of  the  figures 
by  no  means  reach  to  the  inscribed  regions  of  the  Earth  and  of  Venus,  but  that 
nevertheless  no  planetary  intervals  approach  more  nearly  to  the  least  ratios 
of  these  figures.  Concerning  these  things,  see  my  Harmonies  (Book  v,  Proposi¬ 
tion  XLix  and  passim),  where  the  causes  not  only  of  the  exact  magnitude  of 
the  ratios  between  two  spheres  but  also  of  the  opposite  intervals  of  any  single 
planet  are  dug  up. 

[473]  No  other  conclusion  concerning  the  interposition  of  the  figures  can  be  drawn 
from  the  periodic  times,  can  it? 

All  ratios  of  time  in  this  case  are  greater  than  the  ratios  of  their  orbits  and 
also  greater  than  the  ratios  of  their  figures,  as  will  be  unfolded  in  the  second 


872 


KEPLER 

part  of  this  book.  Nevertheless  the  property  of  the  figures  can  be  recognized 
without  diflSculty  even  among  the  time  ratios.  For  as  there  are  three  ratios 
among  the  figures — the  greatest  ratio  which  is  alone,  and  the  middle  and  the 
least,  which  are  both  found  in  two  cases — the  greatest  ratio  is  found  in  the 
tetrahedron  alone,  the  middle  ratio  in  the  cube  and  the  octahedron,  and  the 
least  ratio  in  the  dodecahedron  and  the  icosahedron;  so  the  greatest  and  the 
solitary  ratio  of  times  is  found  between  Jupiter  and  Mars,  approximately 
that  of  6  to  1,  nearly  12  years  to  less  than  2  years,  an  argument  for  the  inter¬ 
position  of  the  tetrahedron.  But  between  Saturn  and  Jupiter  and  between 
Venus  and  Mercury  the  ratio  of  times  is  less  and  in  both  cases  approximately 
the  same,  an  argument  for  the  interposition  of  the  cognate  bodies,  in  the 
first  case  the  cube  and  in  the  second  case  the  octahedron,  which  have  ap¬ 
proximately  the  same  ratios  between  their  spheres.  For  as  the  30  years  of  Saturn 
are  to  the  12  years  of  Jupiter,  so  approximately  are  the  225  days  of  Venus 
to  the  88  days  of  Mercury.  And  finally  there  is  the  least  ratio  of  times  between 
Mars  and  the  Earth  and  between  the  Earth  and  Venus,  and  again  it  is  prac¬ 
tically  the  same  in  both  cases,  an  argument  for  the  interposition,  in  the  first 
case  of  the  dodecahedron,  and  in  the  second  case  of  the  icosahedron,  which 
are  bodies  cognate  and  having  the  same  ratio.  For  as  the  687  days  of  Mars 
are  to  the  365J^  days  of  the  Earth,  so  the  365}^  days  are  to  194  days,  since 
instead  of  these  Venus  has  225  days,  a  little  more,  and  makes  the  least  time 
ratio  of  all.  The  causes  of  such  a  small  discrepancy  are  unfolded  in  my  Har¬ 
monies  (Book  v). 

You  do  not  have  any  other  evidence ^  do  you^  except  that  from  the  two  classes  of 
figures  that  the  globe  [474]  of  the  Earth  has  the  principal  proportionality  in  lo¬ 
cation? 

Indeed  it  is  not  by  chance  that  the  mean  interval  between  the  Earth,  the 
middle  planet,  and  the  sun  is  found  to  be  almost  exactly  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  shortest  interval  of  Mars,  the  lowest  of  the  higher  planets,  and 
the  longest  interval  of  Venus,  the  highest  of  the  lower  planets.  For,  as  was 
said  above,  the  space  between  Mars  and  Venus  was  left  for  the  Earth — left 
undetermined  by  the  inscribing  of  figures  and  open  and  free,  so  that  in  dividing 
it  by  the  sphere  of  the  Earth,  either  this  ratio  or  some  other,  if  the  other  were 
better,  could  be  expressed.  Therefore  the  mean  in  the  classes  of  the  figures, 
and  the  middle  wall  between  the  higher  and  the  lower  planets  had  to  be  a 
mean  geometrically  too. 

Then  what  determined  this  interval  which  the  inscribings  did  not  determine? 

Even  if  there  is  a  certain  augmented  figure,  the  aculeate  or  wedge-shaped 
dodecahedron,  which  is  taken  as  determining  this  interval  as  accurately  as  the 
interval  between  Jupiter  and  Mars  is  determined  by  the  tetrahedron,  and  the 
relationship  of  that  imperfect  figure  with  its  cognates,  the  dodecahedron  and  the 
icosahedron,  is  seen  not  to  lack  its  proper  ratio;  nevertheless  the  figures  alone 
do  not  determine  these  intervals  or  any  others  exactly,  but  this  job  was  left  to 
the  ornament  of  harmonic  movements,  which  demands  a  certain  amount  of 
freedom  in  determining  these  intervals  exactly. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERXICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 


873 


4.  On  the  Ratios  of  the  Principal  Bodies  of  the  World 
TO  One  Another 

Where  do  you  judge  that  the  beginning  should  be  made  in  investigating  the  ratios 
5/  bodies? 

From  the  Earth  (1)  as  the  home  of  the  speculative  creature,  [475]  and  (2) 
Df  the  same  image  of  God  the  Creator;  (3)  for  we  read  in  the  holy  Book  of  Moses 
that  in  the  beginning  God  created  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth;  (4)  moreover,  the 
sphere  of  the  Earth  is  the  middle  figure  between  the  planets,  and  their  common 
Doundar>^  and  even  a  geometrical  mean  proportional  between  the  territories  of 
the  higher  and  the  lower  planets;  (5)  finally,  the  very  structure  of  these  ratios 
3ries  in  a  loud  voice  that  God  the  Creator  in  fitting  the  bodies  and  intervals  to 
the  solar  body,  as  to  a  measure  prior  to  their  generation,  made  His  beginning 
it  the  Earth. 

What  do  you  judge  to  be  the  reason  for  the  magnitude  of  the  solar  body? 

The  following  things  argue  that  the  solar  globe  is  the  first  of  all  the  bodies  of 
the  world  in  the  order  of  creation,  at  least  in  the  archetypal  order;  if  not  also  in 
the  temporal:  (1)  Moses  makes  light  the  w’ork  of  the  first  day,  and  instead  of 
light  we  can  understand  the  solar  body.  (2)  Above  by  many  votes,  the  solar 
body  obtained  the  principate  among  natural  things;  w’hy  not  also  in  quantity 
ind  in  time,  in  w’hich  it  was  created? 

Furthermore,  the  first  body,  because  first,  does  not  acquire  any  ratio  to  the 
bodies  following;  but  rather  the  bodies  following  acquire  a 
ratio  to  it  as  first.  MTierefore  there  is  no  archetypal  cause 
of  the  magnitude  of  the  sun:  nor  could  there  have  been  a 
different  globe  twice  as  great  as  it  is  now,  because  the  rest 
of  the  universe  and  the  w’hole  w’orld  and  man  in  it  w^ould 
have  had  to  be  twice  as  great  as  they  now’  are. 

Then  by  what  means  was  the  magnitude  of  the  Earth  adjusted 
to  the  solar  globe? 

By  means  of  vision  of  the  sun.  For  the  Earth  w’as  going  to 
be  the  home  of  the  speculative  creature,  and  for  his  sake 
the  universe  and  w’orld  have  been  made.  But  now  specu¬ 
lation  has  its  origin  in  the  vision  of  the  stars:  [476]  w’here- 
fore  too  the  magnitude  of  the  things  to  be  contemplated 
had  to  have  its  origin  in  the  magnitude  of  the  things  to  be 
seen.  But  the  first  visible  is  light  or  the  sun,  as  it  is  (1)  the 
w’ork  of  the  first  day  and  (2)  the  most  excellent  of  all  visible 
things,  the  principal,  the  primary,  and  that  which  w’as 
going  to  be  the  cause  of  the  visibility  of  all  the  rest.  So  it 
follow’s  that  the  beginning  [principium]  in  proportioning 
the  bodies  of  the  w’orld  w’as  taken  from  the  vision  of  the 
sun  from  the  Earth;  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  upper  planets  the  regions  of  the 
world  were  separated  by  the  mean  proportionality  of  the  orbit  of  the  Earth. 

How  great  does  the  diameter  of  the  sun  appear  to  be  on  the  Earth? 

It  is  established  by  the  very  old  observations  of  Aristarchus  and  by  the  most 
recent  of  our  time,  that,  if  the  Earth  is  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the  sun,  and 


874 


KEPLER 


with  the  point  of  vision  E  as  centre  a  circle  is  described,  then  exactly  one-seven- 
hundred-twentieth  of  that  circle,  z.6.,  is  occupied  and  so  to  speak  defined 
by  the  diameter  of  the  sun;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  angle  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  lines  touching  each  rim  of  S  the  sun,  is  one-seven-hundred 
twentieth  of  four  right  angles. 

What  do  you  think  is  the  reason  for  this  number? 

We  must  seek  the  archetypal  cause  of  the  first  thing  among  the  first  causes. 
But  there  is  no  geometrical  cause  for  the  division  of  a  circle  into  720  parts  [477] 
in  a  figure  lacking  that  number  of  sides.  For  this  figure  is  derived  by  bisection 
from  a  figure  having  45  sides;  and  there  is  no  [geometrical]  demonstration  of 
that  figure,  as  is  proved  in  the  Harmonies,  Book  i.  It  follows  that  this  sectioning 
of  the  circle  is  taken  from  the  composition  of  figures  and  so  from  harmonic 
ratios.  And  it  seems  to  bring  about  the  necessity  that  the  circle  of  the  zodiac, 
wherein  all  the  planets  had  to  practise  their  harmonic  movements  in  reality  and 
the  sun  in  appearance — that  this  circle,  I  say,  should  be  divided  into  parts  of  a 
harmonic  numbering  by  the  appearance  of  the  first  body.  But  the  least  number 
which  offers  itself  in  determining  all  the  parts  of  the  monochord  and  in  setting 
up  the  twofold  scale  of  the  octave  [systema  diapason  duplex],  i.e.,  in  the  minor 
and  the  major  mode — I  say  that  this  number  is  720,  as  was  showm  in  the  Har¬ 
monies,  Book  III,  Chapter  6h 

Wherefore,  since  the  movements  of  all  the  planets,  as  I  show  in  Book  v  of  the 
Harmonies,  had  to  be  adjusted  to  this  twofold  scale;  it  was  fitting  that  the  first 
body,  which  was  the  leader  of  the  dance  to  this  music,  by  its  apparent  diameter 
on  the  Earth,  should,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Earth-dweller — i.e,,  the  speculative  crea¬ 
ture — divide  that  circle  as  an  index  and  measure  of  the  apparent  harmonic 
movements,  by  the  division  of  the  monochord,  i.e.,  by  the  division  into  720 
parts,  which  is  twice  360,  thrice  240,  four  times  180,  five  times  124,  six  times  120, 
eight  times  90,  nine  times  80,  ten  times  72,  twelve  times  60,  fifteen  times  48,  six¬ 
teen  times  45,  eighteen  times  40,  twenty  times  36,  twenty-four  times  30,  by  a 
multiplex  form  of  division  into  aliquot  parts. 

Then  what  follows  in  respect  to  the  interval  between  the  sun  and  the  Earth  from  the 
assumption  of  this  hypothesis?  or,  what  is  the  magnitude  of  this  rod  used  by  us  here¬ 
tofore  as  a  measure  of  the  planetary  spheres? 

If  S  the  diameter  of  the  sun  had  to  occupy  with  the  point  of  vision  E  set 
up  on  the  Earth;  it  is  necessary  that  the  point  of  vision,  or  [478]  in  place  of  it  E 
the  centre  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  should  be  distant  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  S 

Rn  Kepler's  musical  system,  if  the  intervals  in  the  octave  are  represented  by  assigning 
whole  numbers  to  the  eight  tones  in  such  fashion  that  the  ratio  between  any  two  numbers 
will  express  the  analogous  musical  interval,  then  the  minor  scale  will  be  represented  by  the 
following  sequence,  in  least  numbers: 

72  :  81  :  90  :  96  :  108  : 120  : 128  : 144 
Similarly,  the  major  scale,  as  follows: 

360  :  405  :  432  :  480  :  540  :  576  :  640  :  720 

Now  if  the  two  scales  are  combined,  “the  twofold  scale  of  the  octave,  i.e.,  in  the  minor  and  the 
major  mode"  thus  produced  will  be  represented  by  the  following  sequence,  in  least  whole 
numbers: 

360  :  405  :  432  :  450  :  480  :  640  :  576  :  600  :  640  :  720 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  875 

,0  the  extent  of  a  little  more  than  229  semidiameters  of  the  round  body  of  the 
5un  Sj  as  we  are  taught  in  geometry. 

r  have  the  interval;  tell  me  also  the  magnitude  of  the  terrestrial  globe  and  give 
'easons. 

These  things  are  not  yet  sufficient  to  determine  the  magnitude  of  the  Earth ; 
)ut  it  is  the  work  of  one  axiom  added  to  another.  Without  doubt,  because  the 
Earth  was  going  to  be  the  home  of  the  measuring  creature;  and  the  Earth  by  its 
)ody  had  to  become  the  measure  of  the  bodies  of  the  'world,  and  by  its  semi- 
liameter  the  measure  of  the  intervals,  as  the  line  is  the  measure  of  lines.  But 
dnce  the  measuring  of  bodies  is  different  from  the  measuring  of  lines,  and  since 
ihe  ratio  between  the  terrestrial  body  and  the  solar  body  is  first,  as  is  the  ratio 
Detween  the  diameter  of  the  Earth  and  the  interval  between  the  Earth  and  the 
5un;  nothing  is  more  in  agreement  with  a  right  and  fitting  and  ordered  propor- 
doning  than  that  the  equality  of  both  ratios  should  be  postulated — so  that  as 
nany  times  as  the  terrestrial  body  E  is  contained  in  the  solar  body  aS,  so  many 
dmes  also  is  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E  contained  in  SE,  the  interval  be¬ 
tween  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  the  Earth;  so  that  in  this  way,  as  the  terrestrial 
Dody  E  isto  the  solar  body  S,  so  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E  is  to  SEy  the 
listance  between  the  centres. 

^ow  is  the  magnitude  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  got  from  these  two  axioms? 

Let  the  semidiameter  of  the  sun  S  be  put  down  as  100,000  parts,  so  that  the 
nterval  SE  between  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  the  Earth  will  be  22,918,166 
uch  parts.  The  cube  of  100,000,  Lc.,  1,000,000,000,000,000  is  to  be  divided  by 
he  interval  22,918,166;  and  the  [square]  root  of  the  quotient — which  is  the  con- 
inued  sine  0°15'0"  is  to  be  taken,  and  it  will  be  6,606.  That  will  be  the  magni- 
ude  [479]  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth.  For  as  6,606 — the  semidiameter  of 
he  Earth — is  contained  3,4693^  times  in  22,  918,166 — the  interval  between  the 
un  and  the  Earth — so  too  the  cube  of  6,606 — the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth — 
s  contained  the  same  number  of  times,  Le.,  3,4693^  in  the  cube  of  100,000,  the 
semidiameter  of  the  sun.  But  it  is  known  from  geometry  that  the  ratio  of  cubes 
:o  one  another  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  globes  inscribed  in  the  same  cubes. 
3o  the  semidiameter  of  the  sun  S  will  contain  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E 
i  little  more  than  fifteen  times;  but  the  body  of  the  sun  S  will  contain  the  body 
Df  the  Earth  E  approximately  3,469  times. 

You  say  that  its  magnitude  is  approximately  three  times  what  the  ancients  assigned 
0  the  longest  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  Earth,  for  they  set  a  lesser  distance,  only 
1200  times  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth:  and  you  say  twenty  times  the  [former] 
'atio  of  bodies,  because  they  made  the  sun  only  166  times  greater  than  the  Earth:  do 
%ot  you  respect  their  astronomical  observations? 

Not  at  all.  For  the  ancients  made  the  sun  as  near  as  a  parallax  of  3'  should  have 
nade  it  to  be.  Whence  Tycho  Brahe  reasoned  that  when  Mars  is  nearer  to  the 
Earth  than  the  sun  is.  Mars  should  be  observed  to  have  a  parallax  much  greater 
:han  3'.  But  I  have  observed  that  the  parallax  of  Mars  is  not  at  all  perceptible 
:o  sense.  Therefore  the  distance  of  Mars,  even  when  most  near,  is  greater  than 
1200  semidiameters;  and  the  distance  of  the  sun  is  greater  too. 

[480]  The  diameters  of  Mars  and  Venus  can  be  observed  through  the  ancient 


876 


KEPLER 


instruments  and  through  the  Belgian  telescope  of  modern  times;  and  they  are 
found  to  be  of  a  very  few  minutes.  Therefore,  if  the  sun  is  as  near  as  the  ancients 
say  it  is;  then  these  planets — each  in  its  own  ratio — will  become  as  near  as 
Tycho  Brahe  said,  out  of  Copernicus.  If  Mars  is  so  near;  it  will  be  even  smaller 
in  its  visible  diameter.  Therefore  Mars  will  be  smaller  than  the  Earth,  namely, 
the  higher  planet  will  be  smaller  than  the  lower;  so  that  there  will  be  no  propor¬ 
tion  [analogia]  between  the  magnitude  of  the  bodies  and  their  order — and  that 
is  not  in  agreement  with  the  adornment  of  the  world. 

The  greater  the  distance  of  the  sun  is  set  down  to  be,  the  smaller  the  parallax 
of  the  sun  becomes.  And  the  smaller  the  parallax  of  the  sun,  the  greater  the 
parallax  of  the  moon  from  the  sun;  if  the  simple  parallax  of  the  moon  is  taken 
from  its  own  principles,  and  that  is  of  great  service  in  correcting  the  doctrine  of 
eclipses.  Therefore  such  a  great  magnitude  for  the  interval  of  the  sun  is  con¬ 
firmed  rather  than  refuted  by  astronomical  observations. 

And  it  accords  with  the  prayer  of  physics  that  the  solar  body,  which  gives 
movement  to  all  the  other  planets,  should  be  much  greater  than  all  the  mobile 
bodies  fused  together  into  one. 

The  determination  of  what  body  follows  most  closely  upon  the  determination  of  the 
Earth? 

Of  the  moon,  a  secondary  planet:  (1)  because  this  star  has  been  assigned  to 
the  Earth  as  its  private  property,  so  that  the  moon  might  help  with  the  growth 
of  earthly  creatures  and  be  observed  by  the  speculative  creature  on  the  Earth, 
and  that  the  observation  of  the  stars  might  begin  with  it.  (2)  Because  the  rea¬ 
sons  for  the  ratio  to  be  established  are  practically  the  same. 

Tell  the  foundations  of  the  ratio  between  the  moon  and  the 
Earthy  by  reason  of  the  body  and  by  reason  of  the  interval. 

1.  Again,  the  visible  diameter  of  the  moon  at  its  great¬ 
est  distance  from  the  Earth  had  to  occupy  M20  of  the  cir¬ 
cle,  both  on  account  of  the  number  itself,  as  before,  and 
also  on  account  of  the  eclipses  of  the  sun,  a  spectacle  or¬ 
dained  by  the  Creator  in  order  that  the  speculative  crea¬ 
ture  should  thereby  be  taught  concerning  the  rationale  of 
the  course  of  the  stars.  And  teaching  would  be  done  most 
rightly  if  the  semidiameters  of  the  sun  and  moon  were  to 
appear  equal  at  the  greatest  distance  of  each:  so  that  in 
this  way  the  moon  could  cover  the  sun  exactly,  during 
this  relationship  of  both  stars,  if  it  occurred.  And  so  M 
the  moon  and  S  the  sun  make  the  same  angle  at  E  the 
Earth. 

2.  Moreover,  it  was  fitting  that  the  ratio  between  the 
terrestrial  body  and  the  lunar  body  should  be  to  the  ratio 
between  the  distance  of  the  moon  and  the  semidiameter 
of  the  Earth  as  in  the  former  case  the  ratio  between  the 
solar  body  and  the  terrestrial  body  was  to  the  ratio  be¬ 
tween  the  solar  interval  and  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth:  namely,  the 
proportion  holding  between  the  pair  of  ratios  should  in  both  cases  be  the 
same.  For  the  moon,  a  secondary  and  terrestrial  planet,  made  in  order  to 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  877 

bscure  the  sun,  should  have  followed  the  example  of  the  ratios  of  the  sphere 
f  the  sun  or  the  Earth. 

Vhat  follows  from  this? 

Two  things  follow  from  postulating  the  two  axioms.  And  either  one  of  these 
wo  things  by  itself,  by  a  wonderful  concord  of  probabilities,  even  if  it  did 
ot  follow  from  the  foregoing,  [482]  could  be  employed  in  place  of  an  axiom, 
ince  they  are  very  worthy  of  belief  by  themselves.  The  first  is  as  follows: 
hat  since  the  proportion  of  ratios  on  the  part  of  the  sun  is  one  of  equality, 
.e.j  as  many  times  as  the  body  of  the  Earth  E  is  contained  in  the  greater  body 
f  the  sun  5,  so  many  times  is  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E  contained  in 
IE  the  distance  or  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  Earth  or  sun.  But  that 
roportion  is  not  more  probable  than  the  following:  that  the  body  of  the  Earth 
;  will  contain  the  lunar  body  M ,  which  is  narrower  and  smaller,  as  many 
imes  as  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E  is  contained  in  the  distance  or  semi- 
iameter  of  the  lunar  orbit  EMj  and  the  former  proportion  is  no  more  probable 
han  this  latter.  This  very  proportion,  employed  as  an  axiom,  has  its  own 
ignity;  hence,  because  the  Earth  is  the  home  of  the  measuring  creature, 
herefore  the  Earth  by  its  own  body  measures  even  the  smaller  lunar  body, 
ust  as  previously  it  measured  the  solar  body  which  is  greater  than  it:  and  by 

semidiameter  it  measures  the  semidiameter  of  the  lunar  sphere.  But  both 
•roportions  are  in  the  ratio  of  equality,  because  M  the  lunar  sphere  is  alone 
•laced  around  E  the  Earth,  just  as  the  Earth’s  sphere  is  placed  around  the 
un;  and  so  the  measurement  of  the  lunar  sphere  and  the  lunar  body,  prior 
0  the  other  planetary  bodies,  is  no  less  proper  to  the  Earth  than  previously 
he  measuring  of  the  solar  body  and  the  solar  sphere  was.  But  in  its  own 
•roper  measuring,  it  is  right  for  the  ratio  of  equality  to  hold,  as  first  and 
•rincipal,  if  nothing  prevents  it. 

The  second  thing  which  follows  from  the  premises  by  a  long  circle  of  demon- 
tration — see  it  in  my  Hipparchus — is  as  follows:  that  by  this  reasoning  the 
emidiameter  of  the  moon’s  orbit  or  the  distance  EM  is  a  mean  proportional 
•etween  the  distance  ES^  or  semidiameter  of  the  Earth’s  sphere,  and  the  semi- 
iameter  of  the  terrestrial  body:  so  that  as  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  E 
i  to  EM  the  semidiameter  of  the  moon’s  sphere,  so  EM  is  to  ES  the  semi- 
iameter  of  the  Earth’s  sphere  or  the  sun’s.  Here  again  there  is  an  equality 
f  both  ratios  which  is  itself  probable,  because  what  the  Earth’s  sphere  placed 
round  the  sun  is  to  the  sun  is  what  the  moon’s  sphere  placed  around  the 
Carth  is  to  the  moon. 

183]  Do  observations  agree  with  this  interval  between  the  moon  and  the  Earth? 

Down  to  the  last  hair:  for  Brahe  found  that  in  its  quadratures  the  distance 
•f^the  perigeal  moon  from  the  Earth  was  slightly  less  than  54  semidiameters 
•f  the  Earth;  but  the  distance  of  the  apogeal  moon  in  the  same  quadratures 
3  more  than  59,  slightly  less  than  60.  And  from  these  beginnings  it  is  inferred 
hat  the  first  distance  is  54,  the  second  59. 

low  is  the  magnitude  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  moon  to  be  inferred  from  the 
xioms  and  conclusions  employed  as  axioms^  which  have  been  posited? 

1.  If  the  semidiameter  of  the  moon  M  is  set  down  as  100,000  parts,  so  that 
he  interval  EM  between  the  centres  of  the  moon  and  the  Earth  is  22,918,166 


878  KEPLER 

such  parts:  the  cube  of  100,000,  i.e,,  1,000,000,000,000,000,  is  to  be  multiplied 
by  22,918,166;  and  the  fourth  root  of  the  product  is  to  be  taken:  the  fourth 
root  will  be  389,085,  showing  the  magnitude  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth 
in  terms  of  the  same  parts.  For  just  as  389,085  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth 
is  contained  in  22,918,166,  the  distance  to  the  moon,  a  little  less  than  59  times, 
so  too  the  cube  of  389,085  will  contain  the  cube  of  100,000  slightly  less  than 
59  times,  and  so  the  globe  of  the  Earth  will  contain  the  globe  of  the  moon 
slightly  less  than  59  times.  Thus  the  semidiameter  of  the  terrestrial  body  E 
will  contain  the  semidiameter  of  the  lunar  body  M  less  than  four  times. 

2.  Differently  and  more  simply,  from  a  later  conclusion:  the  square  root 
of  3,4693/^,  viz.,  of  the  distance  to  the  sun,  is  taken,  and  it  is  slightly  less  than 
59;  and  EM  the  distance  of  the  moon  is  59  whereof  the  semidiameter  of  the 
Earth  is  1.  But  if  1  the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  is  divided  by  59,  and  the 
cube  root  of  the  quotient  is  taken,  the  result  will  be  the  semidiameter  of  the 
lunar  body  in  terms  of  the  same  dimensions. 

Then  what  is  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the  sun  and  moon  inferred  to  he? 

The  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  solar  sphere  to  the  lunar  sphere,  or  that  of  the 
[484]  lunar  [sphere]  to  the  terrestrial  body,  viz.,  the  ratio  holding  between 
slightly  less  than  59  to  1.  And  so  the  solar  body  contains  the  lunar  body  more 
than  200,000  times. 

What  are  the  ratios  of  the  'planetary  globes  to  one  another? 

Nothing  is  more  in  concord  with  nature  than  that  the  order  of  magnitudes 
should  be  the  same  as  the  order  of  spheres,  so  that  among  the  six  primary 
planets.  Mercury  should  have  the  least  body,  because  it  is  inmost,  and  should 
obtain  the  most  narrow  sphere;  that  next  to  Mercury  should  be  Venus,  which  is 
larger,  but  still  smaller  than  the  Earth,  because  moving  around  in  a  sphere 
narrower  than  the  Earth’s  but  nevertheless  wider  than  Mercury’s;  that  the 
larger  globe  of  Mars  should  be  next  to  the  Earth,  because  its  sphere  is  outside 
and  more  spacious,  but  the  lowest  of  the  higher  spheres;  then  the  larger  globe 
of  Jupiter,  in  the  middle  among  the  higher  planets;  and  finally  Saturn’s  globe, 
the  largest  of  the  moving  bodies,  because  it  is  the  highest. 

Now  since  bodies  have  three  dimensions,  along  the  diameters,  across  the  sur¬ 
faces,  or  in  the  space  contained  by  the  surfaces — or  the  corporeality — the  ratio 
of  the  surfaces  is  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  diameters,  and  the  ratio  of  the 
bodies  is  the  ratio  of  the  cubes  of  the  diameters;  it  is  consonant  that  one  of  the 
three  ratios  of  the  globes  should  have  been  made  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  inter¬ 
vals.  For  example,  since  Saturn  is  approximately  10  times  farther  away  from  the 
sun  than  the  Earth,  either  the  diameter  of  Saturn  will  be  10  times  the  diameter 
of  the  Earth,  the  surface  100  times  the  surface  of  the  Earth  and  the  body  1,000 
times  the  body  of  the  Earth:  or  the  surface  of  Saturn  will  be  10  times  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  Earth,  so  that  the  ratio  of  the  bodies  will  become  the  ratio  of  the 
%  power  of  the  intervals,  and  thus  Saturn  will  be  30  times  larger  than  the 
Earth,  just  as  it  is  30  times  slower;  while  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  will  be  mere¬ 
ly  the  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the  intervals,  viz.,  Saturn’s  diameter  will  be  a 
little  more  than  thrice  the  Earth’s:  or  the  bodies  themselves  have  the  ratio  of 
the  intervals,  so  that  Saturn  will  be  only  ten  times  greater  than  the  Earth,  just 


879 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

as  it  is  ten  times  farther  away  [from  the  sun],  while  in  the  surfaces  the  ratio  of 
the  ^  power  of  the  intervals  will  be  kept,  and  in  the  diameters  the  ratio  of  the 
cube  roots  of  the  intervals.  And  so  the  diameter  of  Saturn^s  body  will  be  shghtly 
greater  than  twice  the  diameter  of  the  terrestrial  body. 

Of  these  three  modes,  the  first  is  refuted  beyond  controversy  both  by  the 
archetypal  reasons  and  also  by  the  observations  of  the  diameters  made  with 
the  help  of  the  Belgian  telescope;  up  to  now  I  have  approved  of  the  second  mode, 
and  Remus  Quietanus  of  the  third.  On  my  side  the  better  reasons,  the  archety¬ 
pal,  seemed  to  stand;  on  Remus’  side  the  observations  stand;  but  in  such  a 
delicate  question  I  was  afraid  that  the  observations  were  not  certain  enough 
not  to  be  taken  exception  to. 

Nevertheless  I  yield  the  place  to  Remus  and  his  observations.  For  Jupiter, 
opposite  the  sun  and  in  the  perigee  of  its  eccentric  circle,  was  frequently  seen 
by  me  to  occupy  approximately  50";  Remus  observes  Saturn  to  occupy  30"; 
Mars,  opposite  the  sun  and  its  perigee  in  the  Aquarius,  appears  greater  than 
Jupiter,  but  not  much  greater.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  a  body  equal  to  the  Earth 
were  seen  at  as  great  an  interval  as  we  assign  to  the  sun,  viz.,  3,469  semidiameters 
of  the  earth,  it  would  appear  to  have  a  diameter  of  2'.  But  now  at  the  perigeal 
distance  of  Alars,  the  same  body  which  is  equal  to  the  Earth  will  be  perceived  to 
occupy  more  than  5'  and  thus  to  be  equal  to  six  Jupiters.  Therefore,  the  greater 
the  diameter  of  the  globe  of  Mars  is  than  the  diameter  of  the  Earth,  the  larger 
will  it  be  in  appearance.  Therefore,  we  ought  not  to  make  this  diameter  of  the 
globe  of  Mars  more  than  one-sixth  greater  than  the  diameter  of  the  Earth,  as 
takes  place  in  the  third  mode. 

But  this  argument  will  make  war  perhaps  not  unsuccessfully  vdth  the  help  of 
the  archetypal  reasons:  for  just  as  previously  we  made  the  ratio  of  the  bodies  of 
the  sun  and  Earth,  and  of  the  Earth  and  moon,  the  same  as  the  ratio  between 
the  semidiameter  of  the  Earth  and  the  semidiameters  of  the  spheres,  so  now 
the  ratio  of  the  planetary  bodies  is  set  down  the  same  as  the  ratio  between  the 
semidiameters  of  the  spheres.  So  Saturn  in  its  bodily  bulk  will  be  slightly  less 
than  ten  times  greater  than  the  Earth;  Jupiter  will  be  more  than  five  times; 
Mars,  one  and  one-half  times;  but  Venus  slightly  less  than  three-quarters  of  the 
terrestrial  body;  and  Mercury  slightly  greater  than  one-third  of  the  same. 

[486]  J ust  as  the  body  of  the  Earth,  so  should  not  all  the  planetary  bodies  be  attuned 
to  the  solar  body  by  the  same  laws  as  the  Earth? 

By  no  means.  For  if  we  were  to  follow  this,  the  planetary  bodies  would  be 
great  in  an  order  contrary  to  the  order  of  the  spheres,  viz..  Mercury  would  be 
greatest;  and  Saturn  smallest  with  a  diameter  less  than  one-third  the  diameter 
of  the  Earth.  That,  however,  is  repugnant  both  to  the  aforesaid  reasons  and  to 
observations  of  their  diameters.  For  Saturn  opposite  the  sun,  when  it  is  nine 
times  farther  away  from  the  sun  than  the  Earth,  occupies  approximately  30" ; 
therefore  if  it  were  near  to  the  sun,  it  would  occupy  43^',  since  the  Earth  at  an 
interval  of  that  size  would  occupy  2'.  And  so  the  diameter  of  Saturn  is  more 
than  twice  as  great  as  the  diameter  of  the  Earth. 

And  this  is  to  say,  as  I  said  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  section,  that  it  is 
very  clear  from  the  things  themselves  that  the  beginning  of  setting  up  the 
ratios  must  be  made  at  the  Earth.  For  observations  of  the  moon  and  the  eclipses 
bear  witness  to  the  equality  of  the  two  ratios,  one  of  which  is  between  the  lunar 


880  KEPLER 

body  and  the  terrestrial  body,  and  the  other  between  the  semidiameter  of  the 
Earth  and  the  lunar  sphere:  we  can  by  no  means  resist  the  certitude  of  the  ob¬ 
servations.  Now  it  was  very  probable  that  the  Earth  too  should  be  attuned  to 
the  sun  by  the  same  laws:  and  when  we  had  set  down  that,  we  already  had  ob¬ 
servations  agreeing  with  it  distantly:  because  the  observations  do  not  bear  out 
the  sun's  having  a  nearness  of  1,200  semidiameters  of  the  Earth,  but  require 
twice  or  thrice  that  distance;  and  this  attunement  absolutely  demands  thrice 
that  distance.  Therefore  the  Earth  is  certainly  the  measure  both  of  the  solar  and 
lunar  bodies  and  of  the  solar  and  lunar  spheres.  But  thus  the  body  of  Saturn  or 
any  other  planetary  body  can  by  no  means  become  the  measure  of  both  things: 
once  more  we  bring  forward  as  witnesses  of  this  the  certain  observations  of  the 
diameters.  Therefore  the  Earth  alone  is  the  real  measure;  but  the  nature  of 
dimensions  demands  that  the  beginning  of  the  conformation  be  taken  from  the 
measure. 

What  should  we  hold  concerning  the  rarity  and  density  of  these  six  globes? 

First,  it  is  not  consonant  that  all  the  planets  should  have  the  same  density  of 
matter.  For  where  any  multitude  of  bodies  is  necessary,  there  too  a  variety  of 
conditions  is  required  in  order  to  make  distinction,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
truly  many.  But  the  principal  condition  of  bodies  as  bodies  is  the  internal  dis¬ 
position  of  the  parts.  For  inequality  of  bulks  somehow  happens  to  the  bodies 
themselves  on  account  of  the  surfaces  bounding  the  bulks,  and  the  internal 
part  of  one  body  does  not  differ  from  the  part  of  another  body  in  this  circum¬ 
scription  of  bulk.  But  the  principal  argument  for  the  dissimilarity  of  matter  is 
drawn  from  the  consideration  of  the  periodic  times:  for  that  consideration  will 
not  advance,  if  we  make  the  globes  have  the  same  density,  as  we  shall  hear 
below. 

Second,  it  is  consonant  that  whatever  body  is  nearer  to  the  sun  is  also 
denser.  For  the  sun  itself  is  the  most  dense  of  all  bodies  in  the  world,  and  its 
immense  and  manifold  force,  which  could  not  exist  without  a  proportionate 
subject,  bears  witness  to  this  thing:  and  the  very  places  which  are  near  the 
centre  W’ear  a  certain  form  [gerunt  ideam]  of  narrowness,  such  as  exists  in  the 
condensation  of  much  matter  into  a  narrow  place. 

Third,  nevertheless  rarity  should  not  be  measured  out  in  proportion  to  the 
greatness  of  the  bodies,  and  density  in  proportion  to  the  smallness.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  by  the  above,  both  the  distance  and  the  amplitude  of  the  globe  of 
Saturn  are  to  the  distance  and  amplitude  of  the  globe  of  Jupiter  as  10  is  to  5, 
approximately.  I  say  that  the  density  of  matter  of  the  globe  of  Saturn  must 
not  be  put  in  the  same  ratio  to  the  density  of  the  globe  of  Jupiter  as  the  ratio 
between  5  and  10. 

For,  if  anyone  followed  this,  he  would  sin  against  another  law  of  variety 
by  introducing  not  an  unequal  amount  [copiam]  of  matter  but  the  same  amount 
throughout  all  the  planets.  For  when  10  the  bulk  [488]  of  Saturn  has  been 
multiplied  by  5  the  density,  the  product  will  be  60  the  amount  of  matter, 
which  is  as  great  as  the  product  obtained  by  multiplying  5  the  bulk  of  Jupiter 
by  1  its  density.  But  it  seems  to  be  preferable  and  more  elegant  that  the  bulks 
of  globes  of  different  density  should  not  be  equal  to  one  another,  and  that  the 
density  of  globes  of  unequal  bulks  should  not  be  the  same,  and  that  the  amount 
of  matter  should  not  be  distributed  in  equal  portions  throughout  all  the  globes. 


881 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

which  dijBfer  in  bulk  and  in  the  density  of  their  matter.  Rather,  all  these  things 
should  vary,  so  that  in  whatever  order  the  moving  globes  succeed  one  another 
after  the  centre,  in  the  same  order — order,  I  say,  not  ratio — let  us  measure 
out  not  only  the  spaces  between  the  bodies  and  the  rarity  of  the  bodies  but 
also  the  amount  of  matter:  thus  if  Saturn  has  50  as  its  amount  of  matter, 
Jupiter  should  be  left  with  less  than  50  but  more  than  25  the  half  of  that — say 
36.  For  thus  the  bodies  will  be  as  50  is  to  25,  the  amount  of  matter  as  50  is 
to  36,  the  rarity  as  50  is  to  36,  or  as  36  is  to  25,  or  the  contrary  density  as  25 
is  to  36  or  as  36  is  to  50. 

Furthermore,  although  formerly  I  upheld  the  equality  of  the  amount  of 
matter,  I  have  been  compelled  to  assign  the  ratio  of  the  periodic  times  to  the 
greatness  of  the  bodies;  so  that  just  as  Saturn  has  30  years  and  Jupiter  12 
years,  so  too  the  amplitude  of  the  globe  of  Saturn  to  the  globe  of  Jupiter  is 
as  30  is  to  12.  But  the  observations  of  the  diameters,  made  by  myself  and  by 
Remus,  refute  this  ratio  as  being  too  great. 

Fourtlily,  the  following  things  persuade  us  that  the  ratio  of  the  amount 
of  matter  should  be  set  down  as  precisely  the  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the 
bulks  or  amplitudes — and  thus  the  ratio  of  the  %th  powers  of  the  diameters 
of  the  globes  and  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  powers  of  the  surfaces.  For  first,  it 
happens  that  the  ratio  of  the  amount  of  matter  and  the  ratio  of  the  density 
are  both  the  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the  intervals  from  the  sun,  and  that 
thus  the  amount  of  matter  and  the  density  participate  equally  but  inversely 
in  that  ratio:  hence  the  amount  of  matter  is  greater,  hence  the  density  of  the 
same  great  body  is  less:  and  that  is  the  best  mean  [mediatio]  of  all.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  Saturn  will  be  twice  as  high  as  Jupiter,  one  and  one-half  times  as  heavy, 
and  one  and  one-half  times  rarer,  or  Jupiter  is  one  and  one-half  times  denser. 
And  in  comparing  the  ratios  of  one  planet:  Saturn  will  be  twice  as  high  as  heavy 
and  twice  as  ample  as  rare. 

Moreover,  this  same  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the  intervals  is  established 
by  the  following  geometrical  propriety:  as  above,  betw^een  the  intervals  of 
two  planets  from  the  sun — for  example,  let  the  intervals  be  1  and  64  for  the 
sake  of  easier  reckoning — let  there  be  set  down  two  mean  proportionals  4 
and  16,  that  is  to  say,  in  order  to  form  the  two  remaining  dimensions  of  the 
bodies,  so  that  the  bodies  of  the  mobile  globes  would  be  to  one  another  as  1 
is  to  64;  but  the  surfaces  of  the  globes  as  1  is  to  16  or  as  4  is  to  64,  and  finally 
their  diameters  as  1  is  to  4  or  as  4  is  to  16  or  as  16  is  to  64.  So  now’  between 
1  and  64  the  intervals  of  the  same  two  planets  from  the  sun,  let  there  be  set 
down  one  mean  proportional  8;  that  is  to  say:  in  order  to  form  ph3"sically 
the  matter  wdthin  the  bodies,  for  the  matter  is  one  thing  only;  so  again  let  the 
intervals  between  the  globes  be  as  1  is  to  64,  but  let  the  amount  of  matter 
and  the  rarity  too  be  in  a  lesser  ratio,  as  1  is  to  8  or  as  8  is  to  64;  or  inversely 
the  density,  as  8  is  to  1,  or  as  64  is  to  8.  For  in  this  proportion  it  makes  no 
difference  in  w’^hat  manner  it  is  that  the  corporeality  is  condensed  or  rarefied, 
whether  it  is  merely  in  length  or  also  in  breadth,  or  finally  in  all  three  dimen¬ 
sions.  For  the  ratio  introduced  prescribes  an  amount  of  the  thing  to  be  con¬ 
densed;  and  different  modes  of  condensation  may  be  found,  wdth  the  amount 
always  remaining  the  same. 

Therefore  if  by  means  of  these  principles  w^e  compute  the  densities  of  the 
planetary  bodies  and  always  seek  a  mean  proportional  between  two  planetary 


882 


KEPLER 


intervals  from  the  sun,  or,  more  precisely,  between  the  diameters  of  two  spheres 
or  orbits,  and  if  we  finally  compare  all  the  numbers  to  some  common  round 
number  and  reduce  them  to  round  numbers:  the  result  will  be  the  numbers 
which  follow  in  the  table;  and  I  have  found  that  the  terrestrial  matters  which 
I  have  placed  next  to  them  agree  fairly  closely  with  them  in  their  ratio — as 
you  can  see  in  my  book  which  I  wrote  in  the  year  1616  in  the  German  language 
concerning  weights  and  measures: 


[490]  Saturn  324 

Jupiter  438 

Mars  810 

Earth  1000 

Venus  1175 

Mercury  1605 


The  hardest  precious  stones 

The  loadstone 

Iron 

Silver 

Lead 

Quicksilver 


So  that  we  may  reserve  gold — whose  density  in  this  proportion  is  1,800  or 
1,900 — for  the  sun. 


Finally  what  do  you  set  down  as  the  ratio  of  greatness  holding  between  those  three 
principal  regions  of  the  world,  between  the  space  wherein  is  the  sun,  the  space 
or  region  of  the  mobile  bodies,  and  the  space  of  the  whole  world  or  the  region  bounded 
by  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars? 

Even  if  the  reasons  of  Copernicus  do  not  extend  to  determining  by  observa¬ 
tion  the  altitude  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars:  so  that  the  altitude  seems 
to  be  like  infinity:  for  in  comparison  with  this  distance  the  total  interval  be¬ 
tween  the  sun  and  the  Earth,  which  by  the  judgement  of  the  ancients  embraces 
1,200,  and  by  our  reasons  3,469,  semidiameters  of  the  globe  of  the  Earth,  is 
imperceptible:  nevertheless  reason,  making  a  stand  upon  the  traces  found, 
discloses  a  footpath  for  arriving  even  at  this  ratio. 

But  in  the  beginning  we  must  glance  at  the  example  of  the  terrestrial  and  the 
solar  and  the  lunar  spheres,  because  the  ratios  of  the  whole  world  are  derived 
from  the  Earth^s  own  proper  ratios.  And  the  region  described  by  these  three 
bodies  and  their  courses  is  as  it  were  a  small  world.  For  what  the  sun  is  in  the 
Copernican  region  of  the  fixed  stars — that  is,  what  the  Earth  is  in  the  sphere  or 
region  of  the  sun — in  appearance,  at  any  rate,  and  for  Tycho  also  is  the  truth 
of  the  thing.  And  just  as  the  sun  is  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars, 
unmoving  in  an  unmoving  home;  so  too  with  respect  to  the  movement  of  the 
moon,  the  Earth  is  motionless  at  the  centre  of  the,  so  to  speak,  motionless 
sphere  of  the  sun.  For  just  as  the  region  of  the  moving  bodies  is  arranged  around 
the  sun,  so  also  the  sphere  of  the  moon  is  drawn  around  the  Earth:  in  the  former 
case  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  the  boundary  for  the  planets;  here  the  sun 
itself  is  the  boundary  for  the  moon,  and  she  returns  to  this  boundary  at  the 
end  of  a  month  when  all  her  phases  are  completed. 

Therefore  it  is  consonant  that,  just  as  by  necessary  reasons  the  sphere  of  the 
moon  was  made  a  mean  proportional  between  the  apparent  sphere  of  the  sun 
and  the  terrestrial  body  at  its  centre;  so  too  the  region  of  the  moving  bodies,  or 
the  outmost  circle  of  Saturn,  becomes  a  mean  proportional  between  the  outmost 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and  the  solar  body  at  the  centre  of  the  world. 

Again  the  same  thing  is  accomplished,  even  without  reference  to  the  small 
world,  by  the  consideration  of  the  great  world  itself.  For  since  in  one  respect 
the  movable  bodies  strive  after  the  immobility  of  the  encircling  body,  which 


883 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

supplies  the  place,  while  they  struggle  against  the  movement,  so  that  they  are 
not  moved  with  such  great  speed  as  the  mover  strives  after;  in  another  respect 
they  receive  movement  from  the  mover  to  a  certain  degree,  so  that  movement 
from  the  mover  and  rest  from  the  body  supplying  the  place  are  somehow  mixed 
together  in  the  movable  bodies.  Therefore  if  it  is  permissible  to  state  a  physical 
thing  in  mathematical  words,  the  movable  bodies  can  very  aptly  be  called  a 
mean  proportional  between  the  body  which  is  the  source  of  movement,  and  the 
immovable  body  which  supplies  the  place. 

But  since  this  thing  is  true  [verum]  physically  and  spatially — for  the  source  is 
inside,  the  thing  supplying  the  place  is  outside,  and  the  movable  bodies  are  in 
the  middle — therefore  nothing  is  more  probable  [verisimilius]  than  that  even 
geometrically  the  semidiameter  of  the  region  of  the  movable  bodies  should  be 
the  mean  proportional  between  the  semidiameter  of  the  solar  body  and  the  semi¬ 
diameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  so  that  just  as  the  solar  globe  is  to  the 
spherical  system  of  all  the  planets,  so  this  system  is  to  the  spherical  body  of  the 
whole  world,  which  is  bounded  by  the  region  of  the  fixed  stars.  See  the  diagram 
on  page  854. 

How  do  we  know  the  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  solar  body  to  the  diameter  of  the 
region  of  the  movable  bodies? 

With  the  aid  of  mathematical  instruments,  from  the  angle  which  the  solar 
body  occupies  in  our  vision.  For  since  [492]  this  angle  is  approximately 
it  follows  that  the  sun  has  a  distance  of  229  of  its  semidiameters  from  our  vision. 
But  our  point  of  vision  is  on  the  Earth ;  and  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  of  the 
Earth,  placed  around  the  sun,  is  slightly  greater  than  of  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  of  Saturn.  Therefore  the  outmost  sphere  of  the  movable  bodies,  ^.e.,  Sat¬ 
urn’s,  contains  approximately  ten  times  as  many  diameters  of  the  sun  [as  the 
terrestrial  sphere  does],  i.e.,  about  2,000.  In  the  diagram  on  page  854  this 
[outmost  sphere  of  Saturn]  is  the  middle  circle. 

How  great  does  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  turn  out  to  be  by  this  reasoning? 

As  the  diameter  of  Saturn’s  sphere,  the  outmost  sphere  of  the  movable  bodies, 
contains  the  diameter  of  the  solar  body  about  2,000  times,  so  too  the  diameter 
of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  would  contain  the  diameter  of  Saturn’s  sphere 
about  2,000  times.  And  so  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  will  con¬ 
tain  about  4,000,000  diameters  of  the  solar  body,  and — according  to  the  ratio 
between  the  solar  and  terrestrial  bodies  believed  by  the  ancients — ^more  than 
five  times  as  many  diameters  of  the  Earth,  z.e.,  20,000,000;  and  by  our  reason¬ 
ing,  three  times  that,  i,e.,  60,000,000. 

But  is  not  this  amplitude  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  unbelievable,  for  you  make 
it  to  be  2,000  times  greater  than  the  sphere  of  Saturn,  although  among  the  ancients 
this  sphere  stood  just  above  Saturn? 

But  much  more  unbelievable  is  the  rapidity — for  the  ancients — of  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars  and  Saturn.  And  since  it  is  necessary  for  one  of  these  two 
opinions  to  stand,  it  is  more  probable  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  should  be 
2,000  or  1,000  times  wider  than  the  ancients  said  than  that  it  should  be  24,000 
times  faster  than  Copernicus  said.  For  in  the  former  case  there  is  no  movement 
present  in  a  subject  which  is  very  spacious  and  as  it  were  infinite;  but  in  the 


KEPLER 


884 

later  case  an  as  it  were  infinite  movement  is  placed  in  the  small  sphere  of  Saturn. 
In  itself  such  a  great  amplitude  is  not  repugnant  to  Brahe^s  observations,  nor  is 
it  discordant  with  reason  that  bodies  which  are  at  rest  should  be  distant  from 
the  movable  bodies  by  such  an  immense  interval. 

[493]  How  do  you  know  that  such  a  great  amplitude  is  not  repugnant  to  Braahe^s 
observations? 

He  observed  the  greatest  altitude  of  the  pole  star — which  at  that  time  was  at 
7°  of  the  Ram — in  the  year  1586  at  the  midnight  after  the  autumn  equinox;  and 
it  was  58°51'.  He  observed  the  greatest  altitude  [of  the  same  star]  on  the  winter 
solstice  on  December  26  at  about  the  sixth  hour  of  the  evening,  and  he  found  it 
again  at  58°51'.  And  so  there  was  no  difference;  even  though  during  the  month 
of  September  the  horizon  cut  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  lower  down — by  ap¬ 
proximately  the  whole  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  in  which  the  Earth  is  borne — 
than  on  December  26,  because  on  the  first  date  the  sun  was  apparent  in  the 
Libra;  and  on  the  second  date,  in  the  Capricornus.  The  same  thing  occurred 
when  the  least  altitude  was  observed  on  the  midnight  after  the  spring  equinox 
and  after  the  winter  solstice  at  6  o^clock  in  the  morning;  for  in  both  cases  the  alti¬ 
tude  was  found  to  be  52°59J^',  although  during  the  month  of  March  the  horizon 
cut  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  higher  up — by  approximately  the  whole  semi¬ 
diameter  of  the  sphere  wherein  the  Earth  is  borne— than  in  December.  Therefore 
the  diameter  of  the  sphere  wherein  the  Earth  is  borne  is  not  perceptible  through 
Brahe’s  instruments. 

And  so  since  the  diameter  [of  the  terrestrial  sphere]  does  not  make  a  difference 
of  1'  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  therefore  it  is  not  part  of  the  semi¬ 

diameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  Therefore  the  semidiameter  of  Saturn’s 
sphere — which  is  approximately  10  times  the  semidiameter  of  the  terrestrial 
sphere — is  not  equal  to  Msoth  part  or  34oof^h  part  of  the  semidiameter  of  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  But  it  is  much  less  possible  to  decide  whether  therefore 
it  is  Mooofhi  part,  i.e.,  where  the  aforesaid  altitudes  of  the  polar  star  differ  by 
3^^'  or  12",  since  the  diameter  of  the  pole  star  seems  to  be  equal  to  at  least  1', 
and  since  we  cannot  believe  in  the  diligence  of  observers  to  the  extent  of  3/^'. 

According  to  Brahe,  Saturn  has  a  distance  of  12,300  semidiameters  of  the  Earth 
from  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  Therefore  its  diurnal  circle,  when  it  is  on  the  equator, 
contains  77,314  semidiameters  of  the  Earth,  f.e.,  66,420,000  German  miles;  and  their 
division  into  24  hours  make  the  portion  of  one  hour  to  be  2,767,500;  and  the  sum  of 
240  miles — for  according  to  Copernicus  that  was  the  space  traversed  by  Saturn  in  one 
hour — are  1 /12,500th  part  of  that. 

But  according  to  Ptolemy,  by  Copernicus^  corrections,  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  would 
be  as  follows: 

The  moon  is  64^^  semidiameters  distant  from  the  Earth. 

505^  for  the  body  of  the  moon  and  Mercury’s 


65  lowest  point  in  sphere  of  Mercury  1 283^  *  913^ 
209  highest  point  J 

1  for  the  body  of  Mercury  and  Venus^ 


210  lowest  point  in  sphere  of  Venus  1 1%  •  195^ 
1,407  highest  point  J 

7  for  the  body  of  Venus  and  the  sun^s 


885 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 


1,414 

lowest  point  of  solar  sphere] 

Although 

:  623^  Copernicus 

1,537 

highest  point  J 

has  1094  : 1190 

6 

for  the  solar  body 

2 

for  the  body  of  Mars 

1,545 

lowest  point  in  sphere  of  Mars  \143^  :  105J^ 

11,241 

higliest  point  / 

2 

for  the  body  of  Mars 

5 

for  the  body  of  Jupiter 

11,248 

lowest  point  of  sphere  of  Jupiter  1 

1 45M  :  74M 

18,253 

highest  point  J 

f 

5 

for  the  body  of  Jupiter 

5 

for  the  body  of  Saturn 

18,263 

lowest  point  of  sphere  of  Saturn  1 

149M  ;  70K 

25,737 

highest  point  J 

f 

5 

for  the  body  of  Saturn 

25,742  This  is  twice  as  wide  as  [495]  what  Brahe  has;  and  the  240  miles,  the  hourly 
movement  of  Saturn  in  Copernicus,  is  smaller  than  l/24,000th  part  of  Saturn^s 
hourly  movement  in  Ptolemy. 

What  do  you  think  are  the  ratios  of  density  of  the  solar  hodyj  the  ether  which  per¬ 
meates  the  whole  universe j  and  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  which  encloses  all  things 
from  the  outside? 

Since  these  three  bodies  are  analogous  to  the  centre,  the  surface  of  the  sphere 
and  the  interval,  three  symbols  of  the  three  persons  of  the  Holy  Trinity;  it  is 
believable  that  there  is  only  as  much  matter  in  one  as  there  is  in  either  one  of 
the  two  remaining:  in  such  fashion  that  a  third  part  of  the  matter  of  the  whole 
universe  should  be  packed  together  into  the  body  of  the  sun,  although  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  amplitude  of  the  world  the  body  of  the  sun  is  very  narrow;  that 
likewise  a  third  part  of  the  matter  should  be  spread  out  thin  throughout  the 
immense  expanse  of  the  world;  that  the  sun  should  in  this  fashion  possess  within 
its  own  body  as  much  matter  as  outside  of  itself  the  sun  is  fated  to  illuminate 
with  the  mighty  power  of  light  and  to  penetrate  with  its  rays;  and  that  finally, 
a  third  part  of  the  matter  should  have  been  rolled  out  in  the  form  of  a  spherical 
surface  and  thrown  around  the  world  on  the  outside  as  a  wall.  And  in  order  that 
we  may  shadow  forth  the  proportion  to  some  extent  of  a  known  thing  which  is 
similar,  even  if  we  cannot  equal  the  proportion,  let  us  imagine  that  the  solar 
body  is  all  gold,  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  of  water,  or  glass,  or  crystal,  and 
the  inside  space  full  of  air.  Whence  we  are  able  to  understand  to  a  certain  extent 
what  divine  Moses  signified  by  the  Firmament — ^^raquia,”  which  properly 
means  expansion,  viz.,  the  blowing  in  of  the  ether — and  what  by  the  super¬ 
celestial  waters.  For  similarly  boys  have  a  game  which  is  an  image  of  creation, 
when  they  make  bubbles  out  of  soap  and  water  by  blowing  air  into  them.  The 
difference  is  that  God  holds  up  the  drop — so  to  speak — of  water  on  the  inside 
[496]  at  the  centre.  In  the  case  of  the  boys,  the  drop  of  water,  on  account  of  its 
weight,  does  not  remain  at  the  centre,  and  is  not  separated  from  the  surface  by 
tl\e  blowing  but  sticks  at  the  bottom  of  the  bubble. 


886  KEPLER 

How  great  do  you  set  down  the  thickness  to  he,  or  the  distance  between  the  inner  and 
the  outer  surface  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars? 

Since  we  have  given  it  as  much  matter  as  is  in  the  total  expanse  of  the  world 
which  it  embraces ;  with  the  exception  of  the  matter  which  is  in  the  very  narrow 
globe  of  the  sun,  but  since  by  no  means  must  the  matter  of  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  be  set  down  as  having  the  same  desnsity  as  the  matter  in  the  region 
of  the  mobile  bodies  but  a  density  which  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the 
density  of  the  ether  and  the  density  of  matter  in  the  solar  body;  therefore  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  should  have  an  extension  which  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  extension  [497]  of  the  solar  body  and  the  extension  of  the  celestial 
ether.  But,  as  above,  the  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  sun  to  the  diameter  of  the 
ether  was  as  1  is  to  4,000,000.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  extensions  is  the  ratio 
of  the  cubes,  i.e.j  1  to  64,000,000,000,000,000,000.  But  the  mean  proportional 
between  these  numbers  is  8,000,000,000.  Therefore,  that  number  of  spaces  equal 
to  the  body  of  the  sun  will  be  equal  to  the  space  between  the  concave  and  con¬ 
vex  surfaces  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  And  so  the  whole  world,  when  its 
three  members  have  been  added  together,  is  represented  by  the  number 
64,000,008,000,000,001.  And  its  cube  root,  4,000,000J^^,ooO;  shows  that  this 
sphere,  having  a  thickness  of  3^,000^^  part  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  solar  body 
and  thrown  up  around  the  celestial  ether,  embraces  in  its  body  8,000,000,000 
spaces  equal  to  the  solar  body.  Therefore  this  skin,  or  tunic  of  the  world,  or 
crystalline  supercelestial  sphere,  is  of  such  great  subtlety,  on  account  of  the  am¬ 
plitude  of  its  expansion,  that  if  you  made  it  coagulate  into  one  spherical  mass, 
it  would  have  a  semidiameter  2,000  times  greater  than  the  semidiameter  of  the 
solar  body,  since  at  present  it  is  not  more  thick  than  K,ooo  of  fhe  semidiameter 
of  the  solar  body,  or  a  little  more  than  2,000  German  miles. 

How  great  will  the  sun  appear  to  be  if  you  imagine  an  eye  placed  on  one  of  the  fixed 
stars? 

The  4,000,000th  part  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  [sphere  of  the]  fixed  stars 
subtends  about  Therefore  the  solar  body  appears  to  have  a  diameter  of 
3^oo^  it  measures  the  great  circle  1,296,000  times;  or  the  apparent  diameter 
of  the  sun  from  among  the  fixed  stars  is  Ks^ooofh  part  of  its  apparent  diameter 
viewed  from  the  earth. 

How  great  in  turn  do  the  fixed  stars  appear  from  the  Earth? 

Skilled  observers  deny  that  any  magnitude  as  it  were  [498]  of  a  round  body 
can  be  uncovered  by  looking  through  a  telescope;  or  rather,  if  a  more  perfect 
instrument  is  used,  the  fixed  stars  can  be  represented  as  mere  points,  from  which 
shining  rays,  like  hairs,  go  forth  and  are  spread  out. 

Does  it  seem  therefore  that  any  one  of  the  fixed  stars  is  such  a  body  as  the  sun  is, 
and  that  the  sun  in  turn  is  seen  from  the  fixed  stars  to  be  of  so  great  and  of  such  an 
appearance  as  any  one  of  the  fixed  stars? 

I  do  not  think  so:  for  these  observations  do  not  prevent  the  sun  from  having 
a  body  of  greater  bulk  than  the  fixed  stars.  Moreover,  the  view  of  the  sun  from 
such  a  great  interval  would  be  brighter  than  that  of  whatever  fixed  stars.  For  if, 
for  example,  you  pierce  through  a  wall  with  only  a  pin,  so  that  the  sun  can  shine 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  887 

through  the  hole,  a  greater  brightness  is  poured  through  from  the  beams  than 
all  the  fixed  stars  shining  together  in  a  cloudless  sky  would  give.  And  the  eye 
is  not  injured  by  any  of  the  fixed  stars;  but  it  cannot  bear  to  look  towards  the 
sun  even  from  a  distance. 

PART  II 

On  the  Movement  op  the  Bodies  of  the  World 
1.  How  Many  and  of  What  Sort  Are  the  Movements? 

[499]  What  was  the  opinion  of  Copernicus  concerning  the  movement  of  bodies?  For 
him^  what  was  in  motion  and  what  was  at  rest? 

There  are  two  species  of  local  movement:  for  either  the  whole  thing  turns, 
while  remaining  in  its  place,  but  with  its  parts  succeeding  one  another.  This 
movement  can  be  called  blvriTLs — lathe-movement,  or  cone-movement — from 
the  resemblance;  or  rotation  from  a  rotating  pole.  Or  else  the  whole  thing  is 
borne  from  place  to  place  circularly.  The  Greeks  call  this  movement  0opd,  the 
Latins  circuitus,  or  circumlatio,  or  ambitus.  But  they  call  both  movements  gener¬ 
ally  revolution. 

Accordingly  Copernicus  lays  down  that  the  sun  is  situated  at  the  centre  of 
the  world  and  is  motionless  as  a  whole,  viz,,  with  respect  to  its  centre  and  axis. 
Only  a  few  years  ago,  however,  we  grasped  by  sense  that  the  sun  turns  with 
respect  to  the  parts  of  its  body,  i.e,,  around  its  centre  and  axis — as  reasons  had 
led  me  to  assert  for  a  long  time — and  with  such  great  speed  that  one  rotation  is 
completed  in  the  space  of  25  or  26  days. 

Now  according  as  each  of  the  primary  bodies  is  nearer  the  sun,  so  it  is  borne 
around  the  sun  in  a  shorter  period,  under  the  same  common  circle  of  the  zodiac, 
and  all  in  the  same  direction  in  which  the  parts  of  the  solar  body  precede  them 

[500]  — Mercury  in  the  space  of  three  months,  Venus  in  seven  and  one-half 
months,  the  Earth  with  the  lunar  heaven  in  twelve  months,  Mars  in  twenty-two 
and  one-half  months  or  less  than  two  years,  Jupiter  in  twelve  years,  Saturn  in 
thirty  years.  But  for  Copernicus  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  is  utterly  immobile. 

The  Earth  meanwhile  revolves  around  its  own  axis  too,  and  the  moon  around 
the  Earth — still  in  the  same  direction  (if  you  look  towards  the  outer  parts  of  the 
world)  as  all  the  primary  bodies. 

Now  for  Copernicus  all  these  movements  are  direct  and  continuous,  and 
there  are  absolutely  no  stations  or  retrogradations  in  the  truth  of  the  matter. 

By  what  arguments  is  it  proved  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  does  not  move? 

It  was  shown  in  Book  i  that  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  does  not  rotate 
around  its  centre  and  axis.  For  we  attribute  wholly  to  the  Earth  whatever 
appearance  of  this  meets  the  eyes.  Let  the  other  arguments  be  sought  there, 
in  folium  104  et  seqq.  Let  us  repeat  two  things  alone  as  proper  to  this  place, 
one  as  regards  the  speed.  For  if  the  outmost  sphere  contains  at  least  4,000,000 
diameters  of  the  sun  in  its  diameter;  the  circumference  will  be  more  than  12,- 
566,370  solar  diameters  in  length.  And  if  all  that  revolves  in  24  hours,  then 
in  one  hour  523,600  diameters  will  revolve;  in  one  minute  8,727 ;  in  one  second — 
which  is  approximately  equal  to  the  heart-beat  of  man — 145  diameters  of  the 
sun,  which  is  not  less  than  13,000  German  miles;  and  so  during  the  space  of 
time  during  which  the  artery  once  dilates  and  again  contracts,  with  a  twin 


888 


KEPLER 


pulse-beat,  around  7,500,000  (German)  miles  of  the  greatest  circle  would  be 
revolved — and  Saturn,  in  an  orbit  2,000  times  narrower,  would  still  traverse 
approximately  4,000  miles. 

The  second  argument  destroys  completely  every  movement  of  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars.  For  it  is  not  apparent  for  whose  good,  since  nothing  is  out¬ 
side  of  it,  it  changes  its  position  and  appearances  by  being  moved  to  what 
place  or  from  what  place,  and  since  it  obtains  by  rest  [501]  whatever  it  could 
acquire  by  any  movement.  For  the  movements  of  all  bodies  are  understood 
from  its  rest;  and  unless  it  gives  them  a  place,  as  it  can  do  perfectly  by  being 
at  rest,  nothing  can  be  moved. 

How  is  the  ratio  of  the  'periodic  timeSj  which  'you  have  assigned  to  the  mobile 
bodies^  related  to  the  aforesaid  ratio  of  the  spheres  wherein  those  bodies  are  borne? 

The  ratio  of  the  times  is  not  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  spheres,  but  greater 
than  it,  and  in  the  primary  planets  exactly  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  powers.  That 
is  to  say,  if  you  take  the  cube  roots  of  the  30  years  of  Saturn  and  the  12  years 
of  Jupiter  and  square  them,  the  true  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter 
will  exist  in  these  squares.  This  is  the  case  even  if  you  compare  spheres  which 
are  not  next  to  one  another.  For  example,  Saturn  takes  30  years;  the  Earth 
takes  one  year.  The  cube  root  of  30  is  approximately  3.11.  But  the  cube  root 
of  1  is  1.  The  squares  of  these  roots  are  9.672  and  1.  Therefore  the  sphere  of 
Saturn  is  to  the  sphere  of  the  Earth  as  9,672  is  to  1,000.  And  a  more  accurate 
number  will  be  produced,  if  you  take  the  times  more  accurately. 

What  is  gathered  from  this? 

Not  all  the  planets  are  borne  with  the  same  speed,  as  Aristotle  wished, 
otherwise  their  times  would  be  as  their  spheres,  and  as  their  diameters;  but 
according  as  each  planet  is  higher  and  farther  away  from  the  sun,  so  it  traverses 
less  space  in  one  hour  by  its  mean  movement:  Saturn — according  to  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  solar  sphere  believed  in  by  the  ancients — traverses  240  German 
miles  (in  one  hour),  Jupiter  320  German  miles.  Mars  600,  the  centre  of  the 
Earth  740,  Venus  800,  and  Mercury  1,200.  And  if  this  is  to  be  according  to  the 
solar  interval  proved  by  me  in  the  above,  the  number  of  miles  must  every¬ 
where  be  tripled. 

2.  Concerning  the  Causes  of  the  Movement  of  the  Planets 

[502]  State  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  astronomers  as  to  how  the  planets  move. 

The  ancients,  Eudoxus  and  Callippus,  and  their  follower  Ptolemy  did  not 
advance  beyond  circles,  wherewith  they  were  accustomed  to  demonstrate  the 
phenomena — not  worrying  as  to  how  the  planets  completed  these  circles: 
for  in  Book  xiii  of  the  Almagest,  Chapter  2,  Ptolemy  vTites  as  follows: 

“But  let  no  one  judge  that  these  inter  weavings  of  circles  which  we  postulate  are 
difficult,  on  the  ground  that  he  sees  that  for  men  the  manual  imitation  of  these  inter¬ 
weavings  is  quite  intricate.  For  it  is  not  right  for  our  human  things  to  be  compared 
on  a  basis  of  equality  with  the  immortal  gods,  and  for  us  to  seek  the  evidence  for  very 
lofty  things  from  examples  of  very  unlike  things. 

“For  is  anything  more  unlike  anything  than  those  things  which  are  always  in  the 
same  state  are  unlike  those  things  which  never  stay  like  themselves,  and  than  those 
things  which  can  everywhere  be  impeded  by  all  things  are  unlike  those  things  which 


889 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

can  be  impeded  not  even  by  themselves?  Indeed  we  must  try  hard  to  fit  the  most  simple 
hypotheses  to  the  celestial  movements,  in  so  far  as  that  is  possible;  but  if  that  is  not 
successful,  whatever  sort  of  hypotheses  can  be  used.  For  if  only  all  things  which  appear 
in  the  heavens  are  given  as  a  consequence  of  these  hypotheses,  then  there  is  no  reason 
for  being  surprised  that  interweavings  of  this  sort  can  occur  in  the  movements  of  the 
celestial  bodies.  For  these  [interwoven  circles]  do  not  have  a  nature  which  may  impede 
their  movement,  but  only  a  nature  which  has  grown  fitted  to  give  way  and  to  offer 
a  place  for  the  natural  motions  of  each  planet,  even  if  the  motions  happen  to  be  con¬ 
trary  to  one  another:  so  much  so  that  all  the  circles,  speaking  absolutely,  can  inter¬ 
penetrate  all  circles  with  no  more  difficulty  than  the  movements  can  be  perceived. 
And  these  movements  occur  with  ease  not  only  around  the  single  circles,  but  also 
around  the  whole  spheres,  and  around  the  axes  of  curved  and  closed  surfaces.  For  even 
if  the  various  interweavings  of  circles,  on  account  of  the  different  movements,  and  the 
engrafting  of  one  circle  in  another  are  very  difficult  in  the  customary  representations 
which  are  constructed  by  the  human  hand,  and  do  not  succeed  so  easily  that  the  move¬ 
ments  themselves  are  not  at  all  impeded :  nevertheless  we  see  in  the  heavens  that  such 
a  manifold  concourse  of  movements  by  no  means  stands  in  the  way  of  the  single  move¬ 
ments  taking  place.  Indeed,  we  should  not  judge  what  is  simple  in  celestial  bodies  by 
the  examples  of  things  which  seem  to  us  to  be  simple,  since  not  even  here  does  the  same 
thing  seem  to  be  equally  simple  in  all  lands.  For  it  will  easily  happen  that  he  who  wishes 
to  judge  celestial  things  in  this  way  will  not  recognize  as  simple  any  of  those  movements 
which  take  place  in  the  heavens,  not  even  the  invariable  constancy  of  the  first  move¬ 
ment:  because  it  is  not  only  difficult  but  utterly  impossible  to  find  among  men  this 
thing  (namely,  something  which  stays  in  the  same  state  perpetually).  Therefore  we 
must  not  form  our  judgement  upon  terrestrial  things,  but  upon  the  natures  of  the 
things  which  are  in  the  heavens  and  upon  the  unchanging  steadfastness  of  their  move¬ 
ments.  So  it  comes  about  that  in  this  way  all  the  movements  are  seen  to  be  simple, 
and  much  more  simple  than  those  movements  which  seem  to  us  to  be  simple.  For  we 
are  unable  to  suspect  them  of  any  labor  or  any  difficulty  in  their  revolutions.^^ ^  So 
Ptolemy. 

What  do  you  find  lacking  in  this  opinion  of  Ptolemy^ sf 

Even  if  it  is  true  for  many  reasons  that  we  should  not  judge  of  the  ease  of 
celestial  movements  from  the  difficulty  of  the  movements  of  the  elements, 
nevertheless  it  does  not  follow  that  with  respect  to  the  celestial  movements 
no  terrestrial  cases  are  akin;  and  Ptolemy  seems  to  draw  out  this  excuse  to 
such  lengths  that  he  undermines  the  whole  possibility  [universalem  rationem] 
of  astronomy;  and  so  the  excuse  satisfies  neither  the  astronomers  nor  the 
philosophers,  and  cannot  be  tolerated  in  a  Christian  discipline. 

For  as  regards  astronomy,  he  brings  all  hypotheses  under  suspicion  of 
falsity  so  long  as  he  argues  so  strongly  for  the  diversity  of  celestial  and  ter¬ 
restrial  things,  so  that  even  reason  is  put  down  as  erring  in  its  judgment  [504] 
of  what  is  geometrically  simple.  For  if  that  which  to  our  reasoning  concerning 
the  heavens  seems  to  be  composite,  because  our  reason  compounds  circles, 
is  simple  in  the  heavens  themselves,  therefore  in  the  heavens  circles  are  not 
compounded  with  one  another  in  order  to  fashion  one  movement.  Therefore 
the  astronomer  is  making  a  false  supposition,  and,  as  is  extremely  astonishing, 
is  eliciting  the  truth  from  things  which  are  absolutely  false.  But  that  is  to 
destroy  the  honor  of  astronomy,  which  Aristotle  upholds  in  his  books  of 

^I  have,  for  obvious  reasons,  translated  Kepler^s  Latin  rather  than  Ptolemy^s  Greek. 
C.  G.  Wallis. 


890  KEPLER 

Metaphysics^  believing  that  “the  astronomers  should  be  listened  to  on  the 
form,  lay-out,  and  movements  of  the  celestial  bodies/^  But  in  truth  Ptolemy 
reveals  himself  as  regards  what  he  desires:  for  he  says  to  construct  hypotheses 
which  are  as  simple  as  possible,  if  that  can  be  done.  And  so  if  anyone  con¬ 
structs  simpler  hypotheses  than  he — understanding  simplicity  geometrically — 
he  on  the  contrary  will  not  defend  his  composite  hypotheses  by  this  excuse 
but  will  say  to  prefer  the  hypotheses  which  seem  simpler  to  us  men  of  the 
earth,  even  if  we  employ  terrestrial  examples. 

As  regards  philosophy:  the  philosophers  will  deny  that  it  is  sufficient  that 
the  matter  of  the  celestial  body  should  be  liquid  and  permeable  by  the  globes 
and  so  should  not  resist  the  motions  of  the  globes  through  it.  For  they  ask 
what  this  thing  is  which  leads  the  globe  around,  especially  if  it  is  established 
that  the  matter  of  the  globes  resists  the  movers.  They  ask  by  what  force  the 
mover  moves  the  body  from  place  to  place,  as  there  is  no  immobile  field  re¬ 
maining  underneath,  and  since  a  round  body  does  not  possess  the  services 
of  feet  or  wings,  by  the  motion  of  which  animals  transport  their  bodies  through 
the  ether,  or  birds  through  the  air  by  pressing  upon  and  springing  up  from  the 
air-current.  They  ask  by  what  light  of  the  mind,  by  what  means  the  mover 
perceives  or  forms  the  centres  of  the  circles  and  the  encircling  orbits.  Finally, 
neither  theology  nor  the  nature  of  things  can  bear  that  Ptolemy,  who  is  steeped 
in  pagan  superstition,  should  make  the  stars  to  be  visible  gods — namely,  by 
inferring  immortal  life  from  their  eternal  motion — and  should  attribute  more 
to  them  than  belongs  to  God  Himself  the  Founder — that  is  to  say,  that  geo¬ 
metrical  reasons  which  are  really  composite,  and  the  understanding  whereof 
[505]  God  wished  man  His  image  to  have  in  common  with  Him,  should  be 
simple  in  the  stars. 

State  Aristotle^s  opinion  as  to  how  the  planets  move  in  a  circle, 

Aristotle,  believing  that  the  heavens  were  joined  together  by  solid  spheres — 
though  of  an  equivocal  matter — and  the  later  philosophers,  whom  the  Arabs 
seem  to  have  followed,  and  after  them  Peurbach  the  writer  on  the  schemata — 
they,  I  say,  at  first  believed  astronomy  as  regards  the  number  of  circles  neces¬ 
sary  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  appearances:  so  Aristotle  believed  Eudoxus 
and  Callippus  concerning  the  twenty-five  spheres.  He  attributed  to  the  spheres 
the  same  number  of  motor  intelligences,  who  were  to  revolve  in  their  mind  the 
time  of  the  period  and  the  region  of  the  world  into  which  the  motion  was  to 
proceed.  But  since  it  was  probable  that  all  the  spheres  should  look  to  the  same 
beginning,  Aristotle  judged  that  twenty-four  other  spheres  should  be  placed 
between  these  twenty-five  spheres,  and  he  called  them  aveXlrTorres,  or  coun¬ 
ter-turners:  namely,  in  order  that  each  lower  sphere  should  be  freed  by  the  in¬ 
terposition  of  the  counter-turner  from  the  carrying  off  which  it  was  going  to 
suffer  from  the  higher  sphere  on  account  of  the  contiguity  of  the  surfaces.  The 
counter-turners  move  in  an  equal  time  and  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the 
higher  sphere,  and  by  that  resistance  give  an  appearance  of  rest,  wherein  as  in 
an  immobile  place  the  lower  sphere  is  stayed  and  completes  its  own  proper 
period.  And  so  the  mover  of  each  sphere  was  appointed  to  give  to  his  own  sphere 
and  to  all  the  lower  spheres  which  it  embraced  a  most  regular  movement  within 
the  higher  sphere  which  was  placed  in  contiguity  to  this  sphere.  But  since  that 
philosopher  had  decided  that  movement  was  eternal,  he  appointed  movers 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  891 

which  were  also  eternal  and  immaterial,  because  material  things  could  not  have 
an  infinite  power.  Therefore  it  followed  that  the  movers  were  separate  and  im¬ 
mobile  beginnings.  But  since  this  eternal  duration  of  the  celestial  essence  seemed 
to  him  to  be  the  goodness  and  perfection  of  the  whole  world,  as  being  opposed 
to  destruction,  which  was  something  evil ;  he  also  gave  to  these  beginnings  the 
highest  perfection  and  the  understanding  of  this  perfection,  and  from  under¬ 
standing  the  good  the  will  [506]  to  pursue  it,  lest  [the  intelligence]  should  not  do 
well  that  which  is  good;  in  this  way  he  introduced  to  us  separate  minds  and 
finally  gods,  as  the  administrators  of  the  everlasting  movement  of  the  heavens — 
just  as  Ptolemy  did.  As  a  matter  of  fact  Scaliger,  who  professed  Christianity, 
and  other  followers  of  Aristotle  dispute  as  to  whether  this  movement  of  the 
spheres  is  voluntary  and  as  to  whether  the  beginning  of  will  in  the  movers  is 
understanding  and  desire.  And  indeed,  if  the  world  were  eternal  as  Aristotle  con¬ 
tended,  at  any  rate  the  fixed  region  in  which  the  planet  revolves  would  bear 
witness  concerning  the  understanding.  For  we  Christians  cannot  deny  that  the 
highest  wisdom  has  presided  over  the  instituting  of  the  movements  whereby  the 
planet  is  made  to  run  into  its  own  region  and  is  dispatched  into  its  own  spaces 
as  if  from  the  barriers;  but  Aristotle  assigned  this  office  to  the  movers  them¬ 
selves,  as  being  eternal. 

Furthermore,  motor  souls  were  added,  tightly  bound  to  the  spheres  and  in¬ 
forming  them,  in  order  that  they  might  assist  the  intelligences  somewhat;  or 
because  it  seemed  necessary  for  the  first  mover  and  the  movable  to  unite  in 
some  third  thing;  or  because  the  power  of  movement  was  finite  with  respect  to 
the  space  to  be  traversed  and  the  movement  was  not  of  an  infinite  speed  but 
was  described  in  a  time  measured  out  according  to  space:  and  that  argued  that 
the  ratio  of  the  motor  power  to  the  movable  body  and  to  the  spaces  was  fixed 
and  measured. 

And  so  by  this  solidity  of  the  spheres  and  by  the  constant  strength  of  the 
motor  power  absolutely  all  the  movements  or  celestial  appearances  were  so  taken 
care  of,  that — given  the  beginning  of  movement — then  indeed  every  variation  in 
the  movements  would  arise  from  the  lay-out  and  plurality  of  the  spheres  with¬ 
out  any  labour  or  worry  on  the  part  of  the  intelligence;  and  the  spheres  moved 
around  poles  which  were  at  rest — in  approximately  the  way  in  which  in  Book  i 
the  terrestrial  body  was  said  to  rotate  around  its  axis  and  its  poles.  And  by  that 
movement  every  sphere — and  certain  people  make  them  wholly  of  adamant,  so 
that  they  by  no  means  yield  to  any  body — carried  around  its  planet,  which  was 
bound  to  the  sphere  at  a  fixed  place;  and  one  sphere  supported  another  [507]  as 
was  said  above:  and  there  was  no  fear  that  the  globes  or  spheres  would  fall, 
bound  to  one  another  in  this  way. 

How  do  you  feel  about  this  'philosophy? 

Again,  I  do  not  raise  as  an  objection  to  it  so  much  the  authority  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  discipline  as  the  absurdity  of  the  teaching  which  fashions  gods  whose  func¬ 
tions  are  among  the  works  of  nature  and  which  meanwhile  ascribes  to  them  from 
eternity  such  things  as  are  necessarily  started  by  one  first  beginning  of  all  things 
at  the  commencement  of  time.  And  since  this  reasoning  cannot  do  without  its 
theology,  the  whole  thing  is  overthrown  by  the  denial  of  gods. 

Further,  solid  spheres  cannot  be  granted,  as  was  proved  above.  But  once 
more,  this  philosophy  rests  upon  solid  spheres,  and  it  is  overthrown  by  under- 


892  KEPLER 

mining  them.  For  Aristotle  will  readily  grant  that  a  body  cannot  be  transported 
by  its  soul  from  place  to  place,  if  the  sphere  lacks  the  organ  which  reaches  out 
through  the  whole  circuit  to  be  traversed,  and  if  there  is  no  immobile  body  upon 
which  the  sphere  may  rest. 

Moreover,  even  if  we  grant  solid  spheres,  nevertheless  there  are  vast  intervals 
between  the  spheres.  Either  these  intervals  will  be  filled  by  useless  spheres 
which  contribute  nothing  to  the  state  of  movement;  or  else,  if  there  are  not 
solid  spheres  throughout  these  intervals,  then  the  spheres  will  not  touch  one 
another  or  carry  one  another. 

Finally  this  theory  abandons  itself,  in  seeing  to  it  that  one  sphere  rests  upon 
another,  but  forgetting  the  lowest  sphere.  For  if  we  are  to  grant  that  spheres  are 
supported  by  spheres  and  that  they  are  contiguous  to  one  another,  then  what 
supports  the  lowest  sphere  of  the  moon  or  by  what  columns  is  it  supported  upon 
the  Earth,  which,  as  they  suppose,  is  at  rest?  Since  nowhere  on  the  surface  of 
the  Earth  is  any  solidity  met  with:  the  winds,  clouds,  and  birds  freely  and  easily 
come  and  go  every^vhere.  Why  doesn’t  the  great  weight  of  the  heavens  sink 
down  upon  us,  especially  when  the  denser  parts  of  the  spheres  [508]  approach 
our  zenith?  Or  if  the  heavens  have  no  weight,  what  need  do  we  have  of  spheres 
for  carrying  the  planetary  globes? 

If  there  are  no  solid  spheres,  then  there  will  seem  to  be  all  the  more  need  of  in¬ 
telligences  in  order  to  regulate  the  movements  of  the  heavens,  although  the  intelli¬ 
gences  are  not  gods.  For  they  can  be  angels  or  some  other  rational  creature,  can 
they  not? 

There  is  no  need  of  these  intelligences,  as  will  be  proved;  and  it  is  not  possible 
for  the  planetary  globe  to  be  carried  around  by  an  intelligence  alone.  For  in  the 
first  place,  mind  is  destitute  of  the  animal  power  sufficient  to  cause  movement, 
and  it  does  not  possess  any  motor  force  in  its  assent  alone,  and  it  cannot  be 
heard  or  perceived  by  the  irrational  globe;  and  even  if  mind  were  perceived,  the 
material  globe  would  have  no  faculty  of  obeying  or  of  moving  itself.  But  before 
this,  it  has  already  been  said  that  no  animal  force  is  sufficient  for  transporting 
the  body  from  place  to  place,  unless  there  are  organs  and  some  body  which  is 
at  rest  and  on  which  the  movement  can  take  place.  Therefore  the  question  falls 
back  to  the  above. 

But  on  the  contrary  the  natural  powers  which  are  implanted  in  the  planetary 
bodies  can  enable  the  planet  to  be  transported  from  place  to  place. 

But  let  it  be  posited  as  suflacient  for  movement  that  the  intelligence  should 
will  movement  into  this  or  that  region:  then  the  discovery  of  the  figure  whereon 
the  line  of  movement  is  ordered  will  be  irrational.  For  we  are  convinced  by 
the  astronomical  observations  which  have  been  taken  correctly  that  the  route 
of  a  planet  is  approximately  circular  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  eccentric — that 
is,  the  centre  [of  the  circle]  is  not  at  the  centre  of  the  world  or  of  some  body; 
and  furthermore  that  during  the  succession  of  ages  the  planet  crosses  from 
place  to  place.  Now  as  many  arguments  can  be  drawn  up  against  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  such  an  orbit  as  there  are  parts  of  it  alreayd  described. 

For  firstly,  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  not  a  perfect  circle.  But  if  mind  caused 
the  orbit,  it  would  lay  out  the  orbit  in  a  perfect  circle,  [509]  which  has  beauty 
and  perfection  to  the  mind.  On  the  contrary,  the  elliptic  figure  of  the  route 
of  the  planet  and  the  laws  of  the  movements  whereby  such  a  figure  is  caused 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  893 

smell  of  the  nature  of  the  balance  or  of  material  necessity  rather  than  of  the 
conception  and  determination  of  the  mind,  as  will  be  shown  below. 

Finally,  in  order  that  we  may  grant  that  a  different  idea  from  that  of  a 
circle  shines  in  the  mind  of  the  mover:  it  is  asked  by  what  means  the  mind 
can  apply  this  or  that  [idea]  to  the  regions  of  the  world.  Now  the  circle  is 
described  around  some  one  fixed  centre,  but  the  ellipse,  which  is  the  figure 
of  the  planetary  orbits,  is  described  around  two  centres. 

Then  what  seat  will  you  give  to  mind,  so  that  it  may  measure  out  a  circle 
or  an  elliptic  orbit  on  the  liquid  plains  of  the  ether?  You  do  not  place  the 
mind  at  the  centre,  do  you?  For  then  you  are  placing  it  in  the  ether,  which 
is  not  different  from  all  the  remaining  space  of  the  world,  because  the  orbit 
of  the  planet  is  eccentric  to  the  solar  body.  But  this  is  exceedingly  absurd, 
since  elsewhere  the  beginning  of  individuation  of  souls  is  assigned  to  the 
matter  and  to  the  body,  to  which  the  soul  is  added,  and  this  matter  differs 
in  place  and  time  and  in  many  other  marks  from  the  remaining  matter  of  the 
world.  Surely  no  other  position  belongs  to  the  soul  and  to  the  mind  than  that 
which  comes  through  its  body,  which  the  soul  informs.  And  by  what  force 
will  mind  be  moved  from  place  to  place  in  a  small  circle  around  the  centre 
of  the  world,  so  that  it  may  be  at  the  centres  of  the  planetary  orbits  in  the 
succession  of  ages,  if  the  mind  is  without  a  body  and  is  no  more  able  to  be 
moved  than  to  be  given  a  position  in  space?  By  what  means  will  mind  view 
its  position  or  its  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  world? 

But  let  it  be  granted  that  the  mind  has  a  view  from  its  seat  at  the  centre: 
then  how  will  it  cause  the  planet,  which  is  very  distant,  to  trace  its  orbit  around 
this  centre?  If  the  mind  had  the  planet  tied  by  a  rope,  perhaps  the  planet 
would  fly  around,  being  tied  to  the  centre.  Perhaps  the  mind,  looking  out  from 
the  centre,  could  perceive — especially  if  it  were  endowed  with  bodily  eyes — 
whether  the  planet  were  moving  in  a  circle,  if  the  planet  were  always  viewed 
making  an  equal  angle;  but  if  it  should  go  outside  of  its  circle,  in  what  way 
would  the  mind  lead  it  back,  if  it  did  not  see  the  orbit  by  itself?  [510]  But 
how  does  the  mind  understand  the  orbit,  which  is  not  stamped  on  the  body 
as  its  special  property?  For  here  there  is  no  question  of  the  intellectual  idea 
of  a  circle,  wherein  there  is  no  distinction  of  great  and  small,  but  of  the  real 
route  of  the  planet,  which  has  a  fixed  magnitude  in  addition  to  the  idea. 

But  if  you  place  the  motor  mind  outside  of  the  centre  of  its  orbit,  its  con¬ 
dition  will  be  worse.  For  either  it  will  be  in  the  body  which  is  at  the  centre 
of  the  world;  and  thus  all  the  minds  will  be  in  the  same  body,  and  the  above 
difficulties  with  respect  to  keeping  the  planet  in  its  orbit  and  with  respect 
to  the  discovery  of  the  orbit  will  remain.  Or  else  the  mind  will  be  in  the  globe 
of  the  planet:  then  in  both  cases  it  is  asked  by  what  means  the  mind  knows 
where  the  centre  is,  around  which  the  orbit  of  the  planet  should  be  organized ; 
and  how  great  the  distance  of  the  mind  and  its  globe  from  that  point  is.  For 
Avicenna  rightly  judged  that  if  the  mover  of  the  planet  is  a  mind,  it  has  need 
of  knowledge  of  the  centre  and  of  its  distance  from  the  centre.  For  the  circle 
is  defined  and  perfected  by  the  same  things,  the  centre  and  the  equal  curva¬ 
ture  around  it,  viz,,  the  distance  of  the  circumference  from  the  centre;  and  so, 
however  much  you  exalt  the  motor  mind,  nevertheless  the  circle  is  nothing 
else  to  God  except  what  has  already  been  said.  And  this  same  thing  should 
be  understood  proportionally  concerning  the  figure  of  the  ellipse. 


894  KEPLER 

Why  do  you  say  that  a  celestial  body,  which  is  unchanging  with  respect  to  its 
matter j  cannot  he  moved  by  assent  alonef  For  if  the  celestial  bodies  are  neither 
heavy  nor  lighty  but  most  suited  for  circular  movement,  then  do  they  resist  the 
motor  mind? 

Even  if  a  celestial  globe  is  not  heavy  in  the  way  in  which  a  stone  on  the  earth 
is  said  to  be  heavy,  and  is  not  light  in  the  way  in  which  among  us  fire  is  said 
to  be  light:  nevertheless  by  reason  of  its  matter  it  has  a  natural  a8vva/iia  or 
powerlessness  of  crossing  from  place  to  place,  and  it  has  a  natural  inertia  or 
rest  whereby  it  rests  [511]  in  every  place  where  it  is  placed  alone.  And  hence 
in  order  that  it  may  be  moved  out  of  its  position  and  its  rest,  it  has  need  of 
some  power  which  should  be  stronger  than  its  matter  and  its  naked  body, 
and  which  should  overcome  its  natural  inertia.  For  such  a  faculty  is  above 
the  capacity  of  nature  and  is  a  sprout  of  form,  or  a  sign  of  life. 

Whence  do  you  prove  that  the  matter  of  the  celestial  bodies  resists  its  movers,  and 
is  overcome  by  them,  as  in  a  balance  the  weights  are  overcome  by  the  motor  faculty? 

This  is  proved  in  the  first  place  from  the  periodic  times  of  the  rotation  of 
the  single  globes  around  their  axes,  as  the  terrestrial  time  of  one  day  and  the 
solar  time  of  approximately  twenty-five  days.  For  if  there  were  no  inertia 
in  the  matter  of  the  celestial  globe — and  this  inertia  is  as  it  were  a  weight 
in  the  globe — there  would  be  no  need  of  a  virtue  [virtute]  in  order  to  move 
the  globe;  and  if  the  least  virtue  for  moving  the  globe  were  postulated,  then 
there  would  be  no  reason  why  the  globe  should  not  revolve  in  an  instant. 
But  the  revolutions  of  the  globes  take  place  in  a  fixed  time,  which  is  longer 
for  one  planet  and  shorter  for  another:  hence  it  is  apparent  that  the  inertia 
of  matter  is  not  to  the  motor  virtue  in  the  ratio  in  which  nothing  is  to  some¬ 
thing.  Therefore  the  inertia  is  not  nil,  and  thus  there  is  some  resistance  of 
celestial  matter. 

Secondly,  this  same  thing  is  proved  by  the  revolution  of  the  globes  around 
the  sun — considering  them  generally.  For  one  mover  by  one  revolution  of 
its  own  globe  moves  six  globes,  as  we  shall  hear  below.  Wherefore  if  the  globes 
did  not  have  a  natural  resistance  of  a  fixed  proportion,  there  would  be  no 
reason  why  they  should  not  follow  exactly  the  whirling  movement  of  their 
mover,  and  thus  they  would  revolve  with  it  in  one  and  the  same  time.  Now 
indeed  all  the  globes  go  in  the  same  direction  as  the  mover  with  its  whirling 
movement,  nevertheless  no  globe  fully  attains  the  speed  of  its  mover,  and  one 
follows  another  more  slowly.  Therefore  they  mingle  the  inertia  of  matter 
with  the  speed  of  the  mover  in  a  fixed  proportion. 

The  ratio  of  the  periodic  times  seems  to  be  the  work  of  a  mind  and  not  of  material 
necessity. 

The  most  accurately  harmonic  attunement  of  the  extreme  movements — the 
slowest  and  the  fastest  movement  in  any  given  planet — is  the  work  of  the  high¬ 
est  and  most  adored  creator  Mind  or  Wisdom.  But  if  the  lengths  of  the  periodic 
times  were  the  work  of  a  mind,  they  would  have  something  of  beauty,  like  the 
rational  ratios,  duplicate,  triplicate,  and  so  on.  But  the  ratios  of  the  periodic 
times  are  irrational  [ineffabiles,  irrationales  vulgo]  and  thus  partake  of  infinity, 
wherein  there  is  no  beauty  for  the  mind,  as  there  is  no  definiteness  [finitio]. 

Secondly,  these  times  cannot  be  the  work  of  a  mind-^I  am  not  speaking  of 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  895 

the  Creator  but  of  the  nature  of  the  mover;  because  the  unequal  delays  in  dif¬ 
ferent  parts  of  the  circle  add  up  to  the  times  of  one  period.  But  the  unequal 
delays  arise  from  material  necessity,  as  will  be  said  below,  and  as  if  by  reason 
of  the  balance  [ex  ratione  stater ae]. 

Therefore  by  what  force  do  you  suspend  your  material  globes  and  the  Earth  in 
especialj  so  that  each  remains  within  the  boundaries  of  its  region,  though  it  is  desti¬ 
tute  of  the  bonds  of  the  solid  spheres? 

Since  it  is  certain  that  there  are  no  solid  spheres,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should 
take  refuge  in  this  inertia  of  matter,  whereby  any  globe,  placed  in  any  place  on 
the  world  beyond  the  motor  virtues,  naturally  rests  in  that  place,  because  mat¬ 
ter,  as  such,  has  no  faculty  of  transporting  its  body  from  place  to  place. 

Then  what  is  it  which  makes  the  planets  move  around  the  sun,  each  planet  within  the 
boundaries  of  its  own  region,  if  there  are  not  any  solid  spheres,  and  if  the  globes 
themselves  cannot  be  fastened  to  anything  else  and  made  to  stick  there,  and  if  without 
solid  [513]  spheres  they  cannot  be  moved  from  place  to  place  by  any  soul? 

Even  if  things  are  very  far  removed  from  us  and  which  are  without  a  real 
exemplification  are  difficult  to  explain  and  give  rise  to  quite  uncertain  judge¬ 
ments,  as  Ptolemy  truly  warns;  nevertheless  if  we  follow  probability  [verisimili- 
tudinem]  and  take  care  not  to  postulate  anything  which  is  contrary  to  us,  it  will 
of  necessity  be  clear  that  no  mind  is  to  be  introduced  which  should  turn  the 
planets  by  the  dictation  of  reason  and  so  to  speak  by  a  nod,  and  that  no  soul 
is  to  be  put  in  charge  of  this  revolution,  in  order  that  it  should  impress  something 
into  the  globes  by  the  balanced  contest  of  the  forces,  as  takes  place  in  the  revo¬ 
lution  around  the  axis;  but  that  there  is  one  only  solar  body,  which  is  situated  at 
the  centre  of  the  whole  universe,  and  to  which  this  movement  of  the  primary 
planets  around  the  body  of  the  sun  can  be  ascribed. 

3.  On  the  Revolution  of  the  Solar  Body  Around  its  Axis 
AND  ITS  Effect  in  the  Movement  of  the  Planets 
By  what  reasons  are  you  led  to  make  the  sun  the  moving  cause  or  the  source  of  move¬ 
ment  for  the  planets? 

1.  Because  it  is  apparent  that  in  so  far  as  any  planet  is  more  distant  from  the 
sun  than  the  rest,  it  moves  the  more  slowly — so  that  the  ratio  of  the  periodic 
times  is  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  powers  of  the  distances  from  the  sun.  Therefore 
we  reason  from  this  that  the  sun  is  the  source  of  movement. 

2.  Below  we  shall  hear  the  same  thing  come  into  use  in  the  case  of  the  single 
planets — so  that  the  closer  any  one  planet  approaches  the  sun  during  any  time, 
it  is  borne  with  an  increase  of  velocity  in  exactly  the  ratio  of  the  square. 

3.  [514]  Nor  is  the  dignity  or  the  fitness  of  the  solar  body  opposed  to  this, 
because  it  is  very  beautiful  and  of  a  perfect  roundness  and  is  very  great  and  is 
the  source  of  light  and  heat,  whence  all  life  flows  out  into  the  vegetables:  to  such 
an  extent  that  heat  and  light  can  be  judged  to  be  as  it  were  certain  instruments 
fitted  to  the  sun  for  causing  movement  in  the  planets. 

4.  But  in  especial,  all  the  estimates  of  probability  are  fulfilled  by  the  sun’s 
rotation  in  its  own  space  around  its  immobile  axis,  in  the  same  direction  in 
which  all  the  planets  proceed:  and  in  a  shorter  period  than  Mercury,  the  nearest 
to  the  sun  and  fastest  of  all  the  planets. 


KEPLER 


896 

For  as  regards  the  fact  that  it  is  disclosed  by  the  telescope  in  our  time  and  can 
be  seen  every  day  that  the  solar  body  is  covered  with  spots,  which  cross  the  disk 
of  the  sun  or  its  lower  hemisphere  within  12  or  13  or  14  days,  slowly  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  and  at  the  end,  but  rapidly  in  the  middle,  which  argues  that  they  are 
stuck  to  the  surface  of  the  sun  and  turn  with  it;  I  proved  in  my  Commentaries  on 
MarSy  Chapter  34,  by  reasons  drawn  from  the  very  movement  of  the  planets, 
long  before  it  was  established  by  the  sun-spots,  that  this  movement  necessarily 
had  to  take  place. 

What  do  you  think  should  he  held  concerning  the  solar  body  and  the  force  whereby 
it  turns  around  its  axis? 

It  was  said  in  the  first  Book  that  this  body — or  any  other  which  revolves 
around  its  own  axis — was  not  merely  moved  in  a  gyre  by  the  Creator's  omnipo¬ 
tence  at  the  commencement  of  things,  but  it  also  seems  to  continue  this  move¬ 
ment  by  the  reinforcement  of  a  motor  soul.  For  even  if,  by  means  of  some 
other  rationale  there  unfolded,  the  movement  could  be  continued,  nevertheless 
the  dailiness  and  yearliness  of  this  movement,  in  which  the  total  life  of  the 
world  consists,  is  more  rightly  obtained  by  the  reinforcement  of  a  soul. 

Do  you  have  any  other  arguments  besides  movement  which  make  it  likely  that  a  soul 
is  'present  in  the  solar  body? 

1.  A  strong  argument  is  drawn  from  the  matter  of  the  solar  body  and  its  [515] 
illumination,  which  seems  to  be  a  quality  in  the  solar  body,  sprung  from  the 
very  mighty  informing  by  a  soul — namely,  a  soul  whose  matter,  it  is  consonant, 
as  was  said  above,  is  the  most  dense  matter  among  the  bodies  of  the  world: 
therefore  it  is  right  to  believe  that  very  great  forces  are  present  in  that  soul, 
which  dominates  and  sets  on  fire  the  enduring  matter. 

2.  Moreover,  I  think  a  soul  must  be  postulated  rather  than  an  inanimate 
form,  because  it  is  apparent  from  the  rising  of  sun-spots  and  their  dispersion 
and  from  the  unequal  illumination  of  different  parts  in  different  times  that  there 
is  not  one  continuous  and  perpetually  uniform  energy  [energiam]  in  all  the  parts 
of  the  solar  body,  but  that  it  admits  movement  and  variation  and  interchanges, 
and  that  such  things  take  place  in  the  solar  globe  as  take  place  in  the  terrestrial 
globe,  mutatis  mutandiSj  so  that  from  its  inmost  bowels  hither  and  yon  things 
which  look  like  clouds  are  breathed  out — which  are  perhaps  black  soot — and 
when  their  matter  has  been  consumed,  the  light  of  the  parts  which  before  were 
covered  by  those  spots  becomes  more  bright.  And  since  these  interchanges  are 
perennial,  they  smell  of  the  guardianship  of  a  soul  rather  than  a  simple  form. 

3.  Moreover,  light  in  itself  [per  se]  is  something  akin  to  the  soul:  no  less  than 
this  same  thing  was  proven  of  heat  in  Book  i.  For  on  the  earth  nothing  is  set  on 
fire  [inflammatur],  that  is  to  say,  is  made  luminous,  which  was  not  engendered 
by  some  soul  in  a  body:  as  a  trunk  from  the  soUl  of  the  shoot,  alcohol  from  the 
soul  growing  in  the  vine,  sparks  from  iron  and  stones,  which  are  things  cooked 
up  in  the  bowels  of  the  Earth  by  the  soul  of  the  Earth.  But  that  light  is  some¬ 
thing  akin  to  our  flames  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  light  concentrated  by  con¬ 
cave  or  convex  lenses  sets  on  fire  in  such  fashion  that  there  are  flames  and  coals. 
And  so  it  is  consonant  that  the  solar  body,  wherein  the  light  is  present  as  in  its 
source,  is  endowed  with  a  soul  which  is  the  originator,  the  preserver,  and  the 
continuator. 


897 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

4.  And  the  function  of  the  sun  in  the  world  seems  to  persuade  us  of  nothing 
else  except  that  just  as  it  has  to  illuminate  all  things,  so  it  is  possessed  [516]  of 
light  in  its  body;  and  as  it  has  to  make  all  things  warm,  it  is  possessed  of  heat; 
as  it  has  to  make  all  things  live,  of  a  bodily  life;  and  as  it  has  to  move  all  things, 
it  itself  is  the  beginning  of  the  movement;  and  so  it  has  a  soul  in  itself. 

You  douH,  do  you^  further  add  mind  or  intelligence  to  the  sould  of  the  sun,  in  order 
for  it  to  regulate  this  movement  of  the  sun  around  the  axis? 

There  is  absolutely  no  need  of  mind  for  the  functions  of  movement.  For  the 
region  in  which  the  sun  revolves  exists  from  the  first  commencement  of  things. 
But  the  constancy  of  the  revolution  and  of  the  periodic  time,  as  was  explained 
above,  depends  upon  the  ratio  of  the  constant  power  of  the  mover  to  the  obs- 
tinancy  [contumaciam]  of  the  matter.  But  the  directing  of  the'  solar  axis  per¬ 
petually  towards  the  same  region  is  stillness  rather  than  the  work  of  mind,  since 
from  the  first  commencement  of  things  none  of  this  movement  has  been  im¬ 
pressed  upon  the  axis.  But  also  the  mean  circle  between  the  extremes  of  the  axis, 
the  poles,  necessarily  follows  the  direction  of  the  axis;  and  it,  regulated  by  the 
same  perpetually  fixed  points,  abides  as  the  axis  abides.  Finally,  the  laying  hold 
of  the  planetary  bodies,  which  the  rotation  of  the  sun  makes  to  revolve,  is  a 
bodily  virtue,  not  animal,  not  mental. 

And  let  these  things  be  said  with  respect  to  movement.  However,  with  respect 
to  the  inferences  concerning  intelligence,  to  which  the  consideration  of  the  celes¬ 
tial  harmonies  leads,  see  the  last  chapter  in  Book  v  of  my  Harmonies, 

Then  does  the  sun  by  the  rotation  of  its  body  make  the  planets  revolve?  And  how  can 
this  be,  since  the  sun  is  without  hands  with  which  it  may  lay  hold  of  the  planet,  which 
is  such  a  great  distance  away,  and  by  rotating  may  make  the  planet  revolve  with 
itself? 

Instead  of  hands  there  is  the  virtue  of  its  body,  which  is  emitted  in  straight 
lines  throughout  the  whole  amplitude  of  the  world,  and  which — [517]  because 
it  is  a  form  of  the  body — rotates  along  with  the  solar  body  like  a  very  rapid  vor¬ 
tex;  moving  through  the  total  amplitude  of  the  circuit — whatever  magnitude  it 
reaches  to — with  equal  speed;  and  the  sun  revolves  in  the  narrowest  space  at 
the  centre. 

Could  you  make  the  thing  clearer  by  some  example? 

Indeed  there  comes  to  our  assistance  the  attraction  between  the  loadstone  and 
the  iron  pointer,  which  has  been  magnetized  by  the  loadstone  and  which  gets 
magnetic  force  by  rubbing.  Turn  the  loadstone  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
pointer;  the  pointer  will  turn  at  the  same  time.  Although  the  laying  hold  is  of  a 
different  kind,  nevertheless  you  see  that  not  even  here  is  there  any  bodily  con¬ 
tact. 

The  example  is  certain,  but  obscure;  explain  what  that  virtue  is  and  of  what  genus 
of  things. 

Just  as  there  are  two  bodies,  the  mover  and  the  moved,  so  there  are  also  two 
powers,  by  which  the  movement  is  administered ;  one  is  passive  and  verges  more 
towards  matter,  namely  the  likeness  of  the  planetary  body  to  the  solar  body, 
with  respect  to  the  bodily  form;  and  there  is  one  part  of  the  planetary  body 


898 


KEPLER 


which  is  friendly  to  the  sun,  and  the  opposite  part  is  unfriendly.  The  other  power 
[potentia]  is  active  and  smells  more  of  form — that  is  to  say,  the  solar  body  has 
the  force  {vim)  to  attract  the  planet  with  respect  to  its  friendly  part  and  to  re¬ 
pulse  it  with  respect  to  its  unfriendly  part,  and  finally  to  keep  it,  if  it  were  placed 
thus,  so  that  it  does  not  direct  either  its  ^^friendly’^  or  its  '‘unfriendly^’  part 
against  the  sun. 

How  can  it  he  that  the  whole  planetary  body  is  like  or  akin  to  the  solar  body,  but  one 
part  of  the  planet  is  friendly  to  the  sun  and  the  other  part  is  unfriendly  to  the  sunf 

Doubtless,  too,  since  the  loadstone  attracts  the  loadstone,  the  bodies  are  akin; 
but  the  attraction  takes  place  with  respect  to  one  part  alone;  and  the  repulsion, 
[518]  with  respect  to  the  opposite  part.  Therefore  friendliness  and  the  unfriend¬ 
less  are  named  from  the  effect  of  rushing  together  or  of  flying  apart,  not  from 
the  unlikeness  of  the  bodies. 

Whence  comes  this  diversity  of  the  opposite  parts  of  the  same  body? 

In  loadstones  the  diversity  comes  from  the  situation  of  the  parts  in  the  whole. 
For  if  you  break  the  loadstone  AB  at  CD,  then 
wheresoever  the  pieces  are  transposed  to, 
parts  A  and  CD  of  the  two  pieces  are  mutually 
repellent.^  In  the  whole  loadstone  these  parts 
formerly  looked  towards  the  same  region  of 
the  world.  But  if  the  pieces  are  put  next  to  one 
another,  so  that  the  former  relative  situation 
of  the  parts  occurs,  as  CAD,  BCD,  then  the 
pieces  attract^  one  another. 

In  the  heavens  the  thing  is  arranged  some¬ 
what  differently.  For  the  sun  possesses  this 
active  and  energetic  faculty  of  attracting  or 
repulsing  or  retaining  the  planet,  not  as  a  loadstone  does,  in  one  region,  but  in 
all  the  parts  of  its  body.  And  so  it  is  believable  that  the  centre  of  the  solar  body 
corresponds  to  one  extremity  or  region  of  a  loadstone,  but  the  whole  surface  to 
the  other  region  of  the  loadstone.  Therefore  in  the  bodies  of  the  planets,  that 
part  or  extremity  which  at  the  first  commencement  of  things  and  at  the  first 
placing  of  the  planet  [519]  looked  towards  the  sun  is  akin  to  the  centre  of  the 
sun  and  is  attracted  by  the  sun;  but  the  part  which  stretched  out  away  from  the 
sun  towards  the  fixed  stars  came  to  possess  the  nature  of  the  surface  of  the  sun; 
and  if  it  is  turned  towards  the  sun,  the  sun  repulses  the  planet. 

In  order  that  I  may  better  understand  the  effect  of  the  whirling-movement  of  the  sun, 
say  what  you  judge  would  have  been  the  case  if  the  sun  did  not  have  a  whirling- 
movement. 

Just  as  a  loadstone  does  not  stop  attracting  a  loadstone  which  has  its  friendly 
part  turned  towards  it,  until  it  brings  the  second  loadstone  into  bodily  contact 
and  unites  it  completely  to  itself ;  and  if  the  unfriendly  part  is  turned  towards  it, 
either  it  turns  the  second  loadstone  around  and  in  the  same  way  attracts  the 
loadstone  -which  has  been  turned  around ;  or  else,  if  it  cannot  turn  the  loadstone 

^Reading  repellunt  for  attrahunt. 

^R^ading  attrahunt /or  repellunt. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  899 

around,  it  repels  it,  and  in  this  case  the  [first]  loadstone  does  not  leave  any  place 
to  the  second  vdthin  the  sphere  of  its  virtue,  if  only  it  is  not  hindered.  So  we 
must  consider  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  that  if  it  did  not  turn  around  its  axis,  none 
of  the  primary  planets  would  revolve  around  the  sun ;  but  a  part  of  the  planets 
would  voyage  towards  the  sun  perpetually,  until  they  were  united  to  it  by  con¬ 
tact;  and  the  part  which  turn  their  behind  towards  the  sun  would  be  repulsed 
towards  the  fixed  stars;  but  the  planets  which  show  their  side  to  the  sun  would 
stick  to  their  place  and  be  utterly  immobile,  while  the  attractive  virtue  of  the 
sun  struggles  with  the  repulsive. 

Then  what  takes  place  now  by  the  sun^s  rotating  around  its  axis? 

Indubitably  by  the  turning  of  the  solar  body  the  virtue  too  is  turned,  just  as 
by  the  turning  of  a  loadstone  the  attractive  force  of  one  part  is  transferred  to 
different  regions  of  the  world.  And  since  by  means  of  that  virtue  of  its  body  the 
sun  has  laid  hold  of  the  planet,  either  attracting  it  or  repelling  it,  or  hesitating 
between  the  two,  it  makes  the  planet  also  revolve  with  it  and  together  with 
the  planet  perhaps  all  the  surrounding  ether.  Indeed,  it  retains  them  by  attrac¬ 
tion  and  repulsion;  and  by  retention  it  makes  them  revolve. 

If  this  were  the  case,  would  not  all  the  planets  make  their  periodic  returns  at  the 
same  time  as  the  sun? 

Yes,  if  only  this  were  the  case.  But  it  has  been  said  before  this,  that  besides 
this  motor  force  of  the  sun  there  is  also  a  natural  inertia  in  the  planets  them¬ 
selves  with  respect  to  movement:  hence  by  reason  of  their  matter  they  are  in¬ 
clined  to  remain  in  their  own  place.  So  the  motor  power  of  the  sun  [potentia 
vectoria]  and  the  powerlessness  or  material  inertia  of  the  planet  are  at  war  with 
one  another.  Each  has  its  share  of  victory:  the  motor  power  moves  the  planet 
from  its  seat;  the  material  inertia  removes  its  own,  t.e.,  the  planetary,  body 
somewhat  from  those  bonds  by  which  it  was  laid  hold  of  by  the  sun,  so  that  it 
is  laid  hold  of  first  by  one  part  and  then  by  another  part  of  this  circle  of  virtue 

[circularis  virtutis]  and  as  it  were 
circumference  of  the  sun — that  is, 
by  the  part  which  comes  next  after 
the  part  from  which  the  planet  has 
just  loosed  itself. 

In  the  diagram,  the  form  [species] 
of  the  rotated  solar  body  is  under¬ 
stood  by  the  outer  circle  designated 
by  dots;  [521]  and  such  a  circle  is 
understood  to  be  drawn  through 
any  position  whatsoever  of  the 
planet  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  E,  G,  or  H, 
Let  the  sun,  and  with  the  sun  its 
form,  turn  from  right  to  left:  first, 
let  the  planet  A  be  laid  hold  of  by 
that  part  of  the  form  of  the  sun 
which  is  designated  by  the  ray  A ; 
let  the  ray  A  be  moved  through  a 
fixed  interval  of  time  as  far  as  the 


900 


KEPLER 


place  of  the  ray  Z);  and  let  it  draw  the  planet,  which  however  resists  and  tries 
to  loose  itself.  Thus,  as  in  the  same  interval  of  time  the  planet  is  propelled 
from  A  to  B,  so  the  first  ray  leaves  the  planet  behind  it  by  the  space  BD.  But 
in  turn,  the  ray  H  has  succeeded  it  and  lays  hold  of  the  planet  in  B.  For  as  far 
as  A  was  moved  forward  to  D,  so  far  has  H  proceeded  to  B. 

But  if  all  things  are  effected  by  natural  'powers  which  are  set  at  work  and  at  war  to 
'move  the  inertia  of  matter ,  how  can  the  planets  preserve  their  periodic  times j  so  that 
the  periodic  times  are  always  exactly  equal? 

More  easily  than  by  the  assistance  of  mind.  For  as  the  ratio  of  the  total  motor 
virtue  to  the  matter  of  the  globe  to  be  moved  is  invariable,  it  follows  that  the 
periodic  times  are  perpetually  equal. 

But  why  does  one  planet  free  itself  from  this  grasp  more  completely  than  another,  so 
that  Saturn  moves  only  240  miles  in  one  hour  while  Mercury  moves  1200  miles  ac¬ 
cording  to  Copernicus? 

1.  Because  the  virtue  flowing  from  the  solar  body  has  the  same  degrees  of 
weakness  in  different  intervals  which  the  intervals  themselves  have,  or  the  am¬ 
plitude  of  the  spheres  described  with  these  intervals:  that  is  the  mightiest  cause. 

2.  Moreover  there  is  something  of  a  cause  in  the  inertia  of  the  planetary 
globes  or  in  the  greater  or  less  resistance,  whereby  the  ratio  only  half  corre¬ 
sponds;  but  more  of  this  somewhat  later  on. 

The  body  of  the  planet  is  always  the  same  but  it  is  repelled  by  the  sun  and  attracted 
to  it,  as  you  wish;  therefore  it  passes  through  different  degrees  of  motor  virtue:  there¬ 
fore  the  ratio  of  the  power  to  the  planetary  body  does  not  remain  constant. 

Not  absolutely,  if  we  consider  the  parts  of  one  revolution;  and  so  the  same 
planet  becomes  faster  in  one  part  of  its  revolution,  as  above  in  E,  than  in  another 
part  A,  as  will  be  said  below.  But  in  spite  of  this  the  general  total  motor  virtue 
[collecta  universa  virtus  vectoria]  throughout  all  those  degrees  through  which  the 
planet  passes  during  one  revolution  always  and  at  every  restitution  is  of  the 
same  magnitude. 

How  is  it  possible  that  the  virtue  flowing  from  the  body  of  the  sun  should  be  weaker  in 
the  greater  interval  at  A  than  near  the  sun  at  E?  What  weakens  the  virtue  or  makes 
it  feeble? 

Because  that  virtue  is  corporeal  and  partakes  of  quantity:  wherefore  it  can 
be  dispersed  and  thinned  out.  Therefore  since  as  much  power  is  diffused  through¬ 
out  the  very  wide  orbital  circle  of  Saturn  as  is  collected  in  the  very  narrow 
orbital  circle  of  Mercury:  therefore  it  is  very  thin  throughout  the  parts  of  the 
orbital  circle  of  Saturn,  and  hence  it  is  very  feeble;  but  it  is  most  dense  at 
Mercury  and  hence  is  very  strong. 

If  it  were  a  question  of  the  body  of  the  sun,  I  might  grant  to  it  this  natural  power  of 
moving:  but  you  draw  out  this  material  power  from  the  body  and  place  it  without  a 
subject  in  the  very  spacious  ether.  DoesnH  this  seem  absurd? 

[523]  That  it  should  not  seem  absurd  is  clear  from  the  example  of  the  load¬ 
stone,  to  which  this  same  objection  can  be  made.  But  in  neither  case  is  this 
force  without  a  proportional  subject.  For  in  this  way  at  the  very  source  the  sub- 


901 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

ject  of  the  natural  faculty  is  the  body  of  the  sun,  or  the  threads  stretching  out 
from  the  centre  to  its  circumference;  thus  even  in  this  very  emanation,  I  think 
a  rational  distinction  should  be  made  between  the  immaterial  form  [speciem]  of 
the  solar  body,  which  flows  as  far  as  the  planets  and  beyond,  and  its  force  or 
energy  which  actually  lays  hold  of  the  planet  and  moves  it — so  that  the  form  is 
the  subject  of  the  force,  though  it  is  not  a  body  but  an  immaterial  form  of  a 
body. 

Could  you  give  an  example  of  this  thing? 

There  is  a  true  example  in  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun.  There  is  no  doubt  but 
that  just  as  the  whole  sun  is  luminous,  so  it  is  all  on  fire,  and  that  on  account  of 
the  density  of  its  matter  it  should  indeed  be  compared  to  a  glowing  mass  of 
gold,  or  to  anything  else  which  may  be  denser.  Now  from  that  light  [ex  luce  ilia] 
of  the  sun  there  emanates  and  comes  down  to  us  a  form  which  is  not  corporeal, 
not  material,  which  we  call  the  illumination  [lumen]  or  rays  of  the  sun  and  which 
however  is  subject  to  dimensions  and  accidents.  For  it  flows  on  straight  lines 
and  may  be  condensed  or  rarefied,  and  many  indeed  be  cut  by  a  mirror  and  by 
glass,  namely,  by  reflection  and  refraction,  as  we  are  taught  in  Optics.  More¬ 
over,  this  form  of  the  sun^s  light  [lucis]  bears  its  heat  with  it;  and  in  proportion 
to  the  greatness  or  smallness  of  the  strength  whereby  it  falls  upon  bodies 
which  can  be  illuminated,  it  warms  them  to  a  greater  or  to  a  lesser  extent. 

Therefore  just  as  that  form  {species)  or  illumination  {lumen) — which  form  we 
know  with  certainty  to  flow  down  from  the  light  {luce)  of  the  sun — is  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  heat-giving  faculty,  which  has  similarly  been  extended  from  the  sun, 
through  a  form;  so  too  the  solar  body’s  immaterial  form,  come  down  as  far  as 
the  planets,  has  as  its  companion  the  form  of  that  energetic  virtue  {speciem 
illius  virtutis  energeticae)  in  the  solar  body;  and  this  form  strives  to  unite  like 
things  to  itself  and  to  repel  unlike. 

There  is  a  more  clear  example  in  this  same  light:  when  it  passes  through 
coloured  glass  or  coloured  weavings  or  has  been  communicated  to  coloured  sur¬ 
faces,  [524]  it  itself  is  coloured.  Hence,  it  cannot  be  denied  that,  although  the 
light  is  an  immaterial  form  of  the  light  which  flowed  into  the  coloured  body,  it 
becomes  the  subject  of  that  colour  and  as  it  were  even  the  outward-going 
vehicle  of  it. 

What  if  this  very  light  and  not  some  other  form  from  the  body  of  the  sun  were  the 
subject  of  the  prehensive  faculty  whereby  the  sun  lays  hold  of  the  planetary  bodies? 

Not  absolutely;  for  it  seems  rather  that  we  should  take  it  that  an  immaterial 
form  flows  off  from  its  body,  in  which  form  the  prehensive  force  and  the  light 
inhere,  but  in  the  light  the  colour  and  heat — each  of  them  drawn  from  its  own 
source. 

State  the  reasons  for  this  distinction  between  the  immaterial  forms  from  one  and  the 
same  solar  globe, 

1.  The  matter  of  the  solar  body  must  be  something  distinct  from  the  light 
in  it.  For  the  movement  of  rays  of  light  in  a  straight  line  takes  place  in  an  in¬ 
stant;  but  the  turning  of  the  solar  body  takes  place  in  time.  But  if  we  were  to 
postulate  that  the  bare  form  of  the  light  is  the  subject  and  vehicle  of  the  pre¬ 
hensive  virtue,  then  one  and  alone  the  light  of  the  sun  could  lay  claim  to  being 


KEPLER 


902 

the  whole  essence  of  its  body.  For  the  same  thing  which  is  found  in  the  form 
from  the  thing  is  found  in  the  thing  as  in  its  origin  [orginaliter], 

2.  Dimensionality  applies  to  emanated  light  doubtless  not  wholly  by  reason 
of  the  inward  essence  of  the  light,  but  by  reason  of  something  different  from  the 
light  itself,  namely,  because  the  light  is  in  a  body  of  some  certain  magnitude  and 
because  the  forms  emanate  together  as  much  from  body  as  from  light. 

3.  The  form  of  light  emanates  from  the  surface  of  the  luminous  body,  or  if 
really  from  the  depths  of  a  pellucid  body,  still  as  if  from  the  surface.  And  so  the 
light  is  considered  as  a  surface,  [525]  and  it  has  the  same  properties  which  other 
surfaces  have  with  respect  to  movement  and  impact;  but  the  body  which  is  be¬ 
neath  the  illuminated  surface  suffers  nothing,  because  nothing  has  come  down 
from  the  inward  corporeality  of  the  source  of  light:  now  the  force  laying  hold 
of  a  body  must  necessarily  come  down  from  a  body,  so  that  there  may  be  a  mov¬ 
ing  cause  which  is  proportional  to  its  movable  object.  And  so  it  is  subject  to 
bodily  dimensions  and  moves  bodies:  not  only  with  respect  to  the  surface  but 
also  winding  its  way  into  their  very  matter. 

4.  Hence,  too,  no  matter  on  the  surface  of  the  object  resists  the  light  in  such 
a  way  that  the  surface  is  not  illuminated  instantaneously;  but  what  resists  the 
light,  i.e.y  something  opaque,  resists  it  perpetually  and  is  never  overcome,  as 
long  as  it  remains  opaque.  But  the  virtue  which  lays  hold  does  not  overcome 
every  whit:  for  the  resistance  of  matter  in  the  planetary  body  stands  up  against 
it  and  restricts  it:  hence  the  planet  does  not  follow  exactly  the  forward  move¬ 
ment  of  the  prehensive  force,  but  is  left  behind  and  abandoned  by  it  and  in  that 
mutual  struggle  there  is  place  for  time. 

5.  There  is  the  same  reason  for  the  further  difference  that  light  is  bounded 
and  stopped  by  the  surfaces  of  opaque  bodies,  so  that  it  goes  on  no  farther  into 
other  bodies  lying  in  the  same  straight  line.  But  this  force  which  moves  the 
planet  by  laying  hold  of  it  is  not  stopped  by  its  surface,  but  goes  into  the  body 
which  it  lays  hold  of,  and  moreover  goes  on  through  the  body  into  the  body  of  a 
farther  planet,  if  it  so  happens  that  two  planets  are  on  a  straight  line  with  the 
sun:  consequently  the  movement  is  not  disturbed  at  all  by  the  interposition  of 
bodies.  But  if  movement  arose  from  the  illumination  of  light,  this  would  be 
absurd;  for  as  often  as  the  higher  planet  was  eclipsed  by  the  lower,  so  often  and 
so  long  would  its  movement  cease  until  the  lower  planet  by  its  speed  should  re¬ 
move  itself  from  the  line  [with  the  sun]. 

6.  Finally,  that  the  planetary  movement  is  not  necessarily  from  the  naked 
light  of  the  sun  is  shown  by  the  examples  of  other  things  where  movement  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  celestial  movements  takes  place  without  light,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
case  of  the  loadstone;  and  this  will  be  shown  below  by  the  example  of  the  moon, 
which  is  moved  by  the  earth,  a  body  which  is  luminous  to  the  least  extent.  And 
even  if  at  that  time  the  illumination  of  the  earth  and  the  moon  has  a  share  [526] 
and  even  if  it  co-operates  in  many  ways  in  moving  the  moon,  nevertheless  it 
does  not  do  that  per  se,  but  merely  strengthens  the  motor  form  from  the  earth 
{specimen  motricem  telluris),  as  will  be  said  in  the  proper  place. 

What  is  the  likeness  between  the  form  of  light  and  the  form  of  this  prehensive  virtue? 

There  is  a  very  close  likeness  in  the  genesis  and  conditions  of  both  forms:  the 
descent  of  each  from  the  luminous  body  takes  place  instantaneously ;  each  remains 
of  averp-ge  greatness  and  smallness  without  loss,  is  not  taxed ;  nothing  perishes 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  903 

in  the  journey  from  its  source,  nothing  is  scattered  between  the  source  and  the 
illuminable  or  movable  thing. 

Therefore  each  is  an  immaterial  outflow,  not  like  the  outflow  of  odours,  which 
are  conjoined  to  a  decrease  of  the  substance;  not  like  the  outflow  of  heat  from  a 
raging  furnace,  or  anything  similar,  by  which  the  spaces  in  between  are  filled. 
For  this  form  is  not  anywhere  except  in  the  opposite  and  ^vithstanding  body; 
the  form  of  the  light  on  its  opaque  surface,  but  the  form  from  the  motor  virtue 
in  the  total  corporeality:  but  in  the  intermediate  space  between  the  sun  and 
the  surface,  the  form  is  not  but  has  been.  But  if  they  were  to  meet  the  concave 
spherical  surface  of  an  opaque  body,  both  solar  forms  would  be  scattered  in  that 
concavity  together  with  all  that  abundance  with  which  they  have  emanated 
from  the  body  of  the  sun:  in  this  way  as  much  of  the  form  would  be  in  a  wide 
and  farther-away  sphere  of  this  sort  as  is  in  the  narrow  and  nearer  sphere.  And 
since  the  ratio  of  convex  spheres  is  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  their  diameters: 
therefore  the  form  will  be  made  weaker  in  unequal  spheres  in  the  ratio  of  the 
square  of  its  distance.  And  again  because  circles  have  the  same  simple  ratio  as 
their  diameters:  therefore  in  longitude  the  form  is  weaker  in  the  same  ratio  of 
its  distance  from  its  source. 

Where  are  the  arguments  for  this  comparison  gotten  from? 

These  properties  of  light  have  been  demonstrated  in  optics.  [527]  The  same 
things  are  proved  by  analogy  concerning  the  motor  power  of  the  sun,  keeping 
the  difference  between  the  works  of  illumination  and  movement  and  between 
the  objects  of  each.  And  these  same  things  are  found  to  be  consonant  with 
astronomical  experiments. 

For  since  one  and  the  same  planet,  as  will  be  said 
below,  in  parts  of  the  eccentric  circle  which  are 
really  equal  but  are  at  unequal  distances  from  the 
sun,  makes  unequal  delays  and  does  that  in  this  very 
ratio  of  the  distances  therefore  it  follows  that  the 
motor  virtue  is  attenuated  in  longitude  in  the  same 
ratio  wherein  the  light  is  attenuated  in  longitude, 
namely  in  the  ratio  of  the  amplitude  of  the  circles 
which  have  those  distances  or  semidiameters.  In 
this  diagram,  let  the  sun  be  >S,  the  same  planet  CA 
as  nearer  and  FD  as  farther  away.  And  let  DH  and 
A I  he  equal  parts  of  the  eccentric  circle — that  is  to 
say,  at  opposite  positions  on  the  eccentric  circle. 
Let  DH  be  the  farther  away,  and  A I  the  nearer. 
Accordingly  as  SD  is  to  SA,  so  the  delay  of  the  plan¬ 
et  in  DH  is  to  the  delay  of  the  planet  in  AI.  From 
this  it  also  follows  that  as  SD  is  to  SA,  so  inversely 
is  the  density  of  CA,  the  light  which  is  at  a  lower 
distance,  to  the  density  of  FD,  the  light  which  is  farther  away. 

[528]  But  if  the  light  is  attenuated  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  intervals,  i.e.,  in 
the  ratio  of  the  surfaces;  why  therefore  does  not  the  motor  virtue  too  become  weaker 
in  the  ratio  of  the  squares  rather  than  in  the  simple? 

Because  the  motor  virtue  has  as  subject  a  form  from  the  solar  body,  not  ac- 


904  KEPLER 

cording  as  it  is  merely  body  but  according  as  it  is  set  in  motion  in  a  revolution 
around  its  immobile  axis  and  poles. 

Therefore  even  if  the  form  from  the  solar  body  is  attenuated  in  longitude  and 
in  latitude  no  less  than  the  light  is;  nevertheless  this  attenuation  contributes 
towards  the  weakening  of  the  motor  virtue  only  by  reason  of  the  longitude:  for 
the  local  movement  which  the  sun  gives  to  the  planets  takes  place  only  in  lon¬ 
gitude,  wherein  even  the  parts  of  the  solar  body  are  mobile,  not  also  in  latitude 
towards  the  poles  of  the  body  with  respect  to  which  the  sun  is  immobile. 

But  nevertheless  the  movable  bodies  have  latitude  no  less  than  longitude.  Wherefore 
they  are  borne  by  this  virtue  so  that  they  each  have  their  latitude  as  well  as  longitude. 
Therefore  why  is  not  this  motor  virtue  weakened  in  latitude,  and  that  in  the  ratio 
of  the  squares  of  the  intervals? 

Indeed  the  planetary  bodies  have  not  only  these  two  dimensions  but  also 
the  third  dimension  of  thickness  or  altitude;  and  they  occupy  this  virtue 
clearly  in  three  ways:  and  exactly  for  that  reason  the  prehensive,  vehicular, 
and  motor  virtue  of  one  planet  is  not  one  circle  lacking  latitude,  but  is  con¬ 
stituted  of  an  infinite  number  as  it  were  of  circles  parallel  in  latitude  and  in 
altitude.  But  it  does  not  accordingly  follow  that  the  attenuation  of  this  virtue 
should  be  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares  or  cubes  of  the  intervals  or  semidiameters. 
For  just  as  elsewhere  in  geometry  equimultiples  have  the  same  ratio:  so  also 
here  in  physics,  as  one  least  physical  line — as  a  part  of  the  planetary  body — is 
to  the  thinness  of  one  circle  of  virtue,  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  intervals;  so  is 
an  infinity  of  least  physical  lines — as  all  the  parts  of  the  planetary  body  laid 
out  in  latitude  as  well  as  in  altitude — to  the  same  number  of  circles  of  the 
motor  virtue,  which  all  together  and  singly  have  force  to  move  merely  in 
longitude;  but  neither  singly  nor  taken  all  together  do  they  have  any  force 
to  move  in  latitude  or  in  altitude.  Therefore,  just  as  the  single  lines  or  solitary 
threads  of  two  planetary  bodies  would  be  moved  by  the  single  circles  of  motor 
virtue  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  intervals;  so,  taken  together,  all  the  threads 
of  the  planetary  globe  are  moved  by  all  the  circles  of  motor  virtue,  taken 
together,  in  the  same  simple  proportion:  for  the  latitude  and  altitude  of  the 
motor  virtue  is  not  of  its  essence  but  of  the  accidents  of  the  movable  thing. 

Nevertheless  are  not  these  statements  concerning  the  form  from  the  solar  body  and 
from  the  solar  virtue,  which  makes  the  planets  and  the  Earth  in  particular  revolve, 
more  difficult  to  believe  than  the  former  statements  of  the  philospohers  concerning 
intelligences,  motor  souls,  and  solid  spheres? 

Their  being  more  difficult  to  believe  is  no  disadvantage,  provided  they 
are  easy  to  comprehend;  and  the  objection  made  against  the  spheres  and  the 
intelligences  cannot  be  made  against  them — or  any  other  objection  wherein 
the  charge  of  impossibility  is  made. 

For  in  the  first  place,  wherever  they  exceed  belief  there  is  none  the  less  a 
true  example  in  the  loadstone.  Then,  if  anyone  should  doubt  whether  the 
faculties  of  a  loadstone,  i.e.,  terrestrial  faculties,  are  present  in  the  heavens, 
or  whether  the  Earth,  a  heavy  body,  could  be  transported  from  place  to  place 
by  an  immaterial  form  from  the  sun;  let  him  regard  the  moon,  which  is  so  much 
akin  to  the  Earth:  he  sees  it  revolve  without  any  solid  sphere  underlying  it. 
[530]  But  that  bodily  forms  which  pass  one  another  back  and  forth  are  strong 


905 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

enough  to  cause  movement  is  shown  by  this  same  moon,  which  moves  the 
seas  on  the  Earth  by  the  form  given  out.  So  we  are  not  lacking  in  examples. 
And  the  mode  by  which  we  perceive  in  mind  what  sort  of  form  it  is  does  not 
disturb  us:  alone  the  unbelievable  strength  [joriitudo]  of  this  form  keeps  us 
in  doubt.  And  indeed  we  can  rightly  answer  here  with  Ptolemy  that  it  is 
never  proper  to  appraise  the  virtues  of  divine  works  according  to  our  weakness, 
or  their  greatness  according  to  our  smallness. 

Now  the  appraisal  of  mode  and  figures  belongs  to  mind;  but  in  this  ap¬ 
praisal  there  should  be  no  judgment  of  greatness  or  smallness,  f.e.,  of  indefinite 
quantities. 

4.  On  the  Causes  of  the  Ratio  of  the  Periodic  Times 

In  the  beginning  of  this  consideration  of  movement  you  said  that  the  periodic  times 
of  the  planets  are  found  to  be  quite  exactly  in  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  powers  of  their 
orbits  or  circles,  I  ask  what  the  cause  of  this  thing  is. 

Four  causes  come  together  in  establishing  the  length  of  the  periodic  time. 
The  first  is  the  length  of  the  route;  the  second  is  the  weight  or  the  amount 
[copia]  of  matter  to  be  transported;  the  third  is  the  strength  of  the  motor 
virtue;  the  fourth  is  the  bulk  [moles]  or  space  in  which  the  matter  to  be  trans¬ 
ported  is  unrolled.  For  as  is  the  case  in  a  mill,  where  the  wheel  is  turned  by 
the  force  of  the  stream,  so  that,  the  vdder  and  longer  the  wings,  planks,  or 
oars  which  you  fasten  to  the  wheel,  the  greater  the  force  of  the  stream  pouring 
through  the  width  and  depth  which  you  will  divert  into  the  machine;  so  too 

that  is  the  case  in  this  celestial  vortex  of  the  solar 
form  moving  rapidly  in  a  gyro — and  this  form 
causes  the  movement.  [531]  Consequently  the  more 
space  the  body — A  or  D  in  this  case — occupies,  the 
more  widely  and  deeply  it  occupies  the  motor  vir¬ 
tue,  as  in  this  case  BCA  understood  according  to 
its  width;  and  the  more  swiftly,  other  things  being 
equal,  is  it  borne  forward;  and  the  more  quickly 
does  it  complete  its  periodic  journey. 

But  the  circular  journeys  of  the  planets  are  in 
the  simple  ratio  of  the  intervals.  For  as  SA  is  to 
SD,  so  too  is  the  whole  circle  BA  to  the  whole 
circle  ED.  But  the  weight,  or  the  amount  of  matter 
in  the  different  planets,  is  in  the  ratio  of  the  3^th 
powers  of  the  intervals,  as  was  proved  above,  so 
that  always  the  higher  planet  has  more  matter  and 
is  moved  the  more  slowly  and  piles  up  the  more  time 
in  its  period,  since  even  before  now  by  reason  of  its 
journey  it  would  have  wanted  more  time.  For  with 
SK  taken  as  a  mean  proportional  between  SA  and  SD  the  intervals  of  the  two 
planets;  as  SK  is  to  the  greater  distance  SD^  so  the  amount  of  matter  in  the 
planet  A  is  to  the  amount  in  the  planet  D.  But  the  third  and  fourth  causes 
balance  one  another  in  the  comparison  of  the  different  planets.  But  the  simple 
ratio  of  the  intervals  plus  the  ratio  of  the  ^^ith  powers  constitute  the  ratio 
of  the  ^th  powers  of  the  same.  Therefore  the  periodic  times  are  in  the  ratio 


906 


KEPLER 


of  the  ^th  powers  of  the  intervals.  Consequently  if  SD^  SK,  SAj  and  SL 
are  continued  [mean]  proportionals,  then  SL  will  be  to  SD  [532]  as  the  time 
period  of  planet  A  is  to  the  time  period  of  planet  D. 

Prove,  in  comparing  two  planets,  that  the  weakening  of  the  motor  virtue  is  exactly 
balanced  by  the  amplitude  wherewith  the  movable  planetary  bodies  occupy  the 
virtue. 

The  bulks  or  expanses  of  the  bodies  are  in  the  simple  and  direct  ratio  of  the 
intervals,  as  was  demonstrated  above.  That  is,  as  SA  is  to  SD,  so  is  the  bulk 
of  the  planetary  body  at  A  to  the  bulk  of  the  other  planet  at  D.  But  too  the 
motor  virtue  is  dense  and  strong,  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  intervals  but  in¬ 
versely;  for  as  the  same  interval  aSA  is  to  SD,  so  the  strength  of  the  form  CA 
is  to  the  strength  of  the  form  FD.  Therefore  the  virtue  is  in  turn  occupied 
in  the  same  ratio  in  which  it  is  weakened;  for  example,  Saturn  is  borne  by  a 
power  ten  times  feebler  than  the  virtue  by  which  the  Earth  is;  but  conversely, 
it  occupies  with  its  body  ten  times  more  of  the  virtue  of  its  region  than  the 
Earth  with  its  body  occupies  of  the  virtue  of  its  region.  And  let  the  total 
virtue  which  Saturn  occupies  by  its  bulk  be  divided  into  ten  parts  which  are 
equal  in  expanse  {spatio)  to  the  total  virtue  which  the  Earth  occupies.  Any 
one  of  these  parts  or  expanses  of  virtue  has  only  one  tenth  of  the  strength 
which  that  one  part  which  is  occupied  by  the  Earth  has,  wherefore  those  ten 
parts  added  together  into  one  are  equal  in  power  [potestate]  to  that  one  part 
by  which  the  Earth  is  borne.  And  so  if  in  the  amplitude  of  the  more  rarefied 
globe  of  Saturn  there  were  not  more  matter  than  in  the  narro\vness  of  the 
denser  terrestrial  body,  the  globe  of  Saturn  in  one  year  would  be  borne  along 
as  great  a  distance  of  its  orbit  as  is  the  length  of  the  whole  orbit  of  the  Earth; 
and  thus  in  ten  years  it  would  complete  its  proper  orbit.  But  in  fact  it  has 
approximately  thrice  as  much  matter  and  weight  as  the  Earth  does;  where¬ 
fore  it  requires  thrice  as  long  a  time,  namely  thirty  years. 

[533]  What  need  was  there  to  teach  of  this  balancing?  W ould  it  not  have  been  enough 
for  establishing  a  demonstration  to  set  down  that  there  is  absolutely  no  cause  for  such 
an  irregular  movement  as  this  either  in  the  different  grades  of  the  motor  virtue  or  in 
the  different  amplitudes  of  the  planetary  globes? 

Now  for  the  demonstration  that  the  ratio  of  the  different  periods  of  the  planets 
is  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  power  of  the  intervals,  it  would  have  made  no  difference 
whether  this  or  that  were  set  do^vn.  But  if  we  had  progressed  to  the  different 
delays  of  one  and  the  same  planet  at  different  intervals,  we  could  not  have  es¬ 
tablished  from  the  same  genus  of  things  the  reason  why  the  delays  in  arcs  which 
are  exactly  equal  should  follow  the  ratio  of  the  intervals. 

Then  what  is  the  reason  why  the  farther  distant  from  the  sun  any  equal  arc  of  the 
eccentric  circle  is,  the  longer  delays  does  the  planet  make  in  that  arc,  and  in  the  ratio 
of  the  intervals? 

The  reason  is  indeed  the  weakening  of  the  motor  virtue:  just  as  light  is  SD 
the  longer  interval  from  the  sun  is  diffused  more  thinly  along  the  length  FD 
than  is  the  diffusion  of  the  same  in  the  shorter  interval  SA .  And  so  what  of  the 
virtue  was  at  that  time  occupied  by  the  body  of  the  planet,  as  FD,  is  more  weak 
than  what  of  the  denser  virtue  is  occupied  by  the  same  CA  which  is  nearer. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  907 

For  here  the  three  remaining  causes  are  missing.  For  the  arc  or  route  is  as¬ 
sumed  in  both  cases  to  be  of  the  same  length,  as  DH,  AI:  the  density  of  the 
body  remains  the  same,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  figure  likewise;  because  FD 
and  CA  are  in  this  case  one  and  the  same  planet.  The  strength  of  the  virtue 
alone  is  left.  But  more  on  this  in  the  following. 

[534]  In  this  case  we  seem  to  meet  a  greater  difficulty  than  above.  For  when  the 
planet  is  nearer  to  the  sun,  it  occupies  not  only  longer  arcs  of  the  circles  of  the  motor 
virtue  hut  also  denser  arcs:  wherefore  should  it  not  extend  its  delays  in  the  ratio  of 
the  squares  rather  than  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  intervals? 

Now  the  same  thing  is  said  as  above,  and  the  same  answer  is  made.  For  even 
if  Saturn  at  that  time  did  not  come  down  into  the  sphere  of  the  Earth:  never¬ 
theless  we  were  comparing  the  expanse  of  power  occupied  by  Saturn  not  merely 
with  that  which  the  Earth  would  have  occupied  in  the  sphere  of  Saturn  but  also 
with  that  which  the  Earth  would  occupy  in  its  own  sphere.  Therefore,  as  before, 
the  fact  that  the  circles  are  denser  (conferiiores)  is  to  be  assigned  to  the  form 
from  the  body;  and  this  form  is  something  distinct  from  the  inhering  motor 
virtue,  which  extends  in  longitude  alone  and  gets  no  advantage  from  the  con¬ 
densation  of  its  subject  in  latitude — unless  a  thin  line  without  width  {latitudine 
carens)  has  no  natural  force  in  length  {in  longum):  where  the  width  {latitudo)  of 
such  a  line  is  judged  not  by  the  density  but  by  the  expanse,  namely  on  account 
of  the  width  of  the  bodies  to  be  moved,  as  I  taught  above. 

5.  On  the  Annual  Movement  of  the  Earth 

Accordingly  this  philosophy  of  Copernicus  makes  the  Earth  one  of  the  planets  and 
sets  it  revolving  among  the  stars:  I  ask  whaty  besides  what  has  been  saidy  is  required 
for  the  easier  perception  of  the  teaching  and  the  arguments. 

Since  the  annual  movement  of  the  Earth  becomes  necessary,  because  it  has 
been  postulated  that  the  centre  of  the  sun  is  at  rest  at  the  centre  of  the  world, 
and  since  this  movement  is  caused  [535]  by  the  revolution  of  the  sun  in  that 
space  and  clearly  removes  the  truth  of  the  stopping  and  retrogradation  of  the 
planets  and  explains  it  as  a  mere  deception  of  sight:  we  must  distinguish  care¬ 
fully  the  following  questions:  (1)  Whether  the  sun  sticks  to  the  centre  of  the 
world.  (2)  Whether  all  the  five  spheres  of  the  planets  and  the  middle  sphere  of 
the  Earth  are  drawn  up  around  the  sun,  so  that  the  sun  is  in  the  embrace  of  all. 
(3)  Whether  the  sun  occupies  the  very  centre  of  the  whole  planetary  system,  or 
whether  it  stands  outside  of  that.  (4)  Whether  this  centre  of  the  system  and  the 
sun  in  it  revolve  in  an  annual  movement,  or  whether  the  Earth  has  an  annual 
movement  through  the  sections  opposite  to  those  in  which  the  sun  is  thought 
to  be  moving  at  any  time. 

You  have  proved  above  that  (1)  the  sun  is  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 
Now  prove  also  that  (2)  it  is  within  the  embrace  of  the  planetary  spheres. 

That  the  sun  is  at  the  centre  of  the  planetary  revolutions  is  proved  first  from 
an  accident  of  this  movement,  namely,  the  appearance  of  stoppings  and  retro- 
gradings,  which  are  deceptions  of  sight,  or  even  because  the  planets  seem  to  be 
faster  when  progressing  than  they  really  are. 

For  to  begin  with  the  lower  planets,  now  for  a  long  time  during  the  many  ages 


908 


KEPLER 


which  followed  Ptolemy — let  us  say  nothing  at  present  of  ancient  Aristarchus — 
it  was  perceived  by  the  authors  Martianus  Capella,  Campanus,  and  others,  that 
it  is  not  possible  for  the  sun,  Venus,  and  Mercury  to  have  the  same  period  of 
time,  namely,  a  year,  unless  they  have  the  same  sphere  and  unless  the  sun  is  at 
the  centre  of  the  two  spheres  of  Venus  and  Mercury  and  these  planets  revolve 
around  the  sun:  for  that  reason,  when  these  planets  seem  to  retrograde,  they  are 
not  really  retrograding  but  are  advancing  in  the  same  direction  in  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars  but  are  going  around  the  sun.  And  that  is  more  consonant  with 
the  nature  of  celestial  things. 

[536]  A  few  years  ago  Galileo  confirmed  this  argument  by  a  very  clear  demon¬ 
stration:  by  means  of  a  telescope  he  disclosed 
the  illumination  of  Venus.  When  Venus  is  pro¬ 
gressing  and  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
sun,  it  has  a  round  figure;  when  retrograding, 
a  horn-shaped  figure.  For  from  this  it  is  proven 
with  the  utmost  certainty  that  its  illumination 
comes  from  the  sun,  that  \vhen  Venus  appears 
round  and  progresses  straight  ahead,  it  is 
above  the  sun ;  but  that  when  it  is  horn-shaped 
and  retrograding,  it  is  below  the  sun,  and  that 
it  thus  revolves  around  the  sun.  Let  the  de¬ 
monstration  of  this  thing  by  reason  of  light  be 
joined  to  the  demonstrations  of  the  illumina¬ 
tions  of  the  moon.  In  the  case  of  Mercury, 

Marius  brings  forward  similar  things  by  the  aid 
of  the  telescope:  the  feebleness  of  its  light  was 
recognized  as  the  planet  came  down  to  the 
Earth:  and  that  is  a  sign  that  the  form 
(speciem)  of  the  illumination  is  changed  and 
the  light  has  become  weaker  in  the  horn,  so  that  it  moves  the  eye  less  when  near 
than  when  far  away.  And  that  would  be  absurd  without  this  weakening  in  the 
horn;  because  elsewKere  things  which  are  nearer  appear  greater  than  if  they  had 
drawn  away  farther.  [537]  Now  as  regards  the  three  upper  planets,  Aristarchus, 
Copernicus,  and  Tycho  Brahe  demonstrate  that  if  we  set  them  in  order  around 
the  sun  and  put  the  sun  as,  so  to  speak,  the  common  centre  of  the  five  planets,  so 
that  the  movement  of  the  sun,  whether  true  or  apparent,  affects  all  the  spheres 
of  the  five  planets,  we  are  freed — as  before  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  IMercury, 
from  two  eccentric  circles,  so  now  in  the  upper  planets — (1)  from  three  epicycles; 
(2)  from  the  blind  unbelievable  harmony  of  their  real  movement  with  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun;  (3)  and  just  as  above  in  the  case  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  the}^ 
have  no  real  stations  and  retrogradations  with  respect  to  the  sun,  around  which 
they  revolve;  (4)  thus  also  very  many  complications  in  the  latitudinal  move¬ 
ment  are  removed  from  the  doctrine  of  the  schemata;  (5)  and  finally  the  reasons 
are  disclosed  for  the  difference  which  makes  the  five  planets  become  stationary 
and  retrograding,  but  never  the  sun  and  the  moon;  and  (6)  why  Saturn,  the 
highest  of  the  upper  planets,  has  the  least  arc  of  retrogradation;  Jupiter,  the 
middle  one,  the  middle  arc;  and  Mars,  the  nearest  one,  the  greatest  arc.  All  these 
things  will  be  explained  below  in  Book  vi.  But  the  ancient  astronomers  were 
totally  ignorant  of  the  reasons  for  these  appearances. 


7 


909 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

3.  But  even  the  secondary  planets  bear  some  witness  to  this  thing.  For 
Marius  found  that  in  the  world  of  Jupiter  the  restitutions  of  the  jovial  satel¬ 
lites  around  Jupiter  is  never  regular  with  respect  to  the  lines  which  we  cast 
out  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  to  Jupiter;  but  that  they  are  regular,  if  they 
are  compared  with  the  lines  drawn  through  Jupiter  from  the  centre  of  the  sun. 
And  that  argues  strongly  that  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  is  arranged  around  the 
sun  and  that  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  centre  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  is 
sure  and  somehow  fixed;  but  that  throughout  the  year  the  Earth  varies  its 
distances  from  this  centre. 


How  many  sects  of  astronorners  are  there  with  respect  to  this  theory,  from  which 
the  second  argument  is  drawn? 

Three:  the  first,  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  the  ancients,  [538]  never¬ 
theless  has  Ptolemy  as  its  coryphaeus;  the  second  and  third  are  ascribed  to 
the  moderns.  Though  the  second,  named  after  Copernicus,  is  the  oldest, 
Tycho  Brahe  is  the  founder  of  the  third. 

Accordingly  Ptolemy  treats  the  single  wandering  stars  only  separately, 
and  he  ascribes  the  apparent  causes  of  all  the  movements,  retrogradations, 
and  stations,  to  their  separate  spheres.  None  the  less  in  the  case  of  each  planet 
he  sets  down  one  unchanging  sphere  which  completes  its  period  with  respect 
to  the  movement  of  the  sun:  but  Ptolemy  does  not  explain  from  what  causes 
that  comes  about — unless  the  Latin  writers,  hypnotized  by  their  complete 
ignorance  of  the  rays,  attribute  some  obscure  force  to  the  constant  rays  of 
the  sun. 

The  remaining  two  founders  compare  the  planets  with  one  another;  and  the 

things  which  are  found  to  be  common  to  their 
movements  are  deduced  from  the  same  common 
cause.  But  this  common  cause,  which  makes  the 
planets  seem  stationary  and  retrograding  in 
some  fixed  configuration  of  the  planet  and  the 
sun,  is  still  attributed  by  Brahe  to  the  real 
movement  of  all  the  planetary  spheres;  but  it  is 
completely  removed  by  Copernicus  from  the 
spheres  of  the  planets.  For  Brahe  teaches  that 
all  the  five  spheres  of  the  primary  planets  are 
bound  together  at  some  common  point,  which  is 
not  far  distant  from  the  centre  of  each  sphere — 
as  if  here  all  the  spheres  were  described  in  the 
common  circular  table  B — and  that  this,  so  to 
speak,  common  node  or  knot  really  revolves  with  the  sun  during  the  year,  and 
that  very  near  to  this  node  the  sun — in  the  small  circle  made  with  dots — makes 
all  the  spheres  revolve  along  with  itself;  and  so  to  speak  dislocates  them  from 
their  own  regions  in  the  world — in  the  manner  wherein  bolters,  grasping  a  sieve 
by  one  part  of  its  rim,  turn  it  with  their  hands  and  shake  it;  hence,  for  example, 
the  position  of  the  whole  planetary  system  during  the  month  of  June  is  along 
circle  B,  during  August  along  C,  during  October  along  D,  during  December 
along  E,  during  February  along  F,  during  March  along  G,  whence  once  more 
along  meanwhile  the  planet,  which  has  not  been  disturbed  at  all  by  this 
dislocation  of  its  sphere,  [539]  completes  its  own  circle  on  the  sphere  around 


910 


KEPLER 


its,  as  it  were,  fixed  centre.  But  as  regards  the  time  of  one  year,  Copernicus 
leaves  the  centres  of  the  spheres  absolutely  fixed  and  also  the  centre  of  the 
sun  fixed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  aforesaid  centres.  But  he  ascribes  to 
the  Earth,  and  thus  to  our  eyesight,  an  annual  movement  around  the  sun: 
hence,  since  our  eyesight  thinks  that  itself  is  at  rest,  the  sun  seems  to  move 
with  an  annual  movement  and  all  the  five  planets  seem  now  to  stop,  now  to 
go  in  the  opposite  direction,  now  to  advance  forward  very  fast. 

So  by  what  arguments  do  you  prove  (3)  that  that  common  node  or  common  node 
or  centre  of  all  the  primary  systems  is  not  [merely]  very  near  to  the  sun  hut  is  in 
the  body  of  the  sun  at  its  centre? 

In  the  teaching  of  astronomy  the  following  arguments  for  this  thing  are 
drawn: 

1.  From  the  movement  of  altitude  and  longitude  of  the  planets.  [540]  Ob¬ 
servations  duly  taken  bear  witness  that  the  longest  line  in  the  schema  of  each 
and  any  primary  planet,  w^hich  exactly  bisects  the  orbital  circle  into  two 
semicircles  equal  in  the  magnitude  and  speed  of  their  parts,  passes  through 
the  centre  of  the  sun.  Therefore  all  the  five  lines  of  altitude  always  meet  at 
the  centre  of  the  sun.  See  the  diagram  on  page  862. 

2.  From  the  movement  of  latitude  of  the  planets.  For  we  learn  from  the 
same  class  of  things,  that  is,  from  observations,  that  the  orbit  of  each  and 
any  primary  planet  is  cut  by  the  ecliptic  at  the  positions  opposite  the  centre 
of  the  sun,  not  opposite  any  other  neighbouring  point. 

3.  But  if  the  centre  of  the  sun  and  the  centre  of  the  region  of  the  movable 
bodies  were  different,  then  the  very  slow  movement  in  the  small  circle  would 
have  to  be  ascribed  either  to  the  centre  of  the  sun  or  to  the  centre  of  the  region 
of  the  movable  bodies,  on  account  of  the  progression  of  the  apogee  of  the  sun, 
as  will  be  taught  in  Books  vi  and  vii.  And  thus  the  one  of  these  two  which 
moves  could  not  either  be  or  remain  at  the  centre  of  the  world.  But  it  is  prob¬ 
able  that  both  of  them  are  at  the  centre  of  the  world  and  are  at  rest  there: 
the  sun  does  so  on  account  of  the  preceding  and  the  following  arguments. 
But  the  node  of  the  movable  bodies  does  so  by  reason  of  being  the  source  of 
movement,  and  we  have  already  said  that  this  movement  starts  from  this 
common  centre  of  the  movable  bodies.  But  stillness  belongs  to  the  source; 
and  on  account  of  stillness,  a  place  at  the  centre  of  the  movable  bodies  and 
at  the  centre  of  the  whole  world. 

4.  The  seat  to  be  assigned  to  this  same  source  of  movement  is  not  in  any 
mathematical  point,  very  near  to  the  most  noble  body,  but  rather  in  that 
most  noble  body,  for  three  reasons:  first,  in  order  for  us  to  avoid  the  absurdity 
that  the  source  of  movement — which  is  necessarily  set  down  as  bding  at  that 
common  node  of  all  the  spheres,  as  will  be  proved  below— should  be  very 
near  to  the  heart  of  the  world,  but  nevertheless  should  not  be  at  the  very 
heart  of  the  world,  namely  the  sun;  secondly,  because  the  motor  force  cannot 
reside  in  a  mathematical  point  but  requires  a  body,  namely  the  heart  of  the 
world,  the  sun;  thirdly,  because  the  motor  force  absolutely  demands  for  itself 
the  centre  of  the  world,  where  the  sun  itself  is:  just  as  stillness  belongs  to  the 
surface  of  the  world,  so  movement  belongs  to  the  inside. 

5.  [541]  But  in  especial,  the  following  thing  must  be  taken  out  of  the  reach 
of  Brahe^s  judgement  and  be  demonstrated;  that  the  centre  of  the  region  of 


911 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

the  movable  bodies  does  not  differ  from  the  centre  of  the  sun.  For  if  Brahe 
admits  this,  he  will  be  forced  to  assign  some  movement  to  the  sun;  and  he  will 
be  forced  to  admit  that  besides  the  centre  of  the  sun,  there  is  another,  different 
centre  for  the  movable  bodies;  and  by  this  movement  it  comes  about  that  the 
sun  now  precedes  this  centre,  now  follows  it,  now  stands  above,  now  stands 
below;  and  nevertheless  both  always  have  the  same  period  of  time, 

(6)  As  a  matter  of  fact,  something  absurd  and  surprising  would  happen  to 
Brahe.  For  the  sun  would  be  moved  by  an  eccentric  movement,  having  its  apsis 
today  in  the  Cancer.  But  the  centre  of  the  movable  bodies  would  have  the  apsis 
of  its  eccentric  movement  in  the  opposite  sign  of  the  Capricornus.  But  what 
would  be  the  reason  for  this  thing? 

(7)  These  two  last  arguments  furnish  an  argument  against  Copernicus  also 
inasmuch  as  he  places  that  common  node  of  the  planets  very  near  to  the  sun, 
but  not  in  the  sun  itself.  For  the  movements  of  all  the  remaining  primary  planets 
agree  in  the  fact  that  the  points  around  which  their  movements  appear  regular 
are  different  in  position  from  the  common  centre  of  the  region  of  the  movable 
bodies:  the  Earth  alone  would  keep  this  point  as  the  measure  of  its  movement, 
if  the  sun  were  not  in  the  centre  of  the  region  of  the  movable  bodies.  But  what 
would  be  the  cause  of  this  difference? 

(8)  Finally  the  reason  why  Copernicus  and  Brahe  make  these  two  centres 
different  is  not  sufficient  nor  astronomical  enough.  For  they  were  led  to  that  by 
the  fact  that  they  wished  in  the  forms  of  their  hypotheses  to  express  their  every¬ 
way  equipollence  to  the  Ptolemaic  form.  But  it  was  not  necessary  that  they 
should  step  exactly  in  Ptolemy ^s  foot-prints.  For  indeed  Ptolemy  did  not  build 
up  all  the  parts  of  his  hypothesis  from  observations,  but  he  based  many  things 
upon  the  preconceived  and  false  opinion  that  it  is  necessary  to  presuppose  that 
the  movements  of  the  planets  are  regular  throughout  the  whole  circle — and 
that  is  demonstrated  by  observations  to  be  false.  Let  anyone  who  wishes  fully 
to  understand  these  astronomical  arguments  which  are  placed  here  under  one 
aspect — let  him  go  to  my  Commentaries  on  the  Movements  of  the  Planet  Mars, 

[542]  Finally  by  what  arguments  do  you  prove  (4)  that  the  centre  of  the  sun, 
which  is  at  the  midpoint  of  the  planetary  spheres  and  hears  their  whole  system — does 
not  revolve  in  some  annual  movement,  as  Brahe  wishes,  but  in  accordance  with 
Copernicus  sticks  immobile  in  one  place,  while  the  centre  of  the  Earth  revolves  in  an 
annual  movementf 

Even  though  the  other  necessarily  follows  from  the  demonstration  of  the  one, 
nevertheless  certain  arguments  pertain  more  closely  to  the  sun  and  certain  to 
the  Earth;  and  certain  others  equally  to  both. 

First  on  this  side  was  the  same  argument  whereby  we  just  now  claimed  for 
the  sun  the  midpoint  of  the  spheres:  namely,  that  the  superfluous  multitude  of 
spheres  and  movements  has  been  removed.  For  as  it  is  much  more  probable  that 
there  should  be  some  one  system  of  spheres  of  the  sun  and  that  it  should  be 
common  to  the  centre  of  the  sun  and  to  that  node  of  the  five  spheres,  according 
to  Tycho  Brahe,  than  that  we  should  believe  according  to  Ptolemy  that  in  any 
one  of  the  five  planets,  over  and  above  the  spheres  which  have  to  do  with 
their  proper  movements,  there  is  present  one  whole  system  of  spheres  exactly 
like  the  sixth  system  of  the  sun;  so  also  it  is  now  much  more  probable  that  the 
centre  of  one  Earth  should  revolve  in  an  annual  movement  and  the  sun  be  at 


912  KEPLER 

rest,  according  to  Copernicus,  than  that,  according  to  Brahe,  this  node  of  the 
five  systems  together  with  the  spheres  and  planets  themselves  and  the  sun  as  a 
sixth  should  have  the  same  annual  movement  besides  the  other  movements 
which  are  proper  to  each.  For  even  though  Brahe  removed  from  the  true  sys¬ 
tems  of  the  planets  those  five  superfluous  schemata  of  Ptolemy,  which  are  like 
those  of  the  sun,  and  reduced  them  to  that  common  node  of  the  systems,  hid 
them,  and  melted  them  down  into  one;  nevertheless  he  left  in  the  world  the  very 
thing  which  was  effected  by  those  schemata:  that  any  planet,  over  and  above 
that  movement  v/hich  must  really  be  granted  to  it,  should  be  moved  by  the 
movement  of  the  sun  and  should  mix  both  into  that  one  movement.  And  since 
there  are  no  solid  spheres,  [543]  from  this  mixing  there  are  caused  in  the  expanse 
of  the  world  very  involved  spirals.  See  the  diagram  of  this  involution  in  my  Com- 
mentaries  on  Mars,  folium  3. 

Copernicus  on  the  contrary  by  means  of  this  one  simple  movement  of  the 
centre  of  the  Earth  stripped  the  five  planets  completely  of  this  extrinsic  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun,  and  made  the  centres  of  the  six  primary  planets — that  is,  the 
Earth  and  the  remaining  five — each  describe  singly  a  simple  and  always  similar 
orbit,  or  line  very  close  to  a  circle,  in  the  expanse  of  the  world. 

The  second  argument  is  from  the  movement  in  latitude.  If  epicycles  revolve 
around  an  Earth  at  rest,  either  according  to  Ptolemy  or  according  to  Brahe;  it 
will  be  necessary  for  those  epicycles,  especially  those  of  the  lower  planets,  in 
different  ways  to  seek  the  sides  as  well  as  the  head  and  feet,  that  is,  to  have  a 
twofold  libration.  But  with  the  Earth  in  motion,  all  the  orbital  circles  have  a 
constant  inclination  to  the  ecliptic.  See  Book  vi.  Part  iii  where  the  latitudes  of 
the  lower  planets  supply  us  with  a  very  clear  argument  for  the  movement  of  the 
Earth. 

Thirdly,  just  as  above,  in  the  doctrine  on  the  sphere,  the  diurnal  revolution 
of  the  Earth  being  granted,  the  immense  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  was  freed 
from  a  diurnal  movement  of  incalculable  speed;  so  now,  an  annual  movement 
being  granted  to  this  same  Earth  after  the  model  of  the  other  planets,  we  have 
ended  that  very  slow  movement  of  the  fixed  stars,  which  is  called  by  Copernicus 
the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  See  Book  vii  as  regards  these  things.  For  it  is 
much  more  believable  to  attribute  them  to  the  axis  of  the  Earth,  a  very  small 
body,  than  to  such  a  great  bulk. 

Fourthly,  the  consideration  of  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  wars  on  this  side. 
For  it  is  by  no  means  probable  that  the  centre  of  a  great  sphere  should  revolve 
in  a  small  sphere.  For  the  proper  spheres  of  the  three  upper  planets  are  much 
greater  than  the  sphere  of  the  sun — Saturn^s  approximately  ten  times  greater; 
Jupiter's  five  times;  Mars'  one  and  one  half  times. 

Therefore  these  five  spheres  are  not  carried  around  or 
dislocated  from  their  position;  but  their  centres  re¬ 
main  approximately  fixed,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
instead  of  this  movement  common  to  them  and  to  the 
sun,  the  Earth  revolves. 

[544]  The  fifth  argument,  which  is  related  to  the 
preceding  one,  is  the  same  as  that  whereby  Brahe 
tried  to  disprove  the  solidity  of  the  spheres.  For  if 
Brahe's  reasoning  holds,  as  the  orbit  of  Mars  is  one 
and  one  half  times  the  orbit  of  the  sun,  so  the  body  of 


913 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

Mars  at  fixed  times  returns  to  that  point  in  the  world's  expanse  where  the  sun 
was  at  other  times.  And  it  is  quite  unbeUevable  that  the  regions  which  the 
primary  planets  pass  through  should  be  so  jumbled  together;  since  in  Coper¬ 
nicus  they  are  not  only  distinct,  but  are  kept  separate  by  very  large  interv^als 
of  emptiness. 

I  make  the  sLxth  argument  'similar  to  the  fourth:  from  the  magnitude  of 
the  movable  bodies.  For  it  is  more  believable  that  the  body  around  which  the 
smaller  bodies  revolve  should  be  great.  For  just  as  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Ven¬ 
us,  and  I^Iercury  are  all  smaller  bodies  than  the  solar  body  around  which  they 
revolve;  so  the  moon  is  smaller  than  the  Earth  around  which  the  moon  re¬ 
volves;  so  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter  are  smaller  than  the  body  of  Jupiter 
itself,  around  which  they  revolve.  But  if  the  sun  moves,  the  sim  which  is  the 
greatest,  and  the  three  higher  planets  which  are  all  greater  than  the  Earth, 
will  revolve  around  the  Earth  which  is  smaller.  Therefore  it  is  more  behevable 
[545]  that  the  Earth,  a  small  body,  should  revolve  around  the  great  body  of 
the  sun. 

The  seventh  reason  is  drawn  from  the  reasons  for  the  interv^als,  which  were 
unfolded  above  in  the  first  part  of  this  book.  These  reasons  are  disturbed  and 
maimed,  unless  we  grant  to  the  Earth  too  its  ovm.  sphere,  which  Copernicus 
gives  to  it  between  the  spheres  of  Mars  and  of  Venus.  For  even  if  the  inter^’al 
between  Saturn  and  Jupiter  could  be  deduced  from  the  cube,  that  of  Jupiter 
and  Mars  from  the  tetrahedron,  and  that  of  Venus  and  Mercurj-  from  the  octa¬ 
hedron,  even  in  Brahe's  ordering:  yet  there  would  still  remain  between  ^lars  and 
Venus  a  single  interval.  But  there  remain  two  figures  in  the  number  of  figures  of 
the  world.  And  the  interval  between  Mars  and  Venus,  which  is  in  a  greater  ratio 
than  double  would  not  square  vdth  one  of  these  figures,  the  dodecahedron  or  the 
icosahedron;  nor  could  it  be  deduced  from  two  figures,  not  even  by  the  inter¬ 
position  of  some  sphere  between  them. 

Eighthly,  the  same  things  are  to  be  said  concerning  the  harmony  of  the  celes¬ 
tial  movements,  which  are  made  up  of  the  same  numbers  and  proportions  as  our 
musical  scale.  And  if  you  consider  the  excellence  of  the  work  or  the  pleasantness 
of  contemplation,  or  finally  the  unavoidable  force  of  the  persuasion,  this  har¬ 
mony  can  truly  be  called  the  soul  and  life  of  all  astronomy.  But  this  harmony 
is  at  last  complete  only  if  the  Earth  in  its  o^n  place  and  rank  among  the  planets 
strikes  its  o\yn  string  and  as  it  were  sings  its  note  through  a  variation  of  a 
semitone:  otherwise  there  would  be  no  manifesting  of  its  semitone,  and  that 
again  is  the  soul  of  the  song.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  the  semitone  of  the  Earth  is 
gone,  there  is  destroyed  from  among  the  celestial  movements  the  manifesting 
of  the  genera  of  song,  i.e.,  the  major  and  the  minor  modes,  the  most  pleasant, 
most  subtle,  and  most  wonderful  thing  in  this  whole  discussion.  But  concerning 
this  in  the  Harmonies} 

Ninthly,  if  we  consider  the  force  of  Brahe's  ordering  and  if  we  image  for  our¬ 
selves  some  matter  of  the  five  dislocatable  spheres,  which  matter  together  with 
the  region  of  the  movable  bodies  is  dislocated  by  the  annual  movement ;  then  in 
this  matter,  in  this,  I  say,  celestial  sphere  which  extends  throughout  all  the 
planetary  regions,  the  Earth  even  when  at  rest  [546]  vdll  describe  such  an  orbit 
around  the  sun  as  Copernicus  assigned  to  it  between  the  spheres  of  Mars  and 
Venus — the  sun  and  the  centre  of  the  region  of  the  movable  bodies  being  at  rest. 

^See  pp.  1009  ff. 


914  KEPLER 

And  so  by  an  absurd  and  unfitting  reason  a  joke  leads  us  from  a  distance  to  the 
same  beauty — namely,  that  the  Earth  should  progress  along  one  circle  or  sphere, 
while  being  at  rest.  It  is  more  believable  that  the  sixth  orbit  of  the  Earth  is 
described  by  the  real  movement  of  the  very  Earth,  just  as  the  remaining  five 
orbits  are  described  by  the  same  number  of  movements. 

The  tenth  argument,  taken  from  the  periodic  time,  is  as  follows:  the  apparent 
movement  of  the  sun  has  365  days,  which  is  the  mean  measure  between  Venus^ 
period  of  225  days  and  Mars^  period  of  687  days.  Therefore  does  not  the  nature 
of  things  shout  out  loud  that  the  circuit  in  which  those  365  days  are  taken  up 
has  the  mean  position  between  the  circuits  of  Mars  and  of  Venus  around  the 
sun:  and  thus  this  is  not  the  circuit  of  the  sun  around  the  Earth — for  none  of 
the  primary  planets  has  its  orbit  arranged  around  the  Earth,  as  Brahe  admits — 
but  the  circuit  of  the  Earth  around  the  resting  sun,  just  as  the  other  primary 
planets,  namely  Mars  and  Venus,  complete  their  own  periods  by  running  around 
the  sun? 

The  eleventh  argument  is  taken  from  the  motor  causes — by  the  supposition 
of  Brahe’s  opinion,  though  it  is  not  admitted  by  all.  For  because  there  are  no 
solid  spheres,  therefore  the  motor  faculties  can  be  placed  nowhere  except  in  the 
movable  bodies.  But  thus  the  condition  of  the  motor  souls  will  become  mighty 
hard,  and  harder  that  of  the  intelligences,  while  the  motor  souls  are  ordered  to 
transport  the  body,  in  which  they  are,  from  place  to  place  by  a  twofold  move¬ 
ment,  without  the  resistance  of  anything,  but  the  intelligences  are  ordered  to 
look  to  very  many  things — so  that  they  may  carry  the  planet  in  its  own  rank 
by  two  in  all  respects  distinct  and  mixed-together  movements.  For  at  least  at 
one  and  the  same  moment  they  are  forced  to  look  to  the  beginnings,  centre, 
periods,  and  figures  of  either  movement.  But  if  the  sun  is  at  rest  and  the  earth 
is  moved,  each  planet  has  only  one  movement,  and  that  movement  can  be  ef¬ 
fected  by  bodily  magnetic  powers.  For  there  is  barely  need  of  the  animal  faculty 
for  the  one  revolution  of  the  solar  body,  but  there  is  absolutely  no  need  any¬ 
where  for  the  supervision  of  mind.  See  my  Commentaries  on  Mars  'passim. 

The  twelfth  is  from  the  source  of  movement.  For  it  has  just  been  demon¬ 
strated  in  many  ways,  and  it  will  be  confirmed  below,  that  every  movement  of 
the  primary  planets,  and  in  part  even  the  secondary  planets,  arises  from  the  sun. 
But  it  is  right  to  believe  that  the  first  cause  of  movement  is  immobile.  Therefore 
the  sun  sticks  immobile  to  its  own  place — and  as  a  consequence  the  Earth  moves 
in  an  annual  movement,  in  place  of  the  sun. 

The  thirteenth  is  from  motor  instruments.  For  if  we  let  the  sun  and  the  Earth 
revolve  around  their  own  axes,  then  the  forms  from  these  bodies  {horum  cor- 
porum  species)  become  the  subjects  of  the  motor  powers  by  which  the  six  planets 
are  moved  by  the  sun,  and  the  moon  by  the  Earth.  But  if  the  sun  revolves  in  an 
annual  movement  while  the  Earth  is  at  rest,  then  no  form  from  a  body,  which 
form  should  introduce  movement,  is  at  hand  for  moving  the  sun.  And  if  the 
Earth  does  not  revolve  around  its  axis  once  a  day,  it  does  not  have  anything 
whereby  it  may  move  the  moon.  But  this  argument  urges  the  daily  movement 
more  strongly  [than  the  annual]. 

The  fourteenth  argument  is  from  the  movement  in  longitude.  If  the  sun 
moves,  carrying  around  with  it  the  system  of  all  the  spheres,  something  novel 
occurs  in  the  case  of  the  sun.  For  some  body  will  move  itself,  or  else  it  surely  will 
be  moved  by  some  special  outside  mover,  since  the  other  primary  bodies  are 


915 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

moved  by  one  common  sun,  and  thus  by  something  other  than  themselves.  But 
if  the  Earth  moves  in  a  circle  and  is  also  moved  by  the  sun,  like  the  other  pri¬ 
mary  bodies,  nothing  novel  happens.  And  so  it  is  probable  that  the  Earth  is 
moved,  for  a  probable  cause  of  its  movement  appears;  and  it  is  probable  that 
the  sun  remains  fixed. 

The  fifteenth  argument  is  from  the  movement  in  altitude.  It  has  already  been 
said  in  part,  and  it  will  be  demonstrated  below  more  fully,  that  all. the  planets 
have  a  movement  of  libration  in  a  straight  line,  which  proceeds  towards  the  sun 
and  by  means  of  this  libration  obey  the  laws  of  their  speed  and  slowness  in  any 
position  on  the  eccentric  circle.  And  thus  it  is  certain  that  the  sun  is  the  cause  of 
this  variation  in  all  five  planets.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  Commen¬ 
taries  on  Mars  that  the  same  thing  takes  place  on  the  Earth,  if  it  moves,  [548] 
namely  that  the  Earth  too  has  a  libration  along  its  diameter  in  the  direction  of 
the  sun.  But  if  it  is  put  down  that  the  sun  is  moving,  then  on  the  contrary  the 
Earth  becomes  the  cause  of  the  sun^s  slowness  and  speed  and  thus  of  its  revolu¬ 
tion  too.  But  indeed  let  the  bodies  of  the  sun  and  the  Eearth  themselves  be 
viewed,  and  let  the  judgement  be  made  as  to  whether  it  is  more  probable  that 
the  sun,  which  is  the  source  of  movement  of  the  five  planets  and  is  many  times 
greater  than  the  Earth,  should  be  moved  by  the  Earth,  or  whether  on  the  con¬ 
trary  the  Earth,  one  among  the  primary  planets,  should  be  moved  by  the  com¬ 
mon  source  of  movement  of  the  remaining  planets.  See  the  Commentaries  on 
Mars. 

The  sixteenth  probability  is  as  follows.  Now  in  Book  i  it  was  maintained  by 
many  arguments  and  by  the  refutations  of  their  contraries  that  the  Earth  has  a 
diural  rotation  around  its  axis,  and  among  those  arguments  not  the  weakest 
were  as  follows:  If  the  Earth  is  put  down  as  having  a  diurnal  movement,  the 
final  and  instrumental  cause  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  can  be  taken  from 
this  same  Earth;  and,  with  the  Earth  at  rest,  neither  of  these  [causes]  can  be 
explained,  nor  can  they  be  sought  from  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  wherein  the 
zodiac  is,  without  a  glance  at  this  petty  little  body  which  is  called  Earth.  There¬ 
fore  the  transportation  of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  can  no  longer  be  absurd.  But 
the  probability  is  sufficient,  if  the  remaining  arguments  demand  the  thing  itself. 
For  this  is  not  to  be  offered  as  a  necessary  argument:  because  even  though  the 
sun  rotates  around  its  own  axis,  nevertheless  it  is  immovable  in  place,  as  a  whole. 

The  seventeenth  reason:  If  the  Earth  revolves  in  an  annual  movement,  not 
only  do  we  find  a  more  probable  cause  for  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  than 
if  we  assign  this  variation  to  the  sun,  the  first  body;  but  also  by  this  same  means 
we  give  a  reason  for  the  irregular  progression  of  the  planetary  nodes,  and  by  the 
inclination  of  the  axis  of  the  diurnal  movement  of  the  Earth  we  explain  the 
causes  of  the  change  in  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  just  as  in  the  case  of  some 
irregularity  in  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes — ^which  irregularity  we  disapprov¬ 
ed  by  the  third  argument.  But  one  must  necessarily  be  profoundly  ignorant  of 
the  causes  of  so  many  of  these  phenomena,  if  the  Earth  does  not  revolve  in  an 
annual  movement. 

[549]  Let  the  eighteenth  argument  come  from  the  end  of  movement,  by  which 
it  is  proved  that  movement  belongs  to  the  Earth  as  the  home  of  the  speculative 
creature.  For  it  was  not  fitting  that  man,  who  was  going  to  be  the  dweller  in 
this  world  and  its  contemplator,  should  reside  in  one  place  of  it  as  in  a  closed 
cubicle:  in  that  way  he  would  never  have  arrived  at  the  measurement  and  con- 


KEPLER 


916 

templation  of  the  so  distant  stars,  unless  he  had  been  furnished  with  more  than 
human  gifts;  or  rather  since  he  was  furnished  with  the  eyes  which  he  now  has 
and  with  the  faculties  of  his  mind,  it  was  his  office  to  move  around  in  this  very 
spacious  edifice  by  means  of  the  transportation  of  the  Earth  his  home  and  to 
get  to  know  the  different  stations,  according  as  they  are  measurers — f.e.,  to  take 
a  promenade —  so  that  he  could  all  the  more  correctly  view  and  measure  the 
single  parts  of  his  house.  Now  you  understand  that — in  order  that  the  first 
part  of  this  Book  iv  might  be  fitted  properly  together — its  writer  needed  to  have 
the  Earth  a  ship  and  its  annual  voyage  around  the  sun.  But  if  the  Earth  moves, 
the  sun  is  necessarily  at  rest. 

6.  On  the  Diurnal  Revolution  of  the  Terrestrial  Body  Around  its 
Axis  and  its  Effect  in  Moving  the  Moon,  and  on  the  ^Iutual 
Proportions  of  the  Year,  Month,  and  Day 
Because j  in  addition  to  the  annual  revolution  around  the  sun,  the  diurnal  rotation 
too  is  assigned  to  the  Earth,  which  is  one  of  the  primary  planets:  I  ask,  you  do  not 
believe,  do  you,  that  all  the  primary  planets  turn  in  this  way  around  their  axes? 

That  is  very  probable,  firstly  in  the  case  of  Venus,  as  being  seen  to  exhibit 
one  spot  after  another — taking  as  a  sign  its  sparkling,  which  is  of  a  different 
form  from  the  sparkling  of  the  fixed  stars;  [550]  again  in  the  case  of  Jupiter, 
as  bearing  four  satellites;  and  Saturn,  which  bears  two  just  as  the  Earth  bears 
one,  the  aforesaid  moon:  concerning  which  satellites  below. 

By  what  principles  is  this  rotation  of  bodies  around  their  axes  brought  to  pass? 

In  Book  i,  which  concerns  the  Earth,  and  in  this  Book  iv,  which  concerns  the 
sun,  it  has  been  said  that  these  bodies  are  turned  by  an  inborn  animal  principle 
or  something  similar.  But  that  this  principle  is  not  alone  in  rotating  the  Earth 
but  is  assisted  by  the  sun  is  gathered  from  two  pieces  of  evidence:  first,  because 
the  number  of  daily  revolutions  of  the  Earth  in  a  year,  which  is  3G53^,  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  proximate  archetype,  which  is  360.  For  it  is  fitting  that,  unless  the 
internal  motor  force  of  the  Earth  were  nourished  by  the  perpetual  presence  of 
the  sun,  the  Earth  would  have  moved  along  somewhat  more  slowly  around  its 
axis;  and  thus  in  the  same  space  of  a  year  it  would  have  made  fewer  revolutions, 
namely  only  360.  With  this  postulated,  it  follows  that  the  534  remaining  and  as 
it  were  supernumerary  revolutions  are  added  to  those  360  on  account  of  some 
assistance  from  the  sun.  The  other  piece  of  evidence  names  this  circumstance: 
that  that  part  of  the  difference  of  time  which  the  preceding  Books  i  and  iii,  folia 
108  and  286,  spoke  of,  and  which  Tycho  Brahe  is  seen  to  have  brought  to  light 
by  clear  experiments  with  eclipses,  and  which  I  reduced  to  physical  form,  is 
relevant  here.  For  because  this  additosubtractive  difference  of  time  puts  the 
summer  revolution  of  the  Earth  as  slightly  slower  than  the  winter:  that  indeed 
could  not  come  from  an  inborn  principle  in  the  Earth,  as  such  principles  are 
wont  to  be  perpetually  uniform;  but  it  must  come  from  the  intervals  between 
the  sun  and  the  Earth,  which  in  our  hemisphere  are  longer  in  the  summer  than 
in  the  winter. 

Perhaps  every  force  causing  this  whirling  movement  is  in  the  sun  alone,  none  in  any 
principle  of  movement  inborn  separately  in  the  earth? 

This  is  repugnant  to  both  of  the  aforesaid  reasons.  For  (1)  if  [551]  the  number 
36534  were  not  composed  of  the  two  effects  of  two  distinct  causes,  there  would 


9i7 


EFrTX3}^![E  OF  OOPERXICAX  ASTHOXO^^.^  IV 

be  ao  'idiv  it  is  ik>i  ODe  of  the  archen'pal  numl^ers,  that  is,  one  of  the 

rcmad  numbers  rather  than  on^  of  the  disjoimed  aad  ignoble  fractions.  .2  If 
the  tn>e  physical  a.dditosubtra»ct3ve  dinerence  of  time  is  posnilat.ed:  then,  if  the 
sim  cansei  eTrerything,  the  whole  dhrmal  levolnu-ons  of  the  Earth  would  be  pro* 
portional  to  the  inieTrals  between  the  sun  and  the  Earth.  But  the  magnitude  of 
this  add:T.osi:btra.ciive  dinerenc^e  €i  time  demands  that  not  the  whoie  revolu- 
tions  but  merely  some  small  parts  of  the  revolutions  should  be  proportional  to 
these  variable  intervals. 

•^{ic:kon  t}ii  irdcTTUil  rvriuc  of  the  Earth  at  360  ra^olution^  in  one  year;  what 
•^eason  for  ihu  7iV.mbcr  do  pow  to  bKow  from  the  archetyprf 

Because  the  sun  had  to  cover  the  72Qth  pan  its  circle  or  apparent  course 
at  its  farthest  dhtance  from  the  Earth;  I  lelieve  that  such  great  strength  has 
i»een  united  to  this  virtue  of  the  whirling  movement.,  that  the  sun  in  any  revo¬ 
lution  of  the  Earth  could  appear  to  have  progressed  through  two  such  small 
parts  of  its  circle — according  to  the  number  of  the  two  parts  of  the  revolution, 
of  which  one  pan  is  called  day  ,  and  the  other  is  called  night — ^to  the  view  from 
any  ‘One  pla.ee  on  the  surface  of  the  Earth,  Consequently  if  two  spaces  of  the 
eclip::ic  are  stamped  by  the  portions  of  the  sun  .cm  two  successive  noons,  there 
would  he  intercepted  an  empty  or  unstamped  space  equal  to  either  of  them;  and 
as  day  is  to  night.,  so  would  the  spa-ce  filled  by  the  sun  be  to  the  empty  space — 
the  <Siimal  space  around  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  the  nocturnal  space., 

F-or  in  aH  these  things,  the  nature  of  man,  the  observer  creature  and  future 
dweller  on  the  Earth,  was  tahen  up  among  the  archetypal  causes — ^as  being  one 
who  was  going  to  reckon  the  magnitude  of  the  solar  body  and  contemplate  the 
dinerence  of  day  and  night, 

}5c2^  if  iM-'S  had  been  souchL  it  socme  that  it  would  aUo  have  been  obtained^ 
Byt  you  your&df  admit  that  those  ratios  ha.ve  been  disturbed-,  since  on  account  of 
those  further  increments  from  the  sun  the  360  days  hate  become  365^4  and  thus  the 
ciumai  f&urneys  ha^  become  shorter, 

1,  It  cannot  l:»e  said  that  this  was  sought  simply,  but  merely  in  the  adjustment 
of  the  principle  of  internal  movement  in  the  Earth;  and  in  that  manner  it  was 
obtained,  2.  But  even  if  in  this  secondaiy  movement  the  concourse  of  causes 
disturbs  the  number  instituted;  stih  this  niisturbance  was  not  so  great  but  tha.t 
during  the  menths  of  Xovemher  and  January  this  magnitude  is  obtained;  be¬ 
cause  then  the  magnitude  of  the  diurnal  movement  of  the  sun  is  or  twice  30', 
And  Ic-ng  before.,  even  if  there  were  no  such  disturbance.,  the  magnitude  of  the 
diurnal  movement  of  the  sun  would  have  been  such  only  twice  during  the  year, 
on  account  of  the  necessary  irregularity  d  the  apparent  movement  of  the  sun, 

Eow  does  ty^e  sun  strenyth^n  the  motor  tirtue  of  the  Earth  by  increasing  the  speed 
of  the  diurnal  raolution  of  zhe  EarthJ 

It  is  very  probahle  that  this  takes  place  by  the  mediation  of  the  light  of  the 
sun  Imediante  soIis  lumme}^  whkh  the  snn  pours  upon  the  Earth,  through  the 
iDunimation  of  the  Earth's  hemisphere..  For  because  the  physical  addit.osubtra.c- 
tive  dinerence  >  d  lime  dema-nds  unequal  daily  revolutions  of  the  Earth, 

according  as  its  distance  from  the  sun  vary;  certainly  at  a  short  interval  the 


918  KEPLER 

illumination  is  strong  tvs  coming  from  a  denser  light;  and  weaker  at  a  long  dis¬ 
tance,  as  from  a  thinner  and  thus  lesser  light;  and  that  occurs — as  reganls  the 
one  dimension  of  longitude,  into  which  the  movement  proceeds — in  the  veiy 
ratio  of  the  distances.  And  so  the  amount  of  light  which  there  is  tit  any  given 
time  is  fitted,  by  means  of  the  distances,  for  distributing  this  acceleration 
throughout  the  year. 

[553]  What  are  the  effects  of  the  daily  revolution  of  the  Earth,  and,  in  general,  of  the 
revolutions  of  the  primary  bodies  around  their  axes? 

Two:  the  first,  which  is  proper  to  the  Earth,  is  that  for  us  who  dwell  on  the 
Earth,  all  the  stars  in  the  heavens,  both  the  fixed  and  the  wandering,  and  so 
also  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  seen  every  day  to  rise  in  the  east  and  set  in  the 
west;  altliough  with  respect  to  this  diurnal  movement  they  remain  fixed  in  their 
places.  I  have  treated  of  this  deceptive  appearance  in  the  first  three  books  on 
the  doctrine  of  the  sphere.  The  other  effect,  which  is  physical  and  most  true  and 
is  common  to  all  the  primary  bodies,  and  hence  to  the  sun,  is  that  the  primary 
planets,  by  means  of  the  form  departed  from  their  body  set  in  revolution,  move 
their  secondary  planets — as  the  Earth,  the  moon — and  cause  the  secondary 
planets  to  move  in  the  same  direction  but  more  slowly,  and  as  if  left  behind. 

By  what  arguments  is  it  made  probable  that  the  primary  planets  share  their  own 
movements  around  themselves  with  the  secondary  jdanets,  and  especially  the  Earth 
with  the  moonf 

The  moon  and  Earth  give  the  first  evidence.  For,  just  as  above,  from  the  fact 
that  the  planets,  on  drawing  near  to  the  sun,  are  borne  more  speedily,  we 
reasoned  that  the  sun  by  means  of  the  form  from  its  body,  iw.,  its  form  set  in 
rotation,  moves  the  planets  around  itself  in  the  same  direction;  so  also,  because 
we  find  that  (1)  in  so  far  as  the  moon  draws  nearer  to  the  I'^arth — but  not  to  the 
sun — so  much  the  more  speedily  does  it  move  around  the  Earth,  and  (2)  in  the 
same  direction  in  which  the  Earth  revolves  around  its  axis;  it  is  with  the  greatest 
probability  that  we  derive  that  movement  of  the  moon  from  the  whirling  of  the 
Earth;  and  that  is  all  the  more  probable,  because  (3)  there  is  also  the  corre¬ 
spondence  that,  just  as  the  rotation  of  the  sun  around  its  axis  is  shorter  than 
tlie  shortest  period  of  Mercury,  so  too  the  Earth  rotates  approximately  thirty 
times,  before  the  moon  has  one  restitution.  For  if  the  moon  revolved  more 
quickly  than  the  Earth,  its  movement  could  not  wholly  come  [554]  from  the 
rotation  of  the  ICarth.  (4)  But  belief  in  this  thing  is  confirmed  by  the  comparison 
of  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter  and  Jupiter  with  the  six  planets  and  the  sun.  For 
even  if  in  the  case  of  the  body  of  Jupiter  we  do  not  have  the  evidence  as  to 
whether  it  rotates  around  its  axis,  which  we  do  have  in  the  case  of  the  terrestrial 
body  and  the  solar  body  in  particular,  that  is  to  say,  evidence  from  sense-per¬ 
ception,  Ibit  sense-perception  testifies  that  exactly  as  it  is  with  the  six  planets 
around  the  sun,  so  too  is  the  case  with  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter:  in  such 
fashion  that  the  farther  any  satellite  can  digress  from  Jupiter,  the  slowlier  does 
it  make  its  return  around  the  body  of  Jupiter.  And  that  indeed  does  not  occur 
in  the  same  ratio  but  in  a  greater,  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  the  power  of  the 
distance  of  each  planet  from  Jupiter:  and  that  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  ratio 
which  we  found  above  among  the  six  planets.  For  Marius  in  his  World  of  J upiter 


919 


EPiTO^^fE  OF  COPEHMCA^v  .^LSTEOXOJSiY.  IV 


rfrpiotXi;  iha^i  niie  distAaceif  fA  tb^  f<mrJ<n'isl  f^ieMites  from  JutpiXer  &Te  at  f<M</vr^: 
3.  -S,  5-  13  (or  14  aoeordiD^  to  Galileo  :  a?  if  «tbeir  ^^nal!  f^pheres  vere  eepa- 

rated  by  tii<e  three  riiorBbo’idal  I  llie  rhomJx^ail  d'crieeahedron  l»e- 

twf:en  tine  mmohi  whose  mten^al'r  are  3  aad  5-  (11/  The  rbombt^al 

triacx/Qtabedroo  4€4.  betwaea  the  middle  spheres,  whose  intervaif^  are 

5  aiid  8,  aad  III  tie  eube,  wiki  is  not 
riocEiioidai,  bot  is  a  begsniiing  of  tie  ihom- 
boidal  soSMs.  between  tie  ertiemes.  which 
Lave  tie  klteri'aI^^  8  and  13  ;oj  14  -  Now  the 
same  ^Mantis  reports  the  periodic  times  as  fol¬ 
lows:  1  day  18^2  hours;  3  days  133^:^  hours;  7 
days  2  hours:  lf>  days  IS  hours;  even'where 
tie  ratio  is  ^ater  tim  double,  and  is  accord- 
greater  tiaa  the  ratio  of  tie  intervals  3, 
5..  S.  13.  or  14,  but  smaller  than  that  of  the 
squares,  wiki  constitute  tie  ratios  -of  t.he  2nd 
powers  of  the  intert'als.  namely  9.  25, 
04.  169  or  196;  jtist  as  also  tie  ^ti  powers 
are  greater  than  t-he  1st  pcm'ers,  but  smaller 
than  the  2nd  powers. 

Therefore  since  tie  agreement  of  t.be  Jovial 
satellites  with  tie  six  primari"  planets  k  so 
exact,  wt  ooiy  did  we  rightly  infer  above  from  this  tiat  the  body  of  Jupiter 
Uims  around  its  axis  like  tie  Him  so  that,  the  proportkci  holds  for  all  its  mem¬ 
bers;  but  here  already,  o"/er  and  abot'e  tiat.  we  are  eosiSrmin^  not'  improperiy 
the  general  statemeiiit  tiat  tiis  rotataon  of  tie  primary'  bodies  around  xheir  axes 
is  tie  cause  of  the  circuit  of  the  secoodar}'  bodies  around  tie  primary  bodies. 
That  'O'  is  so  znmh  the  caoce  probable  l^ecause  we  see  that,  just  as  tie  sun  is 
greater  than  aH  the  planets  whkh  it  moves,  so  too  tie  Earti  is  much  gieater 
tSaan  its  moon,  and  Jupiter  t^ian  its  .satellites,  and  for  that  reasm.  Hie  the  sun, 
£t  for  mmung  them.  The  remaining  probaijiliiies  have  to  do  ■v^it-h  the  moon 
agam-  For  that,  the  bodies  of  tie  mooo  and  earti  are  akin  is  taught  us  by  the 
tekscope.  wfeki  reveals  .si^s  m  tie  moon  of  mountains  and  -of  seas,  such  as 
they  are  in  our  giobe  of  the  Earti.  Even  Aristotle,  elsewhere  a  very  sharp  de¬ 
fender  of  tie  fifth  e^enoe  of  the  hea vens.  rec-ogaixed  this  kinship,  and.  a.oeording 


to  ATerr't^s.  he  said  tiat  tie  moon  seemed  to  be  a  certain  ethereal  Earth.  1  am 
silent  as  to  PHutarch  and  the  other  philosophers  in  31acrx^ius. 

.4ie«ocdmg!y.  jkLst  a.s  tie  kinship  of  their-  bodies  makes  the  !oadst<me  attract 
loadstooe  off  iron;  so  also  in  the  case  of  the  nsoon  it  is  not  unbdievaMe  that 
fie  .should  be  moved  by  the  terrestrial  body  whkh  is  akin,  although  neither 
in  tiat  case  nor  in  this  case  is  there  any  contact  between  the  bodies.  And 
fcrtiermt're  '7  why  is  it  surprising  that  the  moon  dhould  be  moved  by  the 
Earth,  rime  we  see  that  in  turn  the  moon  also,  b;*'  its  passing  above  the  t'ertioes 
of  piaoes,  causes  the  ebb  and  Sow  of  the  ocean  on  the  Earth?  I-s  not  t-his  a 
clear  enough  etidecce  the  sh'aring  of  movement•^  bv  these  two  bodies? 
Fmaih'  8  the  same  thing  is  conSmaed  by  the  remaining  part  of  the  propor¬ 
tion:  the  Han  aod  Earth  wheel  around  their  axes,  as  experience  makes  us 
certain — La  the  case  of  the  sum  of  itself  Jper  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  only 
in  CJdpernicus — namely  m  offder  that  by  this  rotation  they  may  give  move- 


920  KEPLER 

merit  to  the  planets  placed  around  them — the  sun  to  the  six  primary  planets, 
and  the  Earth  to  the  moon:  that  the  moon  in  turn  does  not  wheel  around  the 
axis  [556]  of  its  own  body  is  argued  by  the  spots.  But  why  is  this  so?  If  not 
because  no  further  planet  is  seen  to  go  around  the  moon.  Accordingly  the 
moon  has  no  planet  to  which  it  gives  movement  by  the  rotation  of  its  body. 
Accordingly,  in  the  moon,  the  rotation  was  left  out,  as  being  superfluous. 

If  these  eight  arguments  are  not  of  use  as  taken  singly,  they  will  be  of 
service  as  taken  together. 

But  does  it  not  seem  absurd  that  the  Earthy  which  lacks  lighty  should  be  compared 
as  an  equal  with  the  suuy  the  source  of  light?  For  does  not  this  quality  make  the 
motor  force  of  the  sun  more  probable? 

Even  if  the  light  [lumen]  of  the  sun  works  itself  up  in  supplying  movement, 
nevertheless  the  body  of  the  sun  is  not  potent  in  motor  force  on  account  of 
the  light  alone.  For  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  two,  so  to  speak,  subjects  of 
motor  virtue  from  being  found  together  in  the  sun — light  and  the  bodily 
affection  of  magnetism — and  only  the  latter  of  them  being  present  in  the  Earth; 
just  because  the  Earth  moves  only  one  planet  and  that  a  very  ignoble — as 
one  of  the  secondary  planets.  Nor  does  the  magnetic  virtue  of  the  Earth  alone 
move  it  without  any  assistance,  as  we  hear;  nor  does  the  Earth  have  this  force 
wholly /rom  itself,  though  the  force  is  in  the  Earth;  but,  the  Earth  seems  to 
have  partly  drawn  off  this  force  as  by  a  certain  canal  by  the  continuation  of 
the  line  from  the  sun  into  itself  and  especially  in  the  illumination  of  its  body, 
and  it  seems  to  have  turned  aside  this  force  into  a  new  source,  namely  into 
its  own  body — as  was  said  a  little  while  before,  and  will  be  said  more  clearly 
below. 

The  rotation  of  the  Earth  keeps  to  the  equatorial  circle;  but  the  movement  of  the 
mooUy  to  the  zodiaCy  which  has  a  great  declination  from  the  equator.  Therefore  it 
is  not  probable y  is  ity  that  the  movement  of  the  moon  comes  from  the  rotation  of  the 
Earth? 

This  does  not  bother  us  any  more  in  the  case  of  the  moon  than  in  that  of 
the  other  planets.  For  even  if  they  have  a  declination  towards  certain  regions 
of  their  own  [557]  and,  so  to  speak,  hold  the  rudder  in  their  hands  and  turn 
at  their  judgement  and  sail  sideways  or  towards  the  banks  of  the  river,  none 
the  less  they  are  seized  by  the  force  of  the  common  whirlpool  of  motion  flowing 
out  from  the  sun;  and  so  they  have  the  movement  of  the  common  river  to 
thank  even  for  the  distinct  movement  of  their  own,  just  as  the  moon  has  the 
direct  movement  of  the  Earth  along  the  equator  to  thank  for  its  own  oblique 
movement  through  the  zodiac. 

Why  therefore  does  the  moon  keep  its  whole  route  along  the  zodiac  rather  than  along 
the  equator? 

Because  in  addition  to  the  proper  circuit  of  the  moon  around  the  terrestrial 
globe — concerning  which  up  to  now — the  whole  heaven  of  the  moon  is  also 
moved  in  the  movement  shared  with  the  centre  of  the  earth  along  the  zodiac 
around  the  sun,  like  the  other  planets.  And  it  comes  about  from  the  composi¬ 
tion  [of  these  movements]  that  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the  sun  the  moon 
always  holds  to  a  direct  course  eastward  not  only  at  the  time  when  the  sun 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  921 

and  the  Earth,  with  their  distances  from  the  moon  overlapping,  hurry  the 
full  moon  into  the  same  region,  but  also  at  the  time  when  the  sun  impels  the 
dark  or  void  moon  forward,  while  the  Earth — with  respect  to  the  centre  of 
the  sun — impels  it  backward.  For  this  impulse  from  the  Earth  is  still  much 
less  than  that  from  the  sun:  wherefore  it  diminishes  the  movement’s  bearing 
eastward,  but  does  not  wholly  absorb  it,  much  less  turn  it  in  the  contrary 
direction.  See  the  diagram  of  this  composite  movement  of  the  moon  in  the 
Commentaries  of  Mars^  folium  149. 

Therefore  since  that  flow  of  the  solar  form  advancing  along  the  zodiac  is 
greater,  and  is  other  than  the  terrestrial  form,  which,  proceeding  along  the 
equator,  is  less;  and  moreover  since  when  the  moon  and  sun  are  in  conjunction, 
by  reason  of  the  speed  and  the  region  of  rising  and  setting,  in  the  space  of  the 
world  more  is  in  obedience  to  the  sun  than  to  the  Earth:  I  believe  that  hence 
it  comes  about  that  by  reasons  of  the  latitudinal  regions  too,  the  moon  is 
more  obedient  to  the  solar  form  as  the  stronger — as  its  whole  heaven  around 
the  sun,  so  also  its  body  around  the  Earth — and  is  compelled  to  advance  along 
the  zodiac  [558]  or  to  regulate  according  to  zodiac  its  own  orbit  around  the 
Earth. 

From  this  does  not  anomaly  arise  in  the  lunar  movement^  if  the  moon  at  the  tropic 
points  advances  according  to  the  lead  of  the  terrestrial  form,  because  the  zodiac 
and  the  equator  are  parallel  at  those  points^  hut  at  the  equinoctial  points  it  crosses 
obliquely  this  form  from  the  terrestrial  body? 

Again,  in  order  to  solve  this  objection,  I  make  the  same  answer  as  in  the  case 
of  the  latitudes.  Namely,  that  the  form  from  the  terrestrial  body  is  very 
strong  in  its  midpart  under  the  equator,  but  is  weaker  to  the  sides  of  the 
equator;  because  even  at  the  source,  namely  in  the  terrestrial  globe,  the  circles 
parallel  to  the  equator,  as  being  smaller,  are  set  in  motion  more  slowly  than 
the  equator,  the  great  circle.  Accordingly  a  balancing  takes  place:  so  that 
w^here  the  moon  experiences  a  strong  motor  form,  there  it  does  not  comply 
w  ith  the  w^hole  form  but  goes  off  crosswise — and  where  it  complies  with  the 
w^hole  form  and  is  utterly  obedient  to  it,  there  the  moon  experiences  it  w^eak. 
Notwithstanding,  I  do  not  proclaim  anything  concerning  the  balancing  in 
all  its  respects,  since  lunar  observations  still  disagree  in  very  small  amounts 
from  any  given  calculations,  and  since  it  is  uncertain  to  what  that  discrepancy 
should  be  referred. 

How  too  can  the  moon  be  borne  around  the  sun  in  an  annual  movement,  but  the 
four  satellites  around  J upiter  in  a  common  duodecennial  movement,  so  that  mean- 
while  neither  does  the  moon  abandon  or  let  go  of  the  Earth  nor  the  four  Jovial 
satellites  J  upiter,  if  the  moon  is  not  bound  by  a  solid  sphere  to  the  Earth,  and  they 
to  Jupiter? 

Now^  the  secondary  planets  are  borne  around  the  sun  by  the  same  virtue 
of  the  solar  form,  w^hereby  also  their  primary  planets,  the  Earth  and  Jupiter, 
are  borne;  but  they  would  revolve  more  speedily  than  their  primary  planets, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  readier  for  movement  by  reason  of  their  density,  bulk, 
or  w^eight,  if  they  w^ere  not  held  back  [559]  and  laid  hold  of  by  the  Earth  and 
Jupiter  by  means  of  a  magnetic  force  similar  to  that  with  w^hich  the  sun  too 
is  endow^ed.  But  this  prehensive  force,  as  w^as  said  above  concerning  the  planets 


922  KEPLER 

too,  is  determined  by  the  contrary  virtues  of  the  approach  and  withdrawal 
of  the  moon  from  the  Earth;  for  as  the  Earth  revolves  around  its  axis,  by  this 
laying  hold  it  makes  the  moon  revolve  but  meanwhile  changes  the  region  of 
its  own  body  with  respect  to  which  approach  and  withdrawal  takes  place. 
See  the  diagram  on  page  899.  Imagine  the  friendly  region  {plagam  amicam) 
of  the  lunar  globe  to  be  turned  towards  the  Earth  and  not  to  be  changed  about 
with  the  contrary  region.  Imagine  also  that  the  Earth  does  not  rotate  around 
its  axis,  but  is  nevertheless  borne  around  the  sun:  in  this  case  the  moon  will 
run  the  same  course  as  the  Earth,  and  meanwhile  it  will  be  attracted  by  the 
Earth,  until  it  comes  into  contact  with  it.  In  turn  imagine  the  same  thing 
concerning  the  unfriendly  region:  in  this  case  the  moon  will  flee  the  Earth 
until  it  gets  outside  of  the  sphere  of  magnetic  virtue  of  the  Earth:  then  it  will 
wholly  give  itself  up  to  seizure  by  the  sun  alone,  and  thus  will  wander  com¬ 
pletely  away  from  the  Earth. 

You  have  said  that  the  middle  circle  of  the  Earth  is  slightly  less  than  sixty  times  nar¬ 
rower  than  the  sphere  of  the  moon.  But  this  same  circle  of  the  Earth  is  only  thirty 
times  faster  than  the  moon  because  the  moon  returns  in  293^^  days.  Therefore  the 
circle  of  the  Earth  is  slower  than  the  centre  of  the  moon  around  the  Earth  in  the 
ratio  of  two  to  one.  How  then  does  a  body,  which  proceeds  more  slowly,  give  to  the 
moon  a  movement  twice  as  great  and  twice  as  fast  as  its  own  movement? 

This  objection  does  not  apply  uniquely  to  lunar  movement,  but  generally  to 
all  the  planets;  and  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  it.  For  the  solar  and  terrestrial 
bodies  do  not  move  [things]  by  contact,  but  by  the  spreading  out  or  unfolding 
of  their  forms  into  every  orbit  of  the  movable  body.  Now  in  so  far  as  the  form 
from  the  terrestrial  body  flows  out  through  space,  it  turns  with  the  Earth,  its 
source,  in  the  same  time  of  24  hours,  since  nevertheless  in  that  place  where  it 
lays  hold  of  the  moon,  it  is  of  the  same  amplitude  as  the  sphere  of  the  moon.  [560] 
Therefore  that  form,  sixty  times  wider  than  the  Earth,  passes  through  the  total 
orbit  of  the  moon  thirty  times  in  one  month,  although  within  the  same  interval 
the  moon,  following  after  the  form  from  the  Earth,  has  only  one  periodic  return. 
And  so  it  remains  probable  that  the  movement  of  that  form  from  the  terrestrial 
body  moves  the  moon;  but  in  such  a  way  nevertheless  that  the  inertia  of  the 
lunar  body  overcomes  diurnally  about  29  parts  of  the  expanse  of  virtue  and  is 
overcome  with  respect  to  not  more  than  the  thirtieth. 

Why  do  you  set  down  that  the  sun  concurs  with  the  motor  form  of  the  Earth  even  in 
that  movement  whereby  the  moon  revolves  around  the  Earth? 

1.  Because  Tycho  Brahe  found  that  the  mean  movement  of  the  moon — that 
is,  without  the  anomaly  which  exists  in  all  planets  on  account  of  the  eccentri¬ 
city  of  the  orbit — [561]  still  has  an  anomaly  or  is  irregular.  For  the  moon  is 
always  speedier  in  the  syzygies,  as  here  in  CD  and  GH,  and  slower  in  the  quad¬ 
ratures  EF  and  IK  than  the  ratio  of  eccentricity  accounts  for — whether  in 
either  case  it  is  in  the  apogee  or  in  the  perigee  or  in  any  other  position  on  its 
eccentric  circle;  and — if  we  are  to  insist  firmly  upon  Tycho^s  hypothesis  for 
the  said  variation — the  moon  is  exactly  as  much  faster  in  the  syzygies  as  it 
is  slower  in  the  quadratures. 

But  the  form  itself  from  the  Earth — the  form  set  in  rotation  and  to  be 
understood  by  the  circle  DFHK — is  of  uniform  speed  all  around,  as  much 


923 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

in  those  parts  which  are  turning 
at  the  syzygies  D  and  H  as  in 
those  parts  which  are  turning  at 
the  quadratures  F  and  K — that 
is  to  say,  for  one  and  the  same 
interval  between  the  moon  and 
the  Earth.  Accordingly  other 
causes  of  movement  which  may 
be  adjusted  to  the  phases  of  the 
moon  must  be  added  to  this 
motor  form.  But  the  phases  of 
the  moon  are  caused  by  the  sun. 
Therefore  the  sun  assists  the 
movement  of  the  moon  around 
the  Earth. 

2.  Belief  in  this  concurrence 
of  the  sun  is  strengthened  by 
the  fact  that  before  this,  on 
pages  917  and  918,  the  same  sun 
was  summoned  in  order  to  aid 
the  speed  of  the  Earth  in  revolving,  by  the  illumination  of  the  [terrestrial  globe] 
— here  represented  by  the  middle  circle  AB.  For  from  this,  as  in  the  example 
of  the  Earth,  we  first  understood  that  even  in  the  light  of  the  sun  there  is  pres¬ 
ent  a  power  of  quickening  movement.  Then  from  the  same  thing  we  weave  a 
necessary  argument  even  for  the  moon.  For  if,  according  as  DFHK  the  form 
from  the  terrestrial  body  is  set  in  whirling  motion,  it  moves  the  moon; 
but  the  sun  accelerates  this  whirling  motion:  therefore  the  sun  will  accelerate 
the  moon  too  by  means  of  the  Earth  and  the  acceleration  of  its  form. 

Then  this  illumination  is  not  disposed  in  one  way  when  the  moon  is  turning  in  the 
quadratures  F  and  K,  and  in  another  way  when  the  moon  is  turning  in  the  syzygies 
D  and  HI 

By  no  means.  For  in  both  cases  the  halves  of  the  globes  are  illuminated,  both 
of  the  Earth  ABy  which  gives  movement,  and  of  the  moon  CD  or  GH,  to  which 
movement  is  given.  Rather,  it  has  already  been  said  that  the  speed  of  the  Earth 
from  this  illumination  [562]  is  equal  at  both  times. 

Whence  then  does  this  disparity  of  effect  come  to  this  accessory  causey  so  that  it  ac¬ 
celerates  the  movement  of  the  moon  very  much  in  the  syzygies  D  and  H  hut  not  at  all 
in  the  quadratures  F  and  K?  And  what  on  the  contrary  slows  the  movement  of  the 
moon  in  the  quadratures  F  and  K? 

No  part  of  celestial  physics  was  more  difficult  to  explain  than  this.  And  in 
order  to  straighten  things  out,  where  possible,  we  must  make  use  of  the  diagram 
on  this  page. 

Accordingly  you  remember  that  all  the  circles  which  bound  the  illumination 
of  the  lunar  globe,  as  CD  and  GHy  were  parts  of  the  same  number  of  spherical 
surfaces,  into  which  the  light  coming  from  the  sun  as  from  a  centre  is  spread  out; 
while  the  circle  DFHK  represents  the  form  of  the  terrestrial  body  AB  at  the 
center  of  its  position,  and  this  form  moves  the  moon.  You  see  that  in  the  syzy- 


924  KEPLER 

gies  D  and  H  the  form  from  the  light  CD  and  the  form  from  the  terrestrial  body 
OCDL  are  joined  to  one  another  hy  contact  {invicem  applicari  per  coniactum), 
and  that  at  L,  M,  Ny  and  0  they  cut  one  another  at  oblique  angles,  so  that  the 
joining  {applicatio)  is  more  incomplete.  But  in  the  quadratures  EF  and  IK  the 
cutting  is  at  right  angles;  therefore  there  is  clearly  no  joining,  since  the  section 
of  the  moon  stretches  towards  the  centre  of  the  Earth  and  a  mere  point  on  the 
circle  NIO  corresponds  to  it. 

Therefore,  since  no  other  cause  for  the  acceleration  in  the  syzygies  is  appar¬ 
ent,  we  shall  have  to  set  down  that  a  faculty  strengthening  the  terrestrial  motor 
form  ODL  is  present  in  the  light  CD  separately,  not  now  in  so  far  as  the  source 
of  the  light,  i.e,y  the  solar  body,  is  rotated — this  modification  given  by  the  move¬ 
ment  was  valid  above,  since  we  were  speaking  of  the  forms  of  the  solar  and  ter¬ 
restrial  bodies  without  any  reference  to  light — but  qua  light:  indeed,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  true  and  somehow  essential  configuration  of  light.  Then  if  we  set 
down  that  this  form  from  the  terrestrial  body  is  strengthened  through  the  modes 
of  its  joining  to  the  circles  (orbes)  of  light;  we  shall  have  at  hand  the  cause  and 
the  measure  of  there  being  a  very  strong  acceleration  in  the  syzygies  CD  and 
GHy  but  none  in  the  quadratures. 

[663]  But  since  by  DFHK  is  represented  not  merely  the  form  of  the  terrestrial 
body  as  agent  or  mover,  but  also  the  very  orbit  of  the  moon  as  of  the  patient  or 
thing  moved — although  at  that  time  the  Earth  must  not  be  placed  at  the  centre 
of  the  circle  but  near  by — we  must  conceive  further  either  that  at  the  syzygies 
CD  and  GH  the  lunar  body  is  better  disposed  towards  movement  according  to 
the  diffusion  or  the  surface  of  the  light  than  in  EF  and  IKy  where  the  moon  cuts 
the  circles  of  diffusion  crosswise,  or  that  the  road  of  the  moon  in  D  and  H  is 
made  as  it  were  slippery,  but  rough  in  F  and  K — as  on  a  table  with  grooves 
running  crosswise  in  the  wood.  And  that  is  not  very  absurd.  For  since  the  power 
of  strengthening  the  movement  is  present  in  the  light,  as  it  was  laid  down;  surely 
where  one  dimension  of  the  light  stretches,  it  is  likely  that  the  passage  is  easy. 

Furthermore,  as  regards  the  effect,  the  same  thing  is  said  by  him  who  says 
that  the  moon  is  accelerated  in  D  and  H  and  slowed  up  in  F  and  K  and  in 
both  cases  in  the  simple  ratio  which  these  joinings  {applicationes)  produce, 
and  by  him  who  says  that  the  moon  is  very  greatly  accelerated  in  D  and  H 
and  none  at  all  in  F  and  iC,  but  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  that  which  results 
from  the  joinings  posited  here. 

Unless  anyone  prefers  to  ascribe  this  twofold  efficacy  of  the  light  to  the  two 
dimensions  of  the  surface  of  the  light;  so  that,  although  any  immaterial  forms 
of  bodies  are  diffused  no  less  than  light  is  diffused  both  in  longitude  and  in 
latitude;  nevertheless  those  forms  up  to  now  have  been  effectual  only  with 
reference  to  longitude;  but  this  [light]  is  effectual  with  reference  both  to 
longitude  and  latitude:  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the  form  moves  as  moved; 
but  it  is  moved  only  in  longitude;  while  light  strengthens  as  light,  i.e.y  ac¬ 
cording  as  it  possesses  its  own  density,  both  in  longitude  and  in  latitude. 

Why  do  you  attribute  the  force  to  strengthen  the  motor  cause  to  the  light  separately 
and  outside  of  its  reference  to  the  rotation  of  its  source? 

Because  in  so  far  as  the  form  from  the  rotating  source  moves  [the  moon], 
it  always  moves  it  eastward  in  the  direction  CIDL;  and  in  the  beginning  of 
this  section  we  already  finished  with  its  effect  [564]  in  moving  the  moon. 
But  this  force  from  the  light  is  potent  in  accelerating  the  moon  even  westward 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  925 

in  the  direction  MNH,  with  reference  to  the  centre  of  the  sun,  at  that  time 
namely  when  the  moon  appears  to  us  to  be  void  of  light  or  in  conjunction  with 
the  sun.  Therefore  the  light  does  not  by  itself  bring  movement  and  direction 
together  {conciliat  motui  plagam),  but  by  means  of  the  acceleration  of  the 
form  MHN. 

If  this  force  is  present  in  light,  greater  force  will  be  present  in  the  denser  light 
around  GH,  as  being  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun;  a  lesser  in  the  more  scat¬ 
tered  light,  around  the  full  moon  in  CD,  since  it  is  farther  away  from  the  sun 
by  a  thirtieth  part  of  the  distance:  therefore  the  new  moon  will  be  speedier  than 
the  full,  other  things  being  equal. 

The  more  perfect  joining  balances  the  weakness  of  the  light  CD,  as  CD  is 
of  a  more  regular  concavity  than  GH.  Therefore  since  the  strengthening  takes 
place  through  the  joining  of  the  forms:  in  the  full  moon  the  more  scattered 
light,  joined  more  perfectly,  accomplishes  as  much  as  in  the  new  moon  the 
denser  light,  joined  more  imperfectly,  does.  Now  the  intervals  between  the 
moon  and  the  sun  which  measure  out  density  to  the  light  and  which  measure 
out  the  curvature  to  the  circles  DC  and  GH  are  the  same:  wherefore  the  density 
is  perfectly  balanced  in  longitude  by  the  curves  CD  and  GH.  But  the  effect 
of  the  light  on  one  side  is  balanced  by  the  diversity  of  the  joining  on  the  other. 
For  even  though  CD  and  GH  are  equally  curved;  nevertheless  in  the  first  case 
the  convex  OCDL  winds  into  the  concave  CD]  in  the  second  case  the  convex 
MGHN  is  turned  towards  GH  the  form  from  light,  which  is  convex  towards 
the  Earth. 

If  that  addition  of  133^  to  the  12  restitutions  (synodos)  in  the  sidereal  year  comes 
from  the  acceleration  of  the  lunar  movement  in  the  syzygies,  the  magnitude  of  the 
acceleration  must  correspond  too. 

Indeed  in  Tycho  Brahe  the  movement  [565]  of  the  moon  in  the  syzygies 
is  accelerated  only  1'26"  per  1°,  and  is  slowed  1'26"  per  1°  in  the  quadratures; 
wherefore  if  the  slowing  is  effaced  by  the  twofold  acceleration,  the  greatest 
acceleration  of  the  syzygies  will  be  2'52".  Wherefore  if  the  sines  squared  of 
all  the  90°  bring  their  small  portions  into  one  sum,  we  shall  have  as  the  ag¬ 
gregate  2°9';  therefore  in  the  sidereal  year  106°22'  but  not  132°45'. 

But  in  the  first  place  the  magnitude  of  the  greatest  variation  is  not  very 
certain  in  Tycho,  who  exhibits  it  as  403^'  at  45°;  and  so,  if  the  variation  is 
set  down  as  51',  we  equal  the  aforesaid  sum — 3'34"40'"  being  taken  as  the 
acceleration  of  1°,  or  in  Tycho's  formulation  1'47"20'",  and  an  equal  slowing 
up  at  90°  or  in  the  quadratures;  and  thus  iij  one  quadrant  the  sum  of  2°41' 
is  added  up,  and  that  sum  will  acquire  great  probability  below,  when  we  deal 
with  the  causes  of  the  irregularities.  Then  if  in  particular  we  keep  Tycho's 
small  magnitude,  at  45°;  the  preceding  and  the  subsequent  magnitudes, 
distributed  in  another  formulation  than  Tycho's,  could  give  the  desired  sum; 
or  else  there  are  hidden  from  us  very  minute  causes,  which  take  away  some¬ 
thing  from  the  133°  in  the  treatment  of  the  variation. 

Then  in  what  proportion  do  you  think  the  monthly  movement  of  the  moon  around 
the  Earth  should  be  distributed  among  those  two  causes,  namely  the  form  of  the 
terrestrial  body  and  the  circle  of  illumination  of  the  bodies? 

We  see  that  while  the  Earth  revolves  around  its  axis  approximately  293^ 
times,  in  the  meantime  the  moon  returns  around  the  Earth  once,  namely 


926  KEPLER 

from  sun  to  sun.  So  it  happens  that  in  one  year  or  365  days  6  hours  9  minutes 
26  seconds  the  moon  returns  twelve  times  and  adds  on  more  than  one  third 
of  the  thirteenth  revolution,  that  is,  132"^^',  Therefore  it  is  likely  that  the 
density  of  matter  in  the  lunar  body  is  so  proportioned  to  the  archetypal  degree 
[566]  of  strength  in  the  form  from  the  terrestrial  body,  that  unless  illumination 
aided  the  daily  revolution  of  the  Earth  and  also  by  means  of  this  [revolution] 
aided  the  progress  of  the  moon,  the  moon  itself  by  reason  of  the  simple  motor 
virtue  of  the  Earth  would  return  slightly  more  slowly,  that  is  to  say,  exactly 
twelve  times.  With  this  laid  down,  it  follows  that  those  remaining  and  as  it 
were  supernumerary  13234°  of  the  incomplete  thirteenth  revolution  must 
be  attributed  to  the  other  motor  cause,  namely  the  illumination. 

Then  you  evaluate  the  density  of  the  lunar  body  as  proportioned  to  twelve 
lunar  revolutions  in  one  year:  what  will  you  say  is  the  archetypal  cause 
of  this  number? 

The  cause  seems  to  be  composite  of  geometrical  beauty  and  of  the  office 
of  this  planet  in  the  world:  as  follows:  For  the  moon  is  a  secondary  planet 
assigned  to  the  Earth,  and  it  keeps  to  its  own  private  course  around  the  Earth. 
But  360  revolutions  were  allotted  to  the  Earth,  while  the  centre  of  the  Earth 
makes  one  return  around  the  sun.  Then,  just  as  among  the  upper  planets, 
the  sphere  of  the  moon  had  to  be  a  mean  proportional  between  the  body  of 
the  Earth  and  the  sphere  wherein  the  centre  of  the  Earth  really  revolves,  but 
the  sun  apparently;  so  also  the  revolutions  of  the  moon  had  to  be  more  than 
one  but  fewer  than  360.  And  indeed  the  mean  proportional  between  1  and 
361  is  19;  but  because  the  number  361  is  not  360  and  because  19  does  not  have 
any  beauty  either  geometrical  or  harmonical;  then  the  two  numbers  nearest 
to  19,  which  when  multiplied  together,  give  360  and  are  the  most  beautiful 
geometrically  and  harmonically,  should  be  chosen.  Now  the  nearest  numbers 
which  give  360  are  18  and  20,  because  the  first  is  smaller  by  unity  alone,  and 
the  second  greater  than  19  by  unity  alone.  But  there  is  no  demonstration  of  a 
figure  of  18  sides.  The  numbers  following  nearest  are  15  and  24,  which  also 
give  360.  Now  there  are  geometrical  demonstrations  of  them,  but  rather 
worthless  ones;  nor  do  they  give  any  outstanding  ratio,  [567]  but  only  the 
ratio  between  5  and  8;  nor  are  they  the  most  excellent  and  first  of  all  in 
harmonics.  But  the  numbers  12  and  30 — for  there  are  no  others  nearer  which 
give  360 — excel  in  all  w^ays:  both  geometrically,  as  being  generated  from 
the  first  figures  inscribed  in  the  circle,  and  harmonically,  because  all  har¬ 
monies  are  represented  by  these  two  divisions  of  the  string.  Then  of  the 
numbers  which,  when  multiplied  together,  give  360,  there  are  none  more 
beautiful. 

Furthermore,  a  number  [not]  less  than  12  and  not  greater  than  30  was  due  to 
the  revolutions  of  the  moon;  because  the  sphere  of  the  moon  exhibits  an  image 
of  the  sphere  of  the  sun,  it  was  fitting  too  that,  just  as  the  year,  which  is  the 
periodic  time  of  the  sun,  is  divided  into  360,  a  great  multitude,  so  also  the 
month,  which  is  the  periodic  time  of  the  moon,  should  be  allotted  parts  or  days 
greater  in  number  than  all  the  months  in  the  year;  and  that  the  multitude 
should  increase  with  the  progress,  if  in  the  first  place  the  year,  the  long  time, 
were  divided  into  12  months,  the  big  parts,  and  thence  the  month,  the  short 
time,  into  30  days,  the  little  parts;  for  multitude  is  becoming  to  small  things. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  927 

And  it  would  not  have  been  of  the  same  beauty,  if  there  had  been  thirty  months 
in  the  year,  and  each  month  had  been  of  twelve  days. 

How  do  you  make  it  probable  that  the  increase  in  the  annual  revolutions  of  the 
Earth  above  the  number  360  and  this  addition  to  the  annual  movement  of  the  moon 
beyond  the  twelve  monthly  revolutions  of  the  moon  come  from  the  same  cause? 

The  very  reasons  of  this  philosophy  bear  witness  to  this  thing;  so  that,  be¬ 
cause  the  daily  rotation  of  the  terrestrial  globe  moves  the  moon,  the  greater  in 
number  and  speedier  the  rotations  are,  they  move  the  moon  with  greater  speed, 
and  make  it  return  more  often.  And  especially  so  does  the  comparison  of  the 
number  of  days  in  the  solar  year — 365  days  6  hours  and  a  little  more — with  the 
archetypal  number  360  and  with  the  number  of  days  in  the  lunar  year — 354  days 
and  a  little  less  than  9  hours. 

[568]  For  since  360  days  in  the  year — making  the  moon  revolve  12  times — 
should  have  come  from  the  archetype,  but  they  have  become  365  by  the  inter¬ 
vention  of  the  other  cause;  accordingly  all  the  revolutions  have  become  faster 
in  the  ratio  of  360  to  365,  and  in  that  ratio  stronger  with  respect  to  moving  the 
moon.  But  at  the  same  time  they  have  become  greater  in  number,  f.e.,  365. 
Therefore  the  faculty  of  the  360  archetypal  revolutions  should  be  evaluated  at 
the  number  360.  But  the  faculty  of  these  actual  365  revolutions  should  be 
evaluated  not  at  the  number  365,  because  these  revolutions  are  faster,  but  at 
the  number  which  is  a  third  proportional,  namely  370°36'50" — if  we  attend  to 
the  minutiae.  But  if  the  faculty  stamped  with  the  number  360  would  have  moved 
the  moon  so  that  it  would  have  completed  12  returns  with  respect  to  the  sun  and 
would  have  ended  the  last  of  those  returns  at  its  initial  position  beneath  the 
fixed  stars:  therefore,  in  the  same  proportion,  the  faculty  evaluated  at  the  num¬ 
ber  371  ^  will  make  the  moon  outrun  the  sun  12  times  and  go  127°10'  beyond  its 
initial  position:  and  because,  after  the  360  days  which  were  in  the  archetype 
have  been  completed,  the  sun  is  still  5°10'  distant  from  its  initial  position  be¬ 
neath  the  fixed  stars,  and  because  the  circle,  which  in  the  archetype  had  been 
divided  among  the  12  positions  of  the  full  moons,  has  been  narrowed  by  that 
interval,  accordingly  the  addition  of  these  5°10'  to  those  127°10'  makes  132°20'. 
See  how  near  this  reasoning  comes  to  the  truth  in  the  astronomical  tables;  for 
they  give  the  excess  of  the  moon  in  the  sidereal  year  as  132°45',  only  25'  more. 

We  will  also  infer  the  same  thing  from  the  days  of  the  lunar  year,  as  follows: 
The  motor  faculty  of  the  360  revolutions  of  the  Earth  would  have  given  the 
moon  its  twelfth  return  with  respect  to  the  sun  and  to  its  initial  position;  there¬ 
fore  the  faculty  of  revolutions  fewer  in  number  but  so  much  the  stronger  will 
accomplish  just  as  much.  Accordingly  as  365  revolutions  is  to  360,  so  the  faculty 
of  the  360  archetypal  days  is  to  the  faculty  of  the  354  actual  days  and  19  hours, 
33  minutes.  Therefore  so  many  terrestrial  revolutions,  now  become  more  in¬ 
tense,  would  have  given  the  moon  its  twelfth  return  with  respect  to  the  sun,  if 
only  the  intervals  between  two  syzygies  had  not  been  contracted  by  the  increase 
in  the  number  of  the  revolutions.  But  because,  with  the  insertion  of  the  super¬ 
numerary  days  in  the  year,  the  360th  day  as  [569]  archetypal  breaks  up  the 
measure  of  contraction  of  the  zodiac,  from  which  5°6'41"  are  due  proportionally 
to  the  length  of  the  lunar  year ;  accordingly  the  moon  too  is  relieved  [sublevatur] 
of  the  same  number  of  degrees;  so  that  even  when  those  degrees  have  not  been 

^To  be  precise:  in  the  actual  computation  Kepler  uses  the  number  370°36'50''. 


928 


KEPLER 


traversed  in  the  expanse  of  the  world,  nevertheless  the  moon  makes  its  twelfth 
return  with  respect  to  the  sun.  Now  those  degrees  are  equivalent  to  10  hours  4 
minutes.  And  when  10  hours  4  minutes  have  been  subtracted  from  19  hours  33 
minutes  which  were  found,  9  hours  29  minutes  remain  in  addition  to  the  354 
days.  Instead  of  these  9  hours  29  minutes  the  astronomical  tables  give  8  hours 
49  minutes,  so  that  less  than  an  hour  is  missing.  And  that  small  difference  can 
be  assigned  to  other  minute  circumstances.  Meanwhile  it  has  been  proved 
exactly  enough  in  both  ways  that  this  straying  from  the  whole  and  beautiful 
numbers  is  due  to  the  concurrence  of  the  causes  of  the  lunar  movement.  And  the 
reason  is  clear  why  360  is  approximately  a  mean  proportional  between  the 
lengths  of  the  lunar  year  and  the  solar  sidereal  year. 

PART  III 

On  the  Real  and  True  Irregularity  of  the  Planets  and  its  Causes 

From  what  do  the  planets  have  that  name  which  signifies  wanderers  in  this  language? 

From  the  manifold  variety  of  their  proper  movements.  For  if  you  follow  the 
judgment  of  the  eyes,  that  variety  has  no  law,  no  determined  circle,  no  definite 
time,  if  a  comparison  is  made  with  the  fixed  stars. 

In  how  many  ways  do  the  planets  seem  to  wander? 

In  three  ways:  (1)  In  the  longitude  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  which  we 
said  extends  along  the  ecliptic.  (2)  In  latitude  [570]  or  to  the  two  sides  of  the 
ecliptic,  towards  its  poles.  (3)  In  altitude,  Lc.,  in  the  straight  line  stretching 
from  the  centre  of  vision  into  the  depth  of  the  ether.  Nevertheless  this  variety  is 
not  uncovered  by  the  eyes  alone;  but  reasoning  from  the  diverse  apparent  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  bodies  and  the  arcs  assents  to  it. 

What  must  he  held  concerning  these  wanderings  of  the  planets?  Do  they  really 
wander  in  so  many  various  ways,  or  is  sight  merely  deceived? 

Even  though  that  movement  is  not  wholly  such  as  meets  the  eyes,  it  is  present 
in  the  planetary  bodies  themselves;  but  much  deception  of  sight  winds  its  way 
in  here.  Nevertheless  when  these  deceptions  have  been  removed  by  the  mind, 
some  irregularity  of  movements  still  remains  and  is  really  present  in  all  the 
planets. 

Then  what  is  that  true  movement  of  the  planets  through  their  surroundings? 

It  is  constant  with  respect  to  the  whole  periods;  and  proceeds  around  the  sun, 
the  centre  of  the  world,  always  eastward  towards  the  signs  which  follow.  It 
never  sticks  in  one  place,  as  though  stationary,  and  much  less  does  it  ever  retro¬ 
grade.  But  nevertheless  it  is  of  irregular  speed  in  its  parts;  and  it  makes  the 
planet  in  one  fixed  part  of  its  circuit  digress  rather  far  from  the  sun,  and  in  the 
opposite  part  come  very  near  to  the  sun:  and  so  the  farther  it  digresses,  the 
slower  it  is;  and  the  nearer  it  approaches,  the  faster  it  is.  Finally,  in  one  part  of 
the  circle  it  departs  from  the  ecliptic  to  the  north,  and  in  the  other,  to  the  south. 
And  so  the  planet  is  left  with  a  real  irregularity  and  one  which  is  threefold,  too: 
in  longitude,  in  latitude  and  in  altitude.  The  astronomers  prove  that  by  suitable 
evidence — concerning  which  in  Book  vi. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 


929 


1.  The  Causes  of  the  True  Irregularities 

[571]  State  what  the  ancients  thought  about  the  causes  of  this  irregularity. 

The  ancients  wished  it  to  be  the  office  of  the  astronomer  to  bring  forward 
such  causes  of  this  apparent  irregularity  as  would  bear  witness  that  the  true 
movement  of  the  planet  or  spheres  is  most  regular,  most  equal,  and  most 
constant,  and  also  of  the  most  simple  figure,  that  is,  exactly  circular.  And 
they  judged  that  you  should  not  listen  to  him  who  laid  down  that  there  was 
actually  any  irregularity  at  all  in  the  real  movements  of  these  bodies. 

Do  you  judge  that  this  axiom  should  be  kept? 

I  make  a  threefold  answer:  I.  That  the  movements  of  the  planets  are  regular, 
that  is,  ordered  and  described  according  to  a  fixed  and  immutable  law  is 
beyond  controversy.  For  if  this  were  not  the  case,  astronomy  would  not  exist, 
nor  could  the  celestial  movements  be  predicted.  II.  Therefore  it  follows  that 
there  is  some  conformity  between  the  whole  periods.  For  that  law,  of  which 
I  have  spoken,  is  one  and  everlasting;  the  circuits  or  traversings  of  the  celestial 
course  are  numberless.  But  if  they  all  have  the  same  law  and  rule,  then  all 
the  circuits  are  similar  to  one  another  and  equal  in  the  passage  of  time. 

III.  But  it  has  not  yet  been  granted  that  the  movement  is  really  regular 
even  in  the  diverse  parts  of  any  given  circuit.  (1)  For  astronomy  bears  witness 
that,  if  with  our  mind  we  remove  all  deceptions  of  sight  from  that  confused 
appearance  of  the  planetary  motion,  the  planet  is  left  with  such  a  circuit  that 
in  its  different  parts,  which  are  really  equal,  the  speed  of  the  planet  is  irregu¬ 
lar — just  as  there  is  apparent  inequality  in  the  angles  at  the  sun  which  are 
equal  with  respect  to  time.  And  Ptolemy  himself,  by  setting  up  different 
centres  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  movement  of  eccentrics  and  epicycles, 
makes  those  circles  of  his  to  move  more  swiftly  at  one  time,  and  more  slowly 
at  another.  (2)  [572]  Finally,  astronomy,  if  handled  with  the  right  subtlety, 
bears  witness  in  this  case  that  the  routes  or  single  circuits  of  the  planets  are 
not  arranged  exactly  in  a  perfect  circle  but  are  ellipses. 

But  by  what  arguments  did  the  ancients  establish  their  opinion  which  is  the  op- 
posite  of  yours? 

By  four  arguments  in  especial:  (1)  From  the  nature  of  movable  bodies. 
(2)  From  the  nature  of  the  motor  virtue.  (3)  From  the  nature  of  the  place  in 
which  the  movement  occurs.  (4)  From  the  perfection  of  the  circle. 

W ill  you  state  their  argument  from  the  nature  of  bodies? 

They  reasoned  that  those  bodies  are  not  composed  of  the  elements,  and  so 
neither  generation  or  corruption  nor  alteration  has  any  rights  over  them. 
The  experience  of  all  the  ages  bears  witness  to  this:  for  the  bodies  are  always 
viewed  as  the  same  and  are  not  found  to  have  changed  at  all  in  mass  or  in 
number  or  in  form.  But  the  movements  of  the  bodies  made  up  of  elements  are 
for  this  very  reason  various  and  inconstant,  because  the  elements  are  variously 
mixed  in  the  constitution  of  the  bodies  and  are  at  war  with  one  another  within 
the  mixed  bodies.  Therefore  in  the  celestial  bodies,  where  there  is  no  such 


KEPLER 


930 

mixture  and  no  war  of  the  elements  as  in  mixed  bodies,  there  is  also  no  place 
for  turbulence,  none  for  irregularity. 

What  answer  do  you  judge  should  be  made  to  this  argument? 

If  the  argument  is  speaking  of  disordered  turbulence  of  movements,  there 
is  none  such  in  the  heavens;  there  are  no  celestial  disturbances  as  in  thunder¬ 
storms. 

Flame  and  drops  of  water  at  war  with  one  another 
because  the  composition  of  the  bodies  of  the  world  is  of  a  very  different  family. 
But  if  the  argument  is  in  opposition  to  every  regular  irregularity  also;  [573] 
then  not  every  irregularity,  certainly  not  that  regular  intensification  and  re¬ 
mission  of  movements,  comes  from  the  war  of  the  elements  mixed  together 
in  the  moved  bodies,  nor  from  the  bodies  being  mutable.  For  some  irregularity 
arises  just  because  they  are  bodies,  bodies  which  are  moved  and  which  give 
movement  too,  and  because  they  are  made  up  of  their  own  matter,  their  own 
magnitude,  and  their  own  figure  both  inwardly  and  outwardly,  and  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  their  magnitudes  and  figures  they  are  endowed  with  their 
natural  power  too.  And  in  accordance  with  their  natural  power  they  are  less 
movable  at  a  distance  than  at  near-by,  where  the  faculties  of  mover  and  moved 
are  in  agreement  rather  than  at  war.  Thus  by  one  part  of  its  body  the  load¬ 
stone  attracts  iron,  and  by  the  other  repels  iron;  not  in  either  case  on  account 
of  any  mixture  of  elements,  but  on  account  of  the  inward  rectilinear  con¬ 
figuration,  in  accordance  with  which  the  loadstone  has  an  inborn  virtue. 
Thus  the  same  loadstone  attracts  more  strongly  iron  when  near-by  than  when 
farther  away — not  that  when  the  loadstone  is  nearer,  it  has  more  of  fire  or 
Earth,  but  because  its  virtue  is  weakened  with  its  distance.  Nevertheless  the 
celestial  bodies-^*.e.,  the  bodies  of  the  world — remain  everlasting  and  im¬ 
mutable  as  regards  their  total  masses  [moles].  For  the  changes  which  come 
about  on  their  surfaces  can  bring  on  nothing  sufficient  to  disturb  [nullum 
momentum  ad  turbandos]  the  movements  of  the  total  masses  [molium].  And 
upon  this  everlastingness  of  the  whole  globes  and  upon  the  fact  that  in  the 
world  there  is  nothing  disordered  which  impedes  their  movements,  there 
depend  this  regularity  of  the  circlings,  and  the  everlasting  similarity,  and  the 
constant  regularity,  with  respect  to  the  whole  cycles,  of  the  irregularity  in 
the  single  parts. 

Will  you  review  the  second  argument  of  the  ancients  taken  from  the  mover  cause? 

They  said,  the  motor  virtues  of  the  celestial  bodies  are  of  the  most  simple 
substance;  they  are  minds  divine  and  most  pure,  which  do  unceasingly  what 
they  do;  they  are  everlastingly  similar;  they  employ  a  most  equal  struggle 
of  forces,  and  they  are  never  tired,  because  they  feel  no  labour.  [574]  And  so 
there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  move  their  globes  differently  at  different 
times.  And  accordingly  even  the  figures  of  the  movements,  on  account  of  the 
very  nature  of  the  minds,  are  most  perfect  circles. 

What  do  you  oppose  to  this? 

Even  though  the  motor  virtue  is  neither  some  god  nor  a  mind,  nevertheless 
we  must  grant  what  the  argument  intends — chiefly  too  in  the  case  of  that  motor 


931 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

cause  which  a  truer  philosophy  brings  in,  namely  in  the  case  of  the  natural 
power  of  the  bodies,  because  wherever  and  in  so  far  as  such  a  power  is  alone, 
it  moves  [a  body]  most  regularly  and  in  a  perfect  circle,  and  does  that  by  the 
sole  necessity  of  effort  and  by  the  everlasting  simplicity  of  its  essence.  That 
is  the  case  in  the  rotation  of  the  solar  body  and  in  that  of  the  Earth  too  in 
especial;  for  this  rotation  comes  from  one  sole  motor  cause:  whether  it  be  a 
quality  of  the  body  or  a  sprout  of  the  soul  born  with  the  body.  For  the  axis 
with  its  two  opposite  poles  stays  fixed;  but  the  body  revolves  around  the  axis 
most  regularly  and  in  a  circle.  This  would  be  the  case  still,  if  any  planetary 
globe  were  always  at  the  same  distance  from  the  sun.  For  it  would  be  carried 
by  the  sun  with  utmost  regularity  in  a  perfect  circle,  by  means  of  the  im¬ 
material  form  released  from  the  solar  body  set  in  a  very  regular  movement 
of  rotation.  And  by  reason  of  this  same  very  regular  movement  even  that 
form  from  the  body  revolves  in  the  amplitude  of  the  expanse  of  the  world, 
like  a  swift  whirlpool. 

But  although  so  far  we  have  granted  the  argument  of  the  ancients,  never¬ 
theless  regularity  of  movements  in  every  respect  does  not  yet  follow  from  this. 
For  not  only  do  the  motor  virtue  and  the  movable  body  come  together  in  the 
movements,  but  also  the  inward  rectilinear  configuration  of  the  movable 
body;  and  in  proportion  to  its  diversity  of  posture  in  relation  to  the  sun, 
this  configuration  is  affected  in  diverse  ways  in  the  movement:  in  one  region 
it  is  repelled,  in  another  it  is  attracted  towards  the  inside.  The  axis  of  the 
magnetic  movable  body  comes  in,  and  so  does  being  at  rest  in  the  parallel 
posture;  and  from  that  inward  repose  and  from  that  revolution  coming  from 
outside  there  results  that  change  of  posture  [575]  of  the  parts  of  the  planet 
in  relation  to  the  sun.  Finally  there  advenes  the  interval  between  the  sun 
and  the  planet,  and  this  interval  varies  with  the  attraction  and  repulsion. 
But  when  the  interval  has  been  changed  and  the  planet  comes  into  a  denser 
or  more  rarefied  virtue,  then  its  movement  too  necessarily  suffers  intensifica¬ 
tion  or  remission,  and  the  figure  of  its  route  becomes  elliptical.  So  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  concourse  of  so  many  required  things,  the  virtue  moving  the  planet 
cannot  be  called  simple,  because  it  moves  by  means  of  different  degrees  of 
its  form. 

What  was  the  ancients^  argument  from  place? 

They  considered  that  the  region  of  the  elements  was  around  the  centre  of  the 
world;  the  heavens  at  the  surface.  Therefore  to  the  bodies  made  up  of  elements 
belongs  rectilinear  movement,  which  has  a  beginning  and  an  end  and  which, 
disbursed  according  to  the  contrary  principles  of  heaviness  and  lightness,  brings 
any  of  those  bodies  back  into  its  own  place;  and  hence  in  proportion  to  different 
nearnesses  to  the  natural  place,  or  mark,  there  are  different  speeds,  and  finally 
pure  rest.  But  the  celestial  bodies  move  everlastingly  in  the  circular  expanse  of 
the  world:  and  that  argues  that  they  are  neither  heavy  nor  light,  and  that  they 
are  not  moved  for  the  sake  of  rest  or  for  the  sake  .of  occupying  a  place — ^for  they 
are  always  circling  in  their  place — but  that  accordingly  they  are  moved  only  in 
order  to  be  moved;  and  so  their  movement  must  be  regular,  and  the  form  of 
their  movement  must  be  other  than  rectilinear,  namely  suited  to  an  eternity  of 
movement,  that  is,  returning  into  itself. 


932  KEPLER 

What  answer  do  you  make  to  this  third  argument? 

Not  every  irregularity  of  movements  comes  from  heaviness  and  lightness,  the 
properties  of  the  elements;  but  some  comes  from  the  change  of  the  distance  too, 
as  is  clear  in  the  case  of  the  lever  and  the  balance;  and  this  cause  produces  in¬ 
tensification  [576]  and  remission  of  movements,  as  has  been  explained  so  far.  We 
must  however  remark  that  there  is  nevertheless  some  kinship  between  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  heaviness  and  lightness  in  the  elements  and  the  natural  inertia  of  the 
planetary  globe  with  respect  to  movement,  but  no  irregularity  of  movement  is 
explained  by  this  kinship. 

But  as  regards  the  figure  of  the  movement,  the  argument  concludes  nothing 
more  than  we  can  grant,  namely  that  the  movement  bends  back  into  itself.  And 
not  only  the  circular  but  also  the  elliptical  are  of  such  a  kind;  and  so  the  as¬ 
sumptions  are  not  denied.  For  in  truth  bodies  which  revolve  around  their  axes 
are  moved  only  in  order  that  by  their  everlasting  motion  they  may  obey  some 
necessity  of  their  own  globe — some  bodies  indeed  in  order  that  they  may  carry 
the  planets  around  themselves  in  everlasting  circles. 

State  the  fourth  argument  of  the  ancients  which  was  taken  from  the  circular  figure. 

They  philosophized  that  of  all  movements  which  return  into  themselves  the 
circular  is  the  most  simple  and  the  most  perfect  and  that  something  of  straight¬ 
ness  is  mixed  in  with  all  the  others,  such  as  the  oval  and  similar  figures:  accord¬ 
ingly  this  circular  movement  is  most  akin  to  the  very  simple  nature  of  the  bodies, 
to  the  motors,  which  are  divine  minds — for  its  beauty  and  perfection  is  some¬ 
how  of  the  mind — and  finally  to  the  heavens,  which  have  a  spherical  figure. 

How  must  this  be  refuted? 

To  this  I  make  answer  as  follows:  Firstly,  if  the  celestial  movements  were  the 
work  of  mind,  as  the  ancients  believed,  then  the  conclusion  that  the  routes  of 
the  planets  are  perfectly  circular  would  be  plausible.  For  then  the  form  of  move¬ 
ment  conceived  by  the  mind  would  be  to  the  virtue  a  rule  and  mark  to  which 
the  movement  would  be  referred.  But  the  celestial  movements  are  not  the  work 
of  mind  but  of  nature,  that  is,  of  the  natural  power  of  the  bodies,  or  else  a  work 
of  the  soul  acting  uniformly  in  accordance  with  those  bodily  powers;  [577]  and 
that  is  not  proved  by  anything  more  validly  than  by  the  observation  of  the 
astronomers,  who,  after  rightfully  removing  the  deceptions  of  sight,  find  that 
the  elliptical  figure  of  revolution  is  left  in  the  real  and  very  true  movement  of 
the  planet;  and  the  ellipse  bears  witness  to  the  natural  bodily  power  and  to  the 
emanation  and  magnitude  of  its  form. 

Then,  even  if  we  grant  them  their  intelligences,  nevertheless  they  do  not  yet 
obtain  what  they  want,  namely  the  complete  perfection  of  the  circle.  For  if  it 
were  a  question  only  of  the  beauty  of  the  circle,  the  circle  would  very  rightly  be 
decided  upon  by  mind  and  would  be  suitable  for  any  bodies  whatsoever  and 
especially  the  celestial,  as  bodies  are  partakers  of  magnitude,  and  the  circle  is 
the  most  beautiful  magnitude.  But  because  in  addition  to  mind  there  was  then 
need  of  natural  and  animal  faculties  also  for  the  sake  of  movement;  those  facul¬ 
ties  followed  their  own  bent  [ingenium]^  nor  did  they  do  everything  from  the 
dictate  of  mind,  which  they  did  not  perceive,  but  they  did  many  things  from 
material  necessity.  So  it  is  not  surprising  if  those  faculties,  which  are  mingled 
together,  could  not  attain  perfection  completely.  The  ancients  themselves  admit 


933 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

that  the  routes  of  the  planets  are  eccentric,  which  seems  to  be  a  much  greater 
deformity  than  the  ellipse.  And  nevertheless  they  could  not  guard  against  this 
deformity  by  means  of  the  province  of  those  minds  of  theirs. 

Now  I  have  often  reminded  you  that  while  I  deny  that  the  celestial  move¬ 
ments  are  the  work  of  mind;  I  am  not  at  that  moment  speaking  of  the  Creator's 
Mind,  which  all  things  indeed  befit,  whether  circular  or  elliptical,  whether  ad¬ 
ministered  and  represented  by  minds  or  compelled  by  material  necessity  from 
the  beginnings  once  laid  down. 

2.  On  the  Causes  of  Irregularity  in  Longitude 

[578]  Then  what  causes  do  you  bring  forward  as  to  why,  although  all  the  routes  of  the 
'primary  planets  are  arranged  around  the  sun,  nevertheless  the  angles — in  which  as 
if  from  the  centre  of  the  sun,  the  different  parts  of  the  route  of  one  planet  are  viewed — 
are  not  completed  by  the  planet  in  proportional  times? 

Two  causes  concur,  the  one  optical,  the  other  physical,  and  each  of  almost 
equal  effect.  The  first  cause  is  that  the  route  of  the  planet  is  not  described  around 
the  sun  at  an  equal  distance  everywhere;  but  one  part  of  it  is  near  the  sun,  and 
the  opposite  part  is  so  much  the  farther  away  from  the  sun.  But  of  equal  things, 
the  near  are  viewed  at  a  greater  angle,  and  the  far  away,  at  a  smaller;  and  of 
those  which  are  viewed  at  an  equal  angle,  the  near  are  smaller,  and  the  far  away 
are  greater. 

The  other  cause  is  that  the  planet  is  really  slower  at  its  greater  distance  from 
the  sun,  and  faster  at  its  lesser. 

Therefore  if  the  two  causes  are  made  into  one,  it  is  quite  clear  that  of  two  arcs 
which  are  equal  to  sight,  the  greater  time  belongs  to  the  arc  which  is  greater  in 
itself,  and  a  much  greater  time  on  account  of  the  real  slowness  of  the  planet  in 
that  farther  arc. 

But  could  not  one  cause  suffice,  so  that,  because  generally  the  orbit  of  the  planet 
draws  as  far  away  from  the  sun  on  one  side  as  it  draws  near  on  the  other,  we  might 
make  such  a  great  distance  that  all  this  apparent  irregularity  might  be  explained 
merely  by  this  unequal  distance  of  the  parts  of  the  orbit? 

Observations  do  not  allow  us  to  make  the  inequality  of  the  distances  as  great 
as  the  inequality  [579]  of  the  time  wherein  the  planet  makes  equal  angles  at  the 
sun;  but  they  bear  witness  that  the  inequality  of  the  distances  is  sufficient  to 
explain  merely  half  of  this  irregularity:  therefore  the  remainder  comes  from  the 
real  acceleration  and  slowing  up  of  the  planet. 

What  are  the  laws  and  the  instances  of  this  speed  and  slowness? 

There  is  a  genuine  instance  in  the  lever.  For  there,  when  the  arms  are  in  equi¬ 
librium,  the  ratio  of  the  weights  hanging  from  each  arm  is  the  inverse  of  the 
ratio  of  the  arms.  For  a  greater  weight  hung  from  the  shorter  arm  makes  a 
moment  equal  to  the  moment  of  the  lesser  weight  which  is  hung  from  the  longer 
arm.  And  so,  as  the  short  arm  is  to  the  long,  so  the  weight  on  the  longer  arm  is 
to  the  weight  on  the  shorter  arm.  And  if  in  our  mind  we  remove  the  other  arm, 
and  if  instead  of  the  weight  on  it  we  conceive  at  the  fulcrum  an  equal  power  to 


934 


KEPLER 


lift  up  the  remaining  arm  with  its  weight;  then  it  is  apparent  that  this  power 
at  the  fulcrum  does  not  have  so  much  might  over  a  weight  which  is  distant  as  it 
does  over  the  same  weight  when  near.  So  too  astronomy  bears  witness  concern¬ 
ing  the  planet  that  the  sun  does  not  have  as  much  power  to  move  it  and  to  make 
it  revolve  when  the  planet  is  farther  away  from  the  sun  in  a  straight  line,  as  it 
does  when  the  interval  is  decreased.  And,  in  brief,  if  on  the  orbit  of  the  planet 
you  take  arcs  which  are  equally  distant,  the  ratio  between  the  distances  of  each 
arc  from  the  sun  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  times  which  the  planet  spends  in 
those  arcs.  Thus  let  the  centre  of  the  sun  or  world  be  represented  by  the  fulcrum 
of  the  lever,  and  its  motor  power  by  one  arm  and  the  weight  on  it — and  we  have 
already  given  the  order  to  dissemble  the  arm  and  the  weight,  and  mentally  to 
reduce  them  to  the  fulcrum;  but  let  the  planet  be  represented  by  the  weight  on 
the  remaining  arm,  and  the  interval  between  the  sun  and  the  planet,  by  the  arm 
for  that  weight. 

[580]  Let  AC  be  the  lever,  D  and  B  the  weights  hanging  from  C  and  A,  FE  the 
fulcrum,  and  FEC  and  FEA  right 
angles.  As  CE  is  to  EA,  so  is  the 
weight  B  on  EA  to  the  weight  D 
on  EC.  Remove  mentally  i?A,  and 
let  the  power  formed  through  EA 
by  the  weight  B  be  the  power  of 
the  fulcrum  E)  accordingly  this 
power  of  the  fulcrum  E  will  keep 
the  weight  D,  hung  from  C,  in  hori¬ 
zontal  equilibrium,  that  is,  so  that 
FEC  will  be  a  right  angle.  But  if 
this  same  weight,  pulled  away  from  C,  approaches  as  near  as  C,  then  the  same 
power  of  E  will  have  more  might  over  this  weight,  and  will  lift  it  up  above  the 
line  EC. 

Now  let  E  be  not  the  fulcrum  but  the  sun,  and  let  D  be  the  planet;  and  EC 
and  EG  the  different  distances  of  the  planet  from  the  sun.  Accordingly  observa¬ 
tions  bear  witness  that  as  EC  is  to  EGj  so  is  GK,  the  forward  movement  of  the 
planet  when  nearer  at  C,  to  GI  or  CH,  the  forward  movement  of  the  planet 
when  farther  away  at  C. 

Then  do  you  attribute  weight  to  the  planet? 

It  was  said  in  the  above  that  we  must  consider  that  instead  of  weight  there 
is  that  natural  and  material  resistance  or  inertia  with  respect  to  leaving  a  place 
once  occupied;  and  that  this  inertia  snatches  the  planet  as  it  were  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  rotating  sun,  so  that  the  planet  does  not  yield  absolutely  to  that 
force  which  lays  hold  of  it. 

[581]  What  is  the  reason  why  the  sun  does  not  lay  hold  of  the  planet  with  equal 
strength  from  far  away  and  from  near-by? 

The  weakening  of  the  form  from  the  solar  body  is  greater  in  a  longer  outflow 
than  in  a  shorter;  and  although  this  weakening  occurs  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares 
of  the  intervals,  i.e.j  both  in  longitude  and  in  latitude,  nevertheless  it  works 
only  in  the  simple  ratio:  the  reasons  have  been  stated  above. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  935 

3.  The  Causes  of  the  Irregularity  in  Altitude 
But  what  pushes  the  planet  out  into  more  distant  spaces  and  leads  it  back  towards 
the  sun? 

The  same  which  lays  hold  of  the  planet,  the  sun,  namely,  by  means  of  the 
virtue  of  the  form  which  has  flow^ed  out  from  its  body  throughout  all  the  spaces 
of  the  world.  For  repulsion  and  attraction  are  as  it  were  certain  elements  of  this 
laying  hold.  For  repulsion  and  attraction  take  place  according  to  the  lines  of 
virtue  going  out  from  the  centre  of  the  sun;  and  since  these  lines  revolve  along 
with  the  sun,  it  is  necessary  for  the  planet  too  which  is  repelled  and  attracted 
to  follow  these  lines  in  proportion  to  their  strength  in  relation  to  the  resistance  of 
the  planetary  body.  So  the  contrary  movements  of  repulsion  and  attraction 
somehow  compose  this  laying  hold. 

Do  you  attribute  to  the  simple  body  of  the  sun  and  to  its  immaterial  form  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  attraction  and  repulsion  which  are  contrary  and  so  not  simple? 

The  natural  action  or  evepyeia  of  moving  [582]  the  planetary  body  for  the 
sake  of  assimilation  or  of  bringing  it  back  to  its  primal  posture  is  one  [in  num¬ 
ber];  but  it  seems  to  be  diverse  on  account  of  the  diversity  of  the  object.  For 
only  in  one  region  is  the  planetary  body  in  concord  with  the  solar  body;  in  the 
other  region  it  is  discordant.  But  it  belongs  to  the  same  simple  work  to  embrace 
like  things  and  to  spit  out  unlike  things.  This  opinion  is  strengthened  by  the 
case  of  magnets;  for  though  they  are  not  celestial  bodies,  nevertheless  they  do 
not  have  that  biform  virtue  from  the  composition  of  elements  but  from  a  simple 
bodily  form. 

Therefore  the  planetary  body  itself  will  be  composed  of  contrary  parts? 

No,  indeed.  For  it  follow^s  only  that  the  planetary  globe  has  an  inward  con¬ 
figuration  of  straight  lines  or  threads,  like  magnetic  threads,  which  happen  to 
be  terminated  in  contrary  regions;  and  in  one  of  these  regions,  not  on  account 
of  the  body  itself  but  on  account  of  its  posture  in  relation  to  the  sun,  there 
reigns  friendship  \familiaritas]  with  the  sun;  and  in  the  other  region,  discord. 

But  isnH  it  unbelievable  that  the  celestial  bodies  should  be  certain  huge  magnets? 

Then  read  the  philosophy  of  magnetism  of  the  Englishman  William  Gilbert; 
for  in  that  book,  although  the  author  did  not  believe  that  the  Earth  moved 
among  the  stars,  nevertheless  he  attributes  a  magnetic  nature  to  it,  by  very 
many  arguments,  and  he  teaches  that  its  magnetic  threads  or  filaments  extend 
in  straight  lines  from  south  to  north.  Therefore  it  is  by  no  means  absurd  or  in¬ 
credible  that  any  one  of  the  primary  planets  should  be  what  one  of  the  primary 
planets,  namely  the  Earth,  is. 

[583]  Granted  that  the  planet  has  an  inward  rectilinear  magnetic  configuration: 
then  what  is  it  that  makes  the  planet  turn  one  region  of  its  body  after  another 
towards  the  sun?  It  does  not  turn  its  threads  about,  does  it? 

By  no  means:  rather  w^e  should  ask  what  it  is  which  keeps  the  planetary  body 
from  removing  its  own  magnetic  axis  from  the  posture  which  it  has  once  taken 
wdth  respect  to  the  parts  of  the  world,  although  nevertheless  its  body,  like  the 
terrestrial  body,  revolves  around  its  axis  and  at  the  same  time  is  moved  out  of 
its  place  and  is  transported  in  a  circle  around  the  sun.  For  out  of  this  direction 
of  the  magnet  towards  the  same  region  of  the  world  during  the  Avhole  circuit  and 
out  of  the  transportation  of  the  body  from  place  to  place  around  the  sun  there 


936 


KEPLER 


is  compounded,  as  out  of  two  elements,  the  following  effect:  that  the  planetary 
globe  changes  the  posture  of  its  regions  with  respect  to  the  sun.  See  the  diagram 
on  page  939. 


What  examples  are  there  of  this  changef 

Again  there  is  a  familiar  example  in  the  magnetic  compass,  namely  where 
the  iron  needle  has  been  magnetized.  For  into 
whatever  place  it  may  be  transported,  the 
compass  needle  always  looks  towards  the 
north.  And  so  if,  carrying  the  compass,  you 
march  around  some  castle,  then  at  one  time 
the  head  and  at  another  time  the  tail  of  the 
needle  looks  to^vards  the  castle,  [584]  because 
in  every  part  of  its  circuit  the  head  always 
looks  towards  the  north. 

There  was  another  astronomical  example 
above  in  the  third  book,  when  we  said  that 
while  the  Earth  revolves  around  the  sun,  the 
axis  of  terrestrial  rotation  remains  in  the  same 
everlasting  parallel  posture — folium  248. 


Then  what  causes  do  you  assign  for  the  pointing  of  the  magnetic  threads  of  the 
planetary  body  towards  the  same  region  of  the  world  throughout  the  whole  circuit 
of  the  planet? 

The  same  as  were  indicated  in  Book  i,  folium  116^,  by  which  the  axis  of  terres¬ 
trial  rotation  is  made  steadfast.  For  firstly  the  parallel  posture  of  the  threads 
manifests  a  certain  sameness,  which  is  rest  rather  than  motion.  The  cause  of  that 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  natural  power  which  is  positive  or  active,  but  rather  one 
which  is  privative  of  all  movement.  And  so  that  natural  inertia  of  matter  with 
respect  to  movement  seems  to  have  an  inward  rectilinear  configuration  and  to 
be  extended  in  accordance  with  these  threads  or  to  be  rendered  stronger  and 
more  unconquerable  by  the  condensation  of  parts  in  a  straight  line. 

But  if  this  is  not  probable:  then  let  there  be  [two]  distinct  adwatiLat  or 
powerlessnesses;  the  first  belongs  to  all  matter  considered  to  be  without  inward 
configuration:  and  it  enables  the  planet  not  to  depart  from  its  own  place, 
unless  it  be  drawn  forth  from  the  outside,  namely  by  the  sun.  The  second 
belongs  to  the  planetary  body  according  as  it  has  a  configuration  of  straight 

^There  are  three  possible  causes.  (1)  Since  the  form  of  the  turning  is  joined  to  the  globe  and 
is  directed  towards  a  definite  region  and  not  towards  all  indiscriminately,  it  follows  with  geo¬ 
metric  necessity  that  the  axis  of  this  turning  is  directed  constantly  towards  the  lateral  regions 
as  long  as  the  middle  circle  of  the  turning  does  not  stray  from  its  own  region.  (2)  There  is  a 
private  cause  of  motion,  namely  the  natural  inertia  of  the  matter  of  the  globe,  due  to  the 
dragging  of  the  axis,  which  necessitates  force  to  turn  it  aside  from  its  position;  since,  however, 
no  power  of  motion  is  brought  to  bear  against  it,  it  remains  at  rest  in  its  position.  (3)  There 
is  an  internal,  positive,  natural  power  in  the  rectilinear  threads,  which  are  parallel  to  the  axis, 
to  maintain  them  in  their  original  position.  For  the  power  of  movement  nests  in  these  threads 
of  the  entire  globe;  they  are  distributed  circularly  around  the  axis  with  equal  strength  on  all 
sides  and  by  means  of  them  this  power  turns  the  body.  Thus  therefore  in  turn  the  axis,  main¬ 
taining  itself  in  its  proper  direction  through  a  natural  constancy  fixes  also  the  region  of  the 
turning,  with  the  result  that  becaase  of  the  inclination  of  the  axis,  the  circle  of  the  movement 
is  also  necessarily  inclined. 


EPITOIME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  937 

threads  on  the  inside,  and  by  reason  of  it  these  threads  are  kept  safe  so  that 
they  are  not  deflected  by  the  revolution  of  the  body  or  moved  out  of  their 
posture.  Finally  the  philosophizers  are  free  to  determine  whether  what  I  have 
just  spoken  of  is  merely  an  adwajiia  or  a  dvvafiis 

You  define  this  aSwafiLa  or  dvvafus  merely  by  the  preservation  of  the  posture.  But 
what  if  something  else  were  absent,  and  that  dvvafjLis  looked  towards  some  other  fixed 
parts  of  the  starry  heavens? 

In  Book  I,  page  116,  when  it  was  a  question  of  the  axis  of  terrestrial 
rotation  which  is  similarly  immovable,  an  answer  was  given  as  to  why  such  a 
thing  should  not  be  thought  of:  namely  because  there  is  no  reason  why  the 
axis  should  point  towards  some  empty  point  in  the  heavens  rather  than  to¬ 
wards  some  star,  and  why  in  this  direction  rather  than  in  that;  and  because 
these  planetary  threads,  no  less  than  the  axis  of  terrestrial  rotation  above, 
are  found  in  the  succession  of  ages  to  swerve  slightly  and  thus  to  desert  their 
original  stars  of  reference  \fixas  pristinas]  and  to  slope  towards  other  succeeding 
stars,  as  can  be  judged  in  general.  For  that  movement  is  so  very  slow  that 
within  the  1400  years  from  Ptolemy  to  us  this  cannot  be  safely  enough  af¬ 
firmed  of  all  the  planets. 

Perhaps  those  axes  of  rotation  of  the  bodies  play  the  roles  of  the  threads  which 
you  bring  in  here  instead  of  librations 

The  axis  of  the  daily  rotation  of  the  earth — of  which  I  have  spoken  in  the 
doctrine  of  spheres — forever  points  in  longitude  towards  the  beginnings  of 
the  Crab  and  of  the  Goat.  For  this  axis  prolonged  in  both  directions  marks 
out  the  poles  of  the  world,  as  in  Book  ii,  page  150.  But  the  arc  drawn  from  the 
pole  of  the  world  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic  passes  also  through  the  poles 
of  the  ecliptic:  therefore  it  is  the  colure  of  the  solstices  and  marks  out  the 
beginnings  of  the  said  signs. 

But  the  threads  by  which  the  Earth  is  repelled  from  the  sun  or  attracted 
pass  from  sign  to  sign.  The  aphelion  [586]  of  the  Earth  was  formerly  in  the 
Archer,  but  now  it  is  at  6®  of  the  Goat.  Therefore  the  axis  of  rotation  of  the 
Earth  and  the  thread  which  changes  the  interval  are  different. 

Then  it  seems  that  the  Earth  nevertheless  should  be  at  its  greatest  distance  in  the 
beginning  of  the  Goat.  For  if  the  whole  body  of  the  Earth  rotates  around  that  axis, 
the  thread  will  be  rotated  too,  in  so  far  as  it  differs  in  posture  from  the  axis,  and 
it  will  describe  as  it  were  two  cones  with  their  vertices  meeting  at  the  centre  of  the 
Earth,  and  only  at  one  moment  of  the  day  will  it  look  towards  its  proper  place: 
during  the  rest  of  the  day  it  will  revolve  around  the  beginning  of  the  Goat  pointed 
out  by  the  axis  of  the  Earth.  And  thus  it  will  pile  up  all  its  own  force  at  this  axis, 
and  by  a  certain  as  it  were  spiral  line  will  draw  the  Earth  away  from  the  sun  and 
always  towards  the  region  pointed  at  by  the  axis. 

Certainly  in  this  way,  by  the  tight  connection  of  the  thread  with  the  axis 
of  daily  movement,  what  is  spoken  of  would  take  place,  and  the  apsis  of  the 
Earth  would  never  depart  from  the  beginning  of  the  Goat.  Or  else  we  are 
therefore  compelled  to  admit  that  the  globe  is  inside  an  outer  crust:  in  such 
fashion  that  the  crust  rotates  during  the  daily  movement,  while  the  globe 
having  the  threads  does  not  rotate;  and  the  ordinary  magnetic  virtue  belongs 
to  the  outward  crust,  because  it  always  shows  the  poles  of  daily  rotation  but 
not  the  apsis  of  the  sun  or  Earth. 


938 


KEPLER 

Whence  let  some  physicist  come  to  the  help  of  J.  C.  Scaliger,  who  argues 
about  the  rising  of  rivers  and  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  sea;  and  let  the  physicist 
see  if  these  separated  bowels  of  the  Earth  can  aid  him  in  his  labour.  Even 
though  the  moon  and  the  soul  of  the  Earth  are  sufficient  for  me. 

If  the  planetary  globes  have  an  inward  rectilinear  magnetic  configuration y  why 
do  you  not  rather  ascribe  to  them  themselves  the  reason  for  their  fleeing  from  the 
sun  and  approaching  the  suny  in  proportion  to  the  diversity  [587]  of  the  regions 
of  their  bodyy  as  was  done  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars? 

1.  Because  astronomy  bears  witness  that  this  drawing  away  from  the  sun 
and  drawing  near  to  it  takes  place  in  a  line  so  to  speak  extended  towards  the 
sun,  in  so  far  as  the  intermingled  revolution  does  not  vary  the  line.  But  the 
magnetic  threads  are  rarely  stretched  out  towards  the  sun. 

2.  Because  two  very  diverse  things  would  be  attributed  to  those  magnetic 
threads.  For  first,  they  would  point  towards  the  same  region  of  the  world — 
which  is  something  like  rest;  then  they  would  move  their  body  in  place,  now 
away  from  the  sun,  now  towards  the  sun.  But  by  means  of  repulsion  and  attrac¬ 
tion  this  [movement  of  approach  and  withdrawal]  is  united  more  simply  with 
the  laying  hold  and  making  bodies  revolve,  which  the  sun  furnishes. 

3.  Furthermore,  it  is  more  probable  that  the  form  of  the  solar  body  and  its 
virtue  continue  as  far  as  to  the  planets  than  that  their  form  and  virtue  continue 
as  far  as  to  the  sun,  so  that,  when  repelling  it,  they  flee,  and  when  attracting  it, 
they  seek.  For  the  sun  is  a  huge  body;  while  a  planetary  body  is  quite  small.  The 
light  and  heat  of  the  sun  manifestly  descend  to  us;  the  sun  makes  the  planets 
revolve.  Accordingly  before  this,  things  were  clear  concerning  other  virtues  of 
the  sun.  But  we  do  not  have  such  and  so  evident  testimony  concerning  the  pro¬ 
longation  of  planetary  virtue  as  far  as  to  the  sun. 

4.  It  will  be  shown  below  that  the  threads  of  the  body  suffer  some  slight  de¬ 
flection  on  account  of  the  sun.  Therefore  it  is  probable  that  the  libration  of  the 
whole  body  also  comes  to  it  from  the  sun  rather  than  that  it  is  inborn;  that  is, 
it  is  a  passion  from  another,  not  an  action  or  movement  from  the  planet  itself. 

But  would  you  set  down  that  this  virtue  is  at  least  shared  between  the  sun  and  the 
planets  and  that  the  force  of  repulsion  and  attraction  passes  back  and  forth  from  one 
to  the  other y  just  as  it  is  shared  between  two  magnets? 

No:  rather  this  is  the  fifth  reason  why  this  repulsion  and  attraction  is  not  at¬ 
tributed  to  the  planets  themselves:  in  order  that  there  be  no  mutual  attraction 
and  repulsion  according  to  [588]  the  very  institute  of  the  Creator,  who  does 
nothing  in  vain.  Therefore,  if  the  virtue  of  the  planet  extended  as  far  as  to  the 
sun,  then  the  planets,  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  bodies,  would  move  the  sun  out 
of  the  position  which  it  occupies  at  the  centre  of  the  world,  or  at  least  the  sun 
ought  to  stagger,  attracted  now  in  this  direction,  now  in  that,  according  as  many 
planets  having  a  like  faculty  assail  the  sun  from  one  side. 

You  seem  not  to  avoid  the  following  inconveniences:  for  the  suny  leaning  against  the 
form  and  virtue  of  its  body  as  against  a  pole  and  pushing  the  planetSy  pushes  itself 
out  proportionally y  and  drawing  the  planet  as  it  were  with  its  clawSy  it  similarly 
droAJOs  itself  to  the  planet? 

We  have  avoided  this  in  every  way  by  denying  mutual  attraction  and  repul¬ 
sion.  For  firstly,  neither  the  shape  [forma]  nor  lay  out  [dispositio]  of  the  bodies 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  939 

will  be  directed  towards  this,  if  such  a  virtue  of  the  planet  [589]  does  not  extend 
to  the  sun.  Then  something  such  does  not  actually  follow — as  though  short  of 
the  Creator's  design — from  material  necessity  alone.  For  the  bulk  is  so  great,  the 
density  of  matter  in  the  solar  body  is  so  great,  and  its  force  of  attraction  and 
repulsion  is  so  great;  and  in  turn  the  weakness  of  the  planet  and  the  weakness 
of  its  resistance  are  so  great;  that  the  sun  is  in  no  danger  of  losing  its  position. 
Thus  when  a  ship  sticks  fast  in  the  sands  and  cannot  be  torn  away  and  moved 
from  its  place  except  by  two  hundred  horses,  nevertheless  one  hundred  horses, 
though  they  are  half  of  the  required  virtue,  do  not  move  forward  half  of  the 
lone  thing,  because  there  is  no  mean  half-way  between  the  moved  and  the  not- 
moved,  since  they  are  contradictory. 


State  a  convincing  hypothesis  as  to  how  any  planet  completes  its  circuits  and  is 
meanwhile  attracted  and  repelled. 

Let  us  begin  with  that  moment  when  the  magnetic  threads  offer  their  sides  to 

the  sun,  so  that  both  extremeties 
of  the  threads  are  equally  distant 
from  the  sun;  and  this  takes  place, 
by  the  foregoing  diagram,  at  A 
the  greatest  distance  of  all:  at  this 
time  the  sun  is  neither  repelling  the 
planet  nor  attracting  it;  but,  as  if 
hesitating  between  both,  it  never¬ 
theless  lays  hold  of  the  planet;  and 
by  means  of  the  rotation  of  its 
body  and  the  flowing  out  of  its 
form,  the  sun  makes  to  move  for¬ 
ward  from  AXoB  the  planet  which 
it  has  laid  hold  of,  and  the  sun  over¬ 
comes  its  resistance  and  in  turn  is 
overcome  by  the  planet,  so  that  the 
sun  lets  it  fall,  so  to  speak  out  of 
its  hands,  i.e.^  out  of  the  preceding 
rays  A  of  its  form  and  virtue,  and 
takes  it  up  again  with  the  following 
rays  and  does  so  in  the  flxed  ratio  of  the  virtue  of  the  form  in  that  interval. 
In  this  way  the  planet  is  moved  forward,  while  in  the  meantime  the  magnetic 
threads,  by  the  force  of  direction,  look  towards  the  same  region  of  the  world,  in 
such  fashion  that  the  region  friendly  to  the  sun  is  gradually  turned  towards  the 
sun,  and  the  discordant  bends  away  from  the  sun:  at  that  time  therefore  the 
globe  begins  to  be  attracted — only  a  little,  if  there  is  little  difference  between 
the  distances  of  the  extremities  from  the  sun:  by  this  attraction  the  planet  will 
go,  from  the  wide  circle  begun  at  A,  gradually  inward  to  B  and  will  betake  itself 
towards  the  sun,  as  if  into  a  narrower  circle  and  a  stronger,  because  denser, 
virtue  [590]  of  laying  hold:  hence  it  frees  itself  less  easily  from  the  virtue  and  so 
is  moved  on  more  speedily.  This  attraction,  which  is  very  slow  at  the  start  very 
near  to  A,  is  very  rapid  at  the  time  when  the  sun  has  the  whole  friendly  hemi¬ 
sphere  of  the  planet  within  its  view,  but  the  whole  discordant  hemisphere  is 


940  KEPLER 

hidden  behind  the  planetary  body,  t.e.,  when  the  magnetic  threads  point  in  a 
straight  line  towards  the  sun;  and  that  takes  place  around  C,  a  quarter  of  the 
whole  circular  ambit.  Thence  around  D  once  more  this  attraction  towards  the 
sun  becomes  more  lax;  but  the  velocity  of  the  progress  along  the  circle  continues 
to  increase,  because  the  interval  between  the  planet  and  the  sun  is  still  decreas¬ 
ing  on  account  of  the  attraction.  This  relaxing  of  the  attraction  amounts  to  al¬ 
most  nothing  in  the  beginning  after  C;  soon,  it  is  felt  more  and  more,  the  more 
the  unfriendly  part  of  the  planet  thrusts  itself  out  and  offers  itself  to  the  view  of 
the  sun,  towards  D,  until  half  of  the  circuit  has  been  traversed  and  once  more 
both  hemispheres  of  the  revolving  globe  regard  the  sun  equally.  For  at  that 
time  all  attraction  stops,  and  the  planet  is  very  near  to  the  sun,  and  so  is  very 
speedy,  because  it  is  struggling  with  a  very  dense  and  a  very  strong  virtue  of 
laying  hold  and  frees  itself  hardly  at  all  from  that  encompassing  virtue. 

But  immediately  the  globe  is  borne  beyond  this  place  E  on  its  orbit  towards 
j5,  because  already  the  discordant  hemisphere  is  nearer  the  sun  than  the  friendly 
hemisphere  and  is  advancing  more  and  more  towards  the  sun.  The  planet  too 
begins  to  be  pushed  away  from  the  sun,  as  though  out  of  a  narrower  and  denser 
sphere  of  solar  form  into  a  wider,  more  rarefied,  and  weaker  sphere.  Whence  the 
decreases  in  its  movement  follow,  and  in  the  contrary  order:  first,  slowly,  after 
E  towards  F;  then,  where  the  whole  discordant  hemisphere  or  region  of  threads 
points  in  a  straight  line  towards  the  sun,  but  the  unfriendly  region  is  turned 
away  from  the  sun:  the  planet  is  repelled  very  swiftly,  but  its  movement  has  now 
once  more  slackened  to  middling.  This  again  takes  place  around  G  the  other 
quarter  of  the  circuit.  When  the  planet  has  been  borne  farther  towards  i/,  this 
repulsion  again  slackens,  until  it  completely  disappears  at  A,  where  the  planet 
has  returned  to  its  primal  place  and  has  been  repelled  to  its  greatest  distance 
from  the  sun. 


[591]  But  it  is  unbelievable  that  the  planet — this  freedom  allowed — should,  after 
completing  its  return,  be  restored  to  exactly  the  same  distance. 

Doubtless  this  is  at  last  a  good  place  for  that  pronouncement  of  Ptolemy *s 
written  out  above,  where  he  reminds  us  that  nothing  takes  place  in  the  heavens 
which  hinders  the  natural  movements  of  any  body  or  which  makes  the  bodies 
stray  as  it  were  from  their  foot-paths.  And  so,  if  such  laws  of  movement  have 
been  instituted  by  nature  that  the  planet  return  unto  itself  most  exactly,  then 
this  will  most  certainly  take  place,  although  without  the  shackles  of  spheres, 
in  the  free  ether.  But  the  laws  were  made  as  we  described  them.  For  the  halves 
of  the  circuit  are  equal  to  one  another — the  one  in  which  the  planet  is  attracted 
and  the  other  in  which  it  is  repelled.  Equal  times  are  taken  by  both  halves. 
Moreover,  the  virtue  of  the  sun  is  the  same  and  everlasting — both  as  attracting 
and  as  repulsing.  And  it  has  the  same  ratio  to  the  planetary  inertia,  which  is 
always  the  same,  because  in  an  everlasting  body.  Accordingly  it  does  as  much 
by  attraction  in  one  half,  as  it  does  by  repulsion  in  the  other.  Why  then  should 
we  be  doubtful  concerning  the  restitution  of  the  planetary  body  to  the  original 
distance  within  one  period  of  time? 

Also  in  these  terrestrial  and  violent  movements,  are  not  the  movable  bodies 
separated  from  that  which  was  the  cause  of  movement,  as  in  scorpions,  ballistae, 
catapults,  bombardae,  and  slings?  And  weapons  hurled  fly  through  the  free  air. 


941 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

and  nevertheless  they  reach  their  appointed  place.  And,  for  a  wonder,  there  are 
some  sclopetarii  and  slingers  with  a  sureness  of  aim  that  cannot  be  imitated. 
If  in  this  case  the  form  of  that  movement — which  movement  was  in  the  thrower 
at  the  movement  of  throw  and  was  directed  towards  a  fixed  region — the  form 
impressed  into  the  movable  body  for  a  short  time  and  vanishing  has  such  power 
that,  as  long  as  the  movable  is  carried  by  a  form  which  has  not  yet  become 
completely  feeble,  it  does  not  cease  to  strive  for  its  appointed  region:  by  how 
much  firmer  defences  will  the  certitude  of  the  celestial  returns  be  protected, 
which  are  governed  [592]  by  the  inward  and  plainly  united  and  hence  everlast¬ 
ing  threads  of  the  movable  thing — since  in  the  first  case  the  air  disturbs  the 
movement  by  its  impact  and  encounter;  and  in  the  second  case  the  density  of 
the  ether  to  be  passed  through  is  clearly  nil  in  effect  or  else  has  a  very  slight 
effect. 

Why  are  not  the  librations  of  the  different  planets  in  the  same  ratio  to  their  mean 
distances,  that  is,  why  is  the  eccentricity  of  Mercury  greatest,  next,  that  of  Mars, 
and  then  those  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  the  Earth,  while  that  of  Venus  is  least? 

The  instrumental  cause  is  the  different  strength  of  the  threads,  whether  that 
is  produced  by  nature  or  by  posture.  But  the  final  cause  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  eccentricities  themselves,  namely  in  order  that  by  reason  of  these  eccen¬ 
tricities  the  movements  of  the  planets  should  become  very  fast  and  very  slow 
in  such  measure  as  would  suffice  for  the  harmonies  to  be  exhibited  through 
them.  Book  v  of  my  Harmonies  has  to  do  with  this. 

There  remains  one  difficulty  with  respect  to  the  direction  of  the  threads  towards  the 
same  region  of  the  world.  For  since  you  said  that  one  region  of  the  threads  has 
friendship  with  the  sun,  and  the  other  is  in  discord  with  the  sun,  so  that  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  former  or  the  latter  region  the  sun  either  attracts  or  repels  the  body  of 
the  planet,  it  seems  that  the  sun  has  the  power  over  the  planet  to  do  what  is  less, 
namely  to  move  these  threads  out  of  their  parallel  posture  and  to  turn  them  towards 
itself,  before  the  planet  is  transported  into  a  position  from  which  the  threads  can 
look  towards  the  sun. 

There  is  nothing  absurd  in  something  like  this  taking  place,  so  that  the  sun 
struggles  with  the  direction  of  the  threads,  just  as  it  struggles  with  the  inertia 
[593]  of  the  body  with  respect  to  movement  in  place — provided  we  keep  in  mind 
that  the  sun  accomplishes  less  with  respect  to  deffecting  the  threads  than  in 
moving  the  whole  body  in  place,  just  as  it  also  accomplishes  less  in  respect  to 
attracting  the  planet.  And  this  tempering  pertains  to  the  Creator’s  plan,  lest 
the  planets  should  come  into  contact  with  the  sun,  if  they  were  not  transported 
into  the  opposite  half  of  the  circuit  in  a  shorter  time  than  the  whole  interval  of 
time  which  could  be  spent  in  the  direct  attraction  of  the  thread. 

Therefore,  since  the  circling  of  the  planet  around  the  sun  forestalls  the  de¬ 
flection  of  the  threads,  hence,  although  in  one  quadrant  of  the  circuit  the  threads 
deflect  somewhat  towards  the  sun  in  their  friendly  region,  and  away  from  the 
sun  in  their  discordant  region;  nevertheless,  because  the  planet  is  transported 
into  the  other  quadrant  before  the  deflection  of  the  threads  becomes  total,  it 
follows  equally  that  there  is  a  change  in  the  posture  of  the  contrary  regions, 
which  are  turned  towards  the  sun,  just  as  if  the  threads  were  not  deflected; 
therefore  in  the  remaining  quadrant  the  sun  by  the  same  force  gives  a  counter- 


942 


KEPLER 


deflection  in  the  other  direction  to  the  planetary  threads,  which  lie  in  the  con¬ 
trary  position  and  turn  their  unfriendly  region  towards  the  sun.  And  so  by  the 
earlier  contrary  deflection  the  sun  again  restores  the  planetary  threads  to  their 
parallel  posture.  In  Book  v  this  deflection  and  counter-deflection  become  the 
principal  means  of  calculation. 

Could  you  cite  a  common  example  of  this  direction  and  mixed  sloping  of  the  threads? 

There  is  an  example  in  the  magnetic  needle.  For  although  it  looks  towards 
the  north  if  it  is  free,  nevertheless  it  is  somewhat  deflected  from  the  north  if  a 
magnet  approaches  obliquely:  for  then  it  bows  somewhat  towards  the  magnet. 

What  things  are  required  for  the  perfect  restitution  of  the  threads  to  the  parallel 
posture? 

That  the  sun  expends  as  much  of  its  forces  in  deflecting — say,  through  the 
quadrant  PIN,  attracting  H  the  solipetal  region 
of  thread  downward  from  line  IS  towards  itself — 
as  it  expends  in  restoring,  as  through  the  quad¬ 
rant  NER,  drawing  back  G  the  same  region  of 
thread  upwards  towards  line  SY,  which  is  nearer 
to  itself.  But  this  can  take  place  only  if,  with  PR 
as  the  line  of  the  apsides  and  PN  and  NR  as  full 
quarters  of  the  orbit,  NQ  the  thread  of  the  planet, 
situated  at  N,  the  limit  of  the  quadrants,  points 
precisely  towards  the  sun  A.  For  even  though,  in 
the  upper  quadrant  PN,  the  sun  A  administers 
this  deflection  SIH,  BNQ,  at  long  distances  AP, 

AI,  etc.,  and  so  with  a  feebler  virtue,  but  in  the 
lower  quadrant  A'i?  at  the  short  distances  AiS,  AR 
and  so  with  a  stronger  virtue;  yet  in  turn  the 
planet  delays  longer  in  the  upper  quadrant  PN 
and  undergoes  those  feeble  forces  of  deflection 
for  a  longer  time;  while  in  the  lower  quadrant  NR 
the  planet  makes  a  shorter  delay  and  has  a 
shorter  time  in  which  to  undergo  the  strong 
forces  which  counteract  the  deflection-  And  there  is  perfect  counterbalancing. 
For  the  same  perfect  counterbalancing  can  also  cause  that  at  N,  one  and  the 
same  limit  of  the  quadrants,  the  distance  AN — in  the  rightly  drawn  orbit- 
should  be  equal  to  the  semidiameter  BP — as  will  be  made  clear  in  Book  v. 

But  what  if  the  planet  were  to  direct  the  thread  NQ  towards  the  sun  not  precisely 
after  traversing  PN  the  upper  quadrant  of  the  orbit  but  at  some  later  time? 

Here  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  opposition.  For  where  the  thread  points 
towards  the  sun  is  the  limit  of  the  quadrants,  which  are  measured  from  the  ap¬ 
sides.  For  IH,  the  deflection  of  the  thread  with  respect  to  the  perpendicular  IS, 
is  always  increasing,  as  long  as  the  thread  H  seeks  the  sun.  But  the  increment 
of  libration  increases  with  it — the  effect  with  the  cause. 

[595]  Therefore  if,  in  this  work  of  attraction  of  the  planet  towards  the  sun, 
more  than  a  quadrant  of  the  orbit  is  traversed  with  reference  to  the  fixed 
stars;  then  more  than  a  quadrant  will  have  to  be  traversed  by  the  planet  in  re- 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  943 

storing  the  right  angle  between  the  thread  and  the  sun  at  R  and  in  the  effect  [of 
the  restoration],  or  the  remaining  part  of  the  libration,  whereby  the  planet  is 
brought  from  the  nearness  N A  to  the  nearness  RA^  by  the  same  degrees  of  in¬ 
crements  which  are  now  decreasing  in  the  contrary  order. 

Therefore,  when  the  quadrants  are  added  together,  their  excess  over  the  semi¬ 
circle  shows  the  magnitude  of  the  change  in  direction  of  the  threads  under  the 
fixed  stars  in  half  of  one  period,  or  the  magnitude  of  the  transportation  east¬ 
ward  of  B  the  centre  of  the  orbit  and  PR  the  line  of  the  apsides.  Therefore  if 
this  magnitude  is  subtracted  from  that  which  is  more  than  half  of  the  orbit  as 
estimated  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  there  will  remain  not  more  than  half 
of  the  elliptic  orbit  as  reckoned  from  the  apsis  P. 

Theyi  do  the  apsides  abide ^  or  are  they  transported  frorn  one  place  to  another  under 
the  fixed  stars? 

In  the  case  of  Jupiter  the  comparison  of  observations  made  by  the  ancients 
with  those  of  today  bears  witness  that  the  apsides  stand  approximately  under 
the  same  fixed  stars,  or  retrograde  very  little.  But  in  the  case  of  all  the  remain¬ 
ing  planets,  the  apsides  are  found  to  have  left  their  original  seats,  by  a  move¬ 
ment  in  the  direction  eastward — as  in  the  case  of  the  apogee  of  the  moon — but 
in  the  case  of  the  planets  by  extremely  slow  movements,  though  the  apogee  of 
the  moon  progresses  quite  perceptibly. 

What  is  the  reason  why  in  the  case  of  the  primary  planets,  the  threads  are  found  so 
perfectly  restored — after  the  whole  periodic  returns  have  been  completed — that  the 
progress  of  the  apsides  is  imperceptible? 

Because  it  is  the  same  sun  which  gives  a  libration  to  the  planetary  body  and 

which  deflects  and  restores  its  threads;  and  be¬ 
cause  in  both  acts  it  is  the  same  threads  by  which 
as  by  instruments  the  planet  is  given  a  libration 
and  is  deflected:  then  there  is  no  cause  why  the 
forces  for  both  acts  should  not  be  measured  out 
through  equal  times.  For  just  as  the  planet, 
which  points  its  thread  NQ  directly  [596]  at  the 
sun,  would  at  some  fixed  time  be  joined  even  in 
contact  with  the  sun,  if  it  did  not  leave  the  line 
NA ;  so  too  the  same  planet,  placed  at  the  same 
N  and,  by  a  fiction,  directing  its  thread  at  right 
angles  to  the  line  N A,  would  be  turned  around 
together  with  its  thread  in  a  fully  equal  time,  so 
that  in  the  end  it  would  direct  the  thread  NQ 
towards  the  sun.  But  just  as  to  the  libration  there 
is  added  a  third  work,  namely  the  moving  of  the 
planet  out  of  its  posture  AN,  so  that  the  thread 
NQ  no  longer  points  towards  the  sun  and  hence 
is  not  attracted  with  the  same  strength  towards 
the  sun — and  in  this  way  it  is  seen  too  that  full 
contact  does  not  take  place  by  a  movement  along  N A,  but  is  forestalled  by  the 
transportation  from  N  to  R,  and  the  planet  gets  no  nearer  than  RA ;  so  too  this 
same  transportation  of  the  planet  from  N  to  R  anticipates  this  deflection  of  the 


944 


KEPLER 


thread,  so  that  the  thread  will  point  at  the  sun  long  before  it  could  have  been 
rotated  a  whole  quadrant  by  the  sun;  and  so,  instead  of  the  quadrant  of  rota¬ 
tion,  no  more  than  arc  QM  is  needed.  But  the  angles  of  the  past  deflections,  or 
the  virtue  expended  in  them,  are  measured  by  the  sines — as  will  be  made  clear 
by  examples  of  natural  things  in  Book  v.  Wherefore  as  PB  the  total  mean  dis¬ 
tance — or  in  the  ellipse,  NA — is  to  BA  the  magnitude  of  half  the  libration — the 
work  of  one  quadrant;  and  this  magnitude  is  the  same  as  the  eccentricity — so 
also  NQ  the  semidiameter  of  the  planetary  globe,  which  is  employed  as  the 
whole  sine,  will  be  to  the  sine  of  MNQ  the  angle  of  greatest  deflection;  and 
MNQ  will  be  the  angle  of  greatest  deflection  at  the  time  when,  by  the  trans¬ 
portation  of  the  planet,  a  quadrant  from  P  the  place  of  greatest  distance  PA 
has  been  exactly  completed. 

But  with  the  assumption  of  this  proportion,  it  is  demonstrated  that  the 
thread  NQ  points  towards  the  sun  A  at  the  time  when  PN  is  a  quadrant  under 
the  fixed  stars,  precisely.  For  let  AN  be  equal  to  PB,  [597]  as  in  the  ellipse;  and 
let  B  be  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle,  and  ABN  a  right  angle,  because  its 
measure  NR  is  a  quadrant.  Now  from  Q  the  solipetal  limit  drop  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  QM  upon  BN,  Two  right  triangles  ABN  and  QMN  are  formed.  And  because 
it  is  assumed  that  NQ  :  QM  :  :  N A  :  AB,  then  N,  Q,  and  A  will  be  in  one  straight 
line,  or  Q  will  point  towards  the  sun. 

But  it  has  already  been  demonstrated  above  that  if,  w^hen  PN  a  quadrant 
under  the  fixed  stars  has  been  completed,  the  thread  Q  of  the  planet  points 
towards  the  sun,  so  that  BNQ  is  its  angle  of  deflection;  then  it  follows  that  in 
NR  the  other  quadrant  under  the  fixed  stars  the  thread  NQ  is  restored  and 
BNQ  the  angle  of  deflection  is  annulled.  Hence  when  the  planet  stands  at  P,  the 
thread  is  once  more  parallel  to  BN,  as  it  was  at  P.  And  this  restitution  of  threads 
is  complete  after  the  semicircle  has  been  traversed.  Let  the  same  judgment  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  other  semicircle ;  for  when  that  has  been  traversed,  the  planet  returns 
to  the  same  position  under  the  fixed  stars. 

But  since  experience  bears  witness  that  the  apsides  are  transported  imperceptibly, 
and  do  not  remain  under  the  same  positions  among  the  fixed  stars;  then  it  follows 
that  NQ  looks  towards  the  sun  at  not  precisely  a  quadrant  from  P  the  original  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  apsis.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  straying  from  the  already  established 
ratio  of  regularity? 

It  seems  that  the  imperceptible  slowness  of  these  movements  must  be  sought 
for  in  material  necessity — if  anything  else  is — namely  in  the  straying  of  the  said 
movements,  the  libration  and  deflection,  from  one  another  through  the  inter¬ 
vention  of  a  third  movement.  For  it  diffuses  itself  in  an  infinity  of  time,  which 
has  no  beauty,  as  being  indeterminate.  But  it  is  difficult  to  state  what  the  inter¬ 
vening  cause  is:  because  all  astronomers  are  not  decided  about  the  thing  itself; 
nor,  for  most  of  them,  does  the  thing  have  any  fixed  magnitude.  But  with  mag¬ 
nitude  removed,  we  lack  any  means  of  examining  the  causes  (which  some  one 
might  have  searched  into  by  conjecture)  of  whatever  sort  of  latitudinal  digres¬ 
sion  the  planets  may  have  away  from  the  ecliptic.  For  the  digression  does  not 
take  place  without  the  deflection  of  the  threads  NQ  to  AN  the  ray  of  the  sun — 
a  deflection  as  great  as  the  digression  of  each  planet.  [598]  It  is  consonant  with 
such  a  greater  or  lesser  deflection  that  the  work  of  the  threads  should  be  some¬ 
what  weakened — and  that  variously,  in  proportion  to  the  varying  relation  of 


945 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

the  digressions  to  the  apsides.  In  Saturn,  Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury  the  mean 
longitudes^  have  some  latitude,  but  none  in  Jupiter;  and  the  apsides  of  Saturn, 
Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury  progress  in  that  proportion,  while  those  of  Jupiter 
stand  still.  Therefore  since  in  other  respects  the  force  to  deflect  the  thread  of  the 
planetary  body  becomes  greatest  at  the  apsides  P  and  72,  where  the  thread  is 
presented  to  the  sun  at  right  angles,  it  is  believable  that  this  force  becomes 
slightl}^  weaker  on  account  of  the  latitude.  And  the  reason  the  force  does  not 
suffer  the  same  loss  from  the  libration  too  is  that  there  the  libration  is  almost 
nil  in  itself.  In  turn,  the  force  of  deflection  at  N  is  almost  nil,  while  the  libration 
is  greatest:  therefore  the  force  of  deflection  suffers  loss  from  libration  here  but 
not  there,  in  proportion  to  the  latitude.  And  it  can  happen  that  the  deflection 
of  the  thread  can  be  slowed  up  in  this  way;  and  with  that  given,  what  has  al¬ 
ready  been  unfolded  takes  place;  the  thread  looks  towards  the  sun  more  slowly, 
namely  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  quadrant.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated 
before  that  at  that  time  the  apsides  are  transported  eastwards.  Then,  this  can  be 
the  cause  of  the  said  phenomenon — a  cause  linked  to  physical  or  geometrical 
necessities,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  previously  laid  down. 

2.  But  in  the  meantime  I  would  not  rigidly  deny  that  this  effect  can  be  a  part 
of  the  design,  so  that  it  is  not  a  consequence  of  necessity,  or  a  mere  consequence: 
because  we  are  still  ignorant  of  the  magnitude  of  it.  Then  there  will  be  room  to 
speak  about  the  final  cause:  to  the  final  cause  belongs  the  mutual  tempering  of 
the  forces  of  libration,  of  the  deflection  of  the  threads,  and  of  the  revolution,  in 
some  fixed  proportion:  in  order  that,  because  the  librations  were  prepared  in 
order  to  set  up  the  harmonies  of  the  movements,  any  given  harmony  should  not 
be  born  always  in  some  one  configuration  of  two  planets,  but  in  the  succession  of 
the  ages  would  pass  through  absolutely  all  the  configurations,  and  in  order  that 
thus  all  the  harmonies  of  movements — which  Book  v  of  the  Harmonies  is  about — 
should  be  mingled  with  all  the  harmonic  configurations — which  is  the  matter  of 
Book  IV  of  the  Harmonies, 

Note  by  Kepler:  Pages  942-44.  A  new  and  hasty  correction  has  perverted  the  original 
and  well-meditated  text:  1.  There  is  a  petitio  prindpi.  2.  It  is  not  in  my  design  that 
on  page  942,  fourth  line  from  bottom,  there  should  have  been  a  case  of  necessity :  the 
direct  variation  of  the  libration  with  the  deflection.  3.  In  the  same  place,  the  cause  is 
not  a  cause.  4.  One  thing  was  proposed  on  page  942,  and  something  else  was  demon¬ 
strated  on  page  944:  on  page  942  it  was  a  question  of  the  fixed  stars:  and  on  page 
944,  of  the  apsides. 

The  true  cause  of  the  almost  perfect  restitution  is  of  physical  necessity.  For  either 
the  threads  remain  parallel,  or  else  in  one  half  they  are  deflected  downward  away  from 
the  apsis,  as  NQ,  and  in  the  other  half,  upward,  since  in  both  directions  the  counter¬ 
balancing  is  perfect,  as  was  said  on  page  942;  moreover  thus  the  threads  are  parallel 
to  one  another  at  both  apsides;  therefore  the  restitution  is  perfect. 

Therefore  on  page  944  something  false  and  contradictory  is  proposed:  the  straying 
of  the  libration  from  the  deflection.  Instead,  the  cause  was  to  be  given  which  is  sug¬ 
gested  on  pages  941-42.  For  in  the  upper  quadrant  PN  the  sun  gives  a  slightly 
smaller  deflection,  in  the  lower  quadrant  NR,  a  slightly  greater  counter-deflection; 
if  at  any  rate  the  fixed  stars  have  their  termini  at  the  quadrants.  Accordingly  since 
the  solipetal  terminus  G  is  at  R,  the  point  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  is  already  above  iSF, 
and  is  therefore  still  nearer  the  sun;  therefore  the  planet  is  still  sailing  on:  wherefore  R 
the  perigeal  apsis  will  be  beyond  R  in  the  fixed  stars.  If  the  latitude  of  the  planet  is 

^For  apsides  reading  longitudines  mediae.  See  note  by  Kepler  below. 


946  KEPLER 

the  cause  of  this  thing,  it  will  have  to  be  explained  in  another  way  than  on  page  945, 
where  instead  of  apsides  read  mean  longitudes,  because  in  Jupiter  P  is  not  the  node 
but  the  limit.  Nor  is  it  sufficient  to  look  to  Jupiter  and  to  say  the  reason  the  apsis  is 
standing  still  is  that  the  apsis  is  at  the  limit.  But  it  is  necessary  to  explain  this  too: 
why  the  progress  of  the  apsides  in  the  case  of  the  other  planets  of  very  unequal 
periods  is  approximately  equal  under  the  fixed  stars. 

4.  On  the  Movement  in  Latitude 

[599]  Under  what  laws  do  the  planets  digress  in  latitude  away  from  the  ecliptic? 

Again,  under  a  very  simple  law:  that  the  plane  which  they  circumscribe  with 
the  centre  of  their  body  be  exactly  even  in  any  period  and  that  it  be  inclined 
to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  in  a  constant  and  invariable  inclination — except  in 
the  case  of  the  moon. 

If  level  planes  are  inclined  to  one  another ^  they  meet  and  cut  one  another  in  one 
straight  line.  I  ask  what  that  common  line  is,  from  which  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is 
inclined  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

In  all  the  planets,  this  line  passes  through  the  centre  of  the  sun;  and  the  line 
of  each  planet  extends  to  its  own  proper  places  on  the  ecliptic,  which  are  opposite 
to  one  another  from  the  centre  of  the  sun. 

How  is  this  established? 

Because,  since  the  planet  at  two  different  points  on  its  return,  as  at  C  and  D, 
is  seen  to  be  under  the 
ecliptic  without  any  lati¬ 
tude;  these  two  positions 
on  the  orbit  are  found  by 
calculation  to  be  in  the 
same  straight  line  CAD 
with  the  sun  A;  so  that 
if  ACM  was  at  17°  of  the 
Bull,  the  interval  of  time 
until  the  planet  was  seen 
again  on  ecliptic,  togeth¬ 
er  with  the  hypothesis  of 
the  eccentric  circle,  ex¬ 
hibits  the  line  ADO  of 
the  other  position  on  the 
eccentric  circle  at  17°  of 
the  Scorpion,  that  is,  op¬ 
posite  17°  of  the  Bull. 

What  is  gathered  from 
this? 

The  same  as  above,  on 
page  910.  For  since  the 
planes  of  all  six  eccentric  circles  meet  at  the  one  common  centre  of  the  sun;  then 
all  cannot  meet  at  once  anywhere  except  at  this  centre  of  the  sun,  because  the 
line  of  section  is  not  common  to  all,  but  [600]  proper  to  each  planet.  But  different 
lines  cannot  meet  at  more  than  one  point. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  947 

Accordingly  because  the  sun  is  the  node  common  to  all  the  systems:  therefore 
either  nature  moves  the  planets  by  bodily  virtues,  or  else  mind,  by  rational  com¬ 
mands.  For  the  planets  the  sun  is  a  fixed  mark,  which  all  their  revolutions  regard. 

What  causes  do  you  assign  for  the  movement  in  latitude? 

In  the  case  of  the  planets  the  sun  is  not  the  cause — unless  the  remote  cause — 
for  this  deviation  from  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  nor  is  there  any  need  for  the 
planet^s  intelligence  in  this  work,  nor  for  the  above  disproved  substructure  of 
solid  spheres,  upon  which  as  upon  chariots  the  planets  travel  along  their  orbit; 
and  there  is  much  less  need  of  the  spheres  here  than  in  the  case  of  the  librations 
into  opposite  altitudes  or  in  the  case  of  the  movement  in  longitude.  But  some 
certain  formation  of  the  planetary  bodies  is  alone  sufficient  to  twist  their  orbits 
away  from  the  ecliptic  and  to  twist  them  back  again. 

Why  is  not  the  sun  ranked  as  a  cause j  since  it  has  already  been  said  that  the  lines 
of  section  go  through  the  solar  body  itself? 

[601]  Because  one  and  the  same  sun,  by  means  of  one  and  the  same  form  of  its 
body,  which  form  revolves  in  a  uniform  and  very  direct  current  along  the 
mean  circle  between  the  poles  of  rotation  of  the  sun,  cannot  carry  different 
planets  through  other  different  paths,  unless  the  planets  add  from  out  of 
themselves  the  causes  of  this  differing  digression  in  latitude. 

Of  what  sort  do  you  hint  that  this  formation  of  the  planetary  bodies  is? 

It  can  be  either  essential,  that  is,  belonging  to  the  inward  rectilinear  mag¬ 
netic  thread,  or  else  accidental,  namely,  the  rotation  of  the  planetary  globe 
around  its  axis  performed  in  such  a  way  that  the  threads  or  axis  of  rotation 
retain  their  parallel  posture  during  the  whole  circuit  of  the  body  and  have 
such  a  direction  that,  when  the  planet  is  on  the  ecliptic,  it  touches  the  orbit 
and  deflects  at  one  terminus  somewhat  towards  the  north,  and  at  the  other 
towards  the  south. 

Do  you  have  a  common  example  of  this  deflection? 

The  oars  of  ships  supply  some  sort  of  example.  For  if  the  ship  is  being  driven 
forward  by  winds,  but  an  oar  is  tied  obliquely  to  the  stern,  then  the  ship  against 
which  the  line  of  wind  is  bearing  is  turned  gradually  to  the  side. 

The  oarj  pole,  or  rudder  always  directs  the  ship  towards  one  single  region.  Hem 
therefore  do  the  planets  now  depart  to  the  sides  of  the  ecliptic  and  now  return  from 
there  to  the  ecliptic? 

If  the  rudder  of  the  ship  is  turned,  the  ship  too  deflects  to  the  other  side. 
Even  though  the  planets  keep  their  threads  straight,  in  a  parallel  posture, 
and  unturned,  nevertheless  the  planets  are  transported  to  the  opposite  parts 
of  their  circuit,  wherein  the  threads,  [602]  by  reason  of  their  original  posture, 
have  the  opposite  inclination  to  their  orbit;  wherefore  too  the  planets  in  the 
other  semicircle  are  driven  towards  the  opposite  regions. 

In  order  that  I  may  better  understand  this  movement^  state  what  surface  one  such 
thread  or  axis  produces  during  the  revolution  of  the  planet  around  the  sun? 

Let  us  lay  down  that  when  the  planet  is  on  the  ecliptic,  as  here  at  C  and 


948  KEPLER 

then  AB  the  thread  of  latitude  does  not  have  any  inclination  with  respect 
to  the  sun — though  this  can  take  place  differently  but  with  the  same  effect, 
if  the  posture  is  equivalent — but  has  such  an  inclination  with  respect  to  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic,  that  EA  or  CA  the  half  [of  the  thread]  is  to  be  understood 
to  be  sunken  below  the  paper— which  represents  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic — but 
the  remaining  half  EB  or  CB  stands  out  above  the  paper,  and  the  angle  of 
inclination  is  as  great  as  the  latitude  is  accustomed  to  be  at  the  limits— F 
the  limit  above  the  paper  and  D  the  limit  below.  Moreover,  let  the  movement 
of  the  solar  form,  as  if  of  a  river  or  wind,  be  from  E  towards  F,  C,  and  D. 

[603]  Then  since  this  movement  at  E  is  going  to  advance  contrary  to  the 
sunken  half  of  the  thread  AE^  but  at 
C  is  similarly  going  to  advance  con¬ 
trary  to  BC  the  half  which  stands  out 
and  which  is  opposite  AE.  Further¬ 
more,  at  E  the  movement  pushes  the 
planet  up  above  the  paper,  in  the  di¬ 
rection  whither  B  the  front  terminus 
tends;  but  at  C  it  pushes  the  planet 
downward  below  the  paper  in  the  di¬ 
rection  whither  A  the  terminus  in 
front  of  that  position  tends.  In  a  rud¬ 
der  the  opposite  takes  place,  because 
the  rudder  is  pushed  by  the  force  of  the 
river,  not  driven  by  an  inborn  apti¬ 
tude.  But  since  meanwhile  the  thread 
AB  remains  in  a  posture  parallel  to 
itself  throughout  its  whole  circuit; 
hence,  when  the  planet  is  most  northern  at  F  or  most  sunken  in  the  south  at 
D;  neither  terminus  A  nor  terminus  B  is  in  front,  but  the  thread  AB^  which 
stretches  out  as  it  were  into  the  depth  of  this  river,  Le.,  towards  the  sun, 
and  which  receives  the  attack  on  the  right  side,  furnishes  no  cause  for  further 
removal  into  any  region:  wherefore  a  changing  around  takes  place  at  these 
points,  so  that,  although  before  point  F  the  terminus  B  had  been  in  front, 
now  after  point  F  the  terminus  A  is  in  front;  and  so  the  planet  begins  to  ap¬ 
proach  the  ecliptic  once  more,  at  first  with  imperceptible  progress. 

From  this  it  is  now  clear  what  sort  of  figure  is  engendered.  For  because 
the  thread  AB  is  moved  from  E  towards  that  very  region  towards  which  the 
front  terminus  B  tends;  then  the  surface  which  is  produced  by  AB  is  at  point 
E  diminished  to  a  mere  line,  which  nevertheless  gradually  becomes  a  surface, 
and,  having  arisen  from  the  point  Ey  acquires  at  F  its  greatest  latitude,  equal 
to  the  length  of  the  thread  AB:  thence  once  more  the  surface  is  diminished  as 
far  as  C,  the  segment  of  the  circuit  which  is  opposite  E,  the  first-mentioned 
segment:  there  again  the  surface  disappears  into  a  line.  The  same  things  are 
to  be  understood  of  the  opposite  semicircle  CDE.  But  the  thread  borne  thus 
to  F  and  D  at  an  inclination  and  always  following  its  own  lead  will  produce 
a  perfect  plane,  Le.,  in  so  far  as  it  keeps  its  posture  parallel;  and  if  this  plane 
is  continued,  it  will  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  sun  because  the  thread  AB 
looks  towards  the  sun — at  Fwith  the  terminus  A ;  but  at  Z),  with  the  terminus  B, 

But  with  this  continuation  of  the  plane  removed,  if  that  which  is  produced 


A/^\B 


A(  t— ^  B 
V  D 


A[  )B 

klJ 


av^;b 


949 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

by  the  thread  [604]  is  alone  considered:  it  will  be  such  a  form  as  two  little 
crescents  exhibit  between  the  two  ellipses,  BCAE  the  outer  ellipse,  and  EACB 
the  inner,  which  touch  one  another  at  C  and  Ey  so  that  the  same  line  CE  is 
the  major  diameter  of  the  smaller  ellipse  EACBy  but  the  transverse  diameter 
of  the  greater  ellipse  CBAE. 

Moreover,  the  centre  of  the  planetary  body  wdll  revolve  in  a  perfect  plane, 
which  in  this  figure  was  made  circular,  namely  CDEFy  although  the  plane 
itself  also,  as  is  clear  from  what  was  said  above,  bends  away  from  the  per¬ 
fection  of  a  circle  to  an  ellipse  with  its  lopped-off  sides. 

The  oar  or  rudder  of  a  ship  stretches  out  from  the  ship  straight  into  the  waves  or 
wind:  hut  these  threads  lie  concealed  within  the  round  body  of  the  planet:  therefore 
it  is  not  the  same  force  which  is  in  rudders. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  all  things  should  correspond  in  an  analogy.  But 
in  place  of  the  oars  there  is  the  other  much  more  suitable  force  in  the  threads. 
And  just  as,  above,  the  threads  have  a  natural  inertia  contrary  to  the  de¬ 
flection  of  themselves,  or  rather  a  power  to  keep  their  posture  parallel  during 
the  transportation  of  the  body;  so  now  also  there  is  present  in  the  threads  of 
latitude,  in  addition  to  the  similar  force  to  keep  their  posture  parallel,  a  natural 
powder  of  agility  too,  or  of  following  exactly  the  same  line  and  of  directing 
along  that  line  the  movement  produced  in  the  planet,  in  so  far  as  the  movement 
tends  towards  the  same  region  as  the  other  extremity  of  the  thread. 

Compare  this  form  of  movement  in  latitude  with  the  ancient  astronomy  in  an 
everyday  example. 

Here  Ave  entrust  the  planet  to  the  river,  with  an  oblique  rudder,  by  means 
of  which  the  planet,  while  floating  doAvn,  may  cross  from  one  bank  to  the 
opposite.  But  the  ancient  astronomy  built  a  solid  bridge — the  solid  spheres — 
above  this  river — the  width  of  the  zodiac — and  transports  the  lifeless  planet 
[605]  along  the  bridge  as  if  in  a  chariot.  But  if  the  whole  contrivance  is  examined 
carefully,  it  appears  that  this  bridge  has  no  props  by  which  it  is  supported, 
nor  does  it  rest  upon  the  Earth,  Avhich  they  believed  to  be  the  foundation 
of  the  heavens. 

Nevertheless  is  not  this  theory  of  the  movement  in  latitude  more  dijfficult  than  if  some¬ 
one  imagines  solid  spheres? 

But,  reader,  you  ought  to  remember  that  we  are  here  busy  with  the  physical 
theory  of  causes,  on  account  of  which  any  hypothesis  is  applied  in  order  that  we 
may  know  what  of  truth  exists  in  such  an  hypothesis  or  astronomical  fiction. 
But  below,  in  Books  v  and  vi,  for  the  sake  of  understanding,  we  shall  not  reject 
the  whole  circles  and  their  inclinations  to  the  ecliptic;  because  they  are  equiva¬ 
lent  to  these  attractions  of  threads  to  the  sides  of  the  ecliptic. 

If  that  earlier  libration  of  the  planet  in  altitude  and  this  digression  in  latitude  had 
the  same  boundary-posts  on  the  ecliptic  and  were  effected  by  the  same  threads y  the 
causes  which  you  assign  would  be  probable. 

Indeed,  what  prevents  one  and  the  same  globe  from  having  twofold  rectilinear 
threads  stretching  out  over  the  Avhole  body,  so  that  from  some  it  receives  a  li¬ 
bration  in  altitude,  and  by  the  others  is  rowed  backward  and  forAvard?  Thus 


950  KEPLER 

on  the  surface  of  rivers  a  threefold  movement  of  the  parts  is 
discerned — each  movement  proceeding  in  its  own  direction: 
the  first  is  the  flow  of  water,  the  second  that  of  the  waves, 
which  that  flow  casts  crosswise  to  the  banks  in  a  continuous 
series,  the  third  comes  from  the  wind.  For  if  a  contrary  wind 
blows  obliquely,  it  roughens  the  surface  of  the  waters,  and 
starts  another  series  of  smaller  waves  moving  in  their  own 
direction,  and  these  waves  advance  on  top  of  the  earlier  waves,  which  are  not 
troubled.  Thus  above  in  Book  i  [606]  I  mentioned  the  nature  [substantia]  of  the 
belly,  which  represents  a  triple-woven  tunic  and  contains  three  kinds  of  threads, 
distinct  as  to  their  regions,  the  seats  of  the  three  faculities  of  attraction,  reten¬ 
tion,  and  expulsion:  although  the  weaving  belongs  to  not  one  but  three  tunics. 

Do  not  the  farthest  digressions  of  the  planets  always  occur  at  the  same  positions  on 
the  zodiaCj  or  do  even  these  digressions  change  their  positions? 

Observation  of  the  progression  of  the  limits  is  more  difiicult  still  than  that  of 
the  apsides:  nevertheless  they  are  seen  to  be  going  back  gradually  westward  in 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  and  more  slowly  than  the  apsides  are  progressing; 
there  is  a  case  of  both  in  the  movements  of  the  moon. 

If  the  limits  retrograde  and  the  apsides  progress,  will  the  threads  productive  of 
latitude  remain  inwoven  with  the  threads  of  longitude,  both  of  which  you  have  given 
to  the  same  globe? 

This  retrogradation  clears  our  way  to  the  inward  substance  of  the  globes,  into 
which  narrows  we  have  already  been  compelled  to  go,  in  the  comparison  of  the 
daily  revolution  of  the  Earth  with  its  threads  of  libration.  Accordingly  here  too 
we  can  seek  within  the  outer  crust  a  separate  globe — like  the  yolk  within  the 
white  of  egg — supplied  with  its  own  threads,  and  able  to  revolve  according  to 
the  same  laws,  and  with  the  strength  of  its  forces  different  from  that  of  the  outer 
crust,  if  need  be;  so  that  both  of  them  [the  crust  and  the  globe]  can  be  deflected 
by  the  same  outside  cause,  with  different  measures  of  speed,  if  there  is  need  of 
this. 

For  thus  in  the  case  of  the  belly  which  I  have  already  brought  in,  there  are 
three  tunics:  the  outmost,  the  inmost,  and  the  middle;  and  one  of  them  can  be 
passive,  if  the  others  are  injured,  or  be  active,  while  the  others  are  at  rest;  al¬ 
though  they  are  unlike  this  thing,  in  that  they  are  not  separated  from  one 
another. 

The  ancient  astronomy  places,  solid  and  plainly  adamantine  spheres  on  top  of 
other  spheres,  where  no  body  is  visible  to  us  and  the  whole  region  is  as  trans¬ 
parent  as  if  it  were  empty.  [607]  Therefore  it  will  not  take  offence  if  we  construct 
something  similar  in  the  globes,  which  are  visible  and  palpable  bodies. 

Cannot  this  already  mentioned  axis  of  revolution  of  the  outer  crust  of  the  planetary 
bodies  perform  this  office  of  deflecting  the  movement  of  the  planets  latitudinally? 

This  cause  rests  upon  very  great  probability,  as  will  have  to  be  said  in  Books 
VI  and  VII  in  the  explanation  of  the  schemata  of  the  sun  and  the  eighth  sphere. 
Nevertheless  nothing  certain  can  be  affirmed  of  all  [the  planets]:  because  even 
though  we  said  it  was  believable  that  the  remaining  primary  planets  rotate 
around  the  axes  of  their  bodies,  nevertheless  the  regions  towards  which  these 


951 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

axes  tend  or  incline  are  unknown  to  us.  Wherefore  we  have  an  example  in  the 
Earth  alone.  And  the  moon,  a  secondary  planet  does  not  rotate,  although  none 
the  less  it  completes  its  latitudes. 

How  can  it  he  effected  that  the  limits  of  digressions  retrograde  westward? 

In  Book  VII  part  of  this  appearance  will  be  explained  as  accidental,  not  as 
physical  or  real.  But  what  remains  of  this  movement  and  is  real  is  caused  by  the 
deflection  [nutu]  westward  of  the  threads  of  latitude:  so  that  they  remain  in 
one  and  the  same  plane  precisely,  during  their  whole  circuit,  but  the  threads 
themselves — i.e,,  the  globe  itself — are  deflected  backward  over  the  centre  of 
their  body  secretly  in  accordance  with  these  threads. 

From  what  causes  does  this  counter-deflection  arise? 

Up  to  now  the  probability  of  most  of  the  causes  brought  forward  was  clear. 
But  in  this  last  train  of  astronomical  matters,  the  causes  have  ill  success;  and 
both  understanding  and  belief  in  those  things  which  one  is  able  to  devise  have 
to  work  hard.  Let  us  however  speak  of  as  much  as  we  can  find  out.  [608]  We 
have  said  that  the  nature  of  the  threads  of  latitude  consists  in  an  aptitude  to 
move  forward  into  the  region  of  their  own  parallel  direction.  We  have  said  more¬ 
over  that  while  the  planet  is  being  transported  from  C  or  E,  the  position  which  it 
has  on  the  ecliptic,  into  D  or  E,  the  position  of  farthest  digression  north  or  south, 
in  the  meantime  those  threads  remain  parallel,  and  for  that  reason  it  comes 
about  that,  since  there  at  C  and  E  the  threads  touched  the  orbit,  now  here  at 
Z)  and  F  they  are  sunken  in  the  depth  towards  the  sun,  whither  that  movement 
to  which  they  are  deflected  does  not  tend;  rather  at  that  time,  the  motor  river 
from  the  sun,  so  to  speak,  meets  the  crosswise  threads  AB  at  right  angles,  more 
speedily  below — that  is,  at  A  in  the  position  F  and  at  B  in  the  position  D — than 
above  and  on  the  outside.  Therefore  if  the  threads  are  deflected  towards  the 
movement,  it  is  surprising  if  this  deflection,  which  with  its  lower  side  seeks  the 
region  of  the  movement,  takes  something  away  from  the  paralleleity  and  does 
so  at  both  limits?  So  the  retrogradation  of  the  limits  follows,  since  no  counter¬ 
balancing  exists.  For  A  is  pushed  out,  at  F,  along  the  road  EAC\  and  B  is 
pushed  out,  at  D,  along  the  same  road  GBE\  so  in  both  cases  B  will  be  deflected 
below  the  paper. 

But  if  this  cause  is  not  admitted,  then  let  the  motor  soul  be  summoned  to 
twist  together,  by  its  laws,  an  inside  kernel  within  the  outer  crust,  according  to 
the  design  of  the  Workman  that  by  the  interweaving  of  the  orbits  with  one 
another  and  their  frequent  plurification  and  condensation  the  solidity  of  the 
sphere  might  be  somewhat  penetrated  by  the  planet  in  the  succession  of  ages. 

Why  is  the  regression  of  the  limits  slower  than  the  progression  of  the  apsides? 

Although  there  is  doubt  concerning  Mercury,  there  is  also  some  doubt  con¬ 
cerning  Jupiter:  nevertheless  let  us  follow  probability  on  account  of  the  clear 
example  of  the  moon,  and  let  us  say  that  the  cause  is  as  follows:  because  a  dis¬ 
turbance,  if  there  is  any,  coming  from  one  and  the  same  outside  cause  is  neces¬ 
sarily  more  perceptible  in  a  great  movement  than  in  a  small.  Now  the  trans¬ 
position  of  the  apsides  arises  from  a  great  movement,  which  is  the  deflection  and 
counter-deflection  of  the  threads  in  any  semicircle,  [609]  and  is  as  great  as  the 
optical  additosubtractive  difference  [aequatio]^  and  it  would  become  greater  and 


952 


KEPLER 

altogether  total  if  it  were  not  anticipated  by  the  revolution  of  the  planetary 
globe.  But  the  transposition  of  limits  takes  place  through  a  small  movement, 
the  digression  of  a  few  degrees  in  latitude,  and  is  not  greater  than  this  measure 
of  it,  so  that  this  digression  can  give  rise  to  nothing  else  whereby  the  transposi¬ 
tion  of  the  limits  may  be  hindered.  Wherefore  the  same  rays  of  the  sun  which 
introduce  movements  in  both  cases,  by  the  laws  already  explained,  have  more 
manifest  effects  there  [in  the  transposition  of  the  apsides]  than  here  [in  the 
transposition  of  the  limits].  In  addition  there  is  the  fact  that  in  the  first  case  rays 
of  the  sun  act  in  relation  to  a  greater  diversity  than  in  the  second,  other  things 
being  equal.  For  in  the  first  case  the  obliquity  of  the  rays  of  the  sun  with  respect 
to  the  threads — and  this  obliquity  tends  to  the  side — or  the  angle  of  latitude, 
whereby  the  work  [of  the  threads]  is  weakened,  was  perceptible.  In  this  second 
case  the  diversity  betw^een  the  parts  of  the  planetary  globe,  and  hence  between 
the  termini  of  the  threads  of  latitude — the  terminus  nearest  the  sun  and  that 
farthest  away  from  the  sun — to  which  diversity  we  assign  the  movement  of  the 
limits,  is  mighty  small.  Accordingly  by  right  this  second  work  is  less  than  that. 

5.  On  the  Twofold  Irregularities  of  the  Moon  and  their  Causes 

These  things  which  up  to  now  have  been  argued  concerning  the  causes  by  which  the 
true  movements  of  the  primary  planets  are  made  irregular  are  not  also  to  be  under¬ 
stood  concerning  the  moon,  a  secondary  planet,  are  they? 

1.  On  the  whole,  the  moon  imitates  the  same  general  form  of  movement, 
around  the  Earth,  as  that 
which  the  planets  keep  to 
around  the  sun ;  and  so  too  we 
ought  to  set  down  the  same 
causes  within  the  lunar  body, 
that  is,  threads  of  magnetism, 
their  rectilinear  tract,  and 
the  contrary  regions  of  that 
tract — one  region  friendly  to 
the  Earth  and  the  opposite 
region  unfriendly — and  final¬ 
ly  the  approximate  parallel- 
eity  to  itself  of  this  tract 
throughout  the  whole  circuit 
of  the  moon.  [610]  According¬ 
ly,  when  the  moon  has  been 
transported  into  the  opposite 
position,  there  is  a  changing 
around  of  the  regions;  and  in 
conformity  with  the  friendly  region  the  moon  is  attracted  by  the  form  of  the 
terrestrial  body;  and  in  conformity  with  the  unfriendly  region  it  is  repelled. 
And  its  movement  in  longitude  too  is  increased  or  decreased  in  that  proportion; 
and  similarly  we  must  conceive  of  other  threads  in  its  body,  by  means  of  which 
threads  the  moon^s  digressions  from  the  ecliptic  are  produced. 

In  this  diagram  are  represented  some  positions  of  the  Earth  going  around  the 
sun,  together  with  the  surrounding  lunar  heaven;  and  in  the  heaven  of  the  moon 


953 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

some  positions  of  the  moon  going  around  the  Earth.  But  the  image  of  the 
magnetized  needle  signifies  the  magnetic  threads  in  the  lunar  globe,  by 
reason  of  which  the  moon  becomes  eccentric  to  the  Earth.  For  the  points  A, 
By  Cy  Dj  Ey  Fy  and  G  signify  the  region  friendly  to  the  Earth,  and  they  lie  at 
the  second  mean  longitude,  and  so  at  A  and  G  the  moon  is  situated  at  the 
mean  position  between  the  perigee  and  the  apogee;  [611]  at  By  Q,  and  i)  it  is  a 
little  before  the  apogee;  at  C,  a  little  after  the  apogee;  and  at  E  and  Fy  a  little 
before  the  perigee. 

2.  But  since  this  movement  of  the  Earth,  as  was  explained  above,  is  derived 
from  two  sources,  as  it  were — namely,  from  the  daily  rotation  of  the  Earth,  and 
from  the  rotation  of  the  sun  around  its  own  axis — and  this  sun  is  the  midpart 
of  the  great  sphere  common  to  the  Earth  and  the  lunar  heaven;  so  it  will  be 
reasonable  that  the  true  and  real  movement  of  the  moon  around  the  Earth — 
and  in  so  far  as  that  revolution  around  the  sun,  which  is  shared  by  both  and  is 
accidental  to  the  'whole  lunar  heaven,  is  removed  from  it  mentally — has  two 
sources,  as  it  were,  and  suffers  all  those  affects  as  twofold  which  the  movements 
of  the  primary  planets  have  as  simple.  And  this  is  perfectly  consonant  with  the 
experience  and  skill  of  artists,  and  with  the  words  arising  from  this  twofoldness. 
For  not  merely  in  the  [pages]  above,  according  as  there  was  a  solitary  mean 
movement  in  some  one  of  planets,  w’as  there  a  mean  movement  and  a  semi¬ 
monthly  variation  of  this  mean  movement  in  the  case  of  the  moon;  but  also 
here  [hoc  loco]y  where  it  is  a  question  of  the  periodic  irregularity  of  this  move¬ 
ment,  and  this  irregularity  is  not  semimonthly  like  the  variation  but  monthly 
or  rather  semiannual:  we  find  in  the  moon  a  twofold  intensification  and  remis¬ 
sion  of  mean  movement  at  the  contrary  moments  of  the  period,  instead  of  the 
simple  intensification  and  remission  found  in  any  one  of  the  primary  planets — 
and  finally  instead  of  the  simple  digression  of  the  primary  planets  ,in  latitude 
also  a  twofold  digression. 

What  cause  does  the  magnitude  of  the  moon^s  eccentricity  have? 

In  the  Harmonies  I  demonstrate  that  the  variety  of  lunar  movements  de¬ 
termines  precisely  the  perfect  fourth,  which  seems  to  have  an  aflSnity  with  the 
quadratures  and  syzygies  of  the  moon.  Therefore  in  order  that  this  interval 
might  be  represented  by  a  composite  movement,  the  eccentricity  was  made 
to  be  as  great  as  it  is. 

[612]  What  diversity  is  found  between  those  irregularities  common  to  the  moon  and 
the  planets  and  these  irregularities  proper  to  the  moon? 

1.  Just  as,  in  the  above,  the  movement  of  the  moon  around  the  Earth  had 
two  elements,  as  it  were,  one  from  the  rotation  of  the  Earth  around  its  axis,  the 
other  from  the  joining  [ex  applicatione]  of  the  solar  light  with  this  motor  form 
from  the  Earth — whereof  the  first  was  free  of  the  phases  of  the  moon,  and  the 
other  was  bound  up  with  the  phases;  so  now  also,  of  the  two  irregularities,  that 
earlier  one  is  found  to  be  an  accident  of  the  earlier  element  or  the  mean  move¬ 
ment  and  to  have  its  o'svn  proper  termini,  which  we  shall  call  the  apogee;  and 
the  first  type  of  digression  in  latitude  has  its  own  termini,  distinct  from  the 
termini  of  the  apogee,  and  they  are  called  limits  and  nodes.  But  the  later  ir¬ 
regularity,  which  arises  from  a  later  element,  or  else  is  an  accident  of  the  ac¬ 
celeration  in  the  syzygies,  and  is  called  by  Ptolemy  the  nodding  [annutus]  of  the 


954  KEPLER 

epicycle,  has  termini  in  common  with  the  lunar  month  and  phases — as  does  the 
second  type  [forma]  of  digression  in  latitude. 

2.  That  earlier  irregularity  both  of  longitude  and  latitude  is  always  constant 
throughout  all  its  periods,  that  is,  it  is  forever  of  the  same  magnitude:  but  each 
of  the  later  irregularities  become  greatest  in  one  month  only  of  any  half  year, 
smaller  in  the  remaining  months,  and  in  certain  months,  which  divide  the  year 
into  two  parts,  almost  nil,  namely,  where  the  opposite  affects,  of  this  second 
acceleration  and  retardation  and  likewise  of  the  northern  and  southern  latitude, 
begin  to  pass  into  the  contrary  halves  of  the  lunations. 

3.  And  so  those  earlier  irregularities  have  their  magnitude  and  the  laws 
of  their  distribution  from  their  own  proper  causes;  but  the  second  irregularities 
take  their  magnitudes  and  affects  from  the  presence  of  the  first  irregularities 
in  any  one  semicircle  of  lunation;  they  have  laws  of  distribution  alone  separate, 
and  adjusted  to  the  cycles  of  lunations,  but  none  the  less  similar  to  the  earlier 
[laws]. 

4.  The  following  fact  is  also  related:  that  in  the  moon  we  find  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  apsides  eastwards,  and  the  movement  of  the  limits  [613]  west¬ 
wards,  much  faster  than  in  the  primary  planets,  not  merely  in  the  ratio  of 
the  faster  periodic  return  of  the  moon,  but  quite  perceptibly;  and  moreover 
the  retrogression  of  the  limits  is  more  than  twice  as  slow  as  the  progression 
of  the  apsides. 

The  moon  is  not  seen  alternately  to  turn  now  this  part  of  its  hody^  now  the  po- 
posite,  to  the  Earth.  For  we  always  view  the  same  spots  on  the  face  of  the  moon. 
Wherefore  the  causes  of  the  approach  and  withdrawal  of  the  moon  from  the  Earth 
cannot  he  sought  from  this. 

1.  It  is  not  necessary  that  at  two  opposite  times  of  a  period  the  lunar  mag¬ 
netic  threads  should  point  in  a  straight  line  towards  the  Earth;  it  is  sufficient 
if  at  those  moments  they  at  least  be  deflected  towards  the  Earth  in  their 
alternate  regions,  and  if  the  posture  of  the  threads  remain  parallel  throughout 
the  whole  circuit  of  the  moon.  For  it  can  come  about  in  this  way  too  that 
now  one  region  of  threads  deflects  more  to  the  Earth,  and  now  the  opposite 
region.  But  if  this  deflection  is  small,  our  eyesight  is  not  so  sharp  that  in  the 
disc  of  the  moon  it  can  observe  very  precisely  whether  on  the  rims  of  the 
lunar  globe,  which  look  towards  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  some  minute  par¬ 
ticles  present  themselves  to  view,  which  are  not  seen  at  any  other  time.  For 
those  parts  of  the  globe  are  shelving  and  of  a  very  tenuous  appearance,  and 
the  illumination  frequently  fails,  now  on  this  rim,  now  on  that,  on  account 
of  the  inconstancy  of  the  lunar  countenance. 

2.  For  a  long  time  we  left  it  as  uncertain,  whether  there  is  a  globe  within 
the  globe,  like  the  kernel  within  the  shell,  having  a  different  rotation  from 
that — as  the  case  of  the  Earth  and  also  the  movement  in  latitude  suggested. 
And  so  such  an  inner  globe  could  direct  towards  the  Earth  regions  which  are 
alternately  reversed — notwithstanding  that  the  outer  crust  always  turns  the 
same  spots  towards  the  Earth.  For  between  these  and  similar  things,  it  is 
uncertain  exactly  what  the  manner  of  this  motion  is:  it  is  alone  very  certain 
that,  whatever  the  manner  is,  it  has  been  fitted  to  physical  and  magnetic  causes, 
[614]  i.e.f  corporeal  and  thus  geometrical;  and  I  have  put  forward  examples 
of  such  causes  in  both  cases  here. 


955 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV 

Then  does  not  this  second  irregularity  of  longitude  really  come  from  some  second 
eccentricity  or  digression  of  the  moon  from  the  Earthy  just  as  the  first  irregularity 
has  its  cause  in  the  change  of  the  interval? 

No:  the  observation  of  the  parallaxes  of  the  moon,  together  with  a  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  eclipses,  opposes  this;  and  the  ratios  of  the  distance  of  the 
bodies  from  the  first  body  militate  against  it — the  ratios  put  forward  in  the 
first  part  of  this  book.  But  it  can  be  argued  that  there  is  absolutely  no  change 
of  interval  bound  up  with  the  phases;  because,  though  different  experimenters 
make  different  corrections  in  the  case  of  this  hypothesis,  the  magnitude  of 
this  change  is  always  made  smaller  and  smaller.  Ptolemy  set  it  down  as  very 
large;  Regiomontanus  reduced  it;  Copernicus  halved  it  and  transposed  it 
from  the  figure  [ex  forma]  of  an  eccentric  circle  into  the  figure  of  the  second 
epicycle;  again,  Tycho  Brahe  got  hold  of  it  and  claimed  a  part  for  the  equant 
circle,  for  which  he  together  with  Copernicus  was  accustomed  to  substitute 
an  epicycle  of  twofold  movement.  I  have  changed  around  the  intervals  at  the 
syzygies  with  those  at  the  quadratures,  and  have  transposed  the  cycles  from 
the  month  to  the  year;  relying  upon  these  discoveries  made  in  latter  times,  I 
at  least  found  that  absolutely  no  change  of  intervals  occurred  through  the 
cycles  of  the  phases. 

Then  from  what  comes  this  second  acceleration  and  retardationy  which  are  bound 
up  with  the  phases? 

From  the  varying  relation  of  the  eccentric  circle  of  the  moon  to  the  phases. 
For  while  the  moon  goes  around  the  Earth,  its  mover,  according  to  the  simple 
and  forever  uniform  law  of  eccentricity,  just  as  any  one  of  the  primary  planets 
goes  around  the  sun;  it  comes  about  by  accident  that  at  different  times  the 
moon  has  different  distances  from  its  movement’s  other  mover,  which  ac¬ 
celerates  the  moon  in  the  syzygies.  For  if  its  longer  interval  from  the  Earth 
occurs  at  the  syzygies,  where  its  greatest  acceleration  takes  place;  then  the 
terrestrial  form,  unrolled  in  a  wider  sphere,  is  weakened  at  one  of  the  syzygies — 
weakened  not  merely  in  its  own  native  and  archetypal  vigour,  but  also  in  the 
reception  of  strengthening  from  the  sun.  In  turn,  if  this  longer  interval  be¬ 
tween  the  moon  and  the  Earth  is  found  at  the  quadratures,  where  there  is 
no  acceleration;  then  there  is  no  loss  in  the  reception  of  nil  vigour,  and  no 
gain  with  the  short  interval  at  the  perigee. 

In  the  diagram  on  page  952  are  depicted  in  the  globes  of  the  Earth  and 
moon,  the  circles  of  illumination  which  divide  the  light  part  from  the  dark. 
But  since  the  apogee  of  the  moon,  through  the  whole  year  and  thus  through 
all  the  positions  of  the  lunar  heaven,  remains  at  the  same  point,  ^.6.,  the  threads 
WF  remain  approximately  parallel  to  themselves  throughout  the  whole  circuit, 
but  the  Earth  together  with  the  lunar  heaven  crosses  from  point  to  point 
hence  the  threads  are  joined  in  different  ways  at  different  times  to  the  circles 
of  illumination — which  spread  out  in  accordance  with  a  circle  homocentric 
with  the  sun  and  exhibiting  the  density  of  the  light  in  longitude — as  you 
may  see  in  the  arcs  DT,  EV,  FWj  GX,  AO,  and  BP.  Accordingly  the 
same  thing  takes  place  also  at  the  apogee  and  perigee  of  the  moon,  as 
they  always  point  towards  the  places  90°  distant  from  the  place  or  region  of 
point  A,  B,  Q,  etc. 


956 


KEPLER 

But  what  if  the  longer  interval  stretches  towards  the  sunf  Will  not  the  movement 
be  weakened  in  that  way?  And  yet  the  moon  is  passing  through  a  denser  light. 

Indeed,  this  is  what  we  remarked  about  above.  For  the  light  of  the  sun 
does  not  move  [the  moon]  by  itself  but  by  means  of  the  form  of  the  terrestrial 
body,  to  which  it  transmits  the  laws  and  modes  of  its  own  work.  Accordingly 
just  as  above  light  did  not  give  the  direction  of  movement,  but  the  form  of  the 
terrestrial  body  gave  a  direction,  somewhere  plainly  contrary  to  the  direction 
in  which  the  sun  moves  around  its  axis;  so  now  also  the  motor  form  from  the 
Earth  is  strengthened  in  proportion  to  its  own  native  strength,  weakly  where 
it  is  weak,  namely  at  its  farther  distance  from  the  Earth  its  source;  strongly 
where  it  is  strong,  at  its  shorter  distance  from  the  Earth — ^whatever  the  varia¬ 
tion  in  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  sun  may  be,  [616]  as  above,  in  the 
case  of  the  causes  of  the  variation,  we  spoke  of  the  counterbalancings  of  this. 

What  is  the  measure  [modus]  of  this  monthly  additosubtractive  difference,  when 
it  is  very  great,  and  what  is  the  cause  of  its  measure? 

Tycho  Brahe  makes  it  equal  to  the  physical  part  of  the  analyzed  periodic 
additosubtractive  difference  [aequationis  periodicae  solutae],  according  to  my 
formulation,  because  since  the  total  periodic  difference  is  approximately  5° 
I  claim  half  of  that  for  the  physical  cause,  the  customary  amount  for  all  the 
planets — that  is,  2°30':  accordingly  Brahe  exhibits  the  synodic  difference  to 
be  that  much — as  if  the  motor  form  from  the  terrestrial  body  became  pre¬ 
cisely  twice  as  strong  at  the  near  distance,  and  twice  as  weak  at  the  far,  through 
this  strengthening  by  the  light,  and  that  is  the  time  when  it  is  without  this 
strengthening.  And  if  it  is  asked  why  that  ratio  holds,  it  seems  that  it  can 
have  no  cause  [617]  except  this  relation  of  equality,  as  the  most  simple  and 
therefore  the  most  beautiful  ratio. 

But  Ptolemy  exhibits  its  measure  as  slightly  greater,  and  just  as  much  as 
above,  from  the  addition  of  132° 

45'  to  12  synods,  we  inferred  the 
variation  of  one  quadrant  to 
be,  namely  2°41'.  But  if  this 
measure  and  magnitude  is  to  be 
kept  at  both  distances,  then  it 
seems  that  the  cause  must  be 
transferred  from  design  to  ge¬ 
ometrical  necessity,  namely,  be¬ 
cause  the  increase  of  the  in¬ 
terval,  i.e.,  the  eccentricity,  ut¬ 
terly  exhausts  that  which  the 
acceleration  by  the  light  at  that 
syzygy  had  given;  but  in  turn 
at  the  other  syzygy  the  subtrac¬ 
tion  of  the  eccentricity  from  the 
interval  adds  as  much  to  the 
speed  as  was  also  produced  by 
the  acceleration  given  by  the 
light. 

So  in  a  month,  which  is  with- 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  957 

out  the  synodic  additosubtractive  difference,  namely  when  in  this  diagram  the 
apogee  is  at  EF  and  the  perigee  at  IK,  the  parts  of  acceleration  given  by  the 
light  are  equal  at  both  syzygies,  because  the  intervals  between  the  moon  and 
Earth  at  both  syzygies,  as  AC  and  AH,  are  equal  during  that  month;  in  the 
succeeding  months,  as  inequality  of  intervals  arises  gradually  at  the  syzygies — 
for  example,  if  L  were  the  apogee  and  N  the  perigee,  then  the  distance  AC  would 
certainly  be  greater  than  AH — there  also  arises  some  monthly  additosubtractive 
difference,  which  always  becomes  greatest  during  that  whole  month  at  EF  and 
IK;  finally  in  that  month  wherein  the  synodic  additosubtractive  difference  is 
complete — for  example,  if  the  apogee  is  at  CD — there  is  no  acceleration  at  the 
syzygy  CD,  but  at  the  other  syzygy  GH  the  acceleration  is  twice  as  great  as  in 
the  month  just  spoken  of;  at  that  time  at  the  quadratures  F  and  K  the  addito¬ 
subtractive  difference  is  the  greatest  of  all  those  which  can  occur  during  the 
total  year.  But  at  G  very  near  to  the  perigee,  there  are  four  parts  to  the  very 
small  additosubtractive  difference,  (1)  the  optical,  as  in  the  planets,  (2)  the 
physical,  as  in  the  planets,  (3)  the  variation  due  to  light,  (4)  the  intensification 
of  the  same  on  account  of  the  distance  being  diminished.  The  ratio  of  these  four 
parts  to  one  another  is  of  geometrical  necessity.  But  the  sum  composed  thus 
of  all  four  was  so  attuned  by  design  that  GH  the  perigeal  movement  of  the  moon 
at  the  syzygy  would  be  to  CD  the  movement  of  the  moon  at  the  quadrature  as 
4  is  to  3;  and  that  the  harmony  would  be  the  perfect  fourth. 

[618]  For  that  reason  it  comes  about  that  although  these  two,  (1)  the  measure 
of  acceleration  at  the  syzygies  and  (2)  the  measure  of  eccentricity,  are  bound  to 
one  another  by  no  necessity;  nevertheless  the  eccentricity  exactly  destroys  the 
acceleration  at  the  apogeal  syzygy  and  doubles  it  at  the  perigeal  syzygy.  I  say 
that  at  present,  while  I  have  been  unable  to  investigate  it. 

What  'probable  cause  do  you  assign  to  the  so  great  speed  of  the  apsides  and  limits  of 
the  moon,  if  the  apsides  and  limits  of  the  primary  planets  are  incomparably  slower? 

Indeed  the  effect  of  the  composition  of  motor  virtues  in  the  moon  is  made 
clear.  For  just  as  in  the  above  pages  we  said  that  the  simple  force  of  the  Earth 
was  attuned  to  harmonic  numbers — at  any  rate  in  the  rotation  of  the  terrestrial 
body  around  its  axis,  to  360  perfect  days,  but  in  the  revolution  of  the  moon 
around  the  Earth,  to  exactly  the  12  months  in  one  year,  or  in  one  periodic  return 
of  the  centre  of  the  Earth  around  the  sun;  so  now  too  let  us  say  that  in  the  de¬ 
flection  and  restitution  of  the  threads  of  the  moon — those  by  which  the  libration 
and  those  by  which  digressions  in  latitude  are  produced — their  simple  forces  are 
attuned  to  the  great  length  of  the  periodic  time  of  the  moon  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  as  was  kept  in  the  other  planets.  But  just  as  in  the  above,  on  account  of 
additional  aid  from  the  sun,  both  in  making  the  terrestrial  globe  rotate  and  in 
making  the  moon  revolve,  the  archetypal  numbers  were  disturbed  in  their  final 
effect,  so  that  instead  of  360  days  there  were  36534?  and  instead  of  12  lunations 
in  the  year,  approximately  1234;  so  now  too  on  account  of  this  increase  in  the 
same  acceleration  of  the  moon  from  the  illumination  of  the  sun,  the  moon  comes 
to  the  mean  latitudes  of  its  circuit  before  the  threads  are  deflected  in  the  right 
measure;  and  so  the  thread  looks  towards  the  sun  from  a  deeper  place  {loco 
profundiori)  than  a  quarter  [of  the  distance]  from  apsis  [to  apsis].  And  I  in¬ 
culcated  above  that  the  transportation  of  the  apsides  took^place  when  that 
occurred.  But  it  is  quite  right  that  this  transposition  of  the  apsides  should  be 


958 


KEPLER 


perceptible,  because  that  increase  [619]  is  perceptible,  namely  approximately 
11°;  none  the  less  this  transposition  is  smaller,  i.e.j  slightly  more  than  3°  in  a 
month:  (1)  because  those  degrees  [of  increase]  are  for  the  most  part  added  on  at 
the  syzygies,  but  the  threads  are  most  deflected  and  counter-deflected  at  the 
mean  longitudes  without  reference  to  the  syzygies ;  in  such  a  way  that  the  affects 
of  degrees  equal  in  number  are  very  distant  from  one  another;  and  it  is  probable 
that  something  still  remains  hidden  at  that  node,  and  that  by  our  ignorance  of 
it  the  movements  of  the  moon  have  not  yet  been  worked  out  to  the  minute, 
not  even  in  Tycho’s  calculation.  (2)  Because  the  deflection  of  the  threads  is 
anticipated  not  merely  in  place  and  time  but  also  in  magnitude  for  that  very 
reason.  For  if  the  moon  had  advanced  more  slowly,  or  if  the  deflection  of  the 
threads  were  as  great  in  the  accelerated  moon  as  it  would  have  been  in  the  slow 
moon,  the  apsides  would  be  transported  even  farther.  But  it  comes  about  by 
the  acceleration  of  the  moon  that  the  thread  points  towards  the  sun  before  it 
reaches  the  just  measure  of  deflection  originally  assigned  to  it.  And  by  the  mix¬ 
ture  of  these  things  it  comes  about  that  a  certain  mean,  334°  between  the  noth¬ 
ing  or  something  imperceptible — which  would  be  the  case  without  the  accelera¬ 
tion  of  the  moon — and  the  11° — which  the  acceleration  causes — overflows  into 
the  movement  of  the  apsides.  The  same  things  are  to  be  said  concerning  the 
impulsion  or  deflection  of  the  threads  of  latitude;  for  it  ought  to  have  been  im¬ 
perceptible,  as  in  the  primary  planets — if  the  moon,  like  the  primary  planets 
was  going  to  advance  according  to  a  simple  force.  But  because  the  acceleratory 
force  which  is  added  to  the  moon  is  evaluated  at  approximately  11°  of  longitude 
in  efficacy;  and  if  this  force  fell  upon  these  threads  of  latitude  during  the  whole 
cycle,  it  would  deflect  them,  as  not  fortified  against  itself,  the  whole  11°;  but 
since  it  gets  possession  of  them  only  at  the  limits  where  they  are  in  opposition 
to  it,  it  gives  them  however  a  deflection  of  134°  one  period.  And  the  precession 
of  the  limits  follows  upon  this  deflection. 

But  although  from  the  observation  of  so  many  ages  exact  determinations  have 
been  made  of  the  magnitudes  and  ratio  of  these  two  movements  of  the  apsides 
and  the  limits;  there  still  remains  room  for  talent.  For  he  who  brings  forward 
such  causes  of  these  things  that  from  the  causes  the  magnitude  itself  follows, 
will  drive  his  chariot  to  the  goal.  And  philosophers  ought  all  the  more  [620]  to 
strive,  because,  over  and  above  so  many  other  experiments,  in  this  question  too 
the  moon  is  our  mistress  in  acquiring  knowledge  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  by 
its  own  example  it  throws  light  upon  the  nature  of  all  the  planets. 

How  is  it  that  besides  its  accustomed  periodic  latitudes  the  moon  also  makes  synodic 
digressions  to  the  north  and  to  the  south? 

Just  as  that  force  of  light  which  strengthens  the  terrestrial  form,  the  mover  of 
the  moon,  borrows  the  region  of  movement  and  the  proportions  of  the  work 
itself  from  that  very  form  which  is  strengthens;  moreover  just  as,  in  the  case  of 
longitude,  that  force  passes  over  into  the  inborn  character  [ingenium]  of  the 
orbit  according  to  the  measure  of  the  mutual  joining;  se  we  must  set  down  that 
that  force  does  the  same  thing  in  the  case  of  latitude.  It  facilitated  the  move¬ 
ment  in  longitude,  because  it  extends  in  longitude;  therefore  it  will  facilitate 
the  movement  in  latitude,  because  it  has  the  other  dimension  of  latitude  also, 
i.e.,  because  light  is  a  surface  partaking  of  density,  as  we  have  often  recounted 
from  optics.  Accordingly  at  the  syzygies,  where  the  thread  of  latitude  is  tangent 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  IV  959 

to  the  orbit  and  has  been  deflected  in  proportion  to  the  latitude  of  the  terrestrial 
form,  the  latitude  of  light  joining  itself  to  the  terrestrial  form  facilitates  the 
digressions,  so  that  they  take  place  at  an  angle  greater  than  that  which  the 
thread  makes  with  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  in  that  way  the  moon  arrives  in 
the  quadratures  at  farther  limits  to  the  north  and  to  the  south  than  those  which 
the  thread  showed  at  the  syzygies.  Conversely,  during  the  other  quarter  of  the 
year  the  thread  of  latitude,  which  is  tangent  to  the  orbit  in  the  quadratures, 
does  not  fit  itself  to  the  dimension  of  the  form  of  light  in  latitude,  but  points 
approximately  towards  the  sun,  just  as  the  orbit  itself  of  the  moon  does.  There¬ 
fore  just  as  in  that  place  the  movement  in  longitude  is  not  at  all  facilitated  by 
the  light,  but  is  made  more  difficult  as  it  were;  so  the  same  thing  overflows  into 
the  digression  in  latitude,  so  that  it  does  not  become  greater  than  the  angle  by 
which  the  thread  of  latitude  is  deflected  towards  the  ecliptic;  and  thus  the  moon 
does  not  arrive  in  the  syzygies  at  limits  farther  than  those  which  the  thread 
showed  in  the  quadratures.  But  what  happens  to  the  moon  turning  at  the  limits, 
or  with  what  face  the  light  of  the  sun  beholds  the  moon,  namely,  when  [621]  the 
thread  of  latitude  points  towards  the  Earth,  has  nothing  to  do  with  latitude. 

Since  you  reduce  everything  to  the  bodily  threads  of  the  globes  and  to  the  immaterial 
forms  from  the  rotating  bodies  of  the  sun  and  Earthy  and  lastly  to  the  light  of  the  sun 
as  a  strengthening  cause,  you  leave  nothing  to  the  animal  faculties:  hence  you  seem 
to  be  philosophizing  just  as  if  someone  were  to  contend  that  its  triple  threads  were 
sufficient  to  the  belly  for  its  operation  and  that  there  is  no  need  of  the  animal  faculty? 

Rather,  I  admit  a  soul  in  the  body  of  the  sun  as  the  overseer  of  the  rotation 
of  the  sun  and  as  the  superintendent  of  the  movement  of  the  whole  world.  Nor 
in  Book  i  did  I  deny  absolutely  that  the  planetary  bodies  had  single  souls  as 
overseers  of  the  rotation  of  their  bodies.  But  just  as  it  was  not  necessary  to  in¬ 
troduce  a  special  soul  into  the  threads  of  the  belly;  for  it  is  sufficeint  for  one 
common  soul  from  the  heart  or  liver  to  advance,  through  its  own  form  or  through 
heat,  into  the  belly  and  to  employ  the  faculties  of  its  threads;  so  too  in  the  world 
that  form — of  light,  or  heat,  and  thus  too,  if  you  will — from  the  soul  of  the  sun, 
flowing  out  together  with  light  and  heat  and  penetrating  even  where  light  and 
heat  are  shut  out,  i.e.,  into  the  inner  threads  of  bodies,  seems  to  be  sufficient; 
hence,  just  as  the  soul  in  the  body  has  no  power  without  the  organ  of  the  belly, 
so  too  the  soul  of  the  world  has  no  power  without  these  laws  and  without  the 
geometrical  lay-out  of  bodies. 

Therefore  let  the  status  of  the  controversy  be  noted:  for  it  is  certainly  one 
thing  to  reduce  every  cause  [rationem]  of  dispensing  celestial  movement — al¬ 
though  involving  contradictions,  and  hence  impossible — simply  to  the  hidden 
forces  of  some  soul,  after  rejecting  all  bodily  organs  and  all  the  means  which  the 
human  mind  can  devise — and  that  is  the  sanctuary  [622]  of  all  ignorance,  the 
death  of  all  philosophy,  but  is  nevertheless  the  common  practice  of  most  of 
those  who  write  or  speak  about  astronomy,  and  in  the  above  was  noted  in  part 
even  in  Ptolemy  himself.  It  is  something  else  first  to  discern  within  the  bodies 
everything  suited  for  movement,  so  that  the  possibility  of  movements  may  be 
apparent — even  with  common  examples — and  afterwards  finally  to  pour  in  a 
motor  soul  on  top  of  all  those  things,  as  upon  the  human  body  compacted  of  all 
muscles  and  nerves.  For  if  the  soul  can  perform  its  functions  anywhere  by  bodily 
organs,  it  will  have  no  need  in  them  for  design  and  discourse,  acts  proper  to  an 


960 


KEPLER 


intellectual  soul — just  as,  on  the  contrary,  if  it  performed  everything  by  design 
and  discourse,  it  would  not  want  those  bodily  organs. 

In  brief,  the  philosophers  have  commented  upon  the  intelligences,  which  draw 
forth  the  celestial  movements  out  of  themselves  as  out  of  a  commentary,  which 
employ  consent,  will,  love,  self-understanding,  and  lastly  command;  the  soul  or 
motor  souls  of  mine  are  of  a  lower  family  and  bring  in  only  an  impetus — as  if  a 
certain  matter  of  movement — by  a  uniform  contention  of  forces,  without  the 
work  of  mind.  But  they  find  the  laws,  or  figure,  of  their  movements  in  their  own 
bodies,  which  have  been  conformed  to  Mind — not  their  own  but  the  Creator’s — 
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  world  and  attuned  to  effecting  such  movements. 

END  OF  BOOK  FOUR,  THE  FIRST  BOOK  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE 
SCHEMATA  OR  OF  CELESTIAL  PHYSICS 


BOOK  FIVE 


LETTER  OF  DEDICATION 


[631]  To  the  Very  Reverend,  Most  Illustrious,  Most  Highborn,  Most  Noble, 
Vigorous,  etc.  Lords,  To  the  Orders  of  the  Archduchy  of  Austria-on-the- 
Anisana,  To  My  Most  Gracious  Lords: 

Four  years  after  the  publication  of  the  first  part  of  Copernican  Astronomy, 
which  contains  the  doctrine  of  the  sphere  unfolded  in  three  books,  one  year 
after  the  publication  of  Book  iv,  wherein  I  have  handed  on  the  celestial  physics, 
or  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  the  schemata  of  the  planetary  movements; 
there  at  last  follows  some  time  the  speculative  part — so  called  from  the  sche¬ 
mata,  that  is,  the  manual  instruments  wherein  as  in  mirrors  [speculis]  the 
movements  of  the  single  planets  are  represented. 

[632]  If  I  regard  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  this  publication,  alas!  ar¬ 
rives  in  town  late,  after  a  very  destructive  war  has  arisen  and  the  assemblages 
of  students  for  whom  these  things  are  written  have  either  been  dispersed  by 
the  confusions  of  war  or  thinned  out  and  wasted  away  by  the  expectation  of 
war;  after  Austria,  hitherto  my  nurse  and  benefactor,  has  struck  against  a 
very  hard  reef  and  seems  to  be  called  away  from  the  guardianship  of  these 
beauties  to  serious  care  for  her  own  safety;  and  after  I  too,  forced  by  the 
hatefulness  of  a  private  enemy  to  leave  my  home  at  Linz,  have  been  moving 
around  for  nearly  a  year  away  from  home. 

If  the  causes  of  such  great  delays  have  to  be  mentioned,  I  shall  not  allege 
the  supineness  of  my  publisher — which  has  lasted  from  the  publication  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  sphere  up  to  now — or  the  inconveniences  of  present  war 
or  the  fears  of  threatening  war:  the  fact  that  this  publication  has  been  pre¬ 
vented  till  now  calls  for  thanks,  not  blame.  Then  what  cause  shall  I  mention, 
whereby  I  may  preserve  my  reputation  and  wash  away  the  charge  of  negli¬ 
gence?  ^^While  our  womanly  manners  are  at  work,^^  says  Comicus,  “while 
they  dress  their  hair,  a  year  passes  by.’’  But  if  the  manners  of  astronomy  are 
known  to  anyone,  he  will  be  able  to  say  that  he  has  never  known  a  slower 
or  more  painstaking  woman.  [633]  For  unless  this  time  had  been  interposed, 
wherein  my  designs  might  reach  their  maturity,  there  was  danger  that  that 
finicalness,  now  that  the  whole  world  was  squeamish,  would  demand  new 
outlays  and  new  adornments.  For  the  computation  of  the  Ephemerides  and 
the  publication  of  the  books  of  the  Harmonies — the  works  of  the  intermediate 
time — gave  me  many  warnings  that  although  most  of  the  things  which  have 
to  do  with  the  six  planets  had  been  drawn  up  or  at  least  indicated  twelve 
years  ago  in  my  Commentaries  on  Mars:  and  although,  taken  over  from  that 
and  put  together  into  the  form  of  a  textbook,  they  had  remained  in  my  writing 
desk  for  seven  years  now,  awaiting  the  work  of  the  printer  and  engraver; 

961 


962 


KEPLER 


nevertheless  as  often  as  I  reread  them,  what  with  additions  or  elucidations 
or  transpositions  of  the  text,  the  necessity  of  making  a  new  copy  was  imposed 
upon  me.  To  such  an  extent  that  not  a  trace  of  the  first  draft  was  left  in  what 
was  shown  to  the  printer.  Now  as  regards  the  moon,  the  last  of  the  planets: 
when  I  first  gave  my  attention  to  the  publication  of  this  Epitome^  I  had  no 
special  concern  about  the  moon,  because  Tycho  Brahe's  hypotheses  about 
the  moon  already  existed,  and  they  could  [634]  in  general  be  found  to  be 
equivalent  to  those  hypotheses  too  by  which  the  manifold  movements  of  this 
planet  were  reduced  to  my  physical  causes.  Moreover  those  hypotheses  existed 
as  shadowed  forth  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars^  and  as  worked  out  further 
in  my  Hipparchus.  But  they  were  of  such  sort  as  to  suppose  two  circles  in  the 
moon,  eccentric  in  each  case — a  thing  quite  inimical  to  physical  speculations, 
and  hence  intolerable.  The  computation  of  the  Ephemerides  rested  upon 
those  bases:  and  from  the  foreword  to  it,  it  is  apparent  that  the  form  of  the 
calculation  has  been  changed  again  and  again,  because  its  agreement  with 
appearance  fluctuates  and  vacillates  everywhere. 

Finally  the  great  felicity  of  my  speculations  freed  astronomy  from  this 
cross  in  the  month  of  April  1620,  when,  after  the  physical  causes  had  been 
considered  more  carefully,  it  appeared  that  the  second  eccentric  circle  of  the 
moon  was  superfluous,  so  that  there  was  no  further  need  for  imagining  it  with 
reference  to  the  movements  in  longitude.  And  it  was  already  time  to  put 
the  finishing  touch  upon  the  fourth  book  of  the  EpitomOy  which,  is  about  the 
principles  of  the  doctrine  of  the  schemata.  That  done,  I  transferred  my  at¬ 
tention  to  the  publication  of  it,  in  the  midst  of  the  Bavarian  armies  and  the 
frequent  sicknesses  and  deaths  both  of  soldiers  [635]  and  of  civilians.  However, 
in  the  year  1621  the  Ephemeris  was  at  once  computed,  and — after  the  fashion 
of  my  other  Ephemerides — the  foreword  was  made  to  signify  publicly  my  re¬ 
joicing  over  the  conquering  of  the  second  eccentric  circle  of  the  moon.  But, 
forestalled  by  the  necessity  of  my  journey,  I  could  not  yet  publish 
this  Ephemeris. 

Now  as  regards  this  last  part  of  the  Epitome,  comprehended  in  three  books; 
although  after  the  publication  of  Book  iv,  I  am  away  from  home  and  spend 
no  little  time  in  journeys  and  in  the  law-courts,  nevertheless  I  have  been  al¬ 
lowed  to  be  at  leisure  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  and  I  have  devoted  all  that 
time  to  the  care  of  this  publication.  When  I  came  to  Tubingen  at  the  end  of 
the  year  1620,  in  order  to  expound  to  Maestlin  a  new  rationale  of  lunar  hypo¬ 
theses,  I  began  to  write  down  questions  about  the  other  planets  and  the  moon 
too  in  accordance  with  the  physical  hypothesis  finally  discovered. 

As  soon  as  I  returned  to  my  family  at  Ratisbon,  I  reread  the  questions 
and  gave  them  over  to  be  copied.  In  the  meantime  I  turned  to  the  last  part 
of  Book  VI,  up  to  now  postponed,  because  I  hoped  of  its  being  easy,  and  it 
seemed  that  it  could  be  put  together  between  proof-readings;  but  [636]  I 
found  it  laborious,  not  so  much  for  the  difficulty  as  for  the  multitude  and 
variety  of  questions  and  the  worry  over  the  method.  A  short  time  I  spent  at 
a  monastery  passed  in  drawing  up  the  ancient  epochs  and  in  computing  the 
eclipses.  At  once,  as  soon  as  I  returned  to  Tubingen,  I  saw  that  the  fourth 
part  of  Book  vi,  on  the  moon,  would  have  to  be  reshaped  and  work  repeated, 
because  the  definitions  conceived  verbally  did  not  yet  accurately  represent 
the  force  of  my  hypothesis. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  963 

During  the  last  months  May  and  June,  Stuttgart  gave  the  last  little  book, 
which  was  also  included  in  the  last  part  of  my  cares  up  to  now:  because  the 
astronomers  have  too  little  evidence  concerning  the  movements  of  the  eighth 
sphere;  but  most  of  the  things  which  could  be  said  concerning  this  matter 
had  been  conceived  by  me  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars,  in  Book  iii  of  the 
Epitome^  long  published,  and  on  other  pages.  Nevertheless  many  things  arose 
on  the  occasion  of  my  conversation  with  Maestlin,  my  old  leader  in  taking 
the  route  of  Copernican  astronomy,  and  many  things  through  the  reading  of 
books  which  I  had  hitherto  been  unable  to  get  hold  of  in  Austria.  And  if  pub¬ 
lication  had  not  been  postponed  till  now,  these  things  would  necessarily  have 
to  have  been  passed  over. 

[637]  Meanwhile,  with  the  shore  of  this  voyage  in  sight,  ^.e.,  the  end  of  this 
work,  and  after  being  refreshed  by  money  sent  secretly  to  Linz,  then  by  the 
argument  of  the  faith  and  kindness  of  your  Very  Reverend  Doctor  of  Divinity, 
Antony,  President  at  Krembsmunster,  and  finally  with  a  truce  intervening 
in  the  law-courts — my  great  grief — I  gave  June  over  to  the  journey  to  Frank¬ 
fort,  and  to  looking  after  the  printing.  And  here  once  more,  while  the  work  is 
being  undertaken,  while  the  pages,  diagrams,  and  forms  are  being  prepared, 
a  month  passes  by.  And  this  sidereal  lady,  who  heretofore  bore  witness  to  her 
fretfulness  by  her  countenance  and  her  noddings,  now  ratifies  and  exercises 
her  fretfulness,  after  finally  coming  to  the  press,  by  quarrels  and  abusive 
language,  only  not  by  hands  and  weapons. 

Therefore,  Very  Reverend,  Illustrious,  Highborn  Lords,  let  her  stand  before 
you  to  plead  my  cause,  which  can  be  got  hold  of  for  me  from  the  daily  delayings 
of  this  publication.  Come  to  an  understanding  with  her.  If  you  have  become 
experienced  in  listening  to  her  sarcasm,  you  will  not  easily  demand  scrupulous 
accounts  of  time  from  him  who  proves  that  the  case  is  with  him  as  with  her, 
especially  if  he  can  show  the  value  of  the  time  and  the  work. 

But  after  I  myself  too,  whom  I  believe  to  care  for  those  arts,  t.e.,  the  pro¬ 
claiming  of  the  divine  w^orks,  [638]  and  who  has  followed  the  footprints  of  divine 
providence  in  an  indefatigable  search — after  I  recall  to  mind  what  utility  the 
little  book  will  have  drained  from  this  delay  in  time;  I  am  not  so  frightened  by 
your  adversities.  Masters — which  have  meanwhile  risen  up  against  you  and 
the  wretched  province  or  else  seem  to  make  further  threats — as  not  to  perform 
my  task,  fulfill  the  promise  made  to  you  in  the  dedication  of  the  little  book  on 
the  sphere,  and  pay  my  debt,  because  I  have  hitherto  been  living  off  your  sub¬ 
sidy.  For  I  hope  that  there  is  so  much  divine  mercy  left  in  the  store-house  that 
He  will  that  this  horrible  tempest  be  calmed,  the  clouds  dispersed,  and  the  sun 
at  last  shine  again  upon  the  penitent,  and  that  some  place  be  left  even  in  Austria 
for  these  peaceful  arts,  the  labour  over  which  He  does  not  stop  caring  for,  and 
that  there  be  gathered  together  in  Austria  once  again  some  number  of  those  who 
learn  from  these  arts  the  praises  of  God  their  Creator.  I  hope  that  this  little  book 
will  be  of  service  to  those  people.  For  it  contains  the  first  adumbration,  so  to 
speak,  of  the  Rudolphine  tables,  and  the  approximate  numbers.  If  these  num¬ 
bers  are  assumed  as  true,  the  lovers  of  this  discipline  may  exercise  themselves 
with  them  until  the  Rudolphine  tables  themselves  come  out,  furnished  with 
everything  accurately  corrected,  fixed  for  calculation,  and  ready  for  use.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  [639]  if  outsiders  get  any  utility  from  my  books,  as  there  are  very 
many  people  not  only  in  Germany  but  also  in  the  surrounding  kingdoms  and 


964  KEPLER 

provinces  who  seek  these  books  at  Frankfort;  it  is  right  for  them  to  learn  from 
this  dedication  of  mine  that,  for  whatever  value  this  book  has,  they  ought  to 
give  thanks  also  to  your  liberality,  Masters,  wherewith  uninterruptedly  you 
have  fostered  me  throughout  these  very  difficult  times.  With  that  learnt,  ac¬ 
cording  as  each  is  most  disposed  towards  the  arts  of  mathematics,  most  devoted 
to  God,  and  most  assiduous  in  gratitude,  the  crown  of  the  virtues ;  so  let  him  very 
frequently  join  his  prayers  with  mine  to  the  most  merciful  God:  that,  with  the 
tumults  of  war  calmed,  the  devastation  restored,  and  hatred  extinguished, 
golden  peace  returning  may  smile  upon  the  Empire  of  the  Most  Powerful  Divine 
Ferdinand  ii.  Emperor  of  Rome,  Our  August  Lord,  and  that  God  may  revivify 
all  the  provinces  of  His  Majesty,  and  especially  Austria-on-the-Anisana,  with 
the  fruitful  showers  of  His  grace.  And  that  finally  to  you,  Very  Reverend,  Illus¬ 
trious,  Highborn,  Noble,  Vigorous  Masters,  God  may  bring  and  make  per¬ 
manent  for  many  years  safety,  health,  riches,  and  dignities,  for  His  own  glory, 
for  the  preservation  of  the  Church,  for  the  adornment  of  the  most  glorious 
Emperor,  and  finally  for  the  necessary  cultivation  of  those  arts  [640]  wherein 
the  divine  name  is  held  in  honour.  Farewell,  Masters,  and  hold  within  your  lik¬ 
ing  your  little  client,  who  is  absent  in  body  for  a  short  while,  but  quite  present 
in  spirit  for  all  acts  of  obedience.  At  Frankfort  on  the  Kalends  of  July  1621. 

Reverend  and  Illustrious  Lords,  Farewell, 
your  most  devoted  Mathematician, 

Johannes  Kepler 

SECOND  BOOK  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  SCHEMATA 
Part  I.  On  the  Eccentric  Circles,  or  Schemata  of  the  Planets 

[641]  If  you  set  up  no  solid  spheres  in  the  heavens  and  if  all  the  movements  of  the 
planets  are  regulated  by  natural  faculties,  which  are  implanted  in  the  bodies 
of  the  planets:  then  I  ask  what  will  the  theory  [ratio]  of  astronomy  be?  For  it  seems 
that  the  theory  cannot  do  without  the  imagining  of  circles  and  spheres. 

It  can  easily  do  without  the  useless  furniture  of  fictitious  circles  and  spheres. 
But  there  is  such  great  need  of  imagining  the  true  figures,  in  which  the  routes  of 
the  planets  are  arranged,  that  we  are  impoverishing  Astronomy  and  that  the 
big  job  to  be  worked  on  by  the  true  astronomer  is  to  demonstrate  from  observa¬ 
tions  what  figures  the  planetary  orbits  possess;  and  to  devise  such  hypotheses,  or 
physical  principles,  [642]  as  can  be  used  to  demonstrate  the  figures  which  are 
in  accord  with  the  deductions  made  from  observations.  Therefore  when  once  the 
figure  of  the  planetary  orbit  has  been  established,  then  will  come  the  second  and 
more  popular  exercise  of  the  astronomer:  to  formulate,  and  to  give  the  rules  of, 
an  astronomical  calculus  in  accordance  with  this  true  figure,  or  even  to  make 
use  of  the  figure  as  expressed  in  material  instruments  not  otherwise  than  the 
solid  spheres  of  the  ancients  were  used,  and  through  these  figures  to  lay  the 
movements  of  the  planets  before  the  eyes. 

Therefore  what  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  Fifth  Book,  the  second  book  on  the  doctrine 
of  the  schemata,  and  how  do  you  keep  its  subject-matter  separate  from  that  of  the 
preceding  Fourth  and  the  following  Sixth? 

So  far,  in  the  Fourth  Book,  the  physical  principles  of  movements — among 
other  things — have  been  demonstrated  by  reasons  and  by  experiments.  Out  of 


965 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

these  physical  principles  the  Fifth  Book  will  form  the  figures  of  the  planetary 
orbits  and  will  explain  the  powers  [potestates]  of  those  figures;  and  there  the  in¬ 
most  sanctuaries  of  geometry  will  have  to  be  searched.  The  Sixth  will  teach  the 
use  of  these  figures  in  the  schemata  of  the  single  planets  and  put  them  into 
operation.  So  the  Fourth  contains  the  theory;  the  Fifth,  the  instrument;  and 
the  Sixth  the  practice;  the  Fourth  was  physical,  the  Fifth  is  geometrical,  and 
the  Sixth  will  be  properly  astronomical. 

How  many  parts  does  Book  V  have? 

Two:  in  the  first  part  the  eccentric  circle  and  its  plane  are  connected  up  with 
physical  causes:  in  the  second,  there  are  given  definitions  of  the  astronomical 
terms  which  occur  universally  among  all  the  planets  in  the  case  of  the  eccentric 
circle;  and  the  method  of  calculation  is  explained  in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  this 
part. 

Then  what  sort  of  figure  of  the  planetary  orbit  is  formed  according  to  the  physical 
principles  of  Book  IV? 

If  the  body  of  the  planet  did  not  have  magnetic  threads,  [643]  so  that  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  one  of  the  regions  of  magnetic  threads  it  is  drawn  to  the  north, 
and  in  accordance  with  the  other  region  towards  the  south — in  accordance  with 
one  region  it  is  attracted  towards  the  sun,  and  in  accordance  with  the  other  is 
repelled;  then  the  sun  in  the  rotation  of  its  body  around  its  axis,  carrying  around 
the  immaterial  form  of  its  own  body  throughout  the  widest  spaces  of  the  world, 
would  carry  around  with  itself  the  planet  held  fast  by  that  form,  and  (1)  if  the 
planet  at  the  start  had  been  situated  under  the  ecliptic,  its  whole  route  would 
be  arranged  along  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  (2)  and  so  the  planet  would  always 
return  to  that  very  point  where  the  start  was  made;  (3)  the  body  of  the  sun  and 
the  planetary  orbit  would  have  the  same  centre;  (4)  the  figure  of  the  orbit  would 
be  a  perfect  circle;  (5)  the  planet  in  all  equal  portions  of  this  circle  would  be 
moved  with  equal  speed. 

But  because  we  have  laid  down  that  in  the  body  of  any  planet  there  are  pres¬ 
ent  twofold  threads:therefore  by  the  mingling  of  the  faculties  of  the  planet^s 
body  and  the  sun^s  motor  power,  (1)  the  planet  describes  an  orbit  oblique  to  the 
ecliptic;  and  because  the  threads  of  latitude  remain  in  approximately  a  parallel 
posture  during  the  whole  circuit  but  not  wholly  so,  and  hence  they  are  deflected 
gradually  after  many  revolutions:  therefore  (2)  the  plane  contained  by  the  orbit 
of  the  planet  is  approximately  a  perfect  plane  but  not  wholly  so;  and  hence, 
when  one  revolution  has  been  completed,  the  centre  of  the  planetary  globe  does 
not  return  exactly  to  its  starting-point,  but  it  entwines  a  new  circle  with  the 
first  circle  traversed  and  described — after  the  fashion  of  the  circles  of  the  natural 
days — of  which  I  have  spoken  in  Book  iii,  page  291 — or  after  the  fashion  of  the 
thread  which  the  silk-worm  drops,  throwing  the  thread  around  itself  and  build¬ 
ing  a  little  house  by  the  inweaving  of  many  entwined  circles.  For  this  reason  the 
longest  digressions  in  latitude  are  not  found  in  all  ages  in  the  same  parts  of  the 
zodiac.  And  because  the  threads  of  libration  make  the  planet  to  be  drawn  away 
from  the  sun  to  one  side  but  then  to  be  driven  away  from  that  region;  accord¬ 
ingly  the  planet  (3)  describes  its  orbit  around  the  sun  but  not  as  around  its 
own  centres,  that  is  to  say,  it  describes  an  orbit  eccentric  to  the  sun:  [644]  and 
for  this  reason  the  orbit  is  not  (4)  a  perfect  circle,  but  one  slightly  narrower  and 


966  KEPLER 

more  pressed  in  on  the  sides,  like  the  figure  of  an  ellipse.  (5)  For  the  same  cause 
and  because  the  form  of  the  solar  body,  which  form  gives  movement  to  the 
planet,  is  slighter  and  weaker  in  the  larger  circle,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  planet 
to  be  moved  with  the  same  speed  in  all  the  parts  of  its  orbit;  but  the  planet  is 
slow  at  a  long  distance  from  the  sun  and  fast  at  a  short  distance.  Finally  because 
too  the  threads  of  libration  are  moved  out  of  their  parallel  posture  by  very  many 
successive  revolutions,  so  too  the  positions  on  the  zodiac  where  the  planets  are 
highest  and  slowest  do  not  always  remain  but  gradually  move  eastward. 

Have  you  not  described  an  intricate  figure  for  the  route  of  the  planet  and  one  that 
cannot  readily  he  laid  before  the  eyes  especially  in  a  plane? 

Even  if  this  is  true,  it  is  nevertheless  not  new  to  astronomy  or  something 
found  only  in  Copernicus;  and  there  is  no  need  for  all  things  to  be  represented 
in  the  same  plane;  but  those  interweavings,  which  have  arisen  from  the  very 
slow  movement  of  the  boundary-posts  of  latitude  and  altitude,  can  be  disen¬ 
tangled  with  the  same  dexterity  which  the  ancient  astronomers  employed  and 
with  less  apparatus. 

How  did  the  ancients  disentangle  the  movements  of  latitude  and  of  altitude? 

They  devised  for  the  latitudes  one  circle  or  sphere  which  is  the  carrier  or  de¬ 
ferent  of  the  nodes,  the  outermost  circle  of  the  whole  schema  of  the  planet — 
and  for  the  altitudes  two  spheres  of  unequal  thickness,  which  they  named  the 
altitudes  of  the  deferents  [defer entium  auges]. 

Why  do  you  fudge  that  those  spheres  or  circles  should  not  be  used? 

Because  they  were  made  for  laying  physical  explanations  of  movement  before 
the  imagination  rather  than^astronomical.  And  so  by  their  use  [645]  those  false 
physical  opinions  concerning  the  solidity  of  the  circles  or  spheres  were  estab¬ 
lished;  and  in  turn  the  true  judgments  were  obscured  concerning  the  causes  of 
their  irregularities  and  of  their  very  slow  transportation — these  causes  were 
demonstrated  in  Book  iv. 

Therefore  what  do  you  substitute  for  these  three  circles  or  spheres  in  laying  your 
astronomical  explanations  before  the  imagination? 

It  is  sufficient  if  we  draw  two  straight  lines  from  the  centre  of  the  sun,  one 
through  the  intersection  of  the  planet’s  orbit  with  the  ecliptic,  the  other  through 
the  centre  of  the  planet’s  orbit — both  lines,  on  either  side  and  everywhere  under 
the  fixed  stars — and  if  we  teach  that  the  movement  of  the  first  line  is  under  the 
ecliptic  towards  the  westward  signs  and  that  the  movement  of  the  second  line 
is  eastward  under  the  circle,  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  which  is  in  the  same 
plane  as  the  orbit  of  the  planet — both  movements  most  regular,  the  first  move¬ 
ment  from  the  mean  equinoctial  point  and  the  second  movement  from  the  line 
of  intersections  [of  the  planet’s  orbit  with  the  ecliptic].  Unless  something  should 
here  be  taken  from  Book  vii  on  the  ground  that  even  the  ecliptic  is  dislocated 
and  does  not  always  run  through  the  same  fixed  stars. 

When  this  separation  has  been  made,  what  remains  for  our  imagination  concerning 
the  figure  of  the  route  of  the  planet? 

The  orbit  remains  as  a  perfect  ellipse  in  a  true  and  most  regular  plane  inclined 
to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  at  constant  angles,  by  which  plane  of  the  ecliptic 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  967 

this  orbit  is  cut  in  the  line  drawn  through  the  centre  of  the  solar  body — as  was 
stated  on  page  946,  Book  iv.  The  planet  moves  in  this  orbit  with  unequal  speed 
through  its  parts  and  returns  to  the  intersections,  and  so  to  the  equinoctial 
points — not  to  say  to  the  fixed  stars  and  to  the  line  through  the  centres,  by  abso¬ 
lutely  equal  measures  of  periodic  times,  so  far  as  they  are  considered  in  them¬ 
selves. 

Does  not  this  imaging  trespass  upon  the  physical  causes  and  measures  of  the  move- 
ments  of  one  period? 

Not  very  far,  provided  we  keep  in  mind  that  those  things  which  are  ab¬ 
stracted  by  means  of  the  said  two  lines  from  the  real  inweaving  and  intercon¬ 
nection  of  many  orbits  [646]  are  not  furnished  physically  by  those  two  lines  but 
by  the  inclination  of  the  real  threads  of  the  planet's  body. 

By  what  right  do  you  make  this  also  a  part  of  Copernican  astronomy^  since  that 
author  abided  by  the  opinion  of  the  ancients  concerning  perfect  circles? 

I  admit  that  this  formulation  of  the  hypotheses  is  not  Copernican.  But  be¬ 
cause  the  part  concerning  the  eccentric  circle  is  subordinate  to  the  general  hypo¬ 
thesis  which  employs  the  annual  movement  of  the  Earth  and  the  stillness  of  the 
sun:  therefore  the  name  comes  from  the  more  important  part  of  the  hypothesis. 
Moreover,  this  small  part  of  the  hypothesis  is  bound  up  with  necessary  argu¬ 
ments  arising  from  the  repose  of  the  sun  and  the  movement  of  the  Earth,  the 
doctrines  of  Copernicus;  and  so  this  part  has  a  good  title  for  being  referred  to 
Copernicus. 

What  is  the  method  of  procedure  whereby  it  will  be  demonstrated  by  the  physical 
causes  established  in  Book  iv  that  such  a  figure  of  the  orbit  arises  and  what  speed  the 
planet  has  through  the  parts  of  its  orbit? 

We  must  start  with  the  approach  and  "withdrawal  of  the  planet  from  the  sun; 
and  first,  we  must  determine  the  geometrical  measure  of  the  strength  of  the 
forces  exerted  in  giving  the  planet  a  movement  of  libration  in  any  posture  of 
the  threads.  And  secondly,  we  must  prepare  a  compendious  geometrical  measure 
of  the  effect  of  the  attraction  or  repulsion,  which  is  heaped  up  through  any  whole 
arc  of  the  orbit  by  all  the  increments  of  the  forces.  Thirdly,  we  must  demonstrate 
that  the  elliptical  figure  of  the  orbit  arises  from  such  a  libration  completed  dur¬ 
ing  the  revolution.  Fourthly,  we  must  show  that  the  plane  of  the  ellipse  exhibits 
the  measures  of  the  time  and  of  the  delays  which  the  planet  makes  in  any  arc  of 
its  elliptical  orbit.  Fifthly,  we  must  teach  the  equivalence  of  the  plane  of  a  circle 
and  the  plane  of  an  ellipse  with  respect  to  this  measuring  of  time.  Finally,  we 
shall  have  to  demonstrate  that  when  the  revolution  of  the  threads  of  latitude 
has  been  thus  procured,  as  [647]  was  laid  down  in  Book  iv,  the  regularity  of  the 
orbital  plane  is  established.  By  these  demonstrations  the  studious  astonomer — 
for  the  popular  astronomer  has  no  need  of  Book  iv  or  of  this  first  part  of  Book  v 
— will  have  his  curiosity  satisfied  concerning  this  part  of  the  calculus  of  move¬ 
ments.  The  other  part  of  Book  v  will  teach  how  to  construct  this  calculus;  and 
Book  VI,  how  to  bring  it  into  use  by  the  application  of  this  elliptical  orbit  and 
its  plane  to  the  great  circle  or  sphere. 


968 


KEPLER 


1.  Concerning  the  Increment  of  Libration 

Begin  with  the  first  and  say  on  what  'principles  the  measure  (modus)  of  increment 
of  the  libration  in  every  position  of  the  planet  is  formed  or  determined. 

Two  causes,  one  active  and  one  passive,  come  together  for  the  formation  of 
this  increment.  The  active  cause  is  the  quantity  {modulus)  of  the  forces  of 
libration  in  themselves,  that  is  to  say,  how  great  the  quantity  [modulus)  is  found 
to  he  in  any  equal  arc  of  the  eccentric  orbit.  The  passive  is  the  varying  lay-out 
of  the  planetary  body  with  respect  to  the  sun;  for  not  every  lay-out  receives  or 
admits  that  whole  quantity  {modulus)  of  forces,  but  any  lay-out  receives  its  own 
proper  portion  [of  the  forces]. 

So  what  measures  the  quantity  of  the  forces  for  giving  the  planet  a  movement  of 
libration? 

These  three  do:  first,  the  distance  of  the  arc  of  the  orbit  from  the  sun;  secondly, 
the  magnitude  of  this  arc;  and  thirdly,  the  time  vrhich  the  planet  takes  to  turn 
through  this  arc. 

What  does  this  distance  of  the  arc — and  of  the  planet  in  the  arc — from  the  sun  have 
to  do  with  the  forces  of  libration? 

The  ratio  of  the  distances  is  the  inverse  of  the  ratio  of  the  tenuity  of  the  solar 
form.  This  same  form  carries  the  planet  around  and  gives  it  a  movement  of 
libration,  now  attracting  it  and  now  repulsing  it,  as  was  said  in  Book  iv,  page 
903.  And  so  the  farther  the  arc  is  distant  from  the  sun,  the  weaker  at  any  mo¬ 
ment  of  time  is  the  libration  of  the  planet  moving  in  the  arc.  For  this  reason 
alone,  the  sun  would  expend  unequal  forces  in  different  arcs  of  the  eccentric 
circle  which  are  equal  to  one  another. 

[648]  What  effect  does  the  magnitude  of  the  arc  of  the  planet  have? 

Because  in  a  long  arc  much  force  is  expended,  and  in  a  short  arc  little  force: 
therefore  if  equal  arcs  are  assumed,  so  much  and  so  far  should  the  forces  be  equal. 

What  does  the  time,  taken  separately,  have  to  do  with  the  increase  offerees,  and  what 
do  all  three  causes,  taken  together? 

Since — Book  iv,  pages  903-06 — it  has  been  shown  that  the  farther  the  planet 
is  distant  from  the  sun,  the  longer  does  it  delay  in  the  equal  arcs  of  the  orbit; 
and  so  much  the  longer  does  it  feel  the  motor  force  of  the  sun,  the  greater  the 
magnitude  of  that  arc:  but  since  it  has  already  been  said  that  the  farther  any 
one  of  the  equal  arcs  of  the  orbit  is  distant  from  the  sun,  so  much  the  feebler  is 
the  movement  of  libration  which  the  planet  undergoes:  wherefore  the  more 
feeble  the  libration  is  in  one  moment  of  time,  in  any  of  the  equal  arcs  of  the 
orbit,  so  much  the  longer  does  the  planet  revolve  and  undergo  a  libration  in  that 
arc.  Therefore  since  the  feebleness  of  the  forces  is  balanced  by  the  stretch  of 
time  wherein  the  planet  experiences  those  forces  in  itself — and  this  occurs  in  the 
same  ratio  on  both  sides,  namely,  in  the  ratio  of  the  distances  from  the  sun: 
hence  there  is  the  final  effect  that  in  the  equal  arcs  of  the  eccentric  circle  the 
quantity  {modulus)  of  the  forces  of  libration  is  disbursed  by  the  sun  and  is  abso¬ 
lutely  equal  with  respect  to  the  sun  as  an  agent.  See  diagrams  on  pages  903  and 
934. 


969 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

Now  therefore  state  the  measure  of  the  portion  of  the  quantity  of  the  solar  forces  which 
the  planet  admits  into  itself  in  any  posture  with  respect  to  the  sun. 

We  must  consider  the  angle  which  the  rays  [radii]  of  the  sun  make  with  the 
magnetic  threads  of  the  planetary  globe.  For  the  sine  of  the  angle  comple¬ 
mentary  to  this  measures  this  portion  of  forces  admitted.  For  since  the  efficient 
causes  of  the  libration  are  the  ray  of  the  sun  and  the  magnetic  threads  of  the 
planet^s  body,  two  physical  lines;  it  is  right  to  seek  the  measure  of  the  strength 
of  the  libration  from  the  angle  between  these  lines  and  from  its  sine. 

[649]  For  example,  let  A  be  the  sun;  and  /,  the  centre  of  the  planetary 

body;  RP  the  line  drawn  through  A  the  sun  and 
through  B  the  centre  of  the  orbit;  EG  and  IH  the 
magnetic  threads  will  be  practically  perpendicular 
to  RP — at  least  if  the  counterbalancing  of  the  semi¬ 
circles  is  considered — and  H  and  F  are  the  solipetal 
termini.  For  it  was  laid  down  in  Book  iv  page  935 
that  during  the  revolution  of  the  body  the  magnetic 
threads  stay  practically  parallel  to  themselves  and 
at  points  P  and  R  provide  no  occasion  of  attraction 
or  repulsion,  because  there  the  positions  of  both  the 
solipetal  and  the  solifugal  termini  are  equally  dis¬ 
tant  from  the  sun  at  A.  But  in  the  intermediate 
positions,  where  the  solipetal  or  the  solifugal  termini 
regard  the  sun  directly,  the  strength  of  the  libration 
is  greatest  of  all.  AE  and  AT  are  the  rays  of  the  sun. 
Let  lines  ED  and  70  be  drawn  parallel  to  line  RP^ 
and  let  perpendiculars  be  dropped  upon  them  from 
points  F  and  C,  wffierein  the  rays  of  the  sun  cut  the 
middle  circles  of  the  planetary  globe;  and  let  the 
perpendiculars  be  CL  and  FK.  Here  the  angles  made 
by  the  rays  of  the  sun  with  the  threads  are  AEG  and  AIH]  the  complementary 
angles  are  CED  and  F70,or  the  arcs  CD  and  FO,  and  CL  and  FK  are  the  sines 
of  these  angles,  according  as  IH  or  EG  is  the  total  sine  of  100,000.  Therefore  it 
is  established  that  as  EG  and  IH  are  to  LC  and  KF,  so  the  total  quantity  of  the 
forces  from  the  sun  which  are  present  at  7  or  F  is  to  the  portion  which  the  planet 
admits  at  the  postures  of  the  threads  EG  and  IH, 

Why  do  you  take  the  sine  as  the  measure ^  rather  than  the  complement  of  the  angle 
or  arc? 

Because,  although  any  magnetic  thread  is  present  in  a  spherical  body,  never¬ 
theless  it  is  not  a  circle,  but  is  a  physical  straight  line;  because  it  works  most 
strongly  towards  undergoing  attraction  or  is  very  strongly  disposed  towards  ad¬ 
mitting  the  forces  of  the  solar  ray  into  itself,  when  it  points  towards  the  sun  in  a 
straight  line:  or  else — wffiat  is  the  same  thing — when  it  is  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  illumination  of  the  circle,  which  bounds  the  part  of  the  globe  which  is 
turned  towards  the  sun;  but  when  [650]  it  is  inclined  obliquely  to  that  plane,  it 
is  equivalent,  as  to  a  shorter  line,  to  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  its  terminus 
to  that  plane.  Thus  the  solar  ray,  considered  with  respect  to  the  work  of  heat¬ 
ing,  heats  most  strongly  when  it  strikes  a  surface  at  right  angles;  but  when  at 
oblique  angles,  it  warms  less,  in  the  measure  that  the  line  drawn  from  the  sun 


970 


KEPLER 


perpendicularly  to  the  same  plane  continued  is  shorter  than  the  oblique  ray. 

The  following  explanation  will  be  more  elegant:  If  you  consider  that  the  whole 
globe  is  made  up  simply  of  threads,  whereof  the  longest  threads  are  those  in  the 
great  circle  of  the  globe;  and  the  shorter,  those  in  the  latitudinal  circles.  In  this 
way  not  only  will  EG^  like  be  a  thread;  but  also  the  aforementioned  sines 
LC  and  KF^  which  are  marked  out  by  the  solar  ray  AE  and  AI  at  the  termini 
C  and  F:  those  sines  are  latitudinal  threads.  Therefore  the  smaller  CL  and  FK 
are  than  GE  and  HIj  so  much  the  less  of  the  forces  from  the  solar  ray  does  any 
one  thread  of  the  whole  body  admit  into  itself,  on  account  of  the  solar  ray  falling 
obliquely  upon  itself.  Thus  the  solar  ray,  by  marking  out  the  latitudinal  thread, 
marks  out  the  sine,  which  is  the  measure  of  the  portion  of  its  virtue  received 
into  the  threads. 

Furthermore,  every  artificial  or  natural  movement,  in  which  the  same  or 
analogous  principles  concur,  is  measured  out  by  the  sines  of  the  angles;  but 
principally  and  most  clearly,  the  movement  or  tendency  [nisus]  of  the  arms  in 
the  balance  and  in  the  lever.  Accordingly  since  this  libration  too  takes  place 
between  movements  which  are  natural  in  a  wider  signification — because  the 
libration  power  of  the  solar  form  is  a  partaker  of  dimensions,  and  somehow, 
though  without  matter,  corporeal ;  but  the  lay-out  of  the  threads  in  the  planet 
again  is  corporeal;  it  is  not  absurd  that  this  libration  too  should  get  the  same 
laws  as  the  balance  and  the  lever.  And  that  is  all  the  more  probable  in  the  case 
of  the  libration  towards  the  sun,  because  the  progression  of  the  planet  in  longi¬ 
tude  along  its  orbit,  by  reason  of  intensification  or  remission,  Le.,  by  reason  of 
speed  and  slowness,  obeys  the  laws  of  the  same  balance  or  lever,  as  was  said  in 
Book  IV,  page  887  and  906,  and  will  be  made  clear  below  in  many  ways. 

[651]  Compare  this  speed  of  libration  with  the  proportionalities  of  the  balance. 

The  line  from  the  sun  into  the  threads  is  like  the  haft  of  the  balance,  the 
threads  like  the  arms  of  the  balance;  and  the  regions  of  the  threads  like  the 
tray;  and  the  weights  in  the  trays  are,  in  the  case  of  the  planet,  the  attraction 
towards  the  sun,  or  repulsion  from  the  same;  and  both  are  of  the  same  family  of 
things.  For  as  the  sun  attracts  the  planet,  so  the  Earth  attracts  bodies,  and  on 
account  of  this  attraction,  bodies  are  said  to  be  heavy.  But  the  sun  attracts  the 
planet  with  respect  to  one  region  and  repels  it  with  respect  to  the  other,  and  does 
this  with  varying  intensity;  while  the  Earth  attracts  weights  without  any  dis¬ 
tinction  being  made  as  to  posture.  Accordingly  that  which  in  the  balance  is  in¬ 
equality  of  weights,  in  the  planet  becomes  the  diversity  of  posture  of  the  threads 
with  respect  to  the  sun:  for  here  the  planet  exhibits  both  weights  on  the  balance 
as  the  same  weight.  And  just  as  in  the  balance,  the  heavier  weight  comes  down 
towards  the  Earth,  and  the  lighter  moves  up  away  from  the  Earth;  so  in  this 
case  the  whole  globe  of  the  planet  suffers  the  affect  (affectionem)  of  the  prevailing 
region.  Hence  if  the  friendly  region  is  more  attracted  by  the  sun  [than  the  un¬ 
friendly  region  is  repelled],  the  whole  planet  approaches  the  sun;  but  if  the  un¬ 
friendly  region  is  more  repelled,  the  whole  globe  of  the  planet  is  repelled  by  the 
sun.  Therefore  too  the  measure,  in  accordance  with  which  the  weights  of  the 
balance  are  at  war  with  one  another,  will  be  dominant  in  the  disbursing  of  this 
attraction  and  repulsion.  But  in  the  balance  the  victory  of  the  weights  is  evalu¬ 
ated  [652]  at  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  between  the  haft  or  handle 
{manubrium)  and  the  arm  of  the  lighter  weight,  as  will  be  proved.  Wherefore 


971 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

too  in  the  libration  of  the  planetary  body  towards  the  sun,  the  passion  of  the 
region  of  thread  nearer  the  sun  will  overcome  the  passion  of  the  opposite  region 
in  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  between  the  solar  ray  and 
the  thread.  But  the  effect  of  victory,  in  the  movement  of  the  planets,  is  the 
strength  of  the  libration  belonging  to  each  position.  Accordingly  this  strength, 
or  the  increment  born  of  that  [strength]  of  libration,  will  similarly  be  evaluated 
at  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  with  the  threads. 

Let  AZ)  be  the  handle  or  haft;  and  let  AB  and  AC,  the  arms  in  the  same 

straight  line  BC,  be  each  equal  to  AD.  Let  H 
be  the  lighter  weight  hanging  from  B:  and  /, 
the  heavier  weight,  hanging  from  C.  Accord¬ 
ingly  the  weights,  which  by  their  power 
(potestaie)  are  at  points  B  and  C,  have  an  al¬ 
titude  as  great  as  BC  the  length  of  the  arms; 
and  the  weights  contend  for  this  altitude, 
which  is  DE.  For  if  the  greater  weight  com¬ 
pletely  overcame  the  other,  the  arm  BA 
would  coincide  with  the  handle  DA ;  and  the 
greater  weight  C  would  be  in  the  place  of 
altitude  E,  and  would  lift  the  lesser  up  to  D 
the  very  top;  but  because  the  heavier  weight 
does  not  overcome  the  lighter  completely, 
therefore  the  perpendicular  BE  drawn  from 
the  end  of  arm  B  to  the  handle  DA  shows 
that  the  weight  B  is  lifted  through  FA,  a  part 
of  the  altitude,  and  that  the  weight  C  goes 
down  the  same  amount,  namely  through  AG. 
Accordingly 
DF  :  FE  :  :  weight  H  :  weight  /. 

FE  :  FG  :  :  weight  I  :  weight  7— weight  H. 

DE  :  FG  :  :  DA  :  FA  :  :  weights  I  &  H  :  weight  I —weight  H. 

But  if  BA  is  set  down  as  the  total  sine,  FA  will  be  the  sine  of  angle  FBA,  which 
is  the  complement  of  angle  FAB. 

In  the  same  way  if  EA  is  the  ray  from  the  sun,  BC  the  magnetic  thread  of  the 
planetary  body,  H  ot  B  the  lesser  strength  of  repulsion,  and  I  or  C  the  greater 
strength  of  attraction — because  C  has  approached  nearer  to  the  sun  than  B — 
then,  if  BA  exhibits  the  strongest  attraction  and  with  no  angle  BAD,  AF  will 
represent  the  attraction  at  the  existing  angle  BAF  or  GAC. 

Apply  these  things  to  the  proportionality  of  the  lever  too. 

The  proportionality  [ratio]  of  the  lever  is  the  same,  with  only  the  followng 
difference:  [653]  in  the  balance  the  fulcrum  A  is  at  the  midpoint  between  B  and 
C  the  extremities  of  the  arms,  and  thence  the  unequal  weights  make  BC  not 
remain  parallel  to  the  horizon:  but  in  the  lever  the  line  of  weights  remains  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  horizon,  while  the  fulcrum  divides  the  length  of  the  arms  not  at  the 
midpoint  but  nearer  the  heavier  weight,  so  that  the  arms  have  the  inverse  ratio 
of  the  weights. 

For  example,  if  DA  the  handle  of  the  balance  is  equal  to  the  arms  BA  and  AC, 
a  lever  will  be  formed,  and  the  weights  hanging  from  B  and  C  will  be  suspended 


D 


972 


KEPLER 


at  equilibrium  with  respect  to  the  horizon — as  follows:  DK  the  perpendicular 
drawn  from  D  to  BC  will  be  the  handle;  and  BK  and  KC  will  be  the  arms;  and 
as  formerly  DF  was  to  FE^  so  now  BK  is  to  KC,  Then  as  BK  the  shorter  arm 
is  to  KC  the  longer  arm,  so  the  lesser  weight  H  to  be  suspended  from  C  is  to 
the  greater  weight  I  to  be  suspended  from  B, 

The  reader  must  be  warned  that  mechanical  experimentation  is  difficult:  be¬ 
cause  the  weight  and  thickness  of  the  arms  themselves  cannot  be  guarded  against 
mechanically.  Now  they  ought  to  constitute  geometrically  a  pure  line  without 
weight  and  width.  It  may  be  seen  in  Archimedes  how  we  must  meet  this  hin¬ 
drance  in  part. 

I  grasp  that  the  measure  of  the  strength^  or  of  the  increment  of  librationj  at  any  given 
posture  of  the  threads  of  the  planetary  body  must  be  sought  from  the  complement  of 
the  angle  made  by  the  thread  with  the  solar  ray;  but  because  it  seems  that  this  angle 
is  discovered  with  difficulty,  in  that  not  only  is  the  body  continually  transported 
from  place  to  place,  but  also  its  threads  are  deflected;  does  not  this  measure  seem 
uncertain  and  therefore  unsuited  for  usef 

On  the  contrary,  on  account  of  this  deflection  of  the  threads,  that  angle  can 
be  converted  to  the  arc  of  the  orbit,  so  that  from  this  arc  will  come  the  same  sine, 
i,e.,  the  same  measure,  and  for  this  reason  that  measure  is  very  well  adapted 
to  use. 

Teach  and  demonstrate  this  converting  of  the  angle  to  the  orbit. 

You  remember  that  at  the  start  when  the  planet  is  at  the  apsides,  [654]  i.e., 
at  the  beginning  of  the  orbit,  the  angle  between 
the  ray  of  the  sun  and  the  thread  is  a  right  angle. 

Again  in  Book  iv,  page  941,  it  was  shown  that 
thread  AQ  of  this  figure  points  towards  A  the 
sun,  or  is  one  with  NA  the  ray  from  the  sun — the 
angle  here  being  null — when  PN  a  quadrant  of 
the  orbit  from  apsis  P  has  been  traversed:  hence 
the  arc  of  the  orbit  from  the  apsis  measures  the 
complement  of  this  angle.  Therefore  it  remains 
to  be  demonstrated,  that  even  the  intermediate 
angles  made  by  the  thread  and  the  sun,  as  HI  A, 
between  a  right  angle  and  no  angle,  have  as  their 
complements  the  middle  arcs  of  the  orbit,  as  PI, 
between  no  arc  and  a  quadrant,  so  that  the  two 
together  make  90°. 

It  is  demonstrated  as  follows:  On  page  944, 
it  was  said  that  IS  :  NB  :  :  angle  HIS  :  angle 
QNB.  That  [ratio]  is  used  for  the  sake  of  discern¬ 
ing  IS  and  NB,  although,  by  the  force  of  physical 
speculation,  that  [ratio]  is  true  of  the  sines  of 
angles  lAP  and  NAP.  But  now 

sin  AIB  :  sin  ANB  :  :  sin  lAP  :  sin  NAP. 

For 

BI :  BA  :  :  sin  BAI :  sin  BIA. 

And 

BI  \  BA  :  \  BN  :  BA  :  :  sin  BAN  :  sin  BNA. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 


973 


Therefore 

sin  BAI :  sin  BAN  :  :  sin  lAP  :  sin  NAP  :  :  sin  AIB  :  sin  ANB, 
Therefore  if  the  foregoing  terms  are  compared  with  one  another,  angle  HIS 
will  be  found  equal  to  angle  AIB^  and  angle  QNB  to  angle  ANB\  and,  if  equals 
are  subtracted  [from  equals],  angle  SIB  will  be  equal  to  angle  HI  A — just 
as,  by  proportion,  angle  BNB  will  be  equal  to  angle  ANA.  But  the  measure 
of  angle  SIB  is  arc  INy  because  the  measure  of  angle  SBI  is  arc  PI.  Therefore 
too  the  measure  of  angle  HI  A  will  be  arc  INy  the  complement  of  arc  PI. 
Therefore,  given  PI  the  arc  of  the  orbit,  SI  the  sine  of  the  arc,  i.e.y  the  measure 
of  the  increment  of  libration,  is  also  given  immediately. 

2.  On  the  Sum  of  the  Libration  Gone  Through  With 
/  comprehend  the  measure  of  the  increment,  or  of  the  strength  of  librationy  at  any 
given  moment.  But  I  should  like  to  know  the  measure  of  the  part  of  the  libration 
gone  through  with  from  the  beginning  up  to  that  moment. 

That  measure  is  got  from  the  versed  sine  of  the  same  orbital  arc  so  far 
traversed.  For  as  the  whole  major  diameter  of  the  ellipse  is  to  the  total  li¬ 
bration,  or — what  amounts  to  the  same — as  the  semidiameter  of  the  orbit 
is  to  the  eccentricity,  so  also  the  versed  sine  of  each  arc  on  the  orbit  starting 
from  the  apsis  is  to  the  part  of  the  libration  which  is  gone  through  with  in  the 
meantime,  while  the  planet  is  traversing  that  arc. 

By  what  means  is  this  demonstrated? 

By  means  of  that  very  measure  of  the  increments  of  libration  which  has 

just  now  been  confirmed  by  its 
own  demonstration. 

For  let  PD  be  a  perfect  circle 
whose  centre  is  B.  Let  A  be  the 
sun,  and  PBAR  the  line  of  the 
apsides:  and  let  P  and  R  be  the 
highest  and  lowest  apsides.  Let 
AB  be  the  eccentricity;  and  let 
its  double,  PB,  be  the  total  li¬ 
bration.  Now  let  the  circle  be 
divided  into  equal  least  parts — 
starting  at  P.  And  let  the  parts 
be  PKy  KGy  GDy  DNy  NS  and 
SR.  And  from  these  divisions  let 
the  perpendiculars  KXy  GF,  DB, 
NAy  and  aSF  be  drawn  to  PR. 

Therefore,  by  the  foregoing, 
as  the  sine  KX  is  to  sines  GFy 
DBy  NAy  SYy  Rnd  RR — a  point 
instead  of  a  line — so  the  incre¬ 
ments  of  libration  correspond¬ 
ing  to  arcs  PKy  KGy  etc.  are  to  one  another — that  is,  as  PM  is  to  MIy  /F, 
FQ,  QVy  and  VB.  And  that  is  true  provided  it  is  understood  that  the  division 
is  continued  to  infinity,  when  KX  and  RR  are  understood  to  be  equal.  There¬ 
fore  since  points  P,  My  /,  P,  Q,  F,  and  B  are  put  down  as  separating  the  said 


R 


974 


KEPLER 


increments  of  libration;  let  them  be  transposed  to  the  different  distances 
of  the  planet  from  the  sun  A:  that  is  to  say,  with  A  as  centre  and  with  in¬ 
tervals  AMj  AI,  AFj  AQj  and  AV  let  the  arcs  ML,  IH,  FE,  QO,  and  FT  be 
described  in  such  fashion  that  a  planetary  orbit  [656]  which  is  an  ellipse  may 
be  understood  to  drop  from  P  to  R  through  the  points  L,  H,  E,  0,  and  T, 
The  distances  of  the  planet  from  the  sun  will  be  AP,  AL,  AH,  AE,  AO,  AT, 
and  AR,  But  the  versed  sines  of  the  said  arcs  PK,  PG,  etc.  will  be  PX,  PF, 
PB,  PA,  PY,  and  PR.  I  say  that  as  the  whole  diameter  PR,  the  sagitta  of  arc 
PDR,  is  to  PB  the  total  libration,  so  the  sagittae  of  the  single  arcs  are  to  the 
single  increments  of  libration,  namely  so  is  PX  to  PM,  so  PF  to  PI,  so  PB  to 
PF,  so  PA  to  PQ,  so  PY  to  PV. 

For  it  has  been  put  down  that  PM  and  PI  the  parts  of  the  libration  are 
in  the  ratio  of  the  sines  KX,  GF,  etc.  But  now  also  the  parts  PX,  PF,  etc. 
of  the  total  sagitta  PR  are  in  the  same  ratio  of  the  sines  KX,  GF,  etc. — and 
in  the  same  state  of  infinite  division,  where — no  less  than  before — the  point 
R  plays  the  role  of  line  RR. 

Therefore,  by  alternation,  the  parts  of  the  libration  correspond  in  the  same 
ratio  to  the  parts  of  the  sagitta — and  as  a  consequence,  any  total  portion  of  the 
libration  from  the  beginning  P  corresponds  to  its  total  sagitta  in  the  same  ratio. 

[657]  Whence  do  we  know  that  the  parts  PX  and  XF  of  the  diameter  PR,  considered 
as  the  sagittae  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  sines  KX  and  GF  which  determine  them? 

Pappus  made  a  demonstration.  Mathematical  Collections,  Book  v.  Prop.  36. 
If  a  sphere — to  be  understood  by  PGZ — is  cut  by  any  number  whatsoever  of 
parallel  planes,  as  KW,  GZ,  etc.,  then  the  surface  of  the  sphere  and  the  axis  of 
the  sections,  as  PR,  are  always  cut  in  the  same  ratio:  so  that,  as  the  spherical 
surface  KPW  is  to  portion  of  the  axis  PX,  so  too  the  surface  KWZG  is  to  the 
portion  XF,  and  so  for  the  rest. 

But  if  the  spherical  surface  is  understood  to  be  divided  into  an  infinite  number 
of  equal  zones,  then  any  zone,  say  KW  or  GZ,  will  be  as  a  circle  without  width. 
But  the  circles  KXW  and  GFZ  are  to  one  another,  with  respect  to  length,  as 
their  semidiameters  KX,  and  GF,  etc.  Wherefore  too  the  corresponding  por¬ 
tions  of  the  axis  PR,  namely  PX,  XF,  will  obey  the  ratio  of  the  sines  KX,  GF, 
by  which  they  are  determined. 

See  the  Commentaries  on  Mars,  Chapter  57,  for  an  attempted  demonstration 
of  the  same  theorem  by  means  of  numbers  and  the  sectioning  of  the  circle.  But 
in  that  place  this  ratio  seemed  to  be  somewhat  deficient,  because  I  had  not  yet 
read  Pappus.  But  the  reason  for  that  was  that  I  did  not  take  the  first  sagitta 
from  a  small  enough  arc,  and  that  is  just  as  if,  in  Pappus,  you  were  to  divide 
the  spherical  surface  into  parts  not  smaller  than  1°  in  width.  For  then  the 
width  of  the  narrowest  zone  would  necessarily  be  twice  that  which  would  be 
true. 

Although  PK,  KG,  and  the  remaining  arcs  taken  from  the  circle  are  equal,  yet  it  does 
not  seem  that  PL,  LH,  etc.,  the  arcs  of  the  true  orbit  are  equal,  hut  are  greater  towards 
E.  Does  not  this  destroy  the  certitude  of  the  demonstration? 

Not  at  all.  For  the  fact  that  the  arcs  are  greater  towards  E  [658]  must  be  at¬ 
tributed  to  these  very  librations,  as  will  be  apparent  below.  But  the  same  thing 
cannot  be  either  the  only  cause  or  a  concurrent  cause  of  itself:  so  that  I  may  pass 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  975 

over  the  disturbance,  because,  even  if  any  is  to  be  admitted,  it  would  clearly  be 
imperceptible. 

3.  On  the  Figure  of  the  Orbit 

I  see  that  the  measure  of  the  libration  is  found  in  the  versed  sines  of  the  arcs  of  the 
orbit  starting  from  the  apsis — by  the  principles  and  causes  of  movement  which  have 
been  assumed.  It  is  left  for  you  to  prove  that  by  this  form  of  libration  an  elliptic  orbit 
is  constituted,  concerning  which  you  have  said  the  observations  bear  witness. 

That  the  planetary  orbit  PLHEOTR  and  the  opposite  half  becomes  an  ellipse 
is  demonstrated  from  the  properties  of  this  figure  which  are  identical  with  the 
properties  which  the  libration  so  far  described  exhibits. 

What  are  the  identical  properties  of  the  ellipse? 

1.  It  is  clear,  from  the  Conics  of  Apollonius  of  Perga,  that  the  ellipse  [659] 
around  which  a  circle  is  circumscribed,  with  the  longer  diameter  of  the  ellipse 
as  the  common  diameter,  cuts  all  the  ordinates  to  that  diameter  in  the  same 
ratio  of  the  segments. 

For  example,  if  the  lines  KX,  GF,  DB,  N A,  and  SY  are  ordinates  applied  to 

PR,  and  if  the  curved  line 
PLHEOTR  is  an  ellipse,  then 
necessarily  DB  :  BE  :  :  GF  : 
FH  ::KX  :  XL:  \NA:  AO  :  : 
SY  :  YT. 

2.  The  ellipse  has  two  points, 
from  which  it  is  described  as 
from  centres;  I  am  accustomed 
to  call  these  two  points  the 
^Toci.^'  Accordingly  if  the  lines 
drawn  from  the  two  foci  to  any 
point  on  the  ellipse,  or  even  the 
lines  drawn  from  one  focus  to 
the  points  opposite  the  centre  of 
the  ellipse,  are  added  together, 
they  are  always  equal  to  the 
longer  diameter.  Hence  when 
they  are  drawn  to  those  points 
on  the  ellipse  which  are  in  the 
shorter  diameter  lying  midway 
between  the  vertices,  each  of  them  is  equal  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  circle. 

For  example,  if  A  is  the  focus,  B  the  centre  of  the  circle,  AB  and  BF  equal, 
F  will  be  the  other  focus.  And  the  sum  of  AH  and  HF  will  be  equal  to  the 
diameter  PR.  So  will  the  sum  of  AL  and  LF,  and  the  sum  of  AO  and  OF.  Where¬ 
fore,  since  BE  is  the  shorter  semidiameter,  and  E  is  the  point  on  it,  AE  and  EF 
will  be  equal,  and  each  of  them  will  be  equal  to  the  semidiameter  BP  or  BR, 
or  BD. 

This  is  applied  to  the  planets,  as  follows:  we  have  said  that  observations  bear 
witness  that  the  planets  are  at  a  distance  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  eccentric 
circle  from  the  sun — one  focus  of  this  ellipse — at  a  time  when  they  have  travers¬ 
ed  exactly  a  quadrant  of  the  orbit  from  apsis  P. 


976 


KEPLER 


Demonstrate  that  these  properties  of  an  ellipse  are  exhibited  in  the  planetary  orbit 
which  arises  from  these  librations. 

Then,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  so  far  given,  let  there  be  described  a  new 
figure,  namely,  with  centre  B, 
the  circle  PDR,  to  which  the  el¬ 
lipse  should  be  tangent.  Let  PR 
be  the  longer  diameter  of  the  el¬ 
lipse,  and  on  PR  let  A  be  a  focus, 
or  the  place  of  the  sun.  Now  let 
Dr  be  drawn  through  B  per¬ 
pendicular  to  PR;  the  shorter 
diameter  will  be  on  DT.  And  be¬ 
cause  BA  the  eccentricity  is  half 
of  the  libration,  therefore  half 
the  libration  has  been  completed 
at  the  completion  of  the  quad¬ 
rant.  Therefore  the  planet  fall¬ 
ing  upon  line  DB  will  be  less  dis¬ 
tant  from  the  sun  [660]  than  at 
Pj  and  the  difference  will  be 
equal  to  BA.  Therefore  it  will 
have  a  distance  equal  to  the 
magnitude  PB.  Wherefore  let  an 
interval  equal  to  DP  be  extended 
from  A  to  DP,  and  let  its  ter¬ 
minus  be  E.  Therefore  the  orbit 
of  the  planet  will  cut  DB  at  E. 

Again  let  there  be  taken  PG  an  arc  of  the  circle,  and  GFZ  its  sine  or  ordinate, 
and  PF  the  versed  sine.  Accordingly  make  BP  be  to  PF  as  BA  half  of  the  libration 
is  to  the  part  [of  the  libration]  belonging  to  PG.  And  when  that  [part  of  the  libra¬ 
tion]  has  been  subtracted  from  AP,  let  the  remainder  be  extended  from  A  to 
GFj  and  let  its  terminus  fall  upon  H.  I  say  that  DB  :  BE  :  :  GF  :  FH.  For  let 
square  GIOF  be  described  on  GF,  but  square  HK  on  HF,  so  that  the  gnomon 
HIK  is  made.  Then  let  GA  and  GB  be  joined;  [661]  and  let  the  perpendicular 
AC  be  drawn  to  GB  continued. 

I  say  in  the  first  place  that  the  square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  HIK. 

For 

BP\PF::BA  :AP-AH. 

Wherefore  too 

PB:BF::BA  :AH-BP. 

But  too 

PB  :BF  ::GB  :BF  ::  AB  :  BC 

because  the  right  triangles  GFB  and  A  CP  have  their  vertical  angles  GBF  and 
ABC  equal.  Therefore 

PC  =  AP-PP. 

But  too 

CG-BP  =  CG-BG^BC. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  977 

Wherefore 

GC=-HA. 

But 

sq.  GC+sq.  AC  =  sq.  GA. 

But  on  the  other  hand 

sq.  AF+sq.  FG  =  sq.  GA, 

Therefore 

sq.  GF+sq.  FA=sq.  GG+sq.  CA. 

Therefore 

(sq.  GG+sq.  GA)— sq.  GG  =  sq.  GA. 

But 

sq.  A^r  =  sq.  GG 

and 

sq.  AFr  =  sq.  AF+sq.  FH, 

Therefore 

(sq.  GF+sq.  FA)— sq.  AH  =  gnom.  HIK, 

From  this  the  remainder  of  the  proposed  demonstration  is  easily  woven 
together. 

For  as  one  sine  GF  is  to  its  perpendicular  AG,  so  all  the  other  sines  are  to  their 
own  perpendiculars  from  A.  Therefore  as  GO  the  square  on  the  sine  is  to  the 
square  on  AG,  i.e.,  to  the  gnomon  HIK^  so  the  squares  of  all  the  sines  are  to 
their  gnomons.  Wherefore  also,  if  the  gnomons  are  subtracted,  as  GO  the 
square  of  one  sine  GFis  to  HK  the  square  on  FH — which  has  been  determined 
by  HA  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  sun — so  the  square  on  any  sine  is  to 
the  square  of  its  minor  determined  by  its  distance.  But  if  the  squares  are  pro¬ 
portional  to  one  another,  the  sides  themselves  are  proportional  to  one  another. 
Therefore  as  GF  is  to  FH,  the  portion  terminated  by  AH ;  so  any  sine,  such  as 
DB,  is  to  BE,  the  portion  terminated  by  AE.  And  this  proportionality  [ratio]  is 
true  of  the  ellipse. 

The  other  property  of  the  ellipse  is  clear  of  itself. 

For  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  the  laws  of  libration,  that  is,  because  half 
of  the  libration,  equal  to  BA,  should  be  completed  in  PE  [662]  a  quadrant  of 
the  orbit,  we  extend  AF — which  is  equal  to  BP  the  remainder  [of  the  libration] 
— from  A  to  DB,  For,  because  A  is  one  focus,  if  the  line  extended  from  B  along 
BP  is  set  down  equal  to  BA,  the  other  focus  will  be  marked  out:  its  distance 
from  E  will  be  equal  to  AF,  and  the  sum  of  the  two  focal  distances  will  be  equal 
to  the  diameter — and  that  is  the  case  in  an  ellipse. 

What  is  the  ratio  of  DE,  the  width  of  the  crescent  cut  off  by  the  ellipse  from  the  circle, 
to  the  eccentricity  BA? 

The  eccentricity  FA  is  a  mean  proportional  between  DE  and  FT.  In  the  same 
way  too,  every  perpendicular,  such  as  AG,  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
GH  and  HZ,  the  remainder  of  the  chord. 

For  the  rectangle  GH,  HZ  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  HIK,  But  this  gnomon 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG.  Therefore  too  the  rectangle  GH,  HZ  is  equal  to 


978 

the  same  square  on  AC.  There¬ 
fore  GHj  ACy  and  HZ  are  in 
continued  proportion. 

What  shall  I  hold  concerning  the 
length  of  this  elliptical  orbit  and 
of  its  parts? 

If  the  figures  of  the  circle  and 
the  ellipse  are  cut  by  an  infinite 
number  of  ordinates,  GF,  DB 
etc.,  the  first  portions  ending  in 
P  will  be — GP  will  be  to  PH — 
as  GF  is  to  FH]  but  the  last  por¬ 
tions  ending  in  D  and  E — GD 
will  be  to  HE — will  be  equal  to 
one  another:  so  the  ratio  of  DB 
to  BEy  which  started  at  P,  is 
gradually  obliterated,  and  at  D 
and  E  vanishes  into  the  mere 
ratio  of  equality.  But  the  total 
arcs,  which  started  at  P,  have  to 
one  another  a  ratio  compounded 
of  all  the  ratios  of  all  the  least 
particles;  and  so  they  never  lay  aside  completely  the  full  ratio  DB  to  BE.  For 
the  quadrant  DP  is  to  the  quadrant  PP,  and  also  the  total  circular  line  is  to 
the  total  elliptical  line,  as  DB  is  to  the  arithmetic  mean  between  DB  and  BE, 
which  is  slightly  longer  than  the  mean  proportional. 

Because  use  will  also  be  made  of  the  plane  of  the  ellipsey  I  ask  in  what  ratio  will 
the  plane  of  the  ellipse  be  to  the  plane  of  the  circle;  and  hence  the  plane  of  any  seg¬ 
ment  of  the  semicircle  to  the  plane  of  the  segment — of  the  semiellipse — made  by  the 
same  ordinate? 

Apollonius  demonstrates  in  his  Conics  that  the  ratio  of  the  longer  diameter 
to  the  shorter  holds  everywhere.  Hence  if  DB  and  GF  are  ordinates,  as  DB  is  to 
BEy  so  is  the  area  of  the  semicircle  PDR  to  the  area  of  the  semiellipse  PER ;  and 
as  GF  is  to  FHy  i.e.y  as  DB  is  to  BEy  so  GPF  a  segment  of  the  semicircle  is  to 
HPF  a  segment  of  the  semiellipse;  and  so  too  GRF  a  greater  segment  of  the 
semicircle  is  to  HRF  a  greater  segment  of  the  semiellipse. 

[664]  Now  let  the  semicircle  be  cut  by  the  straight  line  GA,  but  the  semiellipse 
by  the  straight  line  HA ;  there  will  be  the  triangles  HAF  and  GAP  having  the 
same  altitude  PA.  Wherefore 

base  GP  :  base  FH  :  :  area  GAP  :  area  PAP. 

But 

GP  :  PP  :  :  area  GPP  :  area  PPP. 

Wherefore 

GP  :  FH  :  :  DB  :  BE  :  :  comp,  area  PGA  :  comp,  area  PH  A. 

Finally  I  should  like  to  know  what  ratio  the  lines  from  the  centre  of  the  figure  to 
the  circumference  of  the  ellipse  have  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  circle? 

A  very  small  ratio  indeed,  as  BE  is  less  than  the  semidiameter  BD  by  DE 
the  total  width  of  the  crescent.  But  all  the  remaining  lines,  such  as  PP,  have 


KEPLER 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  979 

a  lesser  difference  between  themselves  and  the  semidiameter  BG  than  at  any 
given  place,  the  width  of  the  crescent,  such  as  GH^  is. 

For  in  the  triangle  GHB,  the  sum  of  the  two  sides  GH  and  BH  must  exceed 
the  third  side  GB.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  defect  at  E  to  the  defect  at  H 
is  greater  than  the  ratio  of  DE  to  GH.  But  this  last  is  the  ratio  of  the  sine 
DB  to  sine  GF.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  defect  at  E  to  the  defect  at  H  is 
greater  than  that  of  sine  DB  to  sine  GF. 

Conversely,  the  ratio  of  the  squares  on  GF  and  iJF  is  as  is  to 
But 


sq.  GF+sq.  BF  :  sq.  /7F+sq.  BF<GF^  :  FH\ 

Wherefore 

side  GB  :  side  BH<GF:  FH. 

Therefore  the  greater  BF  is,  the  more  the  ratio  GB  :  BH  is  diminished,  so  as 
not  to  equal  the  ratio  GF  :  FH.  And  conversely,  the  more  PF  increases,  the 
more  the  ratio  GB  :  BH  increases,  approaching  the  ratio  GF  :  FH.  But  PF 
increases  slowly  from  P,  but  quickly  near  DB.  Therefore  if  GH  everywhere 
stayed  of  the  same  magnitude,  it  would  vary  the  defect  HB  slowly  around  P, 
quickly  around  D.  But  GH  does  not  remain  the  same,  but  increases  quickly 
around  P,  slowly  around  D — that  is,  it  increases  with  its  sines  GF  and  DB. 
Again  therefore  the  defect  HB  increases  quickly  around  P,  but  slowly  around 
E.  Therefore 


But 


defect  EB  :  defect  PP<sag.  PB  :  sag.  PF. 


arc  DP  :  arc  PG>sin  DB  :  sin  GF 
<sag.  BP  :  sag.  FP. 

Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  defect,  of  lines  PP,  [665]  approaches  the  ratio  of 
the  degrees  PG.  However,  towards  D  it  verges  upon  the  ratio  of  sine  DB  to 
sine  GF.  But  towards  P  it  verges  upon  the  ratio  of  sagitta  BP  to  sagitta  FP. 


P 


4.  On  the  Measure  of  Time, 

OR  OF  the  Delay  made  by 
THE  Planet  in  any  Arc 
OF  ITS  Orbit 

How  is  the  plane  of  the  segment 
of  an  ellipse  fitted  for  measuring 
the  delay  of  the  planet  in  the  arc 
of  that  segment? 

Not  otherwise  than  if  by  the 
division  of  the  circle  into  equal 
parts  unequal  arcs  of  the  ellipse 
are  constituted — small  arcs 
around  the  apsides,  and  greater 
around  the  mean  longitudes — as 
follows: 

With  centre  B  and  distance 
PP,  let  the  circle  PDRT  be  de¬ 
scribed.  Let  PBR  be  its  diam- 


KEPLER 


980 

eter,  and  on  PBR^  as  on  the  line  of  the  apsides,  let  A  be  the  sun,  [666]  the 
source  of  movement,  towards  R)  AB  the  eccentricity,  and  BV  equal  to  ABj 
towards  P;  so  that  P  and  R  are  the  apsides. 

Now  with  the  points  A  and  V  as  the  foci,  let  the  ellipse  PERI  be  described, 
which  is  tangent  to  the  circle  at  P  and  P,  and  which  represents  the  orbit 
of  the  planet.  And  let  El  be  the  shorter  diameter,  and  DT  the  diameter  of  the 
circle,  which  are  at  right  angles  to  PR. 

Now  let  the  semicircle  PDR  be  divided  into  small  equal  parts,  and  let 
P,  0,  Nj  P,  P,  and  T  be  the  points  between  the  divisions;  and  from  these 
points  let  there  be  drawn  to  PR  the  line  of  apsides  the  perpendiculars,  such 
as  OM  and  NKj  cutting  the  ellipse  at  points  C  and  K.  Therefore  if  the  points 
C,  Ky  Ey  and  I  of  the  sections  are  joined  with  A  the  sun,  I  say  that  the  delay 
of  the  planet  in  arc  PC  is  measured  by  the  area  PC  Ay  the  delay  in  the  arc 
PCK  is  measured  by  the  area  PCKAy  the  delay  in  PE  is  measured  by  the 
area  PE  Ay  and  finally  the  delay  in  PPP,  half  of  the  orbit  from  apsis  P  to 
apsis  P,  is  measured  by  the  area  PPPP,  which  is  half  of  the  total  area  of  the 
ellipse  PERIP. 

[667]  Show  in  what  ratio y  hy  means  of  this  sectioning y  the  mean  parts  of  the  planet¬ 
ary  orbit  are  made  greater  than  the  parts  around  the  apsides. 

In  the  ratio  of  the  longer  semidiameter  to  the  shorter. 

For  in  the  circle  let  there  be  the  equal  parts  PO  and  ND — PO  at  the  apsis 
P,  and  ND  at  the  mean  longitude  D.  Therefore,  since  on  the  sectioned  ellipse 
the  arcs  PC  and  KE  correspond  to  them,  it  has  already  been  said  above  that 
KE  is  equal  to  ND — the  most  minute  division  being  supposed — then  KE 
will  also  be  equal  to  PO.  Moreover,  it  was  said  that  as  OM  is  to  MCy  i.e.y  as 
PP  is  to  BEy  or  the  longer  semidiameter  PB  to  the  shorter  semidiameter 
BEy  so  PO  the  arc  of  the  circle  is  to  PC  the  arc  of  the  ellipse;  therefore  as 
PB  is  to  BEy  so  also  will  KE  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  at  the  mean  longitude  be  to 
PC  the  arc  at  the  apsis. 

What  follows  from  this  sectioning  of  the  elliptic  orbit  into  unequal  arcs? 

It  follows  that  equal  areas  are  assigned  to  the  sum  of  the  [two]  smaller 
orbital  arcs  taken  around  both  apsides  and  to  the  sum  of  the  [two]  greater 
arcs  taken  around  both  mean  longitudes,  as  the  measures  of  the  delays  in  those 
arcs — though  nevertheless  the  sum  of  the  [two]  smaller  arcs  is  as  equally 
distant  from  the  sun  as  the  sum  of  the  [two]  greater  arcs. 

For  as  above  let  PC  and  RG  be  equal.  The  areas  PCB  and  RGB  will  also 
be  equal.  Again  let  KE  and  LI  be  equal  to  one  another,  but  greater  than  the 
former  arcs,  as  has  already  been  demonstrated:  the  areas  KEB  and  LIB  will 
also  be  equal. 

But  it  has  already  been  demonstrated  that 

PB  :  BE  ::KE:  PC 

in  the  given  sectioning  of  the  orbit.  Accordingly  there  are  the  triangles  BPC 
and  BEK — rectilinear  or  as  it  were  reciprocal,  because  as  BP  the  altitude 
of  the  first  triangle  is  to  BE  the  altitude  of  the  second,  so  is  KE  the  base  of 
the  second  triangle  to  PC  the  base  of  the  first  triangle. 

Wherefore 


area  BEK  =  area  BPC. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  981 

Therefore 

area  BEK+oxedi  -B/L  =  area  5PC+area  BRG. 

But 

area  BPC+area  Pi2G  =  area  APC+area  ARGy 

because 

[668]  alt.  PP+alt.  PP  =  alt.  AP+alt.  AR. 

And 

area  PPiiC+area  P/L  =  area  APii^+area  A/L, 
because  on  base  PAT  or  on  the  line  touching  it  at  P,  the  triangles  BEK  and 
AEK  have  the  same  altitude  BE  and  the  same  base  PP,  and  on  base  /L  or 
on  the  line  touching  it  at  /  the  triangles  BIL  and  AIL  have  the  same  altitude 
BI  and  the  same  base  IL.  Therefore  the  areas  EAK  and  lAL  are  assigned 
to  the  long  arcs  KE  and  LI ;  and  areas  ARC  and  ARG,  which  are  equal  to  them 
[in  sum],  are  assigned  to  the  shorter  arcs  PC  and  PG,  since  nevertheless  the 
sum  of  the  distances  EA  and  AI  from  the  sun  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  dis¬ 
tances  PA  and  AP,  as  was  demonstrated  before. 

If  equal  areas  are  assigned  to  unequal  arcs  equally  distant  from  the  suUy  while  the 
times  or  delays  of  unequal  arcs  equally  distant  from  the  sun  ought  also  to  he  un¬ 
equal — hy  the  axiom  employed  above — then  how  do  equal  areas  measure  unequal 
delays? 

Although  in  this  way  the  pairs  of  arcs  are  really  unequal  to  one  another, 
nevertheless  they  are  equivalent  [aequipollent]  to  equal  arcs  in  partaking  of 
periodic  time. 

For  it  has  been  said  in  the  above  that,  if  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  divided 
into  the  most  minute  equal  parts,  the  delays  of  the  planet  in  them  increase  in 
the  ratio  of  the  distances  between  them  and  the  sun.  But  this  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  not  of  all  equal  parts  as  such,  but  principally  of  those  which  are  opposite 
the  sun  in  a  straight  line,  as  PC  and  PG,  where  there  are  the  right  angles  APG 
and  APG.  But  in  the  case  of  the  other  parts  which  face  the  sun  obliquely,  this 
is  to  be  understood  only  of  that  which  in  any  of  those  parts  belongs  to  the 
movement  around  the  sun.  For  since  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  eccentric,  there¬ 
fore  in  order  to  form  it  two  elements  of  movement  are  mingled  together — as 
has  been  demonstrated  already:  one  element  comes  from  the  revolution  around 
the  sun  by  reason  of  one  solar  virtue;  the  other  comes  from  the  libration  towards 
the  sun  by  reason  of  another  solar  virtue  distinct  from  the  first.  For  example,  in 
arc  IL  the  termini  I  and  L  are  at  unequal  distances  from  A  the  source  of  move¬ 
ment;  therefore  let  AL  continued  to  Q  as  AQ  be  a  mean  proportional  between 
AL  and  AI.  And  if  with  centre  A  and  distance  [669]  AQ  the  arc  QS  is  described 
cutting  the  longer  line  AI  in  5,  arc  QS  is  of  the  first  element  of  the  composite 
movement;  but  the  difference  between  AL  and  A/,  or  the  sum  of  LQ  and  Sly  is 
of  the  second  element  of  the  movement,  which  must  be  separated  out  in  mind. 
For  none  of  the  periodic  time  is  due  to  it,  since  it  [the  second  element]  has 
already  in  the  above  received  its  own  portion  under  other  laws,  when  it  was  a 
question  of  the  libration.  But  this  second  element  of  movement  can  be  separated 
out  in  no  other  way  than  by  this  sectioning  of  the  orbit  into  unequal  parts, 
which  we  gave  above.  For  the  quantity  whereby  the  sum  of  the  arcs  KE  and 
LI  exceeds  the  sum  of  the  arcs  PC  and  PG  comes  wholly  from  the  second  ele- 


982 

ment  of  the  movement;  and 
with  that  excess  separated  out, 
there  remains  of  the  first  ele¬ 
ment  something  which  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  arcs  PC  and 
RG,  which  I  demonstrate  as 
follows. 

For  by  the  above  demon¬ 
strations,  AE  and  A I  are  equal 
to  BP  and  BR.  Let  arcs  [of  cir¬ 
cles]  be  described  through 
points  E  and  /,  and  let  the  first 
arc  cut  away  and  subtract  as 
much  from  the  area  AEK  to¬ 
wards  Kj  as  the  second  arc 
adds  to  area  AIL  above  L: 

Hence  in  this  fashion  the  tri¬ 
angles — or  rather  sectors — get 
these  new  right  bases  instead 
of  the  oblique  bases  KE  and 
LI:  Wherefore  if  the  area  equal 
to  the  sum  of  PCB  and  RGB  is  applied  to  AE  and  AIj  the  bases  or  arcs  described 
through  E  and  I  are  equal  to  the  bases  described  through  P  and  R,  But  it  was 
previously  demonstrated  that 

area  i^i/A+area  LIA=SiTesi  PCB+area  RGB, 

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  oblique  bases  KE  and  LI  which  has  to  do  with  the 
revolution  around  the  sun  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  arcs  PC  and  RGy  where 
almost  no  libration  with  respect  to  the  sun  is  mixed  in  with  it,  because  AP  and 
AC  are  imperceptibly  different,  like  AR  and  AG. 

The  same  things  will  also  be  demonstrated  of  the  other  small  parts  of  the 
orbit:  for  example,  if  CF  is  taken  and  CB  and  FB  are  continued  to  G  and  P,  and 
if  GHj  corresponding  to  CP,  is  joined,  and  the  four  points  are  connected  with  A 
the  source  of  movement.  For  it  was  demonstrated  in  the  above  that 

CA+AG  =  PA+AR  =  PR 

and 

FA+AH=PA+AR  =  PR, 

Wherefore  too,  as  previously, 

area  ACP+area  ACH  =  area  PCP+area  BGH, 

and  hence 

area  A  CP + area  AGH  =  areB,  APC+area  A  PC, 
although  by  the  proportionality  of  sectioning  set  up,  CP  [670]  will  be  slightly 
longer  than  PC,  and  GH  longer  than  RG.  For  the  sum  of  the  new  arcs  described 
with  centre  A  and  distances  AC  and  AG  and  cutting  AP  and  AH  will  be  equal 
to  the  arcs  PC  and  RG;  because  the  greater  the  circle  of  the  first  arc  than  the 
circle  of  the  second  arc,  the  smaller  an  angle  CAP  does  the  first  arc  measure, 
and  the  greater  an  angle  GAH  does  the  second  arc  measure,  so  that  thus 
angle  CAP+ angle  GAP  =  angle  PA C+ angle  PAG. 

Therefore,  since  the  regularity  of  the  first  element  in  the  planetary  movement, 
namely  the  regularity  of  the  progression  around  the  sun,  consists  in  the  equality 


KEPLER 


P 


983 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

of  the  angles  around  the  sun,  i.e.,  in  the  equality  of  the  sum  of  two  angles;  and 
since  the  area  of  the  ellipse  is  equally  distributed  among  the  arcs  which  subtend 
these  angles,  that  is,  two  areas  are  always  equal  to  two  other  areas:  therefore 
rightly — up  to  now  and  in  so  far  as  we  are  dealing  with  pairs  of  arcs — is  the  area 
set  up  as  the  measure  of  time;  because  the  delays  of  time  ought  to  be  equal  not 
to  equal  arcs  as  such  but  to  their  equal  progressions  around  the  sun,  at  the 
same  distance  from  the  sun. 

Then  in  this  way  let  the  area  of  the  ellipse  be  rightly  distributed  between  the  pairs  of 
opposite  arcs;  now  demonstrate  that  the  single  triangles  are  separately  the  most 
exact  measures  of  the  single  delays? 

The  demonstration  is  easy  by  means  of  the  foregoing. 

For  since  by  our  axiom  the  delay  of  the  planet  in  arc  PC  is  to  the  delay  in  the 
equal  arc  RGj  as  AP  the  distance  of  arc  PC  from  the  source  of  motion  is  to  AR 
the  distance  of  arc  RG]  but  since  also  the  area  of  triangle  PC  A  is  to  the  area 
of  triangle  RGA — which  has  its  base  RG  equal  to  PC  the  base  of  the  first  tri¬ 
angle — as  PA  the  altitude  of  triangle  PC  A  is  to  RA  the  altitude  of  triangle 
RGA:  Wherefore  the  delay  of  the  planet  in  arc  PC  is  to  the  delay  in  the  equal 
arc  RG  as  the  area  of  triangle  PC  A  is  to  the  area  of  triangle  RGA, 

In  the  same  way  it  will  be  demonstrated  that  the  delay  of  the  planet  in  CF 
— which  is  equal  in  power  (potestate)  to  CP — is  to  the  delay  of  the  same  in  G//, 
as  the  area  ACF  is  to  the  area  AGH — where  the  sum  of  each  pair  of  areas  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  [two]  prior  areas,  and  so  on  in  order.  Therefore  the  total 
area  of  the  ellipse — which  has  been  cut  up  at  A  into  triangles — [671]  is  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  arcs  in  the  same  proportion  wherein  the  total  periodic  time 
has  been  distributed  among  them.  Therefore  the  single  triangles  are  pro¬ 
portionally  the  most  exact  measures  of  their  single  arcs. 

A  demonstration  of  this  full  equivalence  is  given  in  my  Commentaries  on 
Mars,  Chapter  59,  page  291.  On  that  page  at  the  line  Apsis  longiorem,  one 
word,  erit,  has  brought  in  great  obscurity;  and  if  you  change  it  to  compu- 
taretur,  everything  will  be  clearer.  Although  I  confess  that  the  thing  is  given 
rather  obscurely  there,  and  most  of  the  trouble  comes  from  the  fact  that  there 
the  distances  are  not  considered  as  triangles,  but  as  numbers  and  lines. 

5.  On  the  Equivalence  of  the  Circular  Plane  and  the  Plane 
OF  the  Ellipse  in  Measuring  the  Delays  in  the  Arcs 

Does  it  not  seem  to  be  a  hard,  unaccustomed,  not  to  say  complicated,  job  for 
the  calculator  to  be  reduced  to  using  the  plane  ‘of  the  ellipse  in  computing  the 
time? 

On  the  contrary,  in  the  opinion  of  all  the  job  becomes  easier  by  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  elliptical  plane  instead  of  the  circular;  so  much  so  that 
the  ancient  calculus  is  by  no  means  to  be  compared  to  this  new  one  for 
ease. 

Demonstrate  the  equivalence  of  the  planes  with  respect  to  measuring  time. 

Then  let  there  be  repeated  the  figure  exhibited  on  page  978  where  we  demon¬ 
strated  the  generation  of  the  plane  of  the  ellipse. 

And  because  it  has  already  been  demonstrated  that  as  half  of  the  periodic 


984 


KEPLER 


time — wherein  the  planet  traverses  PER  half 
of  the  orbit — is  to  the  time  which  the  planet 
spends  in  PH  or  in  PE^  precisely  so  is  the  area 
PER  to  the  area  PH  A  or  PEA,  But  it  was  also 
demonstrated  above  that 
PDR  :  PER  :  :  PGA  :  PH  A  :  :  PDA  :  PEA, 

For  they  all  have  the  same  ratio  as  [672]  DB  to 
BE,  And  thus  too,  by  alternation,  as  the  area 
PER  is  to  PH  A  or  to  PEA^  so  the  area  PDR 
is  to  PGA  or  to  PDA,  Therefore  as  half  the 
periodic  time  of  arc  PER  is  to  the  time  of  arc 
PH  or  PEj  so  the  area  PDR  is  to  PGA  or  PDA, 

Wherefore  in  these  segments  of  the  semicircular 
plane  there  is  found  a  very  exact  measure  of  the 
delays  which  the  planet  makes  in  any  given  arc 
of  the  ellipse. 

Now  also  show  the  convenience  of  this  measuring. 

Let  the  segment  PGA  be  taken,  and  let  a  straight  line  be  drawn  from  G 
to  the  centre  B,  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  sector  GBP  to  the  whole  plane  of 
the  circle  is  given  by  the  given  magnitude  of  the  arc  PG — so  that  there  is  no 
need  of  computation.  For  the  total  periodic  time  and  the  total  plane  of  the 
circle  are  divided  into  360® — astronomical  fashion.  Therefore  GBA  the  other 
part  of  the  segment  is  left.  But  the  computation  of  it  is  easy.  For  as  DB  the 
total  sine  is  to  GF  the  sine  of  the  given  arc  PG,  so  is  area  DBA  to  area  GBA, 
Therefore  once  the  area  of  the  great  triangle  DBA  has  been  determined,  that 
is,  by  the  multiplication  of  half  the  eccentricity  by  the  total  sine  and  by  the 
conversion  of  the  result  into  astronomical  terms,  it  will  ever  afterwards  be 
useful. 

Does  not  the  circular  plane  have  some  other  further  use? 

In  the  schema  of  the  moon  there  is  a  special  use  of  it  in  demonstrating  one 
of  its  irregularities,  which  the  moon  possesses  uniquely,  in  contrast  to  all  the 
other  planets.  But  because  this  Fifth  Book  is  given  over  only  to  those  properties 
which  are  common  to  all  the  planets;  therefore  what  remains  of  the  geometrical 
apparatus  for  carrying  out  the  demonstration  of  this  special  use  is  rightly 
postponed  to  Book  vi  Part  iv,  Le.,  to  the  schema  of  the  moon. 

In  what  way  does  the  old  Ptolemaic  astronomy  measure  the  delays  of  the 
planet  in  any  arc  of  its  eccentric  circle^  or  what  does  it  have  instead  of  the  cir¬ 
cular  plane? 

For  this  it  uses  a  special  circle,  which  has  the  name  of  “equant,'^  [673]  of 
which  the  centre  would  in  our  figures  be  the  other  focus — in  the  last  diagram, 
Fj  in  the  next  to  the  last,  V]  because  the  other  focus  is  as  far  distant,  towards 
P  the  highest  apsis,  from  B  the  centre  of  the  eccentric  circle,  as  A  the  sun, 
towards  R  the  lowest  apsis,  is  distant  from  the  same  centre  of  the  eccentric 
circle.  For  if  a  line  is  drawn  from  V  the  centre  of  the  equant  through  the  body 
of  the  planet,  the  arc  of  the  equant  intercepted  between  this  line  and  VP  the 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  985 

line  of  the  apsides  is  set  down  as  the  measure  of  the  time  which  the  planet 
spends  in  the  arc  of  its  orbit. 

This  hypothesis  seems  to  be  more  convenient  for  manual  representations  by  means 
of  the  instruments  called  schemata:  why  do  you  not  keep  it,  since  you  have  already 
twice  employed  substitute  quantities  in  place  of  the  true? 

1.  Because  the  equant  never  says  the  truth  perfectly,  unless  we  wish  to 
give  its  centre  an  irregular  movement  of  libration.  And  in  that  way  we  should 
draw  away  from  simplicity  of  hypotheses,  and  set  up  an  astronomy  which  is 
more  complicated  and  laborious  in  practice  than  the  astronomy  of  these  two 
books,  the  fourth  and  fifth,  in  the  explanation  of  causes.  And  with  these  causes 
once  perceived,  and  not  even  believed  in  but  merely  laid  down,  practice  after¬ 
wards  becomes  easy  in  the  second  part  of  Book  v  and  in  Book  vi. 

2.  Because  in  Ptolemy  the  proportionality  {ratio)  of  this  equant  is  one 
thing  in  the  higher  planets,  something  else  in  the  two  lower  planets,  some¬ 
thing  else  in  the  moon,  and  now  it  would  be  something  else  again  in  the  sun. 
But  for  us  the  plane  of  the  eccentric  circle  serves  the  same  use  in  the  same 
way  in  all  the  planets. 

3.  Because  the  equant  circle  is  very  distant  from  the  true  causes  of  the 
movements.  And  the  plane  of  the  [eccentric]  circle  represents  these  causes 
very  closely,  because  it  is  of  the  same  family  as  the  plane  of  the  ellipse. 

Let  it  be  understood  that  the  same  things  are  spoken  against  other  equi¬ 
valences,  which  the  wonderful  force  of  human  ingenuity  is  accustomed  to 
bring  forward:  for  example,  b}^  means  of  a  single  libration  of  the  centre  of  the 
eccentric  circle  in  the  shorter  diameter  of  our  ellipse — although  the  libration 
needs  the  contrary  motions  of  two  equal  circles — [674]  David  Fabricius  both 
saves  the  movements  inward  of  the  planet  away  from  the  sides  (a  lateribus) 
of  our  immovable  eccentric  circle  and  at  the  same  time  gives  the  apsis  a  move¬ 
ment  of  libration — so  that  now,  by  means  of  numbering  continued  from  the 
apsis,  which  has  the  libration,  to  the  planetary  body,  the  eccentric  circle 
itself  furnishes  us  with  a  measure  of  time.  For  neither  absolute  regularity  of 
movements  nor  perfect  precision  is  obtained,  nor  is  there  a  curtailment  of 
labour.  And  the  causes  of  the  movements  are  hidden  and  denied. 

But  I  absolutely  reject  the  Copernican  machinery,  which  makes  two  epicycles 
having  the  ratio  of  one  to  two  in  their  movements  revolve  on  a  concentric  circle. 
For  observations  bear  witness  that  at  the  mean  positions  between  the  apsides 
the  planet  moves  inward  towards  the  sides.  But  this  Copernican  hypothesis  by 
a  contrary  proportionality  [ratione]  makes  it‘  wander  outward.^  These  small 
parts  of  the  Copernican  hypotheses  must  be  completely  corrected.  But  his 
general  hypothesis  of  the  annual  movement  of  the  Earth  must  be  saved,  whence 
the  name  of  this  teaching  comes. 

6.  On  the  Regularity  of  the  Digressions  in  Latitude 

The  calculus  of  latitude  is  not  certain,  is  it,  if  there  are  no  solid  spheres,  even  though 
special  threads  in  the  planetary  body  take  their  place? 

If  we  lay  down  those  things  which  were  laid  down  in  Book  iv,  page  948,  and 

^See  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  Book  v,  Chapter  iv. 


986  KEPLER 

which  are  absolutely  possible  and  concordant, 
then  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  perfect 
plane  of  an  ellipse  to  arise. 

For  in  this  diagram  let  TZX  be  a  circle 
through  the  poles  of  the  ellipse.  Either  let  A 
be  the  sun,  if  TZX  is  a  plane;  or,  if  TAX  is  a 
hemisphere,  let  A  first  be  the  position,  on  the 
concave  surface,  of  the  lower  intersection  of 
the  ellipse  TX  and  EG  the  orbit  of  the  planet, 

— so  that  the  poles  of  the  orbit  are  at  Z  and  W, 

Let  the  threads  of  latitude  point  along  GA 
[dirigantur  secundum  GA] ;  and  let  them  have 
the  faculty  of  deflecting  the  movement  XATj 
given  by  the  sun,  through  the  angle  GAX;  and 
during  the  whole  circuit  let  the  threads  remain 
parallel.  [675]  It  is  clear  that  while  the  planet  is  turning  at  A  the  lower  section, 
the  threads  stretched  along  GA  will  direct  the  planet  according  to  the  total 
angle,  and  the  planet  will  come  in  a  perfect  plane  as  far  as  G,  by  ascending  up  to 
the  plane  drawn  through  the  poles.  And  because  now  the  thread  at  G  points 
towards  the  sun  A  and  not  crosswise  over  the  ecliptic;  accordingly  here  the 
planet  will  not  digress  any  farther,  but  G  will  be  the  limit:  thence,  gradually 
raised  up  above  the  plane  ZXWj  the  planet  will  direct  its  thread  along  the  line 
drawn  from  intersection  A  through  the  sun  A,  until  the  planet  comes  to  A,  now 
the  upper  intersection  on  the  convex  surface.  Therefore  just  as  at  A  there  is 
the  greatest  angle  of  inclination  of  the  thread  with  the  ecliptic  TX,  and  the 
angle  decreases  rapidly;  but  at  G  and  E  there  is  no  angle  of  inclination  of  the 
thread  with  the  plane  [longitudinem]  of  the  ecliptic,  and  this  smallness  of  in¬ 
clination  lasts  a  long  time;  so  too  if  out  of  the  circuit  EAG  there  is  made  a  per¬ 
fect  plane,  its  parts  at  A  have  their  greatest  inclination  with  the  ecliptic  TX, 
and  the  inclination  decreases  quickly.  But  around  G  and  E  the  rim  of  the  plane 
— which  is  understood  to  stretch  downward  into  the  depth  of  the  sphere  or  up¬ 
ward — extends  for  a  long  time  approximately  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 
Therefore  if  instead  of  the  operation  of  the  thread  we  employ  the  product  itself, 
that  is,  EAG,  as  a  perfect  plane,  the  calculus  will  be  absolutely  consonant  with 
the  principles. 

Conclusion  op  the  First  Part  of  Book  v 

Then  let  what  has  been  written  so  far  be  done  for  geometers  endowed  with  a 
keen  mind,  who  do  not  think  it  right  to  admit  into  their  calculus  that  which 
has  not  been  confirmed  by  a  very  accurate  demonstration  and  deduced  from 
the  natural  principles  of  the  movements. 

Part  Two 

On  the  Astronomical  Terms  Arising  from  Calculations  and  the] 

Eccentric  Orbit 

[676]  How  is  the  orbit  of  any  planet  called f 

It  is  called  by  the  ancient  name  of  “eccentric,’’  sc.  circle.  For  even  if  the  orbits 


987 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

are  elliptical,  as  PERI  here, 
and  have  as  it  were  two  cen¬ 
tres,  A  and  L,  which,  in  phys¬ 
ical  language,  we  call  the 
“hearths’’  or  “foci,”  and  the 
sun  itself,  as  centre  of  the 
world,  is  situated  at  one  of 
those  foci;  nevertheless  also 
the  point  midway  between  the 
foci,  as  B,  is  with  peculiar  [677] 
rightness  called  the  “centre” 
by  writers  on  conics.  And  fur¬ 
thermore,  for  the  sake  of 
measurement,  a  perfect  circle 
PDR  having  its  centre  B  dis¬ 
tinct  from  A  the  centre  of  the 
world  is  circumscribed  around 
the  figure. 

In  astronomy j  what  name  does  PR  the  longer  diameter  of  the  ellipse  have? 

It  is  called  the  “line  of  apsides,”  because,  since  it  is  drawn  through  A  the 
centre  of  the  world  and  B  the  centre  of  the  orbit,  its  sections  with  the  orbit 
designate  P  the  highest  apsis  and  R  the  lowest. 

Why  are  they  called  the  highest  apsis  and  the  lowest,  and  what  other  name  do  they 
have? 

The  word  “apsis”  is  taken  from  wheels;  for  the  apsides  are  points  on  the  ec¬ 
centric,  P  the  farthest  away  from  A  the  sun  and  R  the  nearest  to  it.  But  in 
geometry  the  explanation  of  the  meaning  is  clearer.  For  the  word  “apsis”  is 
derived  from  “being  tangent”;  and  indeed  in  points  P  and  R  the  director  circle 
is  tangent  to  the  elliptic  orbit.  The  Latin  translations  of  Arabian  books  express 
the  Greek  words  “apsis,”  “apsides”  by  the  words  “aux,”  “auges” — as  if  the 
Arabs  had  changed  the  Greek  Psi  to  Xi.  However  some  one  who  boasts  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  Arabic  language  asserted  to  me  that  the  word  “augh”  signifies  alti¬ 
tude. 

Book  VI  will  call  those  points  the  “aphelion”  and  the  “perihelion,”  in  the 
case  of  the  primary  planets;  and  in  the  case  of  the  moon,  the  “apogee”  and  the 
“perigee.” 

What  necessity  compels  us  to  suppose,  instead  of  the  circular  route  of  the  planet 
believed  in  by  the  ancients,  an  elliptical  route,  i.e.,  one  falling  away  from  the  circle, 
and  to  set  up  in  it  a  longer  diameter  and  on  that  longer  diameter  the  sun? 

Both  of  them  are  demonstrated  from  the  observations  and  by  means  of 
a  very  sure  demonstration  in  the  Commentaries  on  the  Movements  of  the  Planet 
Mars,  and  they  are  employed  in  Book  iv  on  page  862  in  the  diagrams  and 
on  pages  910  and  932  and  933,  and  also  in  the  first  part  of  Book  v.  There¬ 
fore,  unless  we  made  these  hypotheses,  we  should  never  represent  the  ob¬ 
servations. 


988 


KEPLER 


[678]  By  what  names  do  we  distinguish  from  one  another  the  semicircles  into  which 
the  line  of  apsides  divides  the  eccentric? 

The  one  half,  PER  or  PDR,  is  called  the  descending  or  the  prior  semicircle; 
the  other,  RIP  or  RTP^  the  ascending  or  posterior. 

What  is  eccentricity? 

In  Greek,  eKKcvr pottos  is  the  line  joining  A  the  centre  of  the  world,  or  of 
the  body  around  which  the  movement  is  arranged,  and  B  the  centre  of  the 
eccentric — namely  ABy  part  of  the  line  of  apsides  PR, 

What  is  the  name  of  the  lines  drawn  to  the  eccentric  orbit  from  the  centre  of  the 
body  around  which  the  movement  is  arranged? 

In  Greek,  they  are  called  aToaTrjpara;  as  latinized,  “intervals^^  or  ^‘dis¬ 
tances’^;  in  translations  from  the  Arabic,  “elongations” — for  example,  AP, 
ACy  AEy  AMy  ASy  AFy  ARy  ANy  AQ,  etc. 

[679]  Which  among  these  elongations  are  the  more  important? 

APy  the  longer  elongation,  in  Arabic,  or  the  aphelial  or  apogeal  distance; 
ARy  the  shorter  elongation  or  perihelial  distance  or  perigeal  distance,  in  the 
case  of  the  moon;  and  the  mean  elongation,  which  is  the  arithmetic  mean 
between  the  longer  and  shorter  elongation:  the  one  which  is  in  the  descending 
semicircle,  namely  AEy  is  called  the  first  mean  elongation,  and  the  one  in  the 
ascending  semicircle,  such  as  A/,  the  second. 

What  else  does  ‘^mean  elongation”  signify? 

By  metonymy,  it  is  used  for  those  points  on  the  orbit  which  are  at  a  mean 
distance  from  the  sun,  such  as  E  and  7,  namely  those  points  which  are  at  a 
distance  of  a  quadrant  or  90°  before  or  after  the  apsides.  And  sometimes  it  is 
also  used  for  the  point  in  the  zodiac  which  is  90°  distant  before  or  after  the 
position  in  the  zodiac  on  which  the  extension  of  the  line  of  apsides  falls. 

Here  we  must  note  emphatically  that  it  is  not  the  extension  of  line  AP  of 
the  same  name  which  falls  upon  this  degree  of  the  ecliptic  called  the  mean 
elongation,  but  rather  line  BE  from  the  centre,  or  its  parallel,  AM — as  being 
lines  which  make  right  angles  with  PR  the  lines  of  apsides. 

What  is  the  name  for  the  difference  between  the  mean  elongation  or  distance  and 
any  other  whatsoever?  > 

This  difference  is  called  the  “libration”  of  the  planet,  because  the  total 
libration,  as  in  the  movement  of  the  trays  of  the  balance,  is  slow  in  the  be¬ 
ginning,  when  the  planet  is  at  its  greatest  distance  from  the  sun,  and  in  the  end, 
when  the  planet  is  nearest  the  sun;  it  is  fast  in  the  middle. 

In  the  diagram,  since  AP  is  the  longest  distance,  and  AR  the  shortest, 
then  let  AR  be  transposed  to  line  AP  and  extended  from  A  to  G,  so  that  the 
total  libration  can  be  laid  before  the  eyes  in  a  single  line  AP  which  is  as  it  were 
at  rest;  the  total  libration  will  be  PG,  twice  the  eccentricity  BA.  Accordingly 
this  libration  is  slow  around  P  and  G,  [680]  namely  when  the  planet  is  either 
in  P  or  in  P,  fast  around  J7,  when  the  planet  or  line  AH  has  been  transferred 
to  line  AE  or  A7. 


989 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

You  have  said  that  a  circle  is  circumscribed  around  the  orbit  for  the  sake  of  measure¬ 
ment.  State  in  how  many  ways  this  circle  conduces  towards  the  measurement  of 
that  orbit. 

Four  ways:  (1)  This  circle  designates  and  divides  the  arcs  of  the  elliptic 
orbit.  For  example,  arc  PC  receives  its  name  and  specification  from  arc  PK. 

(2)  The  circle  gives  the  measures  of  the  librations  of  the  planet  and  thus 
determines  the  lengths  of  the  intervals  between  the  planet  and  the  sun.  For 
example,  AC  or  AO  is  determined  by  arc  PK  or  its  complement  KD,  because 
arc  PK  gives  the  magnitude  of  the  libration  HO  which  must  be  added  to  the 
semidiameter  AH. 

(3)  The  circle  exhibits  also  the  measure  of  the  time  which  the  planet  spends 
in  any  arc  of  its  elliptic  orbit.  For  example,  we  learn  through  arc  PK  how  long 
the  planet  moves  in  arc  PC. 

(4)  When  those  things  have  been  found,  we  can  also  investigate  the  angle 
at  the  sun  subtended  by  the  arc  of  the  orbit.  For  example,  if  arc  PK  is  not 
known,  if  line  AC  is  unknown,  angle  CAP  cannot  be  found. 

1.  Concerning  Designation 

In  what  way  does  the  circle  designate  and  divide  the  arcs  of  the  ellipse,  and  by 
what  means,  and  wherefore? 

Since  the  circumference  of  an  ellipse  cannot  be  divided  geometrically  into 
equal  parts,  nor  can  parts  into  which  it  has  been  divided  be  designated  from 
their  number:  therefore,  in  place  of  the  ellipse,  the  circle  is  divided  into  equal 
parts — starting  from  the  apsides,  and  from  the  points  of  division  perpendicu¬ 
lars  cutting  the  ellipse  are  drawn  to  the  line  of  apsides.  Therefore  the  arc  of 
the  circle  between  the  aphelion  and  any  perpendicular  whatsoever  supplies 
the  name  for  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  intercepted  between  the  same  limits  and 
applies  its  number  of  degrees  and  minutes  to  that  arc. 

[681]  Let  arc  PK  be  50°0',  and  KL  cutting  the  ellipse  in  C  perpendicular 
to  PR.  Therefore  too  PC  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  is  said  to  be  50°0'. 

But  the  name  is  untrue,  since  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  is  not  so  great — neither  with 
reference  to  the  circle  nor  with  reference  to  the  total  elliptic  orbit. 

This  causes  no  trouble,  for  there  is  no  question  of  anything  at  present  except 
the  name;  and  the  name  is  not  the  name  of  the  apparent  measure,  but  of  the 
geometrical  determination  and  division.  And  there  is  no  need  to  know  the 
true  length  of  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  as  if  measured  with  a  yardstick,  provided 
we  may  afterwards  learn  how  great  an  angle  is  made  at  the  centre  of  the  sun 
by  the  arc  of  the  ellipse  so  determined  and  how  long  the  planet  delays  in  that 
arc.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  first  part  of  Book  v,  I  demonstrate  that  this 
arc  of  the  ellipse  is  as  great,  if  not  in  length,  at  least  in  power. 

How  are  these  perpendiculars  called  which  cut  the  ellipse? 

In  the  circle,  they  are  called  the  sines  of  the  arcs  of  the  circle  which  begin  at 
the  aphelion;  in  the  ellipse,  they  are  generically  called  ordinates,  viz.,  to  the  axis. 
For  example,  here  KL  is  the  sine  of  arc  KP.  CL  is  the  ordinate. 

But  specifically,  that  which  is  drawn  through  the  centre  of  the  figure — as 
EBI — is  called  the  shorter  diameter  or  minor  axis  of  the  figure.  We  can  employ 
the  Greek  term  ^Miacentre.^'  Finally,  the  perpendicular,  such  as  MAN,  which 


990 


KEPLER 


passes  through  the  centre  of  the  sun  is  without  a  name,  although  it  is  among  the 
principal  ones.  Let  it  be  called  by  the  new  name  “dihelion.^^ 

Now  what  is  the  function  of  those  two  perpendiculars  ^  the  diacentre  and  the  dihelion? 

They  divide  the  orbit  into  upper  and  lower  parts:  the  diacentre,  into  parts 
which  are  equal  but  unequal  in  respect  to  time  and  apparent  movement;  the  di¬ 
helion,  into  parts  which  are  [682]  unequal  both  in  time  and  in  length  but  which 
none  the  less  appear  equal  as  it  were  from  the  sun. 

For  example,  EPI  which  is  constituted  by  EBI  is  180°,  but  it  appears  to 
be  less  than  180°  by  angle  EAI.  But  the  greater  segment  MPN  cut  off  by  line 
MAN  and  MRN  the  lesser  segment  both  appear  equal  in  magnitude  to  180°. 

2.  Concerning  Libration 

Tell  how  to  measure  and  compute  the  librations  and  how  to  determine  the  intervals. 

Let  PK  be  an  arc  of  the  eccentric  less  than  90°,  for  example,  46°18'51";  there¬ 
fore  KD  its  complement  will  be  43°41'9",  and  BL  its  sine,  69.070;  and  let  ec¬ 
centricity  AB  or  half  libration  PH  be  9.265,  whereof  BP  is  100.000.  Therefore 

9.265X69.070  =  6.399, 

if  the  last  five  decimals  are  ignored;  and  hence  the  libration  OH  will  be  6.399, 
which  is  to  be  added  to  BP  or  AH  in  the  upper  semicircle;  and  AO  or  its  equal 
AC^  namely  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  sun  will  be  106.399  (whereof  the 
semidiameter  is  100.000)  which  goes  with  arc  PK  or  PC. 

But  if  the  arc  of  the  eccentric  is  313°41'9",  the  excess  over  and  above  three 
quadrants  or  270°  will  also  be  43°41'9",  which  gives  the  same  sine  as  a  multi¬ 
plicand.  Hence  when  the  libration  of  6.399  is  produced,  that  same  number  is  to 
be  added  to  the  upper  semicircle  which  is  an  ascending  semicircle. 

But  if  the  semidiameter  BP  receives  a  different  mensuration,  for  example, 
152.342,  we  shall  multiply  BP  by  the  1.06399  of  ACj  and  (if  the  last  five  decimal 
places  are  ignored)  AC  will  be  162.090  at  this  distance. 

By  means  of  Napier^s  invention,  this  whole  operation  is  finished  most  ex¬ 
peditiously  in  a  single  addition.  For  the  logarithm  of  the  sine  of  arc  KD  is  added 
to  the  logarithms  of  9.265  the  eccentricity  and  of  152.343  the  mensuration  pro¬ 
posed;  and  the  sum  produced  as  a  logarithm  will  give  a  libration  of  9.748  to  be 
added  to  the  distance  152.342. 

[683]  So  next,  if  arc  PW  is  greater  than  90°,  viz.,  133°39'7";  DW  its  excess 
over  and  above  90°  is  43°397";  and  its  sine  or  logarithm,  together  with  the  two 
aforesaid  beginnings,  will  give  a  libration  of  9.777  to  be  subtracted  from  152.342, 
as  in  the  semicircle  below  the  diacentre:  hence  the  corresponding  interval  AS 
will  be  142.565. 

The  same  thing  will  hold,  if  the  arc  of  the  eccentric  is  226°20'53".  For  its  com¬ 
plement  with  respect  to  270°  will  be  43°397" — as  great  in  the  ascending  semi¬ 
circle  as  was  DW  in  the  descending  semicircle. 

Review  the  principal  moments  in  the  libration, 

1.  When  the  planet  begins  to  move  away  from  the  apsis,  then  simultaneously 
the  libration  commences — that  is,  the  planet,  which  had  just  before  finished  its 
ascent  away  from  the  sun,  begins  to  descend  towards  the  sun. 

2,  When  the  planet  is  60°  away  from  the  apsis,  then  the  libration  is  equal  to 
half  the  ecceutricity. 


991 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 

3.  When  the  planet  has  traversed  90°  of  the  orbit  from  the  apsis,  then  half 
of  the  libration  has  been  completed,  so  that  the  planet  is  at  a  distance  from  the 
sun  of  a  semidiameter  of  the  eccentric.  For  example,  if  PD  is  90°,  then  AE 
equals  BD. 

4.  When  the  planet  has  traversed  120°  from  the  apsis,  three  quarters  of  the 
libration  have  been  completed. 

5.  When  the  planet  is  at  the  lowest  apsis,  then  it  is  nearest  to  the  sun  and 
has  completed  the  total  libration.  The  order  through  the  ascending  semicircle 
is  the  reverse. 

6.  If  the  planet  has  traversed  equal  arcs  on  the  eccentric,  on  one  occasion 
from  the  aphelion,  on  the  other  occasion  from  the  perihelion,  then  the  sum  of 
those  tw'o  distances  from  the  sun  is  equal  to  the  diameter.  For  example,  if  a 
straight  line  is  drawn  from  B  to  Q,  then  the  sum  of  CA  and  AQ  is  equal  to  RP. 

3.  Concerning  the  Delay  of  the  Planet  in  Any  Arc 
What  does  the  word  anomaly^ ^  meanf 

Although,  properly  speaking,  anomaly — irregularity — is  an  affect  of  the 
movement  of  the  planet,  nevertheless  astronomers  employ  this  [684]  word  for 
the  very  movement  in  which  the  irregularity  is  present.  And  since  the  following 
three  measurable  things  come  together  in  the  movement:  the  space  to  be  tra¬ 
versed,  the  temporal  delay  in  the  space,  and  the  apparent  magnitude  of  the 
space;  the  word  ^^anomaly^'  is  to  be  applied  to  all  three.  And  again,  with 
reference  to  time,  the  use  of  the  word  is  twofold.  For,  prfmo,  Ptolemy  employs 
it  for  the  total  time  which  the  planet  spends  while  its  total  irregularity  returns 
to  its  starting  point,  and  he  counts  as  many  anomalies  as  there  are  periodic  re¬ 
turns  such  as  these. 

Secundo,  parts  of  this  total  time  are  commonly  called  anomalies,  according 
as  Ptolemy  said  a  movement  was  a  complete  part  of  the  full  anomaly. 

Then  how  many  anomalies  are  there  as  parts  of  a  whole? 

Three  anomalies  are  denominated  in  any  position  of  the  planet  whatsoever: 
(1)  mean  anomaly;  (2)  anomaly  of  the  eccentric;  and  (3)  the  corrected  anomaly. 

What  is  the  mean  anomaly? 

It  is  the  interval  of  time  which  the  planet  spends  in  any  arc  of  its  orbit — be¬ 
ginning  at  the  apsis:  this  interval  is  reduced  to  degrees  and  minutes,  w’hereof  the 
total  anomaly  is  equivalent  to  360°  by  mathematical  or  astronomical  enumera¬ 
tion. 

Why  is  it  called  mean? 

Not  from  being,  as  it  were,  a  mean  proportional  between  its  related  ano¬ 
malies,  as  will  be  remarked  a  little  later;  but  it  is  called  mean  in  imitation 
of  the  ancient  astronomy  which  usually  speaks  of  the  mean  anomaly  instead 
of  the  mean — z.e.,  uniform — movement  of  anomaly,  because  the  time  thus 
reduced  to  mathematical  terms  indicates,  by  means  of  the  number  of  degrees 
and  minutes,  how  great  an  arc  of  its  circle  the  planet  would  have  been  going 
to  traverse,  if  during  that  whole  time  which  we  call  the  mean  anomaly  it  had 
moved  in  a  uniform  movement  which  was  a  mean  between  the  slowest  and  the 
fastest  movement. 


992  KEPLER 

How  should  the  mean  anomaly  be  determined  or  measured  in  these  diagrams^ 
according  to  the  ancient  astronomy? 

If  the  distance  BL  equal  to  the  eccentricity  is  marked  off  in  the  line  of 
apsides  BPy  as  was  said  in  Part  i  of  Book  v;  the  mean  anomaly,  according  to 
the  ancient  astronomy,  would  be  the  arc  of  the  equant  circle  described  around 
L — the  arc  which  progresses  eastwards  and  is  intercepted  by  two  lines  drawn 
from  L,  the  one  through  apsis  P  and  the  other  through  the  planetary  body  C, 
Or  it  would  be  the  angle  between  those  lines  at  L,  or  the  difference  between 
that  angle  and  360°.  For  example,  in  this  case  if  C  were  the  planet,  then  angle 
PLC  could  be  used  instead  of  the  mean  anomaly  approximately. 

Define  the  line  of  mean  movement  and  the  mean  position  of  the  planet,  according 
to  this  ancient  hypothesis  of  the  equant. 

It  would  be  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  parallel  to  the  line  which  has  been  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the 
equant,  or  from  the  other  focus  of  the  ellipse,  through  the  planetary  body. 
And  either  one  of  these  lines  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  would  indicate  the 
mean  position  of  the  planet.  In  the  diagram,  if  C  were  the  planet  and  AM 
were  parallel  to  LC,  then  AM  would  be  the  line  of  its  mean  movement. 

If  therefore  in  this  new  formulation  of  astronomy,  no  equant  circle  is  expressed, 
then  in  terms  of  what  other  magnitude  will  the  mean  anomaly  he  computed  or 
measured? 

In  terms  of  the  area  comprehended  between  the  arc  of  the  circle  which 
designates  and  determines  the  proposed  arc  of  the  orbit  and  between  the 
two  straight  lines  which  connect  the  extremities  of  the  arc  with  the  centre 
of  the  sun.  For  example,  if  the  proposed  position  of  the  planet  is  C,  then  if  a 
line  be  drawn  from  C  perpendicular  to  PR  which  will  cut  circle  PD  in  K, 
and  if  PA  and  KA  are  joined,  area  PKA  is  the  measure  of  the  mean  anomaly, 
whereof  the  area  of  the  whole  circle  is  equivalent  to  360°. 

[686]  Tell  how  to  compute  the  mean  anomaly  or  the  amount  of  time  which  the 
planet  spends  in  the  proposed  arc. 

Again,  let  eccentricity  AB  be  9.265,  whereof  the  semidiameter  BP  is  100.000. 
First  of  all,  we  must  take  the  area  of  the  greatest  triangle  which  has  a  right 
angle  at  B  and  an  altitude  BD.  The  multiplication  of  this  area  by  half  AB 
will  give  a  product  of  4632.50000.  The  value  of  this  area  DAB  is  to  be  expressed 
by  the  number  of  seconds,  whereof  the  total  area  of  the  circle  PDT  is  360° 
or  21,600'  or  1,296,000".  Therefore,  since  if  BP  is  100.000,  the  area  of  the 
circle  by  calculation  is  314,159.26536,  area  DAB  is  19,110". 

Now  let  arc  PC  be  given  by  arc  PK  which  designates  it;  and  let  it  be  46° 
18'51".  Therefore  the  sine  of  PK,  namely  KL  the  altitude  of  triangle  BKA, 
multiplied  by  the  value  of  the  greatest  triangle — and  the  last  five  decimals 
cut  off  from  the  product — will  give  triangle  AKB  a  value  of  3819",  which  is 
3°50'19".  But  sector  KBP  is  equal  in  value  to  the  number  of  degrees  which 
have  been  given  in  arc  PK,  namely  46°18'51".  Therefore  by  the  addition  of 
the  areas,  PKA  is  50°9'10,"  and  the  mean  anomaly  is  of  that  magnitude. 

In  this  way,  the  area  of  the  additosubtractive  triangle  {trianguli  aequatorii) 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  993 

is  to  be  added,  as  long  as  the  sector  or  arc  is  smaller  than  a  semicircle;  but  if 
the  arc  is  greater  than  a  semicircle,  the  area  is  to  be  subtracted. 

State  the  rule  for  the  relation  between  these  triangles. 

Any  two  triangles  equally  distant  from  the  vertices,  the  one  from  the  highest 
apsis,  and  the  other  from  the  lowest  apsis,  are  of  equal  magnitude.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  if  arcs  PK  and  RW  are  equal,  areas  BKA  and  BWA  will  also  be  equal. 

What  is  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric? 

It  is  the  arc  of  the  eccentric  circle  measured  eastwards  and  intercepted 
between  the  line  of  apsides  and  the  perpendicular  drawn  to  that  line  through 
the  planetary  or  through  any  proposed  [687]  point  on  the  orbit.  For  example, 
with  C  as  the  proposed  point  on  the  orbit  or  with  the  planet  revolving  at  that 
point,  if  through  C  perpendicular  to  PAR  line  KCL  is  drawn  cutting  the 
circle  in  Ky  arc  PK  will  be  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric. 

In  what  sense  is  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  used? 

Here  too  the  phrase  “of  movement^ ^  is  understood  [between  “anomaly^ ^ 
and  “of  the  eccentric^ ^].  For  although,  according  to  the  figure,  in  arc  PK  of 
the  circle  no  irregularity  or  anomaly  is  apparent:  nevertheless  the  movement 
of  the  planet  in  orbit  PC  is  truly  anomalous  or  irregular  in  three  respects: 
first,  by  reason  of  its  elliptic  figure  which  bends  with  unequal  curvature  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  difference  of  its  parts  and  is  unequally  distant  from  the  centre 
of  the  figure ;  second,  by  reason  of  its  speed,  which  is  not  the  same  in  all  parts 
of  its  orbit;  thirdly,  by  reason  of  its  apparent  movement  as  seen  from  the  sun, 
because  equal  parts  of  the  orbit  subtend  unequal  angles  at  the  sun.  Therefore 
since  the  arc  PK  concurs  in  all  those  determinations,  as  has  been  said:  where¬ 
fore  with  the  same  right  wherewith  the  ancient  astronomy  introduced  the 
equant  circle  and  by  means  of  that  computed  the  mean  anomaly,  we  our¬ 
selves  circumscribe  an  eccentric  circle  PK  around  the  real  orbit  PC  and  by 
means  of  that  compute  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric,  employing  something 
uniform  in  measuring  that  which  is  not  uniform. 

And  indeed  in  the  ancient  astronomy  the  equant  circle  seduced  the  physicists 
into  imagining  that  either  the  circle  or  at  any  rate  the  movement  was  real:  but 
here  no  one  can  be  seduced,  since  it  is  apparent  to  the  eyes  that  PC  the  true 
orbit  of  the  planet  coincides  with  this  artificial  circle  PK  only  in  the  two  points 
P  and  Ry  the  apsides,  and  throughout  the  remaining  tract  it  betakes  itself, 
within  the  embrace  of  the  eccentric,  towards  the  centre  of  the  figure. 

What  is  the  corrected  anomaly? 

It  is  the  arc  of  the  great  circle  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  which  is  marked  out 
by  the  continuation  of  the  plane  of  the  planetary  orbit:  this  arc  is  measured 
eastwards  from  the  position  of  the  apsis  to  the  very  position  of  the  planet  or  the 
apparent  position  of  any  other  point  on  the  orbit.  Or — which  amounts  to  the 
same  thing— it  is  the  angle  which  any  arc  of  the  true  planetary  orbit  subtends 
or  which  is  formed  by  the  two  aforesaid  lines  at  the  centre  of  the  sun,  or  the 
difference  between  that  angle  and  360®. 

For  example,  if  the  planet  is  in  C,  the  corrected  anomaly  is  angle  PAC.  And 
if  the  planet  is  at  Q,  then  the  corrected  anomaly  is  made  up  of  the  two  right 
angles  PAM  and  MAR  and  also  angle  RAQ.  But  if  with  centre  A  a  circle  of  any 


994  KEPLER 

magnitude  whatsoever  be  described,  and  thus  even  a  circle  in  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars,  the  arc  of  this  circle  measured  eastwards  from  A P  as  far  as  AC  or 
continued  to  AC  will  also  be  called  the  corrected  anomaly. 

Why  is  it  called  ^^corrected”  [coaequata]? 

Practitioners  used  to  call  it  the  corrected  movement  of  anomaly  or  simply  the 
corrected  anomaly,  not  as  if  the  irregular  movement  assumed  had  been  cor¬ 
rected  in  such  a  way  as  to  become  a  regular  [aequalis]  movement,  but  with  a 
plainly  contrary  meaning:  Now  since  in  the  beginning  a  time  or  portion  of  the 
periodic  time  is  laid  down,  and  since  this  time,  as  reduced  to  astronomical  terms, 
indicates  how  great  an  arc  of  its  circle  the  planet  would  have  been  going  to  tra¬ 
verse  within  this  interval  of  time,  if  it  had  been  moving  with  a  uniform  move¬ 
ment:  so  it  is  the  office  of  the  astronomer  to  show  how  much  of  the  really  ir¬ 
regular  apparent  movement  of  the  planet  corresponds  to  this  time  and  this 
fictitious  uniform  movement.  Therefore  ^‘corrected  movement”  means  the  same 
thing  as  movement  to  which  an  additosubtraction  has  been  applied  and  which 
has  been  converted  to  an  apparent  movement,  namely  by  putting  on  the  irregu¬ 
larity  which  the  appearances  introduce  into  it:  on  account  of  this  irregularity  the 
total  period  is  called  the  anomaly. 

Therefore  since  you  have  distinguished  these  three  anomalies  and  formulated  them 
by  means  of  a  fictitious  eccentric  circle  circumscribed  around  the  orbit:  I  ask  whether 
the  true  orbit  of  the  planet  could  not  be  put  to  the  same  use. 

Although  there  is  no  need,  nevertheless  that  is  possible  on  account  of  their 
equipollence.  For,  as  has  been  said  in  Book  v.  Part  i,  the  area  PC  A  measures  the 
time  and  hence  the  mean  anomaly ;  and  anyone  who  wishes  to  can  understand 
the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  circle  also  by  arc  PC.  But  angle  PAC  has  even 
before  this  been  called  the  corrected  anomaly. 

How  are  these  three  related  anomalies  distinguished  in  magnitude? 

The  number  of  degrees  and  minutes  of  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  is  always 
a  mean  between  the  others.  But  before  a  semicircle  has  been  completed,  the  so- 
called  mean  anomaly  is  always  the  greatest  of  the  three,  and  the  corrected,  the 
least;  but  after  the  semicircle,  the  so-called  mean  is  the  least  in  magnitude  and 
the  corrected  the  greatest. 

4.  Concerning  the  Angle  at  the  Sun 
Tell  how  to  compute  the  corrected  anomaly  or  the  angle  at  the  sun. 

There  are  various  modes;  but  the  most  compendious  is  the  one  which  [690] 
employs  the  interval  between  the  planet  and  the  sun.  For  we  need  that  for  other 
uses  too. 

Now  there  are  three  cases  of  this  mode.  For  either  the  planet  is  above  the 
diacentre,  or  below  the  dihelion,  or  between  the  diacentre  and  the  dihelion. 

1.  Therefore  first  let  the  planet  be  above  the  diacentre  DBT^  viz.,  in  C;  and 
let  PK  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  be  47°42'20",  and  let  LB  the  sine  of  its  com¬ 
plement  KD  be  67.277,  so  that  the  libration  of  the  planet  will  be  6.233.  By  the 
addition  of  6.233  to  BP  let  AC  the  interval  between  the  planet  and  the  sun  be 
exactly  106.233  in  terms  whereof  BP  is  100.000.  Accordingly  let  this  same  LB 
the  sine  of  the  complement  be  added  to  the  9.265  of  eccentricity  BA,  in  such 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 


995 


fashion  that  LA  the  other  side 
of  right  triangle  CAL  is  76.542. 
Accordingly  if  LA  is  divided 
by  CA  and  five  ciphers  are 
added,  the  quotient  of  72.051 
as  a  sine  shows  the  arc  to  be 
46°5'48",  which  is  equal  to 
angle  LCA,  whereof  the  com¬ 
plement,  which  is  43°54'12",  is 
the  required  angle  LAC  or 
PAC, 

If  you  subtract  the  loga¬ 
rithm  of  half  the  divisor  from 
the  logarithm  of  half  the  divi¬ 
dend,  the  logarithm  of  the 
same  sine  or  arc  remains. 

2.  Secondly,  let  the  planet 
be  below  the  dihelion  MAN, 
viz.,  in  S]  and  let  PW  be  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric  and  DW  its  excess  over  and  above  90°.  Accordingly 
in  the  same  way  as  above,  the  libration  found  by  means  of  BZ  the  sine  of 
that  arc  is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  radius,  so  that  the  exact  interval  AS 
may  be  manifest.  So  too  the  eccentricity  BA  is  now  to  be  subtracted  from  sine 
BZ,  so  that  AZ  the  other  side  of  the  right  triangle  remains.  Then  once  more,  if 
the  number  of  side  AZ — to  which  five  ciphers  have  been  added — is  divided  by 
side  AS,  the  quotient  will  be  the  sine  of  angle  ASZ,  to  which  angle  MAS  is 
equal,  which  is  the  excess  of  the  required  angle  PAS  over  and  above  angle  PAM 
which  is  right  or  90°. 

3.  Thirdly,  let  the  planet  be  between  DBT  and  MAN.  Accordingly  let  PX 
be  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  and  DX  its  excess  over  and  above  90°,  and  BY 
the  sine  whereby  the  subtractive  libration  is  computed,  since  the  sine  lies  below 
B.  But  since  the  sine  is  less  than  eccentricity  BA,  it  is  to  be  subtracted  from  this 
eccentricity,  so  that  YA  remains.  Accordingly  we  must  operate  on  YA  and  on 
the  exact  interval,  as  in  the  first  case. 

[691]  What  do  you  call  the  eccentric  position  of  the  planet? 

That  point  in  the  zodiac  on  which  there  falls  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the 
centre  of  the  sun  through  the  planetary  body. 

What  is  the  equalization^^  [aequatio]  or  'Wdz^o5t/6^rac^zon^'[prosthaphaeresis], 
and  what  is  the  reason  for  the  name? 

It  is  the  difference  between  the  number  of  degrees  and  minutes  of  the  mean 
anomaly  and  the  degrees  and  minutes  of  the  corrected  anomaly.  Or,  according 
to  the  old  astronomical  formulation,  it  is  the  angle  at  the  centre  of  the  sun  and 
its  measure,  the  arc  of  the  great  circle  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  intercepted 
between  the  lines  of  the  mean  and  of  the  apparent  movement  of  the  planet. 
Now  since  in  one  semicircle  this  angle  is  to  be  subtracted  [from  the  mean  move¬ 
ment]  and  in  the  other  semicircle  it  is  to  be  added  to  the  mean  movement,  so 
that  the  movement  may  be  corrected:  hence  it  has  been  called  by  the  compound 


996 


KEPLER 


name  ^^additosub traction^'  [Trpo(Tda<t>aip€aLs].  But  it  has  been  called  the  ^^equali- 
zation^^  because  by  its  addition  to,  or  subtraction  from,  the  corrected  anomaly, 
which  divides  unequal  arcs  and  times  into  equal  portions,  there  comes  to  be 
the  mean  and  uniform  anomaly. 

By  what  epithet  or  title  is  the  additosuhtraction  called? 

By  two  words  or  their  index  letters  or  syllables:  A.,  add.,  additive;  S.,  sub., 
subtractive. 

How  many  parts  are  there  to  the  additosuhtraction  and  what  is  the  measure  of  each? 

There  are  two  parts,  the  one  physical,  and  the  other  optical,  to  the  aforesaid 
additosuhtraction.  For  the  physical  part  is  due  to  the  irregularity  which  really 
accedes  to  the  planetary  movement  on  account  of  physical  causes.  But  the 
optical  part  is  due  to  an  irregularity  which  is  merely  apparent  or  as  it  were  ap¬ 
parent,  i.e.y  on  account  of  the  greater  or  less  distance  between  the  arc  of  the 
orbit  and  the  sun.  Both  parts  are  somehow  distinguished  in  the  same  triangle, 
which  is  hence  called  additosubtractive  [aequatorium]. 

For  if  A  and  B  the  termini  of  the  eccentricity  are  joined  to  [692]  the  planetary 
body  C,  the  physical  part  of  the  additosuhtraction  finds  its  measure  in  area  BAC 
— or  by  equipollence,  in  area  BAK]  while  the  optical  part  of  the  additosub- 
traction  would  be  equal  to  angle  BCAy  if  that  were  computed:  angle  BKAy 
which  is  easier  to  compute,  is  alwaj^'s  slightly  less  than  angle  BCA, 

What  use  is  there  for  this  additosuhtraction? 

In  this  formulation  of  astronomy  made  new,  there  is  no  necessary  or  very 
great  need  of  the  total  additosuhtraction  composed  of  both  elements.  For  the 
anomalies  are  not  determined  through  this  additosuhtraction;  but  on  the  con¬ 
trary  through  the  comparison  of  the  corrected  anomaly — which  we  first  com¬ 
pute — with  the  mean  anomaly,  we  elicit  the  additosuhtraction,  if  at  any  time 
we  wish  to  use  it. 

But  three  distinct  anomalies  are  laid  down  in  the  tables.  For,  first,  the  anom¬ 
aly  of  the  eccentric  is  placed  on  the  left,  according  to  the  order  of  the  whole  de¬ 
grees,  from  1°  to  180°;  and  that  is  done  [693]  because  the  anomaly  of  the  eccen¬ 
tric  being  given  becomes  the  starting-point  for  computing  the  others,  and  also 
the  distance  or  interval  between  the  planet  and  the  sun.  Secondly,  there  is 
found  under  the  same  head  and  as  corresponding  to  this  anomaly  of  the  eccen¬ 
tric,  the  physical  part  of  the  additosuhtraction  or  the  value  of  the  area  of  the 
additosubtractive  triangle  in  degrees  and  minutes  and  seconds:  and  from  this 
inclusion  of  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  together  with  the  physical  part  of  the 
additosuhtraction  beneath  the  same  head,  we  understand  that  the  sum  of  the 
two  constitutes  the  corresponding  mean  anomaly.  Thirdly,  to  the  right  of  this 
and  in  a  separate  column  is  placed  the  corrected  anomaly  corresponding  to  the 
arc.  If  anyone  now  wishes  to  learn  the  composite  additosuhtraction,  let  him 
subtract  the  corrected  anomaly  from  the  mean  anomaly  found  next  to  it  or 
from  the  sum  of  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  and  the  physical  part  of  the 
additosuhtraction;  and  the  remainder  will  be  the  required  additosuhtraction, 
which  in  the  descending  semicircle  is  called  subtractive,  and  in  the  ascending, 
additive. 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V  997 

Nevertheless  state  how  these  parts  of  the  additosuhtraction  are  related^  if  they  are 
compared  with  one  another. 

The  smaller  the  eccentricity,  the  nearer  they  approach  to  equality:  in  the 
upper  semicircle  however,  above  the  diacentre,  the  optical  part  is  slightly  smaller 
than  the  physical  part;  but  in  the  lower  semicircle,  below  the  diacentre,  it  is 
slightly  greater. 

For  example,  in  the  accompanying  diagram,  let  A  be  the  sun  and  PAR  the 

line  of  apsides,  and  DBT  and 
MAN  are  at  right  angles  to 
PAR;  and  DPT  the  upper  semi¬ 
circle,  or  so  to  speak,  and  DRT 
the  lower  semicircle.  In  the  up¬ 
per  semicircle  let  the  additosub- 
tractive  triangles  be  BCA  and 
BFAj  and  BSA  and  BQA  in  the 
lower.  Therefore  since  the  areas 
of  the  triangles  are  the  measure 
of  the  physical  part  of  the  ad- 
ditosub traction,  while  the  angles 
at  C,  Fj  Sy  and  Q  are  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  the  optical  part:  then 
surely  the  upper  areas  are 
greater  parts,  while  the  lower 
areas  are  lesser  parts,  of  the  area 
of  360®  of  the  total  circle  than 
those  angles  of  theirs  are  of  four 
right  angles  or  360®.  For  the  cen¬ 
tres  C  and  *S  and  CB  and  SB  as  the  lengths  of  the  semidiameters,  let  there  be 
described  the  arc  BL  ending  at  CA  and  the  arc  BH  ending  at  SA  continued: 
these  arcs  measure  angles  C  and  S.  But  areas  CBL  and  SBH  are  equivalent  to 
these  same  arcs.  Therefore  if  these  areas  were  the  optical  [694]  parts  of  the  ad- 
ditosubtractions,  the  two  parts  of  one  additosuhtraction  would  be  equal.  But 
not  CBL  but  the  greater  area  CBA  is  the  measure  of  the  optical  part;  and  thus, 
in  the  lower  semicircle,  not  SBH  but  the  smaller  area  SB  A  in  the  lower.  There¬ 
fore  in  the  upper  semicircle  the  physical  part  exceeds,  and  the  optical  part  in  the 
lower. 

Where  is  the  composite  additosuhtraction  greatest? 

Of  the  parts,  the  prior  one,  the  physical,  is  greatest  at  D  and  T,  the  extremi¬ 
ties  of  the  diacentre,  because  the  altitude  of  no  triangle  can  be  greater  than  BD 
or  BTy  which  is  the  semidiameter  in  the  circle  and  even  in  the  ellipse,  the  longest 
of  the  ordinates.  The  posterior  part,  the  optical,  would  be  greatest,  if  the  orbit 
were  circular,  at  M  and  N  the  extremities  of  the  dihelion:  for  there  the  line 
drawn  from  centre  B  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  MA  would  be  the 
longest,  but  that  line  is  the  sine  of  angle  BMA  the  optical  part,  whereof  BM  is 
the  sine  of  the  total  additosuhtraction.  For  upon  EAy  a  higher  line,  there  falls 
from  B  a  shorter  perpendicular  than  BA. 

But  because  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  elliptical,  accordingly  the  optical  part 


998 


KEPLER 


of  the  additosubtraction  is 

[695]  greatest  between  M  and 
Z),  and  thus  between  N  and  T, 

For,  first,  angle  BMA  is  great¬ 
er  than  angle  ADBj  because 
both  are  right  triangles  upon 
the  same  base,  but  altitude  DB 
is  greater  than  altitude  MA^ 
namely  the  shorter  diameter  is 
greater  than  any  other  ordi¬ 
nate  whatsoever.  Second,  if 
points  B  and  I  are  marked  at 
the  centres  of  arcs  DM  and  TN 
or  thereabouts,  angles  AEB 
and  AIB  will  again  be  greater 
than  AMB  and  ANB,  For,  of 
all  the  lines  drawn  from  centre 
B  to  the  orbit,  BD  is  the  short¬ 
est;  and  the  farther  away  the 
other  lines  are,  the  longer  they 
are.  Therefore  BM  is  perceptibly  longer  than  BE,  But  the  perpendicular 
from  B  to  AM  is  not  perceptibly  longer  than  the  one  from  BE  to  AE,  There¬ 
fore  the  ratio  of  MB  to  BA  is  greater  than  the  ratio  of  EB  to  its  perpendicular. 
And  so  angle  BE  A  is  also  greater  than  angle  BMA,  Therefore  if  BA  is  bisected 
at  G,  and  the  perpendicular  EGI  is  drawn,  the  optical  additosubtraction  will 
be  greatest  around  E  and  I,  But  the  physical  was  greatest  around  D  and  T, 
Therefore  the  composite  additosubtraction  is  greatest  at  the  mean  position 
between  D  and  E  and  between  T  and  /. 

You  have  taught  us  how  to  compute  the  mean  anomaly  and  the  corrected  anomaly 
from  the  assumption  of  anomaly  of  the  eccentric:  hut  practice  more  frequently 
requires  uSy  given  the  mean  anomaly,  as  from  the  time  given,  to  find  the  others: 
teach  this  too. 

Here  there  is  no  direct  way;  but  he  who  wishes  to  compute  this  without 
tables  must  apply  the  rule  of  suppositions,  namely  by  supposing  that  the 
anomaly  of  the  eccentric — PK,  in  the  accompanying  diagram — is  of  this  or 
of  that  magnitude,  and  upon  that  assumption,  compute  his  mean  anomaly 
PKA,  For  if  PKA  turns  out  to  be  as  great  as  it  was  given  to  be,  then  the  sup¬ 
position  as  to  PK  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric  will  be  right.  But  if  it  does 
not  turn  out  as  great,  then  the  supposition  is  to  be  corrected  in  view  of  the 
result,  and  the  work  done  over  again. 

Could  you  by  way  of  example  teach  a  convenient  method,  lest  through  unfamiliarity 
one  err  too  much  in  mistaken  suppositions? 

Then  let  the  foregoing  example  be  used  again,  and  let  the  said  mean  anomaly 

[696]  or  area  PKA  be  50°9'10".  It  is  manifest  that,  if  the  area  of  triangle  KBA 
were  known,  the  remaining  area  KBP  would  have  the  same  number  of  de¬ 
grees  as  its  arc  PK\  and  hence,  if  the  value  of  KBA  is  subtracted  from  PKA, 
the  remainder  will  be  PK  the  anomaly  of  the  eccentric.  Therefore  since  PKA 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOAIY,  V  999 

is  greater  than  PKBj  the  sine  of  arc  PX  will  be  smaller  than  the  sine  of  50° 
9'10",  and  therefore  smaller  than  76.775.  In  our  first  supposition,  let  this  sine 
be  70.000  for  the  sake  of  ease  in  multiplication. 

Accordingly  if  this  sine  is  multiplied  by  the  value  of  triangle  DBA — which 
was  11,910"  in  the  preceding  example — and  the  last  five  decimal  places  are 
cut  off,  the  product  BKA  will  be  8,337"  or  2°18'57".  Add  these  2°18'57"  to  the 
arc  of  sine  70.000,  which  is  44°25'.  The  area  PKA  will  be  46°44'.  This  is  too 
small,  for  it  is  deficient  in  3°25',  since  it  ought  to  be  50°9',  the  quantity  given. 

Accordingly,  in  the  second  supposition,  let  a  greater  sine  be  supposed,  by 
the  addition  of  the  deficiency  of  3°25'  to  the  44°25'  of  the  arc  previously  sup¬ 
posed,  so  that  PC  will  be  about  47°50';  its  sine  is  approximately  74.000,  which 
I  choose  for  the  sake  of  ease  in  calculation  again.  The  multiplication  of  74.000 
by  11,910"  makes  PKA  to  be  7'56"  greater,  namely  2°26'53".  Add  this  to  the 
PK  of  the  second  supposition,  namely  to  the  47°44'6"  of  PKB.  Arc  PKA  will 
be  50°10'59";  and  there  will  be  an  excess  of  T49"  over  the  required  50°9T0". 

And  so  we  understand  that  this  very  small  excess  is  to  be  subtracted  from 
the  third  supposition  of  P/i,  and  the  remainder  will  be  the  required  anomaly 
of  the  eccentric  or  PK  will  be  equal  to  47°42T7".  It  is  possible  to  prove  this. 
For  the  sine  of  this  arc  is  73.969,  and  the  multiplication  of  that  by  11,910" 
gives  2°26'50"  for  KBA.  And  the  addition  of  that  to  47°42'17"  gives  50°9'7", 
which  is  imperceptibly  different  from  the  requisite  50°9'10". 

5.  On  the  Digression  of  the  Planets  Away  from  the  Ecliptic 

What  is  understood  by  the  name  ^^orbit”? 

Properly  speaking,  it  is  that  line  which  the  planet  describes  around  the  sun 

by  means  of  the  centre  of 
its  body.  For  example,  in 
the  diagram,  if  ECGD  is  a 
part  of  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic,  HCFD  will  be  the 
orbit. 

But  in  a  secondary  sense, 
it  is  understood  to  be  the 
[697]  great  circle  wherein 
the  plane  of  the  orbit  con- 
^  tinned  cuts  the  sphere  of 
the  fixed  stars.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  here  it  is  section  MN 
which  has  been  made  by 
plane  CAK  continued. 

What  do  you  call  the  ^Hn- 
cUnation  of  the  planet”  or 
^^of  any  point  in  its  orbit y” 
and  what  is  the  circle  of 
inclination”? 

Properly  speaking,  plan¬ 
ets  or  points  do  not  have  an  inclination,  but  lines  or  planes  do.  But  because 
those  planes  are  circumscribed  around  the  orbits  of  the  planets,  and  because 


1000  KEPLER 

the  lines  of  movement  of  the  planets  are  understood  as  having  been  described 
in  those  planes:  in  common  usage  these  words  have  been  transferred  to  the 
planets  themselves,  for  the  sake  of  brevity  in  speaking. 

Therefore  since  that  which  below,  in  Book  vi,  will  be  called  latitude,  par¬ 
ticipates  in  that  adventitious  or  optical  irregularity — which  is  the  second  thing 
we  will  investigate — wherefore,  in  order  that  things  which  are  distinct  may 
also  be  distinguished  by  their  names,  let  the  real  digression  of  the  planet 
from  the  ecliptic  be  called,  not  latitude,  but  inclination.  Now  it  is  defined  as 
being  the  arc  of  the  great  circle,  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  described 
around  the  sun,  [698]  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic  and  called  the  circle  of  in¬ 
clination,  which  arc  is  intercepted  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  eccentric 
position  of  the  planet.  Or,  it  is  the  angle  at  the  sun  which  this  arc  measures. 

In  the  diagram,  if  A  is  the  sun,  FKDHC  the  orbit,  and  MLO  the  ecliptic, 
the  inclination  of  point  K  will  be  angle  KAI  or  NAL  or  its  arc  NL  described 
around  the  sun  A. 

What  do  you  call  ^^nodes,^^  and  what,  ^^limits”? 

The  nodes  are  the  two  points  on  the  ecliptic  wherein  it  is  cut  by  the  plane  of 
the  orbit  continued.  In  Greek,  crvvhkafioi,  because  in  them  different  routes,  the 
apparent  route  of  the  sun  and  that  of  the  planet,  are  knotted  together.  The  one  is 
^The  ascending  node,'^  where  the  planet  leaves  the  southern  hemisphere  and 
turns  northward;  the  other  ^The  descending  node,’’  which  transfers  the  planet 
to  the  south — the  words  “ascending”  and  “descending”  having  been  accom¬ 
modated  to  our  hemisphere,  as  that  in  which  the  first  founders  of  astronomy 
lived.  For  example,  if  the  plane  of  the  orbit  and  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  coincide 
in  line  CAD,  which,  on  being  prolonged  into  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  desig¬ 
nates  the  ecliptic  section,  M  and  0  will  designate  the  nodes. 

[699]  But  the  points  on  the  ecliptic  which  are  90°  distant  from  the  nodes  are 
called  the  limits:  the  northern  limit,  wherefrom  the  planet  is  distant  to  the  north, 
and  the  southern  limit,  wherefrom  it  is  distant  to  the  south.  They  are  called 
limits,  wherefrom  it  is  distant  to  the  south.  They  are  called  limits  because  the 
planet  arriving  at  those  points  does  not  digress  farther  in  any  direction  but  from 
that  place  turns  around  and  begins  to  return  to  the  ecliptic.  For  example,  in  the 
diagram  points  E  and  G  on  the  ecliptic  are  called  the  limits.  But  also  points  H 
and  F  on  the  real  orbit  and  the  corresponding  points  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed 
stars,  are  called  by  the  same  name,  and  more  frequently  too. 

What  do  you  call  ^Hhe  argument  of  the  inclination”? 

It  is  the  arc  of  the  planetary  orbit  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  intercepted 
between  the  ascending  node  and  the  eccentric  position  of  the  planet  and  meas¬ 
ured  eastwards.  For  example,  if  0  is  the  ascending  node,  N  the  eccentric  position 
of  the  planet,  OMN  will  be  the  argument  of  inclination  LN.  Copernicus  uses 
the  northern  limit  instead  of  the  ascending  node. 

The  greatest  inclination  of  the  limit  for  any  given  planet  is  not  the  same  through¬ 
out  all  the  ages,  is  it? 

According  to  the  physical  principles  employed  in  Book  iv,  of  itself  it  is  un¬ 
changeable.  But  on  account  of  the  dislocation  of  the  ecliptic — concerning  which 
I  shall  speak  in  Book  vii — it  can  change  per  accidens. 


1001 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY,  V 
How  is  the  inclination  of  the  planet  computed? 

No  differently  from  the  way  in  which  the  declination  of  a  point  on  the  ecliptic 
was  computed  in  Book  iii.  If  the  sine  of  the  greatest  inclination  is  multipled  by 
the  sine  of  the  argument  of  the  inclination,  and  the  last  five  decimal  places  are 
cut  off  from  the  product,  the  sine  of  the  inclination  will  be  given.  See  the  method 
followed  on  folium  245  et  seqq.  If  instead  of  the  sines  of  the  arcs  you  employ  their 
logarithms,  the  multiplication  will  be  converted  to  simple  addition. 

What  is  the  eccentric  position  of  the  planet  on  the  ecliptic? 

That  point  on  the  ecliptic  wherein  it  is  cut  by  the  circle  of  inclination  drawn 
through  the  eccentric  position  [700]  in  the  simple  sense.  For  example,  if  the  ec¬ 
centric  position — in  the  simple  sense — of  the  planet  at  AT  is  and  NL  is  the 
circle  of  inclination,  and  angles  NLM  and  NLO  are  right,  L  will  be  the  eccentric 
position  of  the  planet  on  the  ecliptic.  It  is  not  called  the  ecliptic  position  simply, 
because  it  also  involves  the  second  irregularity,  the  matter  of  Book  vi ;  but  the 
word  “eccentric”  is  added  in  order  for  us  to  understand  that  it  is  a  question  of 
that  position  which  is  determined  on  the  ecliptic  by  the  eccentric  alone,  without 
the  introduction  of  the  great  sphere,  whereof  I  shall  speak  in  Book  vi. 

What  is  the  eccentric  longitude  of  the  planet  held  to  be? 

The  arc  of  the  ecliptic  measured  eastwards  from  the  beginning  of  the  Ram  to 
the  circle  of  inclination  of  the  planet  or  its  eccentric  position  on  the  ecliptic.  It 
is  called  the  eccentric  longitude,  not  because  it  is  measured  on  the  eccentric  but 
because  the  eccentric  causes  it. 

What  is  meant  by  ^Hhe  reduction  to  the  ecliptic”? 

The  small  arc  which  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  argument  of  the 
inclination  and  the  eccentric  longitude — that  is,  the  difference  between  the  two 
arcs,  one  on  the  orbit  and  the  other  on  the  ecliptic,  beginning  at  the  common 
node  and  ending  at  the  circle  of  inclination.  For  example,  in  this  case  it  is  the 
difference  between  MN  and  ML. 

How  is  it  computed? 

Not  otherwise  than  on  page  255,  Book  iii,  the  difference  between  the  right 
ascension  and  the  corresponding  arc  on  the  ecliptic  is  computed.  For  if  the  sine 
of  the  complement  of  the  greatest  inclination  is  multipled  by  the  tangent  of  the 
argument  of  the  inclination,  and  the  last  five  decimal  places  are  cut  away  from 
the  product,  the  tangent  of  the  argument  of  the  reduction  will  be  given. 

Or  else:  the  antilogarithm  of  the  greatest  inclination  is  added  to  the  mes- 
ologarithm  of  the  argument,  and  thus  the  sum  will  be  the  mesologarithm  of  the 
argument  of  the  reduction. 

A  compendious  and  more  useful  method,  even  for  the  ascension,  is  as  follows. 
The  greatest  reduction  around  45°  from  the  node,  if  multiplied  by  the  sine  of 
twice  any  arc,  and  the  last  five  decimals  cut  off,  constitute  the  required  reduc¬ 
tion  for  the  arc  taken  simply. 

[701]  How  is  this  reduction  to  be  employed,  and  in  relation  to  what? 

When  the  planet  is  progressing  from  the  nodes  to  the  limits,  the  reduction  is 


1002 


KEPLER 


to  be  subtracted  from  the  argument  of  the  inclination;  it  is  to  be  added,  when 
the  planet  is  progressing  from  the  limits  to  the  nodes;  then  the  result,  if  added 
to  the  ascending  node,  constitutes  the  eccentric  longitude  of  the  position  of  the 
planet. 

What  do  you  call  ^Hhe  foreshortening^^? 

It  is  the  particle  of  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  which 
corresponds  to  the  sagitta  of  the  inclination  of  the  planet  in  the  same  ratio  in 
which  the  total  interval  corresponds  to  the  total  sine. 

Let  A  be  the  sun,  and  P  and  Q  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic.  Let  TAX  represent 
the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  and  EAG  the  plane  of 
the  orbit.  Let  the  planet  now  be  at  S  or  (?  and 
with  A  as  centre  and  intervals  AE,  AG  let  the 
arcs  EH  and  GF  be  drawn;  and  from  E  and  G 
let  the  perpendiculars  ER  and  GS  be  dropped 
upon  TX,  HR  and  SF  will  be  the  foreshorten¬ 
ings. 

What  is  the  foreshortened  distance? 

It  is  the  straight  line  in  the  plane  of  the  eclip¬ 
tic  between  the  centre  of  the  sun  and  the  per¬ 
pendicular  from  the  centre  of  the  planetary 
body.  In  the  diagram,  if  the  planet  is  at  E  or  (?, 
then  AR  or  AS  is  the  foreshortened  distance. 

How  is  the  foreshortened  distance  computed? 

The  assumed  distance,  expressed  in  the  numbers  of  the  measurement 
proper  to  each  planet,  is  multipled  by  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the  assumed  distance,  and  the  last  five  decimal  places  are  re¬ 
moved  from  the  product.  Or,  the  logarithm  [702]  of  the  distance  is  added  to  the 
antilogarithms  of  the  proper  inclination,  and  the  sum  is  the  logarithm  which 
is  the  index  of  the  foreshortened  distance. 

Where  is  the  distance  foreshortened  the  most? 

Around  the  limits,  and  more  around  the  limit  which  is  nearer  the  aphelion. 
For  example,  if  V  and  Y  are  the  limits,  and  thus  Z  and  W  are  the  poles  of  the 
orbit,  and  V  is  nearer  the  aphelion  than  F,  then  HR  will  be  longer  than  FS  and 
will  be  the  longest  of  all. 

6.  On  the  Movement  of  the  Apsides  and  Nodes 
How  do  you  define  the  movement  of  the  apsis  among  the  primary  planets? 

It  is  the  arc  of  the  orbit  in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  intercepted  between 
that  point  on  the  orbit  which  is  at  the  same  distance  from  the  moving  node  as 
a  fixed  point  on  the  ecliptic — viz.,  the  beginning  of  the  Ram,  or  even  the  first 
star  of  the  Ram — and  the  position  of  the  highest  apsis,  and  measured  eastwards. 

What  kind  of  movement  is  this  movement  of  the  apsides? 

It  is  set  down  as  being  uniform,  (1)  on  account  of  its  unbelievable  slowness 
whereby  the  astronomers  are  impeded  to  such  an  extent  that  they  cannot  pre* 


1003 


EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTROXO]\IY,  V 

cisely  investigate  this  movement  in  its  single  parts;  (2)  because  we  have  an 
instance  of  regularity  in  one  planet,  where  the  period  of  the  apsis  of  this  physical 
movement,  which  we  touched  upon  in  Book  iv,  page  945,  as  resting  upon  mere 
conjectures,  cannot  be  prejudicial  to  this  regularity  at  all,  although  in  virtue  of 
them  it  seems  that  this  movement  can  be  made  irregular.  But  more  about  this 
in  Book  vi,  in  connection  with  the  single  planets. 

What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  movement  of  the  nodes  in  the  'primary  planets,  or 
what  is  the  longitude  of  the  node? 

The  movement  of  the  node  is  the  arc  on  the  ecliptic  measured  westwards  [703] 
from  a  fixed  point  on  it — namely,  either  from  the  beginning  of  the  Ram  or  from 
the  position  of  the  first  star  of  the  Ram — to  the  position  of  the  ascending  node. 
But  if  the  measurement  is  made  eastwards,  then  this  arc  too  can  be  called  the 
longitude  of  the  node. 

What  kind  of  movement  is  this  movement  of  the  nodes? 

Although  it  is  reasonable  that  even  the  movement  of  this  point  is  uniform 
of  itself,  nevertheless  it  seems  that  some  irregularity  is  present  in  it  per  accidens, 
on  account  of  the  dislocation  of  the  ecliptic,  with  which  Book  vii  is  concerned. 

What  figures  do  the  movement  of  the  nodes  and  limits  describe? 

The  nodes  proceed  along  the  great  circle  of  the  ecliptic,  while  the  limits  of  the 
orbit,  in  so  far  as  their  inclination  is  assumed  to  remain  unchangeable,  proceed 
in  circles  parallel  to  the  ecliptic  or  to  that  circle  with  reference  to  which  their 
inclination  is  unchangeable. 

In  order  to  aid  the  understanding,  their  movements  can  be  represented  by  a 

not  absurd  picture  [of  the  movements]  of  the 
poles,  provided  we  remember  that,  physically 
speaking,  there  is  no  need  of  the  poles.  For 
example,  in  the  accompanying  diagram,  let 
the  orbit  be  VY — by  the  continuation  of  the 
plane  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars — and  let 
its  poles  Z  and  W  move  in  small  circles  around 
P  and  Q  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  TX,  There¬ 
fore  in  what  direction  away  from  P  pole  Z 
moves  at  any  time,  the  limit  V  moves  in  this 
same  direction  away  from  point  T  on  the  eclip¬ 
tic,  and  so  does  the  limit  Y  away  from  point  X 
on  the  ecliptic;  and  the  circuit  of  Z  in  the 
small  circle,  which  is  parallel  to  TX  in  the 
same  direction  is  followed  by  the  limit  V  in 
northern  parallel  which  is  as  much  greater  [than  the  small  circle]  as  it  is  nearer 
to  TX)  and  similarly  F,  in  the  southern  parallel.  For  the  following  six  points 
will  always  be  found  in  the  great  circle  of  inclination:  Z  and  W  the  poles  of  the 
orbit,  P  and  Q  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic,  and  V  and  F  the  limits  of  the  orbit. 

Accordingly,  up  to  now  we  have  been  concerned  with  the  definitions  of  the 
terms  having  to  do  with  the  planetary  orbit  and  the  eccentric  circle  circum¬ 
scribed  around  it.  Since  they  are  common  to  all  the  five  planets,  they  have  been 


1004 


KEPLER 


put  ahead  in  Book  v.  However,  we  shall  teach  their  employment,  with  respect 
to  the  single  planets,  in  Book  vi,  which  follows^ 

THE  END  OF  BOOK  FIVE,  THE  SECOND  BOOK  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF 
THE  SCHEMATA  OR  OF  CELESTIAL  PHYSICS 

iFor  the  information  of  the  reader ^  the  translator  here  appends  a  table  of  contents  of  the  part 
of  the  work  which  has  been  left  untranslated. 

Book  vi.  The  third  book  concerning  the  Apparent  Movements  of  the  Planets  or  the 
Doctrine  of  the  Schemata 

Part  I.  Concerning  the  schema  for  the  solar  movement 

Part  II.  Concerning  the  three  upper  planets,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  and  certain 
things  which  they  have  in  common  with  the  two  lower  planets 

i.  Concerning  eccentric  movements 

ii.  Concerning  progression,  station,  and  retrogradation 

iii.  Concerning  the  increases  in  magnitude  of  the  planets 

iv.  Concerning  latitude 

Part  III.  Concerning  the  two  lower  primary  planets,  Venus  and  Mercury 
Part  IV.  Concerning  the  moon 

i.  Concerning  the  resolution  of  the  irregularity  of  the  moon 

ii.  Concerning  the  monthly  irregularity 

iii.  Concerning  the  inequality  in  time 

iv.  Concerning  the  third  irregularity  in  the  movement  of  the  moon  in  longitude,  or 
concerning  the  variation 

v.  Concerning  the  monthly  latitude  of  the  moon 

Part  V.  Concerning  the  affects  common  to  all  or  most  of  the  planets 

i.  Concerning  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  relation  to  sunrise  and  sunset 

ii.  Concerning  the  illumination  of  the  moon 

iii.  Concerning  the  apparitions  and  occupations  of  the  planets  on  account  of  the  sun 

iv.  Concerning  the  figures  formed  by  the  planets  in  relation  to  one  another 
V.  Concerning  the  calendar  lunar  years 

vi.  Concerning  the  great  and  the  greatest  conjunctions 

vii.  Concerning  eclipses  of  the  luminaries,  and  first,  of  the  moon 

viii.  Concerning  the  eclipse  of  the  sun 

ix.  Concerning  the  harmonic  proportions  in  the  movements 

Book  vii.  Which  Deals  with  the  Doctrine  on  the  Sphere  and  the  Doctrine  on  the  Sche¬ 
mata  in  conjunction 

Concerning  the  movement  of  the  ninth  or  eighth  sphere,  the  difference  in  length 
between  the  sidereal  and  tropical  year,  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  the  change  in 
the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  and  related  questions. 


Johannes  Kepler 
THE  HARMONIES  OF 
THE  WORLD 


im 


,  KKl'J  Ef< 


vc' 


V.  Ho^vevt-r,  yrt^  ii  Uii^lr  <imployirw!ijt  *  iih  x«j|>cot 

tCf  i^iegle  planeT5^^it> v^.  whirli  lolbt/s^  f 


OF  i^iWK  Wji,  T^  t^:qxv,  nooii  oy  Tfii:  ikk^frine  of 
THE  6CHE?.rAT.,,  oil  OF  C£i^:STIAi  ^ 

*T<rf (^ctrnriiilt^krr^Oi^>}^'i^al(^iiofcw  : 

tf  h^h  ktghcii  kfl  urUtan$in4':ii,  V'*  ^  ,  ' 

Y7.  Tiu?  ttod  iKHiV  tfuj  i|>i>«fWit  Mi  /cmvuU  Plruiot'j  o?  ihe’'* 

Doi’trine  of  the  3qhmn*tii  •  ^  4  ^ 

i.  for  *•  ^ 

Pc^xt  i;  CQWrri^T,:^.  ii\(*,  U[>pff  pl.\r».‘tr,  -Juplfer,  taid  Msuk,  «uiu 

Brings  Wht^  t^6y  h  4»ninic>i^  vi.ttf’  v  /*  1-  >;«:wtT  pUntt^ 

•L  Cf;c»:nfxic 

tL  Cvti**fjminr  Ai»ii  ret7!‘f.i-a^ti. /» 

‘  iH.  Coucpr^j^tAc-lricreagcft  ifi  rafli^Uy>  ‘  <  ;1>e  plAnot<ji  .  ;  ' 

iv;  Conv/'JxiM^g  iiUt^de  -  \ 

P»xt  111.  Coucemiiig  Uic  tvo  It  ^  "  v,  .ti  $  arnl  Mermity  ‘ 

'  i?v  XVtK^ftrnii^^ 


>*.  'em 


Uv ,  CAnK^ftruu^g  ^  w-.  ^ v*  U 

a,  c»<«.4  ‘  ^a»  ga  w  aHT 

•  iv.  crqmg  frAr^i  ’fx^guirvM  'i.‘;i:.  ::'^  fnemu  io  longttDft,  0? 

tK’ rr  1  Q  "nrxjf'^p 

V.  Cq/><^mgtheTi^  /Y  k.lrl  1  ^ 

F^rt  -V  Gbnwidtig  the  nfft.'ctB  to  bJ^--  nt  t’^e  pi&ne^a 

I  Crrr.f^mit^g  the  pr,-i»-*ir  n«  of  ihd  phujm^  mc  n  to 

i*.  CaucersJBg  ’he  il](U/utiAtioa  0/  fhi*  laMft. 

^  rqr.rr5riing  fh«  Aiwi  rw;vr>.’tU.ti<Jn^  0/  r*»e  pkne?^  on  ucce  iml  M  th^ 

iv  Cn!5??miV,i:  O'c  lorn^cJ  by  ti>  fV)!Ati(*44kJ  ood 

V,  11  :  t  .1^*^ 

in.  vjOTf-cnrfaK  J5^*‘^v  Hi-iiWb/ a  .r,'! 

yii/ Cfen<5«rqiiqg  inxi  *  e  Vhr.  I|:»>m3'  ^  ^ 


‘  viii.  Cof»oor2ar4C  v,.- 

be.  CoacerniJH’;  tlic  buxju^^iiiic  -d*  :te«  ^  •  u.t- 
%>OK  vrf.  Which  'Vf^\h  ^  r.';  r‘  •’>  - 


inatfA  in  conai^M’tir.3 

Ciinucjitiiiig  th«*  novi?q?  •  :,>  i  r :  r  *  , 

bfttwe^ii  tb^  ir  7.!^  '-j  ,  , 

the  oUkiuivy  of  the  aftliptic,  aad  q  :. 


«A)d  Doctrine  mi  the  BcIh^ 


h  iipheie,  the  diff#*fcni  ^  m  length 
k  ijii  tlveecpimojces,  tUc  ii  m 


•a'^ 


» '  »i*i  ■ 

'■■‘=Ti 


rf  .  ■  **., 

■  ^  :.  *'  ; 


CONTENTS 


BOOK  FIVE 

Proem  1009 

1.  Concerning  the  Five  Regular  Solid  Figures  1011 

2.  On  the  Kinship  of  the  Harmonic  Ratios  with  the  Five  Regular  Solids  1012 

3.  Summary  of  Astronomical  Doctrine  Necessary  for  the  Consideration 

of  the  Celestial  Harmonies  1014 

4.  In  What  Things  Pertaining  to  the  Planetary  Movements  have  the  Har¬ 

monic  Ratios  been  Expressed  by  the  Creator,  and  in  VTiat  Way?  1023 

5.  That  the  Clefs  of  the  Musical  Scale,  or  Pitches  of  the  System,  and  the 

Genera  of  Consonances,  the  Major  and  the  IMinor,  are  Expressed  in 
Certain  Movements  1034 

6.  The  Musical  Modes  or  Tones  have  Somehow  been  Expressed  in  the 

Extreme  Planetary  Movements  1039 

7.  The  Universal  Harmonies  of  All  Six  Planets  may  Exist,  like  Common 

Quadriform  Counterpoint  1040 

8.  In  the  Celestial  Concords  which  Planet  Sings  Soprano,  which  Alto, 

which  Tenor,  and  Which  Bass  1049 

9.  Genesis  of  the  Eccentricities  in  the  Single  Planets  from  the  Procure¬ 

ment  of  the  Consonances  between  their  JMovements  1049 

10.  Epilogue  Concerning  the  Sun,  by  way  of  Conjecture  1080 


1007 


eooi 

1 101  earurgn  hiU)?^  lalusafl  9vrT  eilt  ;5nifne?)noO  .1 

SI 01  ebcioS  971?  edi  riifw  Rcritall  oinoamill  oH^  lo  qidnoDI  od^  aO  .fi 

ooiJfiiebJfuioO  od:^  lol  ^i^PSioOsVL  dniilocQ  Lc-orrnoacniBA  lo  vi/inimijB  .8 
tIOI  cJdiaomxaH  Ifti^sofoO  odl  lo 

-ibH  9jlj  sv^d  a>ln9nio7i)M  ol  gniniatK/I  ggniriT  ^iidW  nl  .h 

SSOl  ^vfiW  i&tTff  ni  fan^  ^^o^ta9rlO  oril  v:d  faoBaoiqxcI  rtsecf  aoilAfl  ouiom 

ed^  briB  aoilixti^l  to  iBoteuM  odj  lo  elelO  odl  ladT  .o 

m  baw^tqzS  ena  ,tomM  ddt  baa  toial/I  exU  ,B90«iino8floO  lo  bioiioO 

1-801  ftluoroOToM  fliB^teO 

edt.fli  b6B»9tqx3  flood  -frodstaoS  Q'/ad  boaoT  to  BoboM  LcoiBuM  odT  .3 
0801  SillOIUOVoM  ^itxUOiLBW  9019X1x3 

nocamoO  9:iil  ,laix3  '^Bxn  xi8  UA  ‘to  BsinonmH  iBatavinU  sdT  rS 

010!  iflioqtolm/oO  ratolhbfliJp 

doidw  ,ofliviqoy  esoiB  toflBl^  thidw  ebtooiioO  IbiIboIsO  odl  nl  .8 
0101  BBBfl  doidW  bfljB  .loxiaT  doidw 

-iniJoatT  odl  motl  atoiud^  ofjiai8  eiU  ai  89iiijhiaeoo5I  adJ  lo  ai«9ii90  .0 
0101  alflomovoM  tiorii  noov/iod  eooflBfloanoO  9di  lo  .Inooi 

0801  '  enLf&oeinoO  lo  xfiw  tOud  udi-gflixitaonoD  ^o^^oIiqS  .01 


K4\  v: 


TOO! 


BOOK  FIVE 


Concerning  the  very  perfect  harmony  of  the  celestial  movements^  and  the  genesis  of 
eccentricities  and  the  semidiameters,  and  the  periodic  times  from  the  same. 

After  the  model  of  the  most  correct  astronomical  doctrine  of  today,  and  the 
hypothesis  not  only  of  Copernicus  but  also  of  Tycho  Brahe,  whereof  either  hy¬ 
potheses  are  today  publicly  accepted  as  most  true,  and  the  Ptolemaic  as  out¬ 
moded. 

I  commence  a  sacred  discourse,  a  most  true  hymn  to  God  the  Founder,  and  I  judge 
it  to  be  piety,  not  to  sacrifice  many  hecatombs  of  bulls  to  Him  and  to  burn  incense  of 
innumerable  perfumes  and  cassia,  but  first  to  learn  myself,  and  afterwards  to  teach 
others  too,  how  great  He  is  in  wisdom,  how  great  in  power,  and  of  what  sort  in 
goodness.  For  to  wish  to  adorn  in  every  way  possible  the  things  that  should  receive 
adornment  and  to  envy  no  thing  its  goods — this  I  put  down  as  the  sign  of  the  greatest 
goodness,  and  in  this  respect  I  praise  Him  as  good  that  in  the  heights  of  His  wisdom 
He  finds  everything  whereby  each  thing  may  be  adorned  to  the  utmost  and  that  He 
can  do  by  his  unconquerable  power  all  that  he  has  decreed. 

Galen,  on  the  Use  of  Parts.  Book  m 

PROEM 

[268]  As  regards  that  which  I  prophesied  two  and  twenty  years  ago  (espe¬ 
cially  that  the  five  regular  solids  are  found  between  the  celestial  spheres),  as 
regards  that  of  which  I  was  firmly  persuaded  in  my  own  mind  before  I  had  seen 
Ptolemy’s  Harmonies,  as  regards  that  which  I  promised  my  friends  in  the  title 
of  this  fifth  book  before  I  was  sure  of  the  thing  itself,  that  which,  sixteen  years 
ago,  in  a  published  statement,  I  insisted  must  be  investigated,  for  the  sake  of 
which  I  spent  the  best  part  of  my  life  in  astronomical  speculations,  visited 
Tycho  Brahe,  [269]  and  took  up  residence  at  Prague:  finally,  as  God  the  Best 
and  Greatest,  Who  had  inspired  my  mind  and  aroused  my  great  desire,  pro¬ 
longed  my  life  and  strength  of  mind  and  furnished  the  other  means  through  the 
liberality  of  the  two  Emperors  and  the  nobles  of  this  province  of  Austria-on-the- 
Anisana:  after  I  had  discharged  my  astronomical  duties  as  much  as  sufficed, 
finally,  I  say,  I  brought  it  to  light  and  found  it  to  be  truer  than  I  had  even  hoped, 
and  I  discovered  among  the  celestial  movements  the  full  nature  of  harmony,  in 
its  due  measure,  together  with  all  its  parts  unfolded  in  Book  iii — not  in  that 
mode  wherein  I  had  conceived  it  in  my  mind  (this  is  not  last  in  my  joy)  but  in  a 
very  different  mode  which  is  also  very  excellent  and  very  perfect.  There  took 
place  in  this  intervening  time,  wherein  the  very  laborious  reconstruction  of  the 
movements  held  me  in  suspense,  an  extraordinary  augmentation  of  my  desire 
and  incentive  for  the  job,  a  reading  of  the  Harmonies  of  Ptolemy,  which  had 

1009 


1010 


KEPLER 


been  sent  to  me  in  manuscript  by  John  George  Herward,  Chancellor  of  Bavaria, 
a  very  distinguished  man  and  of  a  nature  to  advance  philosophy  and  every  type 
of  learning.  There,  beyond  my  expectations  and  with  the  greatest  wonder,  I 
found  approximately  the  whole  third  book  given  over  to  the  same  consideration 
of  celestial  harmony,  fifteen  hundred  years  ago.  But  indeed  astronomy  was  far 
from  being  of  age  as  yet;  and  Ptolemy,  in  an  unfortunate  attempt,  could  make 
others  subject  to  despair,  as  being  one  who,  like  Scipio  in  Cicero,  seemed  to  have 
recited  a  pleasant  Pythagorean  dream  rather  than  to  have  aided  philosophy. 
But  both  the  crudeness  of  the  ancient  philosophy  and  this  exact  agreement  in 
our  meditations,  down  to  the  last  hair,  over  an  interval  of  fifteen  centuries, 
greatly  strengthened  me  in  getting  on  with  the  job.  For  what  need  is  there  of 
many  men?  The  very  nature  of  things,  in  order  to  reveal  herself  to  mankind, 
was  at  work  in  the  different  interpreters  of  different  ages,  and  was  the  finger  of 
God — to  use  the  Hebrew  expression;  and  here,  in  the  minds  of  two  men,  who 
had  wholly  given  themselves  up  to  the  contemplation  of  nature,  there  was  the 
same  conception  as  to  the  configuration  of  the  world,  although  neither  had  been 
the  other^s  guide  in  taking  this  route.  But  now  since  the  first  light  eight  months 
ago,  since  broad  day  three  months  ago,  and  since  the  sun  of  my  wonderful  specu¬ 
lation  has  shone  fully  a  very  few  days  ago:  nothing  holds  me  back.  I  am  free  to 
give  myself  up  to  the  sacred  madness,  I  am  free  to  taunt  mortals  with  the  frank 
confession  that  I  am  stealing  the  golden  vessels  of  the  Egyptians,  in  order  to 
build  of  them  a  temple  for  my  God,  far  from  the  territory  of  Egypt.  If  you 
pardon  me,  I  shall  rejoice;  if  you  are  enraged,  I  shall  bear  up.  The  die  is  cast, 
and  I  am  writing  the  book — whether  to  be  read  by  my  contemporaries  or  by 
posterity  matters  not.  Let  it  await  its  reader  for  a  hundred  years,  if  God  Him¬ 
self  has  been  ready  for  His  contemplator  for  six  thousand  years. 

The  chapters  of  this  book  are  as  follows: 

1.  Concerning  the  five  regular  solid  figures. 

2.  On  the  kinship  between  them  and  the  harmonic  ratios. 

3.  Summary  of  astronomical  doctrine  necessary  for  speculation  into  the 
celestial  harmonies. 

4.  In  what  things  pertaining  to  the  planetary  movements  the  simple  con¬ 
sonances  have  been  expressed  and  that  all  those  consonances  which 
are  present  in  song  are  found  in  the  heavens. 

5.  That  the  clefs  of  the  musical  scale,  or  pitches  of  the  system,  and  the 
genera  of  consonances,  the  major  and  the  minor,  are  expressed  in  cer¬ 
tain  movements. 

6.  That  the  single  musical  Tones  or  Modes  are  somehow  expressed  by  the 
single  planets. 

7.  That  the  counterpoints  or  universal  harmonies  of  all  the  planets  can 
exist  and  be  different  from  one  another. 

8.  That  four  kinds  of  voice  are  expressed  in  the  planets:  soprano,  con¬ 
tralto,  tenor,  and  bass. 

[270]  9.  Demonstration  that  in  order  to  secure  this  harmonic  arrangement, 
those  very  planetary  eccentricities  which  any  planet  has  as  its  own, 
and  no  others,  had  to  be  set  up. 

10.  Epilogue  concerning  the  sun,  by  way  of  very  fertile  conjectures. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1011 

Before  taking  up  these  questions,  it  is  my  wish  to  impress  upon  my  readers 
the  very  exhortation  of  Timaeus,  a  pagan  philosopher,  who  was  going  to  speak 
on  the  same  things:  it  should  be  learned  by  Christians  with  the  greatest  ad¬ 
miration,  and  shame  too,  if  they  do  not  imitate  him:  ’AXX’  Soj/cpares,  tovto  ye 
8r}  TPT€Sj  6(701  Kal  Kara  ^paxv  (Toxppoavvris  perexovatVy  eirl  Traafj  oppfj  Kal  apiKpov 
Kai  peydXov  wpcxyparos  deov  aei  wov  KoiKomiv.  rj pas  8^  rovs  irepi  tov  ttolptos  \6yovs 
TTOieiadai  wy  pkWovTas ,  .  , ,  eL  py  TrauTawaaL  wapaWaTTopeu,  dvdyKrj  Oeovs  re  Kai  Beds 
eTTLKaXovpepovs  evx^(7BaL  rravra,  Kara  vow  eKetvoLS  pev  pdXLaraj  ewopevajs  8e  rjp'iv  eiire'tv. 
For  truly,  Socrates,  since  all  who  have  the  least  particle  of  intelligence  always  invoke 
God  whenever  they  enter  upon  any  business,  whether  light  or  arduous)  so  too,  unless 
we  have  clearly  strayed  away  from  all  sound  reason,  we  who  intend  to  have  a  dis¬ 
cussion  concerning  the  universe  must  of  necessity  make  our  sacred  wishes  and  pray 
to  the  Gods  and  Goddesses  with  one  mind  that  we  may  say  such  things  as  will  please 
and  he  acceptable  to  them  in  especial  and,  secondly,  to  you  too. 


1.  Concerning  the  Five  Regular  Solid  Figures 

[271]  It  has  been  said  in  the  second  book  how  the  regular  plane  figures  are 
fitted  together  to  form  solids;  there  we  spoke  of  the  five  regular  solids,  among 
others,  on  account  of  the  plane  figures.  Nevertheless  their  number,  five,  was 
there  demonstrated;  and  it  was  added  why  they  were  designated  by  the  Pla- 
tonists  as  the  figures  of  the  world,  and  to  what  element  any  solid  was  compared 
on  account  of  what  property.  But  now,  in  the  anteroom  of  this  book,  I  must 
speak  again  concerning  these  figures,  on  their  own  account,  not  on  account  of 
the  planes,  as  much  as  suffices  for  the  celestial  harmonies;  the  reader  will  find 
the  rest  in  the  Epitome  of  Astronomy,  Volume  ii,  Book  iv. 

Accordingly,  from  the  Mysterium  Cosmographicum,  let  me  here  briefly  incul¬ 
cate  the  order  of  the  five  solids  in  the  world,  whereof  three  are  primary  and  two 
secondary.  For  the  cube  (1)  is  the  outmost  and  the  most  spacious,  because  first¬ 
born  and  having  the  nature  [rationem]  of  a  whole,  in  the  very  form  of  its  genera¬ 
tion.  There  follows  the  tetrahedron  (2),  as  if  made  a  part,  by  cutting  up  the  cube; 
nevertheless  it  is  primary  too,  with  a  solid  trilinear  angle,  like  the  cube.  Within 
the  tetrahedron  is  the  dodecahedron  (3),  the  last  of  primary  figures,  namely,  like 
a  solid  composed  of  parts  of  a  cube  and  similar  parts  of  a  tetrahedron,  i.e.,  of 
irregular  tetrahedrons,  wherewith  the  cube  inside  is  roofed  over.  Next  in  order 
is  the  icosahedron  (4)  on  account  of  its  similarity,  the  last  of  the  secondary* 
figures  and  having  a  plurilinear  solid  angle.  The  octahedron  (6)  is  inmost,  which 
is  similar  to  the  cube  and  the  first  of  the  secondary  figures  and  to  which  as  in- 
scriptile  the  first  place  is  due,  just  as  the  first  outside  place  is  due  to  the  cube  as 
circumscriptile. 

[272]  However,  there  are  as  it  were  two  noteworthy  weddings  of  these  figures, 
made  from  different  classes:  the  males,  the  cube  and  the  dodecahedron,  among 
the  primary;  the  females,  the  octahedron  and  the  icosahedron,  among  the 
secondary,  to  which  is  added  one  as  it  were  bachelor  or  hermaphrodite,  the 
tetrahedron,  because  it  is  inscribed  in  itself,  just  as  those  female  solids  are  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  males  and  are  as  it  were  subject  to  them,  and  have  the  signs  of  the 
feminine  sex,  opposite  the  masculine,  namely,  angles  opposite  planes.  Moreover, 
just  as  the  tetrahedron  is  the  element,  bowels,  and  as  it  w’ere  rib  of  the  male 


KEPLER 


1012 

cube,  so  the  feminine  octahedron  is  the  element  and  part  of  the  tetrahedron  in 
another  way;  and  thus  the  tetrahedron  mediates  in  this  marriage. 

The  main  difference  in  these  wedlocks  or  family  relationships  consists  in  the 
following:  the  ratio  of  the  cube  is  rational.  For  the  tetrahedron  is  one  third  of 
the  body  of  the  cube,  and  the  octahedron  half  of  the  tetrahedron,  one  sixth  of 
the  cube;  while  the  ratio  of  the  dodecahedron's  wedding  is  irrational  [ineffahilis] 
but  divine. 

The  union  of  these  two  words  commands  the  reader  to  be  careful  as  to  their 
significance.  For  the  word  ineffahilis  here 
does  not  of  itself  denote  any  nobility,  as  else¬ 
where  in  theology  and  divine  things,  but  de¬ 
notes  an  inferior  condition.  For  in  geometry, 
as  was  said  in  the  first  book,  there  are  many 
irrationals,  which  do  not  on  that  account 
participate  in  a  divine  proportion  too.  But 
you  must  look  in  the  first  book  for  what  the 
divine  ratio,  or  rather  the  divine  section,  is. 

For  in  other  proportions  there  are  four  terms 
present;  and  three,  in  a  continued  propor¬ 
tion;  but  the  divine  requires  a  single  relation 
of  terms  outside  of  that  of  the  proportion  it¬ 
self,  namely  in  such  fashion  that  the  two 
lesser  terms,  as  parts  make  up  the  greater 
term,  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  as  much  as  is 
taken  away  from  this  wedding  of  the  dodecahedron  on  account  of  its  employing 
an  irrational  proportion,  is  added  to  it  conversely,  because  its  irrationality  ap¬ 
proaches  the  divine.  This  wedding  also  comprehends  the  solid  star  too,  the  gen¬ 
eration  whereof  arises  from  the  continuation  of  five  planes  of  the  dodecahedron 
till  they  all  meet  in  a  single  point.  See  its  generation  in  Book  ii. 

Lastly,  we  must  note  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  circumscribed  around  them  to 
those  inscribed  in  them:  in  the  case  of  the  tetrahedron  it  is  rational,  100,000  : 
33,333  or  3  :  1 ;  in  the  wedding  of  the  cube  it  is  irrational,  but  the  radius  of  the 
inscribed  sphere  is  rational  in  square,  and  is  itself  the  square  root  of  one  third 
the  square  on  the  radius  [of  the  circumscribed  sphere],  namely  100,000  :  57,735; 
in  the  wedding  of  the  dodecahedron,  clearly  irrational,  100,000  :  79,465;  in  the 
case  of  the  star,  100,000  :  52,573,  half  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  or  half  the 
distance  between  two  rays. 

2.  On  the  Kinship  Between  the  Harmonic  Ratios  and  the 
Five  Regular  Figures 

[273]  This  kinship  [cognatio]  is  various  and  manifold;  but  there  are  four  de¬ 
grees  of  kinship.  For  either  the  sign  of  kinship  is  taken  from  the  outward  form 
alone  which  the  figures  have,  or  else  ratios  which  are  the  same  as  the  harmonic 
arise  in  the  construction  of  the  side,  or  result  from  the  figures  already  con¬ 
structed,  taken  simply  or  together;  or,  lastly,  they  are  either  equal  to  or  ap¬ 
proximate  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  of  the  figure. 

In  the  first  degree,  the  ratios,  where  the  character  or  greater  term  is  3,  have 
kinship  with  the  triangular  plane  of  the  tetrahedron,  octahedron,  and  icosahe- 


1013 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

dron;  but  where  the  greater  term  is  4,  with  the  square  plane  of  the  cube;  where 
5,  with  the  pentagonal  plane  of  the  dodecahedron.  This  similitude  on  the  part 
of  the  plane  can  also  be  extended  to  the  smaller  term  of  the  ratio,  so  that  wher¬ 
ever  the  number  3  is  found  as  one  term  of  the  continued  doubles,  that  ratio  is 
held  to  be  akin  to  the  three  figures  first  named:  for  example,  1  :  3  and  2  :  3  and 
4  :  3  and  8  :  3,  et  cetera;  but  where  the  number  is  5,  that  ratio  is  abolutely  as¬ 
signed  to  the  wedding  of  the  dodecahedron:  for  example,  2  :  5  and  4  :  5  and  8  :  5, 
and  thus  3  :  5  and  3  :  10  and  6  :  5  and  12  :  5  and  24  :  5.  The  kinship  will  be  less 
probable  if  the  sum  of  the  terms  expresses  this  similitude,  as  in  2  :  3  the  sum  of 
the  terms  is  equal  to  5,  as  if  to  say  that  2  :  3  is  akin  to  the  dodecahedron.  The 
kinship  on  account  of  the  outward  form  of  the  solid  angle  is  similar:  the  solid 
angle  is  trilinear  among  the  primary  figures,  quadrilinear  in  the  octahedron,  and 
quinquelinear  in  the  icosahedron.  And  so  if  one  term  of  the  ratio  participates  in 
the  number  3,  the  ratio  will  be  connected  with  the  primary  bodies;  but  if  in  the 
number  4,  with  the  octahedron;  and  finally,  if  in  the  number  5,  with  the  icosahe¬ 
dron.  But  in  the  feminine  solids  this  kinship  is  more  apparent,  because  the 
characteristic  figure  latent  within  follows  upon  the  form  of  the  angle:  the  tetra¬ 
gon  in  the  octahedron,  the  pentagon  in  the  icosahedron;  and  so  3  :  5  would  go 
to  the  sectioned  icosahedron  for  both  reasons. 

The  second  degree  of  kinship,  which  is  genetic,  is  to  be  conceived  as  follows: 
First,  some  harmonic  ratios  of  numbers  are  akin  to  one  wedding  or  family, 
namely,  perfect  ratios  to  the  single  family  of  the  cube;  conversely,  there  is  the 
ratio  which  is  never  fully  expressed  in  numbers  and  cannot  be  demonstrated  by 
numbers  in  any  other  way,  except  by  a  long  series  of  numbers  gradually  ap¬ 
proaching  it:  this  ratio  is  called  divine,  when  it  is  perfect,  and  it  rules  in  various 
ways  throughout  the  dodecahedral  wedding.  Accordingly,  the  following  con¬ 
sonances  begin  to  shadow  forth  that  ratio:  1  :  2  and  2  :  3  and  2  :  3  and  5  :  8.  For 
it  e:dsts  most  imperfectly  in  1  :  2,  more  perfectly  in  5  :  8,  and  still  more  perfectly 
if  we  add  5  and  8  to  make  13  and  take  8  as  the  numerator,  if  this  ratio  has  not 
stopped  being  harmonic. 

Further,  in  constructing  the  side  of  the  figure,  the  diameter  of  the  globe  must 
be  cut;  and  the  octahedron  demands  its  bisection,  the  cube  and  the  tetrahedron 
its  trisection,  the  dodecahedral  wedding  its  quinquesection.  Accordingly,  the 
ratios  between  the  figures  are  distributed  according  to  the  numbers  which  ex¬ 
press  those  ratios.  But  the  square  on  the  diameter  is  cut  too,  or  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  figure  is  formed  from  a  fixed  part  of  the  diameter.  And  then  the 
squares  on  the  sides  are  compared  with  the  square  on  the  diameter,  and  they 
constitute  the  following  ratios:  in  the  cube  1  :  3,  in  the  tetrahedron  2  :  3,  in  the 
octahedron  1  : 2.  Wherefore,  if  the  two  ratios  are  put  together,  the  cubic  and 
the  tetrahedral  will  give  1:2;  the  cubic  and  the  octahedral,  2:3;  the  octahedral 
and  the  tetrahedral,  3  :  4.  The  sides  in  the  dodecahedral  wedding  are  irrational. 

Thirdly,  the  harmonic  ratios  follow  in  various  ways  upon  the  already  con¬ 
structed  figures.  For  either  the  number  of  the  sides  of  the  plane  is  compared 
with  the  number  of  lines  in  the  total  figure;  [274]  and  the  following  ratios  arise: 
in  the  cube,  4  :  12  or  1  : 3;  in  the  tetrahedron  3  :  6  or  1  : 2;  in  the  octahedron 
3  :  12  or  1  : 4;  in  the  dodecahedron  5  : 30  or  1  :  6;  in  the  icosahedron  3  : 30  or 
1  : 10.  Or  else  the  number  of  sides  of  the  plane  is  compared  with  the  number  of 
planes;  then  the  cube  gives  4  :  6  or  2  :  3,  the  tetrahedron  3  :  4,  the  octahedron 
3  : 8,  the  dodecahedron  5  :  12,  the  icosahedron  3  : 20.  Or  else  the  number  of 


1014 


KEPLER 


sides  or  angles  of  the  plane  is  compared  with  the  number  of  solid  angles,  and  the 
cube  gives  4  :  8  or  1  :  2,  the  tetrahedron  3  :  4,  the  octahedron  3  :  6  or  1  :  2,  the 
dodecahedron  mth  its  consort  5  :  20  or  3  :  12  (t.e.,  1  :  4).  Or  else  the  number  of 
planes  is  compared  \nth  the  number  of  solid  angles,  and  the  cubic  wedding  gives 
6  :  8  or  3  : 4,  the  tetrahedron  the  ratio  of  equality,  the  dodecahedral  wedding 
12  :  20  or  3  :  5.  Or  else  the  number  of  all  the  sides  is  compared  with  the  number 
of  the  solid  angles,  and  the  cube  gives  8  :  12  or  2  : 3,  the  tetrahedron  4  : 6  or 

2  : 3,  and  the  octahedron  6  :  12  or  1  :  2,  the  dodecahedron  20  : 30  or  2  : 3,  the 
icosahedron  12  :  30  or  2  :  5. 

Moreover,  the  bodies  too  are  compared  with,  one  another,  if  the  tetrahedron 
is  stowed  away  in  the  cube,  the  octahedron  in  the  tetrahedron  and  cube,  by 
geometrical  inscription.  The  tetrahedron  is  one  third  of  the  cube,  the  octahedron 
half  of  the  tetrahedron,  one  sixth  of  the  cube,  just  as  the  octahedron,  which  is 
inscribed  in  the  globe,  is  one  sLxth  of  the  cube  which  circumscribes  the  globe. 
The  ratios  of  the  remaining  bodies  are  irrational. 

The  fourth  species  or  degree  of  kinship  is  more  proper  to  this  work:  the  ratio 
of  the  spheres  inscribed  in  the  figures  to  the  spheres  circumscribing  them  is 
sought,  and  what  harmonic  ratios  approximate  them  is  calculated.  For  only  in 
the  tetrahedron  is  the  diameter  of  the  inscribed  sphere  rational,  namely,  one 
third  of  the  circumscribed  sphere.  But  in  the  cubic  wedding  the  ratio,  which  is 
single  there,  is  as  lines  which  are  rational  only  in  square.  For  the  diameter  of  the 
inscribed  sphere  is  to  the  diameter  of  the  circumscribed  sphere  as  the  square  root 
of  the  ratio  1:3.  And  if  you  compare  the  ratios  with  one  another,  the  ratio  of 
the  tetrahedral  spheres  is  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  cubic  spheres.  In  the 
dodecahedral  wedding  there  is  again  a  single  ratio,  but  an  irrational  one,  shghtly 
greater  than  4  :  5.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  cube  and  octahedron 
is  approximated  by  the  follomng  consonances:  1  :  2,  as  proximately  greater,  and 

3  :  5,  as  proximately  smaller.  But  the  ratio  of  the  dodecahedral  spheres  is  ap¬ 
proximated  by  the  consonances  4:5  and  5  :  6,  as  proximately  smaller,  and  3  :  4 
and  5  :  8,  as  proximately  greater. 

But  if  for  certain  reasons  1  :  2  and  1  :  3  are  arrogated  to  the  cube,  the  ratio  of 
the  spheres  of  the  cube  will  be  to  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  tetrahedron  as 
the  consonances  1  : 2  and  1  : 3,  which  have  been  ascribed  to  the  cube,  are  to 
1  :  4  and  1  :  9,  which  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  tetrahedron,  if  this  proportion  is 
to  be  used.  For  these  ratios,  too,  are  as  the  squares  of  those  consonances.  And 
because  1  : 9  is  not  harmonic,  1  : 8  the  proximate  ratio  takes  its  place  in  the 
tetrahedron.  But  by  this  proportion  approximately  4  :  5  and  3  : 4  will  go  with 
the  dodecahedral  wedding.  For  as  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  cube  is  ap¬ 
proximately  the  cube  of  the  ratio  of  the  dodecahedral,  so  too  the  cubic  con¬ 
sonances  1  :  2  and  2  :  3  are  approximately  the  cubes  of  the  consonances  4  :  5  and 
3  :  4.  For  4  :  5  cubed  is  64  :  125,  and  1  :  2  is  64  : 128.  So  3  :  4  cubed  is  27  :  64, 
and  1  :  3  is  27  :  81. 

3.  A  Summary  of  Astronomical  Doctrine  Necessary  for  Speculation 
INTO  the  Celestial  Harmonies 

First  of  all,  my  readers  should  know  that  the  ancient  astronomical  hypotheses 
of  Ptolemy,  in  the  fashion  in  which  they  have  been  unfolded  in  the  Theoricae  of 
Peurbach  and  by  the  other  writers  of  epitomes^  are  to  be  completely  removed 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1015 

from  this  discussion  and  cast  out  of  [275]  the  mind.  For  they  do  not  convey  the 
true  lay  out  of  the  bodies  of  the  world  and  the  polity  of  the  movements. 

Although  I  cannot  do  otherwise  than  to  put  solely  Copernicus^  opinion  con¬ 
cerning  the  world  in  the  place  of  those  hypotheses  and,  if  that  were  possible,  to 
persuade  everyone  of  it ;  but  because  the  thing  is  still  new  among  the  mass  of  the 
intelligentsia  [apud  vulgiis  siudiosorum],  and  the  doctrine  that  the  Earth  is  one 
of  the  planets  and  moves  among  the  stars  around  a  motionless  sun  sounds  very 
absurd  to  the  ears  of  most  of  them:  therefore  those  who  are  shocked  by  the  un¬ 
familiarity  of  this  opinion  should  know  that  these  harmonical  speculations  are 
possible  even  with  the  hypotheses  of  Tycho  Brahe — because  that  author  holds, 
in  common  with  Copernicus,  everything  else  which  pertains  to  the  lay  out  of 
the  bodies  and  the  tempering  of  the  movements,  and  transfers  solely  the  Co- 
pernican  annual  movement  of  the  Earth  to  the  whole  system  of  planetary 
spheres  and  to  the  sun,  which  occupies  the  centre  of  that  system,  in  the  opinion 
of  both  authors.  For  after  this  transference  of  movement  it  is  nevertheless  true 
that  in  Brahe  the  Earth  occupies  at  any  time  the  same  place  that  Copernicus 
gives  it,  if  not  in  the  very  vast  and  measureless  region  of  the  fixed  stars,  at  least 
in  the  system  of  the  planetary  world.  And  accordingly,  just  as  he  who  draws  a 
circle  on  paper  makes  the  writing-foot  of  the  compass  revolve,  while  he  who 
fastens  the  paper  or  tablet  to  a  turning  lathe  draws  the  same  circle  on  the  re¬ 
volving  tablet  with  the  foot  of  the  compass  or  stylus  motionless;  so  too,  in  the 
case  of  Copernicus  the  Earth,  by  the  real  movement  of  its  body,  measures  out  a 
circle  revolving  midway  between  the  circle  of  Mars  on  the  outside  and  that  of 
Venus  on  the  inside;  but  in  the  case  of  Tycho  Brahe  the  whole  planetary  system 
(wherein  among  the  rest  the  circles  of  Mars  and  Venus  are  found)  revolves  like 
a  tablet  on  a  lathe  and  applies  to  the  motionless  Earth,  or  to  the  stylus  on  the 
lathe,  the  midspace  between  the  circles  of  Mars  and  Venus;  and  it  comes  about 
from  this  movement  of  the  system  that  the  Earth  within  it,  although  remaining 
motionless,  marks  out  the  same  circle  around  the  sun  and  midway  between 
Mars  and  Venus,  which  in  Copernicus  it  marks  out  by  the  real  movement  of  its 
body  while  the  system  is  at  rest.  Therefore,  since  harmonic  speculation  con¬ 
siders  the  eccentric  movements  of  the  planets,  as  if  seen  from  the  sun,  you  may 
easily  understand  that  if  any  observer  were  stationed  on  a  sun  as  much  in  mo¬ 
tion  as  you  please,  nevertheless  for  him  the  Earth,  although  at  rest  (as  a  con¬ 
cession  to  Brahe),  would  seem  to  describe  the  annual  circle  midway  between 
the  planets  and  in  an  intermediate  length  of  time.  Wherefore,  if  there  is  any  man 
of  such  feeble  wit  that  he  cannot  grasp  the  movement  of  the  earth  among  the 
stars,  nevertheless  he  can  take  pleasure  in  the  most  excellent  spectacle  of  this 
most  divine  construction,  if  he  applies  to  their  image  in  the  sun  whatever  he 
hears  concerning  the  daily  movements  of  the  Earth  in  its  eccentric — such  an 
image  as  Tycho  Brahe  exhibits,  with  the  Earth  at  rest. 

And  nevertheless  the  followers  of  the  true  Samian  philosophy  have  no  just 
cause  to  be  jealous  of  sharing  this  delightful  speculation  with  such  persons,  be¬ 
cause  their  joy  will  be  in  many  ways  more  perfect,  as  due  to  the  consummate 
perfection  of  speculation,  if  they  have  accepted  the  immobility  of  the  sim  and 
the  movement  of  the  earth. 

Firstly  [i],  therefore,  let  my  readers  grasp  that  today  it  is  absolutely  certain 
among  all  astronomers  that  all  the  planets  revolve  around  the  sun,  with  the 
exception  of  the  moon,  which  alone  has  the  Earth  as  its  centre:  the  magnitude 


1016  KEPLER 

of  the  moon^s  sphere  or  orbit  is  not  great  enough  for  it  to  be  delineated  in  this 
diagram  in  a  just  ratio  to  the  rest.  Therefore,  to  the  other  five  planets,  a  sixth, 
the  Earth,  is  added,  which  traces  a  sixth  circle  around  the  sun,  whether  by  its 
own  proper  movement  with  the  sun  at  rest,  or  motionless  itself  and  with  the 
whole  planetary  system  revolving. 

Secondly  [ii]:  It  is  also  certain  that  all  the  planets  are  eccentric,  i.e.,  they 
change  their  distances  from  the 
sun,  in  such  fashion  that  in  one 
part  of  their  circle  they  become 
farthest  away  from  the  sun, 

[276]  and  in  the  opposite  part 
they  come  nearest  to  the  sun. 

In  the  accompanying  diagram 
three  circles  apiece  have  been 
drawn  for  the  single  planets: 
none  of  them  indicate  the  ec¬ 
centric  route  of  the  planet  itself; 
but  the  mean  circle,  such  as  BE 
in  the  case  of  Mars,  is  equal  to 
the  eccentric  orbit,  with  respect 
to  its  longer  diameter.  But  the 
orbit  itself,  such  as  AD,  touches 
AFy  the  upper  of  the  three,  in 
one  place  A,  and  the  lower  circle 
CDy  in  the  opposite  place  D,  The 
circle  GH  made  with  dots  and 
described  through  the  centre  of 
the  sun  indicates  the  route  of 
the  sun  according  to  Tycho 
Brahe.  And  if  the  sun  moves  on 
this  route,  then  absolutely  all 
the  points  in  this  whole  planet¬ 
ary  system  here  depicted  ad¬ 
vance  upon  an  equal  route,  each 
upon  his  own.  And  with  one 
point  of  it  (namely,  the  centre 
of  the  sun)  stationed  at  one 
point  of  its  circle,  as  here  at  the 
lowest,  absolutely  each  and 
every  point  of  the  system  will  be 
stationed  at  the  lowest  part  of 
its  circle.  However,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  space  the  three  circles  of 
Venus  unite  in  one,  contrary  to  my  intention. 

Thirdly  [iiij:  Let  the  reader  recall  from  my  Mysterium  Cosmographicum, 
which  I  published  twenty-two  years  ago,  that  the  number  of  the  planets  or  cir¬ 
cular  routes  around  the  sun  was  taken  by  the  very  wise  Founder  from  the  five 
regular  solids,  concerning  which  Euclid,  so  many  ages  ago,  wrote  his  book  which 
is  called  the  Elements  in  that  it  is  built  up  out  of  a  series  of  propositions.  But  it 
has  been  made  clear  in  the  second  book  of  this  work  that  there  cannot  be  more 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1017 

regular  bodies,  i.e.y  that  regular  plane  figures  cannot  fit  together  in  a  solid  more 
than  five  times. 

Fourthly  [iv] :  As  regards  the  ratio  of  the  planetary  orbits,  the  ratio  between 
two  neighbouring  planetary  orbits  is  always  of  such  a  magnitude  that  it  is  easily 
apparent  that  each  and  every  one  of  them  approaches  the  single  ratio  of  the 
spheres  of  one  of  the  five  regular  solids,  namely,  that  of  the  sphere  circumscrib¬ 
ing  to  the  sphere  inscribed  in  the  figure.  Nevertheless  it  is  not  wholly  equal,  as  I 
once  dared  to  promise  concerning  the  final  perfection  of  astronomy.  For,  after 
completing  the  demonstration  of  the  intervals  from  Brahe’s  observations,  I 
discovered  the  following:  if  the  angles  of  the  cube  [277]  are  applied  to  the  inmost 
circle  of  Saturn,  the  centres  of  the  planes  are  approximately  tangent  to  the 
middle  circle  of  Jupiter;  and  if  the  angles  of  the  tetrahedron  are  placed  against 
the  inmost  circle  of  Jupiter,  the  centres  of  the  planes  of  the  tetrahedron  are  ap¬ 
proximately  tangent  to  the  outmost  circle  of  Mars ;  thus  if  the  angles  of  the  octa¬ 
hedron  are  placed  against  any  circle  of  Venus  (for  the  total  interval  between  the 
three  has  been  very  much  reduced),  the  centres  of  the  planes  of  the  octahedron 
penetrate  and  descend  deeply  within  the  outmost  circle  of  Mercury,  but  none¬ 
theless  do  not  reach  as  far  as  the  middle  circle  of  Mercury;  and  finally,  closest 
of  all  to  the  ratios  of  the  dodecahedral  and  icosahedral  spheres — ^which  ratios 
are  equal  to  one  another — are  the  ratios  or  intervals  between  the  circles  of  Mars 
and  the  Earth,  and  the  Earth  and  Venus;  and  those  intervals  are  similarly  equal, 
if  we  compute  from  the  inmost  circle  of  Mars  to  the  middle  circle  of  the  Earth, 
but  from  the  middle  circle  of  the  Earth  to  the  middle  circle  of  Venus.  For  the 
middle  distance  of  the  Earth  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  least  distance 
of  Mars  and  the  middle  distance  of  Venus.  However,  these  two  ratios  between 
the  planetary  circles  are  still  greater  than  the  ratios  of  those  two  pairs  of  spheres 
in  the  figures,  in  such  fashion  that  the  centres  of  the  dodecahedral  planes  are  not 
tangent  to  the  outmost  circle  of  the  Earth,  and  the  centres  of  the  icosahedral 
planes  are  not  tangent  to  the  outmost  circle  of  Venus;  nor,  however,  can  this 
gap  be  filled  by  the  semidiameter  of  the  lunar  sphere,  by  adding  it,  on  the  upper 
side,  to  the  greatest  distance  of  the  Earth  and  subtracting  it,  on  the  lower,  from 
the  least  distance  of  the  same.  But  I  find  a  certain  other  ratio  of  figures — name¬ 
ly,  if  I  take  the  augmented  dodecahedron,  to  which  I  have  given  the  name  of 
echinus,  (as  being  fashioned  from  twelve  quinquangular  stars  and  thereby  very 
close  to  the  five  regular  solids),  if  I  take  it,  I  say,  and  place  its  twelve  points  in 
the  inmost  circle  of  Mars,  then  the  sides  of  the  pentagons,  which  are  the  bases 
of  the  single  rays  or  points,  touch  the  middle  circle  of  Venus.  In  short:  the  cube 
and  the  octahedron,  which  are  consorts,  do  not  penetrate  their  planetary 
spheres  at  all;  the  dodecahedron  and  the  icosahedron,  which  are  consorts,  do 
not  wholly  reach  to  theirs,  the  tetrahedron  exactly  touches  both:  in  the  first  case 
there  is  falling  short;  in  the  second,  excess;  and  in  the  third,  equality,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  planetary  intervals. 

Wherefore  it  is  clear  that  the  very  ratios  of  the  planetary  intervals  from  the 
sun  have  not  been  taken  from  the  regular  solids  alone.  For  the  Creator,  who  is 
the  very  source  of  geometry  and,  as  Plato  wrote,  ^'practices  eternal  geometry,” 
does  not  stray  from  his  own  archetype.  And  indeed  that  very  thing  could  be  in¬ 
ferred  from  the  fact  that  all  the  planets  change  their  intervals  throughout  fixed 
periods  of  time,  in  such  fashion  that  each  has  two  marked  intervals  from  the 
sun,  a  greatest  and  a  least;  and  a  fourfold  comparison  of  the  intervals  from  the 


1018 


KEPLER 


sun  is  possible  between  two  planets:  the  comparison  can  be  made  between  either 
the  greatest,  or  the  least,  or  the  contrary  intervals  most  remote  from  one  an¬ 
other,  or  the  contrary  intervals  nearest  together.  In  this  way  the  comparisons 
made  two  by  two  between  neighbouring  planets  are  twenty  in  number,  although 
on  the  contrary  there  are  only  five  regular  solids.  But  it  is  consonant  that  if  the 
Creator  had  any  concern  for  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  in  general.  He  would  also 
have  had  concern  for  the  ratio  which  exists  between  the  varying  intervals  of  the 
single  planets  specifically  and  that  the  concern  is  the  same  in  both  cases  and  the 
one  is  bound  up  with  the  other.  If  we  ponder  that,  we  will  comprehend  that  for 
setting  up  the  diameters  and  eccentricities  conjointly,  there  is  need  of  more 
principles,  outside  of  the  five  regular  solids. 

Fifthly  [v]:  To  arrive  at  the  movements  between  which  the  consonances  have 
been  set  up,  once  more  I  impress  upon  the  reader  that  in  the  Commentaries  on 
Mars  I  have  demonstrated  from  the  sure  observations  of  Brahe  that  daily  arcs, 
which  are  equal  in  one  and  the  same  eccentric  circle,  are  not  traversed  with  equal 
speed;  but  that  these  differing  delays  in  equal  parts  of  the  eccentric  observe  the 
ratio  of  their  distances  from  the  sun,  the  source  of  movement;  and  conversely, 
that  if  equal  times  are  assumed,  namely,  one  natural  day  in  both  cases,  the 
corresponding  true  diurnal  arcs  [278]  of  one  eccentric  orbit  have  to  one  another  the 
ratio  which  is  the  inverse  of  the  ratio  of  the  two  distances  from  the  sun.  Moreover,  I 
demonstrated  at  the  same  time  that  the  planetary  orbit  is  elliptical  and  the  sun, 
the  source  of  movement,  is  at  one  of  the  foci  of  this  ellipse ;  and  so,  when  the  planet 
has  completed  a  quarter  of  its  total  circuit  from  its  aphelion,  then  it  is  exactly  at  its 
mean  distance  from  the  sun,  midway  between  its  greatest  distance  at  the  aphelion 
and  its  least  at  the  perihelion.  But  from  these  two  axioms  it  results  that  the  diurnal 
mean  movement  of  the  planet  in  its  eccentric  is  the  same  as  the  true  diurnal  arc  of  its 
eccentric  at  those  moments  wherein  the  planet  is  at  the  end  of  the  quadrant  of  the 
eccentric  measured  from  the  aphelion,  although  that  true  quadrant  appears  still 
smaller  than  the  just  quadrant.  Furthermore,  it  follows  that  the  sum  of  any  two  true 
diurnal  eccentric  arcs,  one  of  which  is  at  the  same  distnace  from  the  aphelion  that 
the  other  is  from  the  perihelion,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  two  mean  diurnal  arcs. 
And  as  a  consequence,  since  the  ratio  of  circles  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  diameters, 
the  ratio  of  one  mean  diurnal  arc  to  the  sum  of  all  the  mean  and  equal  arcs  in  the 
total  circuit  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  mean  diurnal  arc  to  the  sum  of  all  the  true 
eccentric  arcs,  which  are  the  same  in  number  but  unequal  to  one  another.  And  those 
things  should  first  be  known  concerning  the  true  diurnal  arcs  of  the  eccentric 
and  the  true  movements,  so  that  by  means  of  them  we  may  understand  the 
movements  which  would  be  apparent  if  we  were  to  suppose  an  eye  at  the  sun. 

Sixthly  [vij:  But  as  regards  the  arcs  which  are  apparent,  as  it  were,  from  the 
sun,  it  is  known  even  from  the  ancient  astronomy  that,  among  true  movements 
which  are  equal  to  one  another,  that  movement  which  is  farther  distant  from 
the  centre  of  the  world  (as  being  at  the  aphelion)  will  appear  smaller  to  a  be¬ 
holder  at  that  centre,  but  the  movement  which  is  nearer  (as  being  at  the  peri¬ 
helion)  will  similarly  appear  greater.  Therefore,  since  moreover  the  true  diurnal 
arcs  at  the  near  distance  are  still  greater,  on  account  of  the  faster  movement, 
and  still  smaller  at  the  distant  aphelion,  on  account  of  the  slowness  of  the  move¬ 
ment,  I  demonstrated  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars  that  the  ratio  of  the  apparent 
diurnal  arcs  of  one  eccentric  circle  is  fairly  exactly  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  squares 
of  their  distances  from  the  sun.  For  example,  if  the  planet  one  day  when  it  is  at 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1019 


a  distance  from  the  sun  of  10  parts,  in  any  measure  whatsoever,  but  on  the 
opposite  day,  when  it  is  at  the  perihelion,  of  9  similar  parts:  it  is  certain  that 
from  the  sun  its  apparent  progress  at  the  aphelion  will  be  to  its  apparent 
progress  at  the  perihelion,  as  81  :  100. 

But  that  is  true  with  these  provisos:  First,  that  the  eccentric  arcs  should  not 
be  great,  lest  they  partake  of  distinct  distances  which  are  very  different — i.e,, 
lest  the  distances  of  their  termini  from  the  apsides  cause  a  perceptible  variation ; 
second,  that  the  eccentricity  should  not  be  very  great,  for  the  greater  its  ec¬ 
centricity  {viz.j  the  greater  the  arc  becomes)  the  more  the  angle  of  its  apparent 
movement  increases  beyond  the  measure  of  its  approach  to  the  sun,  by  Theorem 
8  of  Euclid’s  Optics]  none  the  less  in  small  arcs  even  a  great  distance  is  of  no  mo¬ 
ment,  as  I  have  remarked  in  my  Optics j  Chapter  11.  But  there  is  another  reason 
why  I  make  that  admonition.  For  the  eccentric  arcs  around  the  mean  anomalies 
are  viewed  obliquely  from  the  centre  of  the  sun.  This  obliquity  subtracts  from 
the  magnitude  of  the  apparent  movement,  since  conversely  the  arcs  around  the 
apsides  are  presented  directly  to  an  eye  stationed  as  it  \vere  at  the  sun.  There¬ 
fore,  when  the  eccentricity  is  very  great,  then  the  eccentricity  takes  away  per¬ 
ceptibly  from  the  ratio  of  the  movements ;  if  without  any  diminution  we  apply 
the  mean  diurnal  movement  to  the  mean  distance,  as  if  at  the  mean  distance, 
it  would  appear  to  have  the  same  magnitude  which  it  does  have — as  will  be  ap¬ 
parent  below  in  the  case  of  Mercury.  All  these  things  are  treated  at  greater 
length  in  Book  v  of  the  Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy]  but  they  have  been 
mentioned  here  too  because  they  have  to  do  with  the  very  terms  of  the  celestial 
consonances,  considered  in  themselves  singly  and  separately. 

Seventhly  [vii]:  If  by  chance  anyone  runs  into  those  diurnal  movements  which 
are  apparent  [279]  to  those  gazing  not  as  it  were  from  the  sun  but  from  the 
Earth,  with  which  movements  Book  vi  of  the  Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy 
deals,  he  should  know  that  their  rationale  is  plainly  not  considered  in  this  busi¬ 
ness.  Nor  should  it  be,  since  the  Earth  is  not  the  source  of  the  planetary  move¬ 
ments,  nor  can  it  be,  since  with  respect  to  deception  of  sight  they  degenerate  not 
only  into  mere  quiet  or  apparent  stations  but  even  into  retrogradation,  in 
which  way  a  whole  infinity  of  ratios  is  assigned  to  all  the  planets,  simultaneously 
and  equally.  Therefore,  in  order  that  we  may  hold  for  certain  what  sort  of  ratios 
of  their  owm  are  constituted  by  the  single  real  eccentric  orbits  (although  these 
too  are  still  apparent,  as  it  were  to  one  looking  from  the  sun,  the  source  of  move¬ 
ment),  first  we  must  remove  from  those  movements  of  their  owtl  this  image  of 
the  adventitious  annual  movement  common  to  all  five,  whether  it  arises  from 
the  movement  of  the  Earth  itself,  according  to  Copernicus,  or  from  the  annual 
movement  of  the  total  system,  according  to  Tycho  Brahe,  and  the  winnowed 
movements  proper  to  each  planet  are  to  be  presented  to  sight. 

Eighthly  [viiij:  So  far  w^e  have  dealt  with  the  different  delays  or  arcs  of  one 
and  the  same  planet.  Now  we  must  also  deal  with  the  comparison  of  the  move¬ 
ments  of  tw^o  planets.  Here  take  note  of  the  definitions  of  the  terms  w^hich  w^ill 
be  necessary  for  us.  We  give  the  name  of  nearest  apsides  of  tw^o  planets  to  the 
perihelion  of  the  upper  and  the  aphelion  of  the  low^er,  notwithstanding  that 
they  tend  not  tow^ards  the  same  region  of  the  world  but  towards  distinct  and  per¬ 
haps  contrary  regions.  By  extreme  movements  understand  the  slow^est  and  the 
fastest  of  the  w^hole  planetary  circuit;  by  converging  or  converse  extreme  move- 
ments,  those  which  are  at  the  nearest  apsides  of  tw^o  planets — namelv,  at  the 


1020 


KEPLER 


perihelion  of  the  upper  planet  and  the  aphelion  of  the  lower;  by  diverging  or 
diverse^  those  at  the  opposite  apsides — namely,  the  aphelion  of  the  upper  and 
the  perihelion  of  the  lower.  Therefore  again,  a  certain  part  of  my  Mysterium 
Cosmographicunij  which  was  suspended  twenty-two  years  ago,  because  it  was 
not  yet  clear,  is  to  be  completed  and  herein  inserted.  For  after  finding  the  true 
intervals  of  the  spheres  by  the  observations  of  Tycho  Brahe  and  continuous 
labour  and  much  time,  at  last,  at  last  the  right  ratio  of  the  periodic  times  to  the 
spheres 

though  it  was  late,  looked  to  the  unskilled  man, 

yet  looked  to  him,  and,  after  much  time,  came, 
and,  if  you  want  the  exact  time,  was  conceived  mentally  on  the  8th  of  March 
in  this  year  One  Thousand  Six  Hundred  and  Eighteen  but  unfelicitously  sub¬ 
mitted  to  calculation  and  rejected  as  false,  finally,  summoned  back  on  the  15th 
of  May,  with  a  fresh  assault  undertaken,  outfought  the  darkness  of  my  mind  by 
the  great  proof  afforded  by  my  labor  of  seventeen  years  on  Brahe^s  observations 
and  meditation  upon  it  uniting  in  one  concord,  in  such  fashion  that  I  first  be¬ 
lieved  I  was  dreaming  and  was  presupposing  the  object  of  my  search  among  the 
principles.  But  it  is  absolutely  certain  and  exact  that  the  ratio  which  exists  be¬ 
tween  the  periodic  times  of  any  two  planets  is  precisely  the  ratio  of  the  ^th  power 
of  the  mean  distances,  i.e.,  of  the  spheres  themselves]  provided,  however,  that  the 
arithmetic  mean  between  both  diameters  of  the  elliptic  orbit  be  slightly  less 
than  the  longer  diameter.  And  so  if  any  one  take  the  period,  say,  of  the  Earth, 
which  is  one  year,  and  the  period  of  Saturn,  which  is  thirty  years,  and  extract 
the  cube  roots  of  this  ratio  and  then  square  the  ensuing  ratio  by  squaring  the 
cube  roots,  he  will  have  as  his  numerical  products  the  most  just  ratio  of  the 
distances  of  the  Earth  and  Saturn  from  the  sun.^  For  the  cube  root  of  1  is  1,  and 
the  square  of  it  is  1 ;  and  the  cube  root  of  30  is  greater  than  3,  and  therefore  the 
square  of  it  is  greater  than  9.  And  Saturn,  at  its  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  is 
slightly  higher  [280]  than  nine  times  the  mean  distance  of  the  Earth  from  the 
sun.  Further  on,  in  Chapter  9,  the  use  of  this  theorem  will  be  necessary  for  the 
demonstration  of  the  eccentricities. 

Ninthly  [ixj:  If  now  you  wdsh  to  measure  with  the  same  yardstick,  so  to 
speak,  the  true  daily  journeys  of  each  planet  through  the  ether,  two  ratios  are 
to  be  compounded — the  ratio  of  the  true  (not  the  apparent)  diurnal  arcs  of  the 
eccentric,  and  the  ratio  of  the  mean  intervals  of  each  planet  from  the  sun  (be¬ 
cause  that  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  amplitude  of  the  spheres),  i.e.,  the  true 
diurnal  arc  of  each  planet  is  to  he  multiplied  by  the  semidiameter  of  its  sphere:  the 
products  will  be  numbers  fitted  for  investigating  whether  or  not  those  journeys 
are  in  harmonic  ratios. 

Tenthly  [xj:  In  order  that  you  may  truly  know  how  great  any  one  of  these 
diurnal  journeys  appears  to  be  to  an  eye  stationed  as  it  were  at  the  sun,  although 
this  same  thing  can  be  got  immediately  from  the  astronomy,  nevertheless  it 
will  also  be  manifest  if  you  multiply  the  ratio  of  the  journeys  by  the  inverse 
ratio  not  of  the  mean,  but  of  the  true  intervals  which  exist  at  any  position  on 

iPor  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars^  chapter  48,  page  232, 1  have  proved  that  this  Arithmetic 
mean  is  either  the  diameter  of  the  circle  which  is  equal  in  length  to  the  elliptic  orbit,  or  else 
is  very  slightly  less. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1021 


the  eccentrics:  multiply  the  journey  of  the  upper  by  the  interval  of  the  lower  planet 
from  the  sun,  and  conversely  multiply  the  journey  of  the  lower  by  the  interval  of  the 
upper  from  the  sun. 

Eleventhly  [xi]:  And  in  the  same  way,  if  the  apparent  movements  are  given, 
at  the  aphelion  of  the  one  and  at  the  perihelion  of  the  other,  or  conversely  or 
alternately,  the  ratios  of  the  distances  of  the  aphelion  of  the  one  to  the  peri¬ 
helion  of  the  other  may  be  elicited.  But  where  the  mean  movements  must  be 
known  first,  viz.,  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  periodic  times,  wherefrom  the  ratio  of 
the  spheres  is  elicited  by  Article  viii  above:  then  if  the  mean  proportional  between 
the  apparent  movement  of  either  one  of  its  mean  movement  be  taken,  this  mean  pro¬ 
portional  is  to  the  semidiameter  of  its  sphere  (which  is  already  known)  as  the  mean 
movement  is  to  the  distance  or  interval  sought.  Let  the  periodic  times  of  two  planets 
be  27  and  8.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  mean  diurnal  movement  of  the  one  to 
the  other  is  8  :  27.  Therefore  the  semidiameters  of  their  spheres  will  be  as  9  to  4. 
For  the  cube  root  of  27  is  3,  that  of  8  is  2,  and  the  squares  of  these  roots,  3  and  2, 
are  9  and  4.  Now  let  the  apparent  aphelial  movement  of  the  one  be  2  and  the 
perihelial  movement  of  the  other  33J^.  The  mean  proportionals  between  the 
mean  movements  8  and  27  and  these  apparent  ones  will  be  4  and  30.  Therefore 
if  the  mean  proportional  4  gives  the  mean  distance  of  9  to  the  planet,  then  the 
mean  movement  of  8  gives  an  aphelial  distance  18,  which  corresponds  to  the 
apparent  movement  2;  and  if  the  other  mean  proportional  30  gives  the  other 
planet  a  mean  distance  of  4,  then  its  mean  movement  of  27  will  give  it  a  peri¬ 
helial  interval  of  3^.  I  say,  therefore,  that  the  aphelial  distance  of  the  former  is 
to  the  perihelial  distance  of  the  latter  as  18  to  3^.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  if  the 
consonances  between  the  extreme  movements  of  two  planets  are  found  and  the 
periodic  times  are  established  for  both,  the  extreme  and  the  mean  distances  are 
necessarily  given,  wherefore  also  the  eccentricities. 

Twelfthly  [xii]:  It  is  also  possible,  from  the  different  extreme  movements  of 
one  and  the  same  planet,  to  find  the  mean  movement.  The  mean  movement  is 
not  exactly  the  arithmetic  mean  between  the  extreme  movements,  nor  exactly 
the  geometric  mean,  but  it  is  as  much  less  than  the  geometric  mean  as  the  geo¬ 
metric  mean  is  less  than  the  [arithmetic]  mean  between  both  means.  Let  the 
two  extreme  movements  be  8  and  10:  the  mean  movement  wdll  be  less  than  9, 
and  also  less  than  the  square  root  of  80  by  half  the  difference  between  9  and  the 
square  root  of  80.  In  this  way,  if  the  aphelial  movement  is  20  and  the  perihelial 
24,  the  mean  movement  will  be  less  than  22,  even  less  than  the  square  root  of 
480  by  half  the  difference  between  that  root  and  22.  There  is  use  for  this  theorem 
in  what  follows. 

[281]  Thirteenthly  [xiii]:  From  the  foregoing  the  following  proposition  is 
demonstrated,  which  is  going  to  be  very  necessary  for  us:  Just  as  the  ratio  of 
the  mean  movements  of  two  planets  is  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  ^th  powers  of 
the  spheres,  so  the  ratio  of  two  apparent  converging  extreme  movements  always 
falls  short  of  the  ratio  of  the  %th  powers  of  the  intervals  corresponding  to  those 
extreme  movements;  and  in  what  ratio  the  product  of  the  two  ratios  of  the  cor¬ 
responding  intervals  to  the  two  mean  intervals  or  to  the  semidiameters  of  the 
two  spheres  falls  short  of  the  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the  spheres,  in  that 
ratio  does  the  ratio  of  the  two  extreme  converging  movements  exceed  the  ratio 
of  the  corresponding  intervals;  but  if  that  compound  ratio  were  to  exceed  the 


1022 


KEPLER 


4  5  8 

ABC 


ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the  spheres,  then  the  ratio  of  the  converging  move¬ 
ments  would  be  less  than  the  ratio  of  their  intervals.^ 

Let  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  be  DH  :  AE]  let  the  ratio  of  the  mean  movements 
be  HI :  EMy  the  ^th  power  of  the  inverse  of  the  former. 

Let  the  least  interval  of  the  sphere  of  the  first  be  CG) 
and  the  greatest  interval  of  the  sphere  of  the  second  be 
BF]  and  first  let  DH  :  CG  comp.  BF  :  AE  be  smaller 
than  the  3^th  power  of  DH  :  AE,  And  let  GH  be  the 
apparent  perihelial  movement  of  the  upper  planet,  and 
FL  the  aphelial  of  the  lower,  so  that  they  are  converg¬ 
ing  extreme  movements.  M— 

I  say  that 

GK  iFL^BF  :CG 
BF^'^  : 

For 

HI  :GK  =  CG^  :DH^; 

and 

FL:EM  =  AE^  :BF^, 

Hence 


3456 

K- 


2025 

I”i600 


H 


But 


HI :  GK  comp.  FL  :  EM  =  CG^  :  DH^  comp.  AFP  :  BF^. 


CG  :  DH  comp.  AE  :  BF<  AE^  :  DH^ 
by  a  fixed  ratio  of  defect,  as  was  assumed.  Therefore  too 
HI :  GK  comp.  FL  :  EM  AE^^  :  DH^ 

AE:DH 

by  a  ratio  of  defect  which  is  the  square  of  the  former.  But  by  number  viii 

HI :  EM -=AE^  :DH^, 

Therefore  let  the  ratio  which  is  smaller  by  the  total  square  of  the  ratio  of  defect 
be  divided  into  the  ratio  of  the  %th  powers;  that  is, 

HI :  EM  comp.  GK  :  HI  comp.  EM  ;  FL  AP  :  DH^ 
by  the  excess  squared.  But 

HI :  EM  comp.  GK  :  HI  comp.  EM  :  FL=^GK  :  FL. 

Therefore 

GK:FL  AE^:DH^ 

by  the  excess  squared.  But 

AE  :DH=AE  :  BF  comp.  BF  :  CG  comp.  CG  :  DH: 

And 

CG  :  DH  comp.  AE  :  BF  AE^  :  DH^ 
by  the  simple  defect.  Therefore 

BF:CG  AE^:DH^ 

by  the  simple  excess.  But 

GK:FL  AE^iDH^ 

but  by  the  excess  squared.  But  the  excess  squared  is  greater  than  the  simple 
excess.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  movements  GK  to  FL  is  greater  than  the  ratio 
of  the  corresponding  intervals  BF  to  CG, 

^Kepler  always  measures  the  magnitude  of  a  ratio  from  the  greater  term  to  the  smaller, 
rather  than  from  the  antecedent  to  the  consequent,  as  we  do  today.  For  example,  as  Kepler 
speaks,  2  :  3  is  the  same  as  3  :  2,  and  3  :  4  is  greater  than  7  :  8. — C.  G,  Wallis. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1023 

In  fully  the  same  way,  it  is  demonstrated  even  contrariwise  that  if  the  planets 
approach  one  another  in  G  and  F  beyond  the  mean  distances  in  H  and  in  such 
fashion  that  the  ratio  of  the  mean  distances  DH  :  AE  becomes  less  than 
DH^ :  AE^,  then  the  ratio  of  the  movements  GK  :  FL  becomes  less  than  the 
ratio  of  the  corresponding  intervals  BF  :  CG.  For  you  need  to  do  nothing  more 
than  to  change  the  words  greater  to  less^  >to<,  excess  to  defect,  and  conversely. 

In  suitable  numbers,  because  the  square  root  of  ^  is  and  ^  is  even 
greater  than  %  by  the  ratio  of  excess  i  the  square  of  the  ratio  8  :  9  [282] 
is  the  ratio  1600  :  2025,  i.e,,  64  :  81 ;  and  the  square  of  the  ratio  4  :  5  is  the  ratio 
3456  :  5400,  f.e.,  16  :  25;  and  finally  the  ^^th  power  of  the  ratio  4  :  9  is  the  ratio 
1600  :  5400,  i.e.,  8  :  27:  therefore  too  the  ratio  2025  :  3456,  i.e.,  75  : 128,  is  even 
greater  than  5  : 8,  i,e.,  75  :  120,  by  the  same  ratio  of  excess  {i.e.,  120  :  128), 
15  : 16;  whence  2025  : 3456,  the  ratio  of  the  converging  movements,  exceeds 
5  :  8,  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  corresponding  intervals,  by  as  much  as  5  :  8  exceeds 
2  :  3,  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  spheres.  Or,  what  amounts  to  the  same 
thing,  the  ratio  of  the  two  converging  intervals  is  a  mean  between  the  ratio  of 
the  square  roots  of  the  spheres  and  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  corresponding 
movements. 

Moreover,  from  this  you  may  understand  that  the  ratio  of  the  diverging  move¬ 
ments  is  much  greater  than  the  ratio  of  the  %th  powers  of  the  spheres,  since 
the  ratio  of  the  powers  is  compounded  with  the  squares  of  the  ratio  of  the 
aphelial  interval  to  the  mean  interval,  and  that  of  the  mean  to  the  perihelial. 


4.  In  What  Things  Having  to  do  with  the  Planetary  Movements  Have 
THE  Harmonic  Consonances  been  Expressed  by  the  Creator, 

AND  IN  What  Way? 

Accordingly,  if  the  image  of  the  retrogradation  and  stations  is  taken  away 
and  the  proper  movements  of  the  planets  in  their  real  eccentric  orbits  are  win¬ 
nowed  out,  the  following  distinct  things  still  remain  in  the  planets;  1)  The  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  sun.  2)  The  periodic  times.  3)  The  diurnal  eccentric  arcs.  4) 
The  diurnal  delays  in  those  arcs.  5)  The  angles  at  the  sun,  and  the  diurnal  arcs 
apparent  to  those  as  it  were  gazing  from  the  sun.  And  again,  all  of  these  things, 
with  the  exception  of  the  periodic  times,  are  variable  in  the  total  circuit,  most 
variable  at  the  mean  longitudes,  but  least  at  the  extremes,  when,  turning  away 
from  one  extreme  longitude,  they  begin  to  return  to  the  opposite.  Hence  when 
the  planet  is  lowest  and  nearest  to  the  sun  and  thereby  delays  the  least  in  one 
degree  of  its  eccentric,  and  conversely  in  one  day  traverses  the  greatest  diurnal 
are  of  its  eccentric  and  appears  fastest  from  the  sun:  then  its  movement  remains 
for  some  time  in  this  strength  without  preceptible  variation,  until,  after  passing 
the  perihelion,  the  planet  gradually  begins  to  depart  farther  from  the  sun  in  a 
straight  line ;  at  that  same  time  it  delays  longer  in  the  degrees  of  its  eccentric 
circle;  or,  if  you  consider  the  movement  of  one  day,  on  the  following  day  it  goes 
forward  less  and  appears  even  more  slow  from  the  sun  until  it  has  drawn  close 
to  the  highest  apsis  and  made  its  distance  from  the  sun  very  great:  for  then 
longest  of  all  does  it  delay  in  one  degree  of  its  eccentric;  or  on  the  contrary  in 
one  day  it  traverses  its  least  arc  and  makes  a  much  smaller  apparent  move¬ 
ment  and  the  least  of  its  total  circuit. 


1024 


KEPLER 


Finally,  all  these  things  may  be  considered  either  as  they  exist  in  any  one 
planet  at  different  times  or  as  they  exist  in  different  planets:  whence,  by  the 
assumption  of  an  infinite  amount  of  time,  all  the  affects  of  the  circuit  of  one 
planet  can  concur  in  the  same  moment  of  time  with  all  the  affects  of  the  circuit 
of  another  planet  and  be  compared,  and  then  the  total  eccentrics,  as  compared 
with  one  another,  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  semidiameters  or  mean  intervals ; 
but  the  arcs  of  two  eccentrics,  which  are  similar  or  designated  by  the  same  num¬ 
ber  [of  degrees],  nevertheless  have  their  true  lengths  unequal  in  the  ratio  of 
their  eccentrics.  For  example,  one  degree  in  the  sphere  of  Saturn  is  approximate¬ 
ly  twice  as  long  as  one  degree  in  the  sphere  of  Jupiter.  And  conversely,  the 
diurnal  arcs  of  the  eccentrics,  as  expressed  in  astronomical  terms,  do  not  exhibit 
the  ratio  of  the  true  journeys  which  the  globes  complete  in  one  day  [283]  through 
the  ether,  because  the  single  units  in  the  wider  circle  of  the  upper  planet  denote 
a  quarter  part  of  the  journey,  but  in  the  narrower  circle  of  the  lower  planet  a 
smaller  part. 

Therefore  let  us  take  the  second  of  the  things  which  we  have  posited,  namely, 
the  periodic  times  of  the  planets,  which  comprehend  the  sums  made  up  of  all 
the  delays — long,  middling,  short — in  all  the  degrees  of  the  total  circuit.  And  we 
found  that  from  antiquity  down  to  us,  the  planets  complete  their  periodic  re¬ 
turns  around  the  sun,  as  follows  in  the  table: 


Days 

Minutes 
of  a  day 

Therefore  the  mean 
diurnal  movements 
Min.  Sec.  Thirds 

Saturn 

10,759 

12 

2 

0 

27 

Jupiter 

4,332 

37 

4 

59 

8 

Mars 

686 

59 

31 

26 

31 

Earth  with  Moon 

365 

15 

59 

8 

11 

Venus 

224 

42 

96 

7 

39 

Mercury 

87 

58 

245 

32 

25 

Accordingly,  in  these  periodic  times  there  are  no  harmonic  ratios,  as  is  easily 
apparent,  if  the  greater  periods  are  continuously  halved,  and  the  smaller  are 
continuously  doubled,  so  that,  by  neglecting  the  intervals  of  an  octave,  we  can 
investigate  the  intervals  which  exist  within  one  octave. 


Saturn 

10,759°12' 

Jupiter 

Mars 

Earth 

Venus 

Mercury 

5,379''36' 

4,332®37' 

87°58' 

Halves 

2,689'’48' 

2,166^19' 

224’’42' 

175°56' 

Doubles 

1,344°54' 

1,083^10' 

686^59' 

365^15' 

449°24' 

351°52' 

672°27' 

541°35' 

All  the  last  numbers,  as  you  see,  are  counter  to  harmonic  ratios  and  seem,  as 
it  were,  irrational.  For  let  687,  the  number  of  days  of  Mars,  receive  as  its  measure 
120,  which  is  the  number  of  the  division  of  the  chord:  according  to  this  measure 
Saturn  will  have  117  for  one  sixteenth  of  its  period,  Jupiter  less  than  95  for  one 
eighth  of  its  period,  the  earth  less  than  64,  Venus  more  than  78  for  twice  its 
period.  Mercury  more  than  61  for  four  times  its  period.  These  numbers  do  not 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1025 


make  any  harmonic  ratio  with  120,  but  their  neighbouring  numbers — 60,  75,  80, 
and  96— Mo.  And  so,  whereof  Saturn  has  120,  Jupiter  has  approximately  97,  the 
Earth  more  than  65,  V enus  more  than  80,  and  Mercury  less  than  63.  And  where¬ 
of  Jupiter  has  120,  the  Earth  has  less  than  81,  Venus  less  than  100,  Mercury  less 
than  78.  Likewise,  whereof  \"enus  has  120,  the  Earth  has  less  than  98,  Mercury 
more  than  94.  Finally,  whereof  the  Earth  has  120,  Mercury  has  less  than  116. 
But  if  the  free  choice  of  ratios  had  been  effective  here,  consonances  which  are 
altogether  perfect  but  not  augmented  or  diminished  would  have  been  taken. 
Accordingly  we  find  that  God  the  Creator  did  not  wish  to  introduce  harmonic 
ratios  between  the  sums  of  the  delays  added  together  to  form  the  periodic  times. 

[284]  And  although  it  is  a  very  probable  conjecture  (as  relying  on  geometrical 
demonstrations  and  the  doctrine  concerning  the  causes  of  the  planetary  move¬ 
ments  given  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars)  that  the  bulks  of  the  planetary 
bodies  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  periodic  times,  so  that  the  globe  of  Saturn  is  about 
thirty  times  greater  than  the  globe  of  the  Earth,  Jupiter  twelve  times,  jMars 
less  than  two,  the  Earth  one  and  a  half  times  greater  than  the  globe  of  Venus 
and  four  times  greater  than  the  globe  of  Mercury:  not  therefore  will  even  these 
ratios  of  bodies  be  harmonic. 

But  since  God  has  established  nothing  without  geometrical  beauty,  which 
was  not  bound  by  some  other  prior  law  of  necessity,  we  easily  infer  that  the 
periodic  times  have  got  their  due  lengths,  and  thereby  the  mobile  bodies  too 
have  got  their  bulks,  from  something  which  is  prior  in  the  archetype,  in  order  to 
express  which  thing  these  bulks  and  periods  have  been  fashioned  to  this  measure, 
as  they  seem  disproportionate.  But  I  have  said  that  the  periods  are  added  up 
from  the  longest,  the  middling,  and  the  slowest  delays:  accordingly  geometrical 
fitnesses  must  be  found  either  in  these  delays  or  in  anything  which  may  be 
prior  to  them  in  the  mind  of  the  Artisan.  But  the  ratios  of  the  delays  are 
bound  up  with  the  ratios  of  the  diurnal  arcs,  because  the  arcs  have  the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  delays.  Again,  we  have  said  that  the  ratios  of  the  delays  and 
intervals  of  any  one  planet  are  the  same.  Then,  as  regards  the  single  planets, 
there  wdll  be  one  and  the  same  consideration  of  the  following  three:  the 
arcs,  the  delays  in  equal  arcs,  and  the  distance  of  the  arcs  from  the  sun  or  the 
intervals.  And  because  all  these  things  are  variable  in  the  planets,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  but  that,  if  these  things  were  allotted  any  geometrical  beauty,  then, 
by  the  sure  design  of  the  highest  Artisan,  they  would  have  been  received  that 
at  their  extremes,  at  the  aphelial  and  perihelial  intervals,  not  at  the  mean  in¬ 
tervals  lying  in  between.  For,  given  the  ratios  of  the  extreme  intervals,  there  is 
no  need  of  a  plan  to  fit  the  intermediate  ratios  to  a  definite  number.  For  they 
follow  of  themselves,  by  the  necessity  of  planetary  movement,  from  one  extreme 
through  all  the  intermediates  to  the  other  extreme. 

Therefore  the  intervals  are  as  follows,  according  to  the  very  accurate  obser¬ 
vations  of  Tycho  Brahe,  by  the  method  given  in  the  Commentaries  on  Mars  and 
investigated  in  very  persevering  study  for  seventeen  years. 


1026 


KEPLER 

Intervals  Compared  with  Harmonic  Ratios^ 


Of  Two  Planets 
Converging  Diverging 

Saturn’s  aphelion  10,052.  a. 

Of  Single  Planets 

More  than  a  minor  whole  tone 

a  _  2  ,  b  _  5 

perihelion  8,968.  b. 

9,000 

Less  than  a  major  whole  tone 

d  1  c  3 

Jupiter’s  aphelion  5,451.  c. 

8,935 

No  concordant  ratio  but  approxi¬ 

c  4  ,  d  3 

perihelion  4,949.  d. 

mately  11  :  10,  a  discordant  or  di 
minished  6  :  5. 

f  1  el 

Mar’s  aphelion  1,665.  e. 

Here  1662  : 1385  would  be  the  con¬ 

e  _  5  ,  f  _  17 

perihelion  1,382.  f. 

sonance  6  : 5,  and  1665  : 1332  would 
be  5  :  4 

h  3  g  20 

Earth’s  aphelion  1,018.  g. 

Here  1025  :  984  would  be  the  diesis 

g_  2  .  1000,  h_ 27 

k  i  20 

perihelion  982.  h. 

24  :  25.  Therefore  it  does  not  have 
the  diesis. 

Venus’  aphelion  729.  i. 

Less  than  a  sesquicomma. 

perihelion  719.  k. 

More  than  one  third  of  a  diesis. 

J _ ^-243 

m  5  i  160 

Mercury’s  aphelion  470.  1. 

243  :  160,  greater  than  a  perfect  fifth 

perihelion  307.  m. 

but  less  than  a  harmonic  8  :  5 

[285]  Therefore  the  extreme  intervals  of  no  one  planet  come  near  consonances 
except  those  of  Mars  and  Mercury. 

But  if  you  compare  the  extreme  intervals  of  different  planets  with  one 
another,  some  harmonic  light  begins  to  shine.  For  the  extreme  diverging  inter¬ 
vals  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  make  slightly  more  than  the  octave;  and  the  con- 


iQeneral  Note:  Throughout  this  text  Kepler^s  concinna  and  inconcinna  are  translated  as 
“concordant’^  and  “discordant.”  Concinna  is  usually  used  by  Kepler  of  all  intervals  whose 
ratios  occur  within  the  “natural  system”  or  the  just  intonation  of  the  scale.  Inconcinna  refers 
to  all  ratios  that  lie  outside  of  this  system  of  tuning.  “Consonant”  {consonans)  and  “dis¬ 
sonant”  (dissonans)  refer  to  qualities  which  can  be  applied  to  intervals  within  the  musical 
system,  in  other  words  to  “concords.”  “Harmony”  (harmonia)  is  used  sometimes  in  the  sense 
of  “concordance”  and  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  “consonance.” 

Genus  durum  and  genus  molle  are  translated  either  as  “major  mode”  and  “minor  mode,”  or 
as  “major  scale”  and  “minor  scale,”  or  as  “major  kind”  and  “minor  kind”  (of  consonances). 
The  use  of  modus,  to  refer  to  the  ecclesiastical  modes,  occurs  only  in  Chapter  6. 

As  our  present  musical  terms  do  not  apply  strictly  to  the  music  of  the  sixteenth  and  seven¬ 
teenth  centuries,  a  brief  explanation  of  terms  here  may  be  useful.  This  material  is  taken  from 
Kepler’s  Harmonies  of  the  World,  Book  in. 

An  octave  system  in  the  minor  scale  {Systema  octavae  in  cantu  molli) 


^  oi>o 


gfedcbAG 
Ratios  of  string  lengths:  72  :  81  :  90  :  96  : 108  : 120  :  128  :  144 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1027 


verging,  a  mean  between  the  major  and  minor  sixths.  So  the  diverging  extremes 
of  Jupiter  and  Mars  embrace  approximately  the  double  octave;  and  the  con¬ 
verging,  approximately  the  fifth  and  the  octave.  But  the  diverging  extremes  of 
the  Earth  and  Mars  embrace  somewhat  more  than  the  major  sixth;  the  con¬ 
verging,  an  augmented  fourth.  In  the  next  couple,  the  Earth  and  Venus,  there  is 
again  the  same  augmented  fourth  between  the  converging  extremes;  but  we 
lack  any  harmonic  ratio  between  the  diverging  extremes:  for  it  is  less  than  the 
semi-octave  (so  to  speak)  i.e.y  less  than  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  2  :  1.  Finally, 
between  the  diverging  extremes  of  Venus  and  Mercury  there  is  a  ratio  slightly 


In  the  major  scale  (In  cantu  duro) 


-rr- 


gf  edcBAG 
Ratios  of  string  lengths:  360  :  405  :  432  :  480  :  540  :  576  :  640  :  720 
As  in  all  music,  these  scales  can  be  repeated  at  one  or  more  octaves  above.  The  ratios  would 
then  all  be  halved,  i.e., 


Various 
80  :81 
24  :25 

128  : 135 
243  : 256 

15  : 16 
9  :10 

8:9 
27  :32 
5:6 

4:5 

64  :81 
243  : 320 

3  :4 
20  :27 
32  :45 
45  :64 
27  : 40 
2:3 


g'  V  e'  d'  c'  b  a  g  f 
180  :2023^  :  216  :  240  :  270  :  288  :  320  :  360  :  405  etc. 

intervals  which  Kepler  considers  are: 
comma  (of  Didymus),  difference  between  major  and  minor  whole  tones 
diesis  [difference  between  e  -  e  flat  or  B  -  b  flat  or  between  a  semitone  and  a 
minor  whole  tone  (^He-^Ho)] 

lemma  [difference  between  a  semitone  and  a  major  whole  tone 
Plato* s  lemma  (not  found  in  this  system  but  in  the  Pythagorean  tuning) 
j  minor  mode  between  e  flat  -  d,  b  flat  -  A 
semitone  between  e  -  d,  B  -  A 

minor  whole  tone  ^  ®  V  ^ 

(major  mode  e  -  d,  B  -  A 

major  whole  tone  Wnor  mode:  g  -  f,  d  -  c,  A  -  G 
(major  mode:  g-f,  d~c,  A-G 
sub-minor  third  (major  and  minor  modes:  f  -  d,  c  -  A) 

minor  third  ®  "  c,  b  flat  -  G 

(major  mode:  g  -  e,  d  -  B 

rruijor  third  g  -  e  -  flat  d  -  b  -  flat 

(major  mode:  e  -  c,  B  -  G 

ditone  (Pythagorean  third)  (major  and  minor  modes:  a  -  f) 
lesser  imperfect  fourth  (inversion  of  “greater  imperfect  fifth^')  see  below 
perfect  fourth  g  -  d.  f  -  c,  e  flat  -  b  flat,  d  -  A,  o  -  G 


(major  mode:  g  -  d,  f  -  c,  e  -  B, 

greater  imperfect  fourth  b'  flat  -  f 

(major  mode:  a  -  e 

augmented  fourth  a  -  e  flat 

(major  mode:  b  -  f 

diminished  fifth  e  -  flat  -  A 

(major  mode:  f  -  B 

lesser  imperfect  fifth  ]“Anor  mode:  f  -  b  flat 
(major  mode:  e  -  A 

perfect  fifth  “°Ae:  g  -  c,  d  -  G 

<major  mode:  g  -  o,  d  -  G 


,  d  -  A,  c  -  G 


1028  KEPLER 

less  than  the  octave  compounded  with  the  minor  third;  between  the  converging 
there  is  a  slightly  augmented  fifth. 

Accordingly,  although  one  interval  was  somewhat  removed  from  harmonic 
ratios,  this  success  was  an  invitation  to  advance  further.  Now  my  reasonings 
were  as  follows:  First,  in  so  far  as  these  intervals  are  lengths  without  movement, 
they  are  not  fittingly  examined  for  harmonic  ratios,  because  movement  is  more 
properly  the  subject  of  consonances,  by  reason  of  speed  and  slowness.  Second, 
inasmuch  as  these  same  intervals  are  the  diameters  of  the  spheres,  it  is  be¬ 
lievable  that  the  ratio  of  the  five  regular  solids  applied  proportionally  is  more 
dominant  in  them,  because  the  ratio  of  the  geometrical  solid  bodies  to  the  celes¬ 
tial  spheres  (which  are  everywhere  either  encompassed  by  celestial  matter,  as 
the  ancients  hold,  or  to  be  encompassed  successively  by  the  accumulation  of 
many  revolutions)  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  plane  figures  which  may  be  in¬ 
scribed  in  a  circle  (these  figures  engender  the  consonances)  to  the  celestial  circles 
of  movements  and  the  other  regions  wherein  the  movements  take  place.  There¬ 
fore,  if  we  are  looking  for  consonances,  we  should  look  for  them  not  in  these 


160  : 243 
81  :  128 

5:8 


3:6 

64  :27 
1  :2 


greater  imperfect  fifth  (compound  of  ditone  and  minor  third 
imperfect  minor  sixth  (minor  and  major  modes:  f  -  A) 

minor  sixth  ®  ^ 

/major  mode:  g  -  B,  c  -  e 

major  sixth  S  -  B  flat,  c'  -  e  flat 

/major  mode:  e  -  G,  b  -  d 

greater  major  sixth  ^  " 

/major  mode:  d- f,  a  -  c 

octave  (g  -  G,  a  -  A,  b  -  B,  b  flat  --  b  flat) 

All  these  are  simple  intervals.  When  one  or  more  octaves  are  added  to  any  simple  intervals 
the  resultant  interval  is  a  “ compound^  ^  interval. 

1  :  3  equals  X  % — an  octave  and  a  perfect  fifth 

3  :  32  equals  (H)^XM — three  octaves  and  a  perfect  fourth 
1  :  20  equals  — four  octaves  and  a  major  third 

Concords:  All  intervals  from  diesis  downward  on  above  list. 

Consonances:  Minor  and  major  thirds  and  sixths,  perfect  fourth,  fifth,  and  octave. 
“Adulterine^^  consonances:  sub-minor  third,  ditone,  lesser  imperfect  fourth  and  fifth,  greater 
imperfect  fourth  and  fifth,  imperfect  minor  sixth,  greater  major  sixth. 

Dissonances:  All  other  intervals. 

Throughout  this  work  Kepler,  after  the  fashion  of  the  theorists  of  his  time,  uses  the  ratios 
of  string  lengths  rather  than  the  ratios  of  vibrations  as  is  usually  done  today.  String  lengths 
are,  of  course,  inversely  proportionate  to  the  vibrations.  That  is,  string  lengths  4  :  5  are  ex¬ 
pressed  in  vibrations  as  5:4.  This  accounts  for  the  descending  order  of  the  scale,  which  follows 
the  increasing  numerical  order.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  Kepler^s  minor  and  major  scales 
are  inversions  of  each  other  and  hence,  when  expressed  in  ratios  of  vibrations,  are  in  the  op¬ 
posite  order  from  those  in  ratios  of  string  lengths: 

Notes  resulting  from  ratios  of  vibrations 


Y 


mu 


T  T  T  1  T  T  T  r 

72  ;  81  :  90  ;  96  : 108  : 120  : 128  : 144 

I-  1  I  1  1 


T 


1  T  f  !  T  T 

360  :  405  :  432  :  480  :  540  :  576  :  640  :  720 

1  1  I  1  1  1  i  I 


A 


P 


roi 


Notes  resulting  from  ratios  of  string  lengths 

An  arbitrary  pitch  G  is  chosen  to  situate  these  ratios.  This  g  or  “gamma^'  was  usually  the 
lowest  tone  of  the  sixteenth-century  musical  gamut.  Elliott  Carter,  Jr. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1029 


intervals  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  semidiameters  of  spheres  but  in  them  in  so  far 
as  they  are  the  measures  of  the  movements,  Le.,  in  the  movements  themselves, 
rather.  Absolutely  no  other  than  the  mean  intervals  can  be  taken  as  the  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  spheres;  but  we  are  here  dealing  with  the  extreme  intervals. 
Accordingly,  we  are  not  dealing  with  the  intervals  in  respect  to  their  spheres  but 
in  respect  to  their  movements. 

Accordingly,  although  for  these  reasons  I  had  passed  on  to  the  comparison  of 
the  extreme  movements,  at  first  the  ratios  of  the  movements  remained  the  same 
in  magnitude  as  those  which  were  previously  the  ratios  of  the  intervals,  only  in¬ 
verted.  Wherefore  too,  certain  ratios,  which  are  discordant  and  foreign  to  har¬ 
monies,  as  before,  have  been  found  between  the  movements.  But  once  again  I 
judged  that  this  happened  to  me  deservedly,  because  I  compared  with  one 
another  eccentric  arcs  which  are  not  expressed  and  numbered  by  a  measure  of 
the  same  magnitude  but  are  numbered  in  degrees  and  minutes  which  are  of  di¬ 
verse  magnitude  in  diverse  planets,  nor  do  they  from  our  place  give  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  being  as  great  as  the  number  of  each  says,  except  only  at  the  centre 
of  the  eccentric  of  each  planet,  which  centre  rests  upon  no  body;  and  hence  it  is 
also  unbelievable  that  there  is  any  sense  or  natural  instinct  in  that  place  in  the 
world  which  is  capable  of  perceiving  this;  or,  rather,  it  was  impossible,  if  I  was 
comparing  the  eccentric  arcs  of  different  planets  with  respect  to  their  appear¬ 
ance  at  their  centres,  which  are  different  for  different  planets.  But  if  diverse  ap¬ 
parent  magnitudes  are  compared  with  one  another,  they  ought  to  be  apparent 
in  one  place  in  the  world  in  such  a  way  that  that  which  possesses  the  faculty  of 
comparing  them  may  be  present  in  that  place  from  which  they  are  all  apparent. 
Accordingly,  I  judged  that  the  appearance  of  these  eccentric  arcs  should  be  re¬ 
moved  from  the  mind  or  else  should  be  formed  differently.  But  if  I  removed  the 
appearance  and  applied  my  mind  to  the  diurnal  journeys  of  the  planets,  I  saw 
that  I  had  to  employ  the  rule  which  I  gave  in  Article  ix  of  the  preceding  chapter. 
[286]  Accordingly  if  the  diurnal  arcs  of  the  eccentric  are  multiplied  by  the  mean 
intervals  of  the  spheres,  the  following  journeys  are  produced: 


Diurnal 

Mean 

Diurnal 

movements 

intervals 

journeys 

Saturn  at  aphelion 

1'53" 

9510 

1065 

at  perihelion 

27" 

1208 

Jupiter  at  aphelion 

4'44" 

5200 

1477 

at  perihelion 

5'15" 

1638 

Mars  at  aphelion 

28'44" 

1524 

2627 

at  perihelion 

34'34" 

3161 

Earth  at  aphelion 

58'6" 

1000 

3486 

at  perihelion 

60'13" 

3613 

Venus  at  aphelion 

95'29" 

724 

4149 

at  perihelion 

96'50" 

4207 

Mercury  at  aphelion 

20T0" 

388 

4680 

at  perihelion 

307'3" 

7148 

Thus  Saturn  traverses  barely  one  seventh  of  the  journey  of  Mercury;  and  hence, 
as  Aristotle  judged  consonant  with  reason  in  Book  ii  of  On  the  Heavens,  the  planet 
which  is  nearer  the  sun  always  traverses  a  greater  space  than  the  planet  which  is  farther 
away — as  cannot  hold  in  the  ancient  astronomy. 


1030 


KEPLER 


And  indeed,  if  we  weigh  the  thing  fairly  carefully,  it  will  appear  to  be  not 
very  probable  that  the  most  wise  Creator  should  have  established  harmonies 
between  the  planetary  journeys  in  especial.  For  if  the  ratios  of  the  journeys  are 
harmonic,  all  the  other  affects  which  the  planets  have  will  be  necessitated  and 
bound  up  with  the  journeys,  so  that  there  is  no  room  elsewhere  for  establishing 
harmonies.  But  whose  good  will  it  be  to  have  harmonies  between  the  journeys, 
or  who  will  perceive  these  harmonies?  For  there  are  two  things  which  disclose  to 
us  harmonies  in  natural  things:  either  light  or  sound:  light  apprehended  through 
the  eyes  or  hidden  senses  proportioned  to  the  eyes,  and  sound  through  the  ears. 
The  mind  seizes  upon  these  forms  and,  whether  by  instinct  (on  which  Book  iv 
speaks  profusely)  or  by  astronomical  or  harmonic  ratiocination,  discerns  the 
concordant  from  the  discordant.  Now  there  are  no  sounds  in  the  heavens,  nor  is 
the  movement  so  turbulent  that  any  noise  is  made  by  the  rubbing  against  the 
ether.  Light  remains.  If  light  has  to  teach  these  things  about  the  planetary 
journeys,  it  will  teach  either  the  eyes  or  a  sensorium  analogous  to  the  eyes  and 
situated  in  a  definite  place ;  and  it  seems  that  sense-perception  must  be  present 
there  in  order  that  light  of  itself  may  immediately  teach.  Therefore  there  will 
be  sense-perception  in  the  total  world,  namely  in  order  that  the  movements  of 
all  the  planets  may  be  presented  to  sense-perceptions  at  the  same  time.  For  that 
former  route — from  observations  through  the  longest  detours  of  geometry  and 
arithmetic,  through  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  and  the  other  things  which  must 
be  learned  first,  down  to  the  journeys  which  have  been  exhibited — is  too  long 
for  any  natural  instinct,  for  the  sake  of  moving  which  it  seems  reasonable  that 
the  harmonies  have  been  introduced. 

Therefore  with  everything  reduced  to  one  view,  I  concluded  rightly  [287]  that 
the  true  journeys  of  the  planets  through  the  ether  should  be  dismissed,  and  that 
we  should  turn  our  eyes  to  the  apparent  diurnal  arcs,  according  as  they  are  all 
apparent  from  one  definite  and  marked  place  in  the  world — namely,  from  the 
solar  body  itself,  the  source  of  movement  of  all  the  planets;  and  we  must  see, 
not  how  far  away  from  the  sun  any  one  of  the  planets  is,  nor  how  much  space  it 
traverses  in  one  day  (for  that  is  something  for  ratiocination  and  astronomy,  not 
for  instinct),  but  how  great  an  angle  the  diurnal  movement  of  each  planet  sub¬ 
tends  in  the  solar  body,  or  how  great  an  arc  it  seems  to  traverse  in  one  common 
circle  described  around  the  sun,  such  as  the  ecliptic  ,in  order  that  these  ap¬ 
pearances,  which  were  conveyed  to  the  solar  body  by  virtue  of  light,  may  be 
able  to  flow,  together  with  the  light,  in  a  straight  line  into  creatures,  which  are 
partakers  of  this  instinct,  as  in  Book  iv  we  said  the  figure  of  the  heavens  flowed 
into  the  foetus  by  virtue  of  the  rays. 

Therefore,  if  you  remove  from  the  proper  planetary  movement  the  parallaxes 
of  the  annual  orbit,  which  gives  them  the  mere  appearances  of  stations  and 
retrogradations,  Tycho^s  astronomy  teaches  that  the  diurnal  movements  of  the 
planets  in  their  orbits  (which  are  apparent  as  it  were  to  spectator  at  the  sun) 
are  as  shown  in  the  table  on  the  opposite  page. 

Note  that  the  great  eccentricity  of  Mercury  makes  the  ratio  of  the  movements 
differ  somewhat  from  the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distances.  For  if  you  make 
the  square  of  the  ratio  of  100,  the  mean  distance,  to  121,  the  aphelial  distance, 
be  the  ratio  of  the  aphelial  movement  to  the  mean  movement  of  245'32",  then 
an  aphelial  movement  of  167  will  be  produced;  and  if  the  square  of  the  ratio  of 
100  to  79,  the  perihelial  distance,  be  the  ratio  of  the  perihelial  to  the  same  mean 
movement,  then  the  perihelial  movement  will  become  393 ;  and  both  cases  are 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1031 


Harmonies  Between 

Harmonies  Between  the 

Two  Planets 

Apparent  Diurnal  Movements 

Movements  of 

Single  Planets 

Diverging 

Converging 

Saturn  at  aphelion 

1'46"  a. 

1  :48"  :2'15"  =  4  :5, 

at  perihelion 

2T5"  b. 

major  third 

a  1  , 

b 

1 

d  3 

c 

2 

Jupiter  at  aphelion 

4'30"  c. 

4'35"  :  5'30"  =  5  :  6, 

at  perihelion 

5'30"  d. 

minor  third 

c  1  , 

5 

f  8 

e 

24 

Mars  at  aphelion 

26'14"  e. 

25'21"  :38'1"  =  2  :3. 

at  perihelion 

38'1"  f. 

the  fifth 

e  5  , 

-L_. 

2 

h  "  12 

g 

3 

Earth  at  aphelion 

57'3"  g. 

57'28"  :61'18"=15  : 16, 

at  perihelion 

61T8"  h. 

semitone 

g  3  , 

A.-, 

5 

k  5 

i 

8 

Venus  at  aphelion 

94'50"  i. 

94'50"  :  98'47"  =  24  : 25, 

at  perihelion 

97'37"  k. 

diesis 

i  _  1  > 

k 

3 

m  4 

1 

5 

Mercury  at  aphelion 

164'0"  1. 

164'0"  :  394'0"  =  5  : 12, 

at  perihelion  384'0"  m. 

octave  and  minor  third 

greater  than  I  have  here  laid  down,  because  the  mean  movement  at  the  mean 
anomaly,  viewed  very  obliquely,  does  not  appear  as  great,  viz.^  not  as  great  as 
245'32",  but  about  5'  less.  Therefore,  too,  lesser  aphelial  and  perihelial  move¬ 
ments  will  be  elicited.  But  the  aphelial  [appears]  lesser  and  the  perihelial  greater, 
on  account  of  theorem  8,  Euclid's  Optics,  as  I  remarked  in  the  preceding  Chap¬ 
ter,  Article  vi. 

Accordingly,  I  could  mentally  presume,  even  from  the  ratios  of  the  diurnal 
eccentric  arcs  given  above,  that  there  were  harmonies  and  concordant  intervals 
between  these  extreme  apparent  movements  of  the  single  planets,  since  I  saw 
that  everywhere  there  the  square  roots  of  harmonic  ratios  were  dominant,  but 
knew  that  the  ratio  of  the  apparent  movements  was  the  square  of  the  ratio  of 
the  eccentric  movements.  But  it  is  possible  by  experience  itself,  or  without  any 
ratiocination  to  prove  what  is  affirmed,  as  you  see  [288]  in  the  preceding  table. 
The  ratios  of  the  apparent  movements  of  the  single  planets  approach  very  close 
to  harmonies,  in  such  fashion  that  Saturn  and  Jupiter  embrace  slightly  more 
than  the  major  and  minor  thirds,  Saturn  with  a  ratio  of  excess  of  53  :  54,  and 
Jupiter  with  one  of  54  :  55  or  less,  namely  approximately  a  sesquicomma;  the 
Earth,  slightly  more  (namely  137  ;  138,  or  barely  a  semicomma)  than  a  semi¬ 
tone;  Mars  somewhat  less  (namely  29  :  30,  which  approaches  34  :  35  or  35  :  36) 
than  a  fifth;  Mercury  exceeds  the  octave  by  a  minor  third  rather  than  a  whole 
tone,  viz.,  it  is  about  38  :  39  (which  is  about  two  commas,  viz.,  34  :  35  or  35  :  36) 
less  than  a  whole  tone.  Venus  alone  falls  short  of  any  of  the  concords  the  diesis; 
for  its  ratio  is  between  two  and  three  commas,  and  it  exceeds  two  thirds  of  a 
diesis,  and  is  about  34  :  35  or  35  :  36,  a  diesis  diminished  by  a  comma. 


1032 


KEPLER 


The  moon,  too,  comes  into  this  consideration.  For  we  find  that  its  hourly  apo- 
geal  movement  in  the  quadratures,  viz.,  the  slowest  of  all  its  movements,  to  be 
26'26",*  its  perigeal  movement  in  the  syzygies,  viz.,  the  fastest  of  all,  35T2",  in 
which  way  the  perfect  fourth  is  formed  very  precisely.  For  one  third  of  26'26" 
is  8'49",  the  quadruple  of  which  is  35'16".  And  note  that  the  consonance  of  the 
perfect  fourth  is  found  nowhere  else  between  the  apparent  movements;  note 
also  the  analogy  between  the  fourth  in  consonances  and  the  quarter  in  the 
phases.  And  so  the  above  things  are  found  in  the  movements  of  the  single 
planets. 

But  in  the  extreme  movements  of  two  planets  compared  with  one  another, 
the  radiant  sun  of  celestial  harmonies  immediately  shines  at  first  glance,  whether 
you  compare  the  diverging  extreme  movements  or  the  converging.  For  the  ratio 
between  the  diverging  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  is  exactly  the  duple  or 
octave;  that  between  the  diverging,  slightly  more  than  triple  or  the  octave  and 
the  fifth.  For  one  third  of  5'30"  is  1'50",  although  Saturn  has  1'46"  instead  of 
that.  Accordingly,  the  planetary  movements  will  differ  from  a  consonance  by  a 
diesis  more  or  less,  viz.,  26  :  27  or  27  :  28;  and  with  less  than  one  second  acceding 
at  Saturn’s  aphelion,  the  excess  will  be  34  :  35,  as  great  as  the  ratio  of  the  ex¬ 
treme  movements  of  Venus.  The  diverging  and  converging  movements  of  Jupiter 
and  Mars  are  under  the  sway  of  the  triple  octave  and  the  double  octave  and  a 
third,  but  not  perfectly.  For  one  eighth  of  38'!''  is  4'45",  although  Jupiter  has 
4'30";  and  between  these  numbers  there  is  still  a  difference  of  18  :  19,  which  is 
a  mean  between  the  semitone  of  15  :  16  and  the  diesis  of  24  :  25,  namely,  ap¬ 
proximately  a  perfect  lemma  of  128  :  135.^  Thus  one  fifth  of  26'14"  is  5'15",  al¬ 
though  Jupiter  has  5'30";  accordingly  in  this  case  the  quintuple  ratio  is  dimin¬ 
ished  in  the  ratio  of  21  :  22,  the  augment  in  the  case  of  the  other  ratio,  viz.,  ap¬ 
proximately  a  diesis  of  24  :  25. 

The  consonance  5  :  24  comes  nearer,  which  compounds  a  minor  instead  of  a 
major  third  with  the  double  octave.  For  one  fifth  of  5'30"  is  1'6",  which  if  multi¬ 
plied  by  24  makes  26'24",  does  not  differ  by  more  than  a  semicomma.  Mars  and 
the  Earth  have  been  allotted  the  least  ratio,  exactly  the  sesquialteral  or  perfect 
fifth:  for  one  third  of  57'3"  is  19'1",  the  double  of  which  is  38'2",  which  is  Mars’ 
very  number,  viz.,  38'11".  They  have  also  been  allotted  the  greater  ratio  of 
5  :  12,  the  octave  and  minor  third,  but  more  imperfectly.  For  one  twelfth  of 
61'18"  is  5'6J^",  which  if  multiplied  by  5  gives  25'33",  although  instead  of  that 
Mars  has  26' 14".  Accordingly,  there  is  a  deficiency  of  a  diminished  diesis  ap¬ 
proximately,  viz.,  35  :  36.  But  the  Earth  and  Venus  together  have  been  allotted 
3  :  5  as  their  greatest  consonance  and  5  :  8  as  their  least,  the  major  and  minor 
sixths,  but  again  not  perfectly.  For  one  fifth  of  97'37",  which  if  multiplied  by 
3  gives  58'33",  which  is  greater  than  the  movement  of  the  Earth  in  the  ratio 
34  :  35,  which  is  approximately  35  :  36:  by  so  much  do  the  planetary  ratios  differ 
from  the  harmonic.  Thus  one  eighth  of  94'50"  is  11'51"+,  five  times  which  is 
59' 16",  which  is  approximately  equal  to  the  mean  movement  of  the  Earth. 
Wherefore  here  the  planetary  ratio  is  less  than  the  harmonic  [289]  in  the  ratio 
of  29  :  30  or  30  :  31,  which  is  again  approximately  35  :  36,  the  diminished  diesis; 
and  thereb}^  this  least  ratio  of  these  planets  approaches  the  consonance  of  the 
perfect  fifth.  For  one  third  of  94'50"  is  31'37",  the  double  of  which  is  63'14",  of 
which  the  61'18"  of  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth  falls  short  in  the  ratio 

'c/.  Footnote  to  Intervals  Compared  with  Harmonic  Ratios,  p.  1026. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1033 


of  31  :  32,  so  that  the  planetary  ratio  is  exactly  a  mean  between  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  harmonic  ratios.  Finally,  Venus  and  Mercury  have  been  allotted  the  double 
octave  as  their  greatest  ratio  and  the  major  sixth  as  their  least,  but  not  absolute- 
perfectly.  For  one  fourth  of  384'  is  96'0",  although  Venus  has  94'50".  Therefore 
the  quadruple  adds  approximately  one  comma.  Thus  one  fifth  of  164'  is  32'48", 
which  if  multiplied  by  3  gives  98'24",  although  Venus  has  97'37".  Therefore 
the  planetary  ratio  is  diminished  by  about  tow  thirds  of  a  comma,  Le.,  126  :  127. 

Accordingly  the  above  consonances  have  been  ascribed  to  the  planets;  nor  is 
there  any  ratio  from  among  the  principal  comparisons  {viz.,  of  the  converging 
and  diverging  extreme  movements)  which  does  not  approach  so  nearly  to  some 
consonance  that,  if  strings  were  tuned  in  that  ratio,  the  ears  would  not  easily 
discern  their  imperfection — with  the  exception  of  that  one  excess  between 
Jupiter  and  Mars. 

Moreover,  it  follows  that  we  shall  not  stray  far  away  from  consonances  if  we 
compare  the  movements  of  the  same  field.  For  if  Saturn’s  4  :  5  comp.  53  :  54 
are  compounded  with  the  intermediate  1  :  2,  the  product  is  2  :  5  comp.  53  :  54, 
which  exists  between  the  aphelial  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter.  Compound 
with  that  Jupiter’s  5  :  6  comp.  54  :  55,  and  the  product  is  5  :  12  comp  54  :  55, 
which  exist  between  the  perihelial  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter.  Thus 
compound  Jupiter’s  5  :  6  comp.  54  :  55  with  the  intermediate  ensuing  ratio  of 
5  :  24  comp.  158  :  157,  the  product  will  be  1  :  6  comp.  36:35  between  the  aphe¬ 
lial  movements.  Compound  the  same  5  :  24  comp.  158  :  157  with  Mars’  2  :  3 
comp.  30  :  29,  and  the  product  will  be  5  :  36  comp.  25  :  24  approximately,  i.e., 
125  : 864  or  about  1  :  7,  between  the  perihelial  movements.  This  ratio  is  still 
alone  discordant.  With  2  : 3  the  third  ratio  among  the  intermediates,  com¬ 
pound  Mars’  2  :  3  less  29  ;  30;  the  result  will  be  4  :  9  comp.  30  :  29,  i.e.,  40  :  87, 
another  discord  between  the  aphelial  movements.  If  instead  of  Mars’  you  com¬ 
pound  the  Earth’s  15  :  16  comp.  137  :  138,  you  will  make  5  :  8  comp.  137  :  138 
between  the  perihelial  movements.  And  if  with  the  fourth  of  the  intermediates, 
5  :  8  comp.  31  : 30,  or  2  : 3  comp.  31  : 32,  you  compound  the  Earth’s  15  :  16 
comp.  137  :  138,  the  product  will  be  approximately  3  :  5  between  the  aphelial 
movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus.  For  one  fifth  of  94'50"  is  18'58",  the  triple 
of  which  is  56'54",  although  the  Earth  has  57'3".  If  you  compound  Venus^ 
34  :  35  with  the  same  ratio,  the  result  will  be  5  :  8  between  the  perihelial  move¬ 
ments.  For  one  eighth  of  97'37"  is  12'12"+  which  if  multiplied  by  5  gives  61'1", 
although  the  Earth  has  61'18".  Finally,  if  with  the  last  of  the  intermediate  ra¬ 
tios,  3  :  5  comp.  126  :  127  you  compound  Venus’  34  :  35,  the  result  is  3  :  5  comp. 
24  :  25,  and  the  interval,  compounded  of  both,  between  the  aphelial  movements, 
is  dissonant.  But  if  you  compound  Mercury’s  5  :12  comp.  38  : 39,  the  double 
octave  or  1  :  4  will  be  diminished  by  approximately  a  whole  diesis,  in  proportion 
to  the  perihelial  movements. 

Accordingly,  perfect  consonances  are  found:  between  the  converging  move¬ 
ments  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  the  octave;  between  the  converging  movements  of 
Jupiter  and  Mars,  the  octave  and  minor  third  approximately;  between  the  con¬ 
verging  movements  of  Mars  and  the  Earth,  the  fifth;  between  their  perihelial, 
the  minor  sixth;  between  the  extreme  converging  movements  of  Venus  and  Mer¬ 
cury,  the  major  sixth;  between  the  diverging  or  even  between  the  perihelial,  the 
double  octave:  whence  without  any  loss  to  an  astronomy  which  has  been  built, 
most  subtly  of  all,  upon  Brahe’s  observations,  it  seems  that  the  residual  very  slight 


1034  KEPLER 

discrepancy  can  be  discounted,  especially  in  the  movements  of  Venus  and 
Mercury. 

But  you  will  note  that  where  there  is  no  perfect  major  consonance,  as  between 
Jupiter  and  Mars,  there  alone  have  I  found  the  placing  of  the  solid  figure  to  be 
approximately  perfect,  since  the  perihelial  distance  of  Jupiter  is  approximately 
three  times  the  aphelial  distance  of  Mars,  in  such  fashion  that  this  pair  of  planets 
strives  after  the  perfect  consonance  in  the  intervals  which  it  does  not  have  in  the 
movements. 

[290]  You  will  note,  furthermore,  that  the  major  planetary  ratio  of  Saturn 
and  Jupiter  exceeds  the  harmonic,  viz.y  the  triple,  by  approximately  the  same 
quantity  as  belongs  to  Venus;  and  the  common  major  ratio  of  the  converging 
and  diverging  movements  of  Mars  and  the  Earth  are  diminished  by  approxi¬ 
mately  the  same.  You  will  note  thirdly  that,  roughly  speaking,  in  the  upper 
planets  the  consonances  are  established  between  the  converging  movements, 
but  in  the  lower  planets,  between  movements  in  the  same  field.  And  note  fourth¬ 
ly  that  between  the  aphelial  movements  of  Saturn  and  the  Earth  there  are  ap¬ 
proximately  five  octaves;  for  one  thirty-second  of  57'3"  is  1'47",  although  the 
aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  is  1'46". 

Furthermore,  a  great  distinction  exists  between  the  consonances  of  the  single 
planets  which  have  been  unfolded  and  the  consonances  of  the  planets  in  pairs. 
For  the  former  cannot  exist  at  the  same  moment  of  time,  while  the  latter  ab¬ 
solutely  can;  because  the  same  planet,  moving  at  its  aphelion,  cannot  be  at  the 
same  time  at  the  opposite  perihelion  too,  but  of  two  planets  one  can  be  at  its 
aphelion  and  the  other  at  its  perihelion  at  the  same  moment  of  time.  And  so  the 
ratio  of  plain-song  or  monody,  which  we  call  choral  music  and  which  alone  was 
known  to  the  ancients,^  to  polyphony — called  “figured  song,^^;^  the  invention  of 
the  latest  generations — is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  consonances  which  the 
single  planets  designate  to  the  consonances  of  the  planets  taken  together.  And 
so,  further  on,  in  Chapters  5  and  6,  the  single  planets  will  be  compared  to  the 
choral  music  of  the  ancients  and  its  properties  will  be  exhibited  in  the  planetary 
movements.  But  in  the  following  chapters,  the  planets  taken  together  and  the 
figured  modern  music  will  be  shown  to  do  similar  things. 

5.  In  the  Ratios  of  the  Planetary  Movements  which  are  Apparent 

AS  IT  WERE  TO  SPECTATORS  AT  THE  SuN,  HAVE  BEEN  EXPRESSED  THE 

Pitches  of  the  System,  or  Notes  of  the  Musical  Scale,  and  the 
Modes  of  Song  [Genera  Cantus],  the  Major  and  the  Minors 

Therefore  by  now  I  have  proved  by  means  of  numbers  gotten  on  one  side 
from  astronomy  and  on  the  other  side  from  harmonics  that,  taken  in  every 
which  way,  harmonic  ratios  hold  between  these  twelve  termini  or  movements  of 
the  six  planets  revolving  around  the  sun  or  that  they  approximate  such  ratios 
within  an  imperceptible  part  of  least  concord.  But  just  as  in  Book  iii  in  the  first 
chapter,  we  first  built  up  the  single  harmonic  consonances  separately,  and  then 

^The  choral  music  of  the  Greeks  was  monolinear,  everyone  singing  the  same  melody  to¬ 
gether. — E.  C.,  Jr. 

^In  plain-song  all  the  time  values  of  the  notes  were  approximately  equal,  while  in  “figured 
song“  time  values  of  different  lengths  were  indicated  by  the  notes,  which  gave  composers  an 
opportunity  both  to  regulate  the  way  different  contrapuntal  parts  joined  together  and  to  pro¬ 
duce  many  expressive  effects.  Practically  all  melodies  since  this  time  are  in  “figured  song” 
style. — E.  C.,  Jr. 

3 See  note  to  Intervals  Compared  with  Harmonic  RaiioSy  p.  1026. 


1035 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


we  joined  together  all  the  consonances — as  many  as  there  were — in  one  common 
system  or  musical  scale,  or,  rather,  in  one  octave  of  them  which  embraces  the 
rest  in  power,  and  by  means  of  them  we  separated  the  others  into  their  degrees 
or  pitches  [loca]  and  we  did  this  in  such  a  way  that  there  would  be  a  scale;  so  now 
also,  after  the  discovery  of  the  consonances  [harmoniis]  which  God  Himself  has 
embodied  in  the  world,  we  must  consequently  see  whether  those  single  con¬ 
sonances  stand  so  separate  that  they  have  no  kinship  with  the  rest,  or  whether 
all  are  in  concord  with  one  another.  Notwithstanding  it  is  easy  to  conclude, 
without  any  further  inquiry,  that  those  consonances  were  fitted  together  by  the 
highest  prudence  in  such  fashion  that  they  move  one  another  about  within  one 
frame,  so  to  speak,  and  do  not  jolt  one  another  out  of  it;  since  indeed  we  see  that 
in  such  a  manifold  comparison  of  the  same  terms  there  is  no  place  where  con¬ 
sonances  do  not  occur.  For  unless  in  one  scale  all  the  consonances  were  fitted 
to  all,  it  could  easily  have  come  about  (and  it  has  come  about  wherever  necessity 
thus  urges  it)  that  many  dissonances  should  exist.  For  example,  if  someone  had 
set  up  a  major  sixth  between  the  first  and  the  second  term,  and  likewise  a  major 
third  between  the  second  and  the  third  term,  without  taking  the  first  into  ac¬ 
count,  then  he  would  admit  a  dissonance  and  the  discordant  interval  12  :  25  be- 
between  the  first  and  third. 

But  come  now,  let  us  see  whether  that  which  we  have  already  inferred  by 
reasoning  is  really  found  in  this  way.  [291]  But  let  me  premise  some  cautions, 
that  we  may  be  the  less  impeded  in  our  progress.  First,  for  the  present,  we  must 
conceal  those  augments  or  diminutions  which  are  less  than  a  semitone;  for  we 
shall  see  later  on  what  causes  they  have.  Second,  by  continuous  doubling  or 
contrary  halving  of  the  movements,  we  shall  bring  everything  within  the  range 
of  one  octave,  on  account  of  the  sameness  of  consonance  in  all  the  octaves. 

Accordingly  the  numbers  wherein  all  the  pitches  or  clefs  [loca  seu  claves]  of  the 
octave  system  are  expressed  have  been  set  out  in  a  table  in  Book  iii.  Chapter  7*, 


^The  table  is  as  follows: 


Concordant 

Lengths 

Intervals 

of  Strings 

1080 

Semitone 

1152 

Lemma 

1215 

Semitone 

1296 

Diesis 

1350 

Semitone 

1440 

Semitone 

1536 

Lemma 

1620 

Semitone 

1728 

Diesis 

1800 

Semitone 

1920 

Semitone 

2048 

Lemma 

2160 

In  familiar 
notes 


High  g 

f  #. 
f 

e 

e  b 
d 

c  it 

c 

b 

b  b 
A 

G  # 
Low  G 


0 


1036 


KEPLER 


i.e.y  understand  these  numbers  of  the  length  of  two  strings.  As  a  consequence, 
the  speeds  of  the  movements  will  be  in  the  inverse  ratios. 

Now  let  the  planetary  movements  be  compared  in  terms  of  parts  continuously 
halved.  Therefore 


Movement  of  Mercury  at  perihelion,  7th  subduple,  or  H28, 

3'0^ 

at  aphelion. 

6th  subduple,  or  H4, 

2'34" 

Movement  of  Venus  at  perihelion, 

5th  subduple,  or  H2, 

3'3" 

at  aphelion. 

5th  subduple,  or  >^2, 

2'58" 

Movement  of  Earth  at  perihelion. 

5th  subduple,  or  H2, 

1'55" 

at  aphelion. 

5th  subduple,  or  H2, 

1'47" 

Movement  of  Mars  at  perihelion. 

4th  subduple,  or  Ke, 

2'23"  1 

at  aphelion. 

3rd  subduple,  or 

3'17" 

Movement  of  Jupiter  at  perihelion. 

subduple,  or  3^, 

2'45" 

at  aphelion. 

subduple,  or 

2'15"  1 

Movement  of  Saturn  at  perihelion. 

2'15" 

at  aphelion. 

1'46^ 

Now  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  at  its  slowest — i.e.,  the  slowest  move¬ 
ment — marks  G,  the  lowest  pitch  in  the  system  with  the  number  T46".  There¬ 
fore  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth  will  mark  the  same  pitch,  but  five 
octaves  higher,  because  its  number  is  1'47",  and  who  wants  to  quarrel  about  one 
second  in  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn?  But  let  us  take  it  into  account, 
nevertheless;  the  difference  will  not  be  greater  than  106  :  107,  which  is  less  than 
a  comma.  If  you  add  27",  one  quarter  of  this  1'47",  the  sum  will  be  2^14",  al¬ 
though  the  perihelial  movement  of  Saturn  has  2' 15";  similarly  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Jupiter,  but  one  octave  higher.  Accordingly,  these  two  movements 
mark  the  note  5,  or  else  are  very  slightly  higher.  Take  36",  one  third  of  E47", 
and  add  it  to  the  whole;  you  will  get  as  a  sum  2'23"  for  the  note  c;  and  here^s  the 
perihelion  of  Mars  of  the  same  magnitude  but  four  octaves  higher.  To  this  same 
T47"  add  also  54",  half  of  it,  and  the  sum  will  be  2'41"  for  the  note  d]  and  here 
the  perihelion  of  Jupiter  is  at  hand,  but  one  octave  higher,  for  it  occupies  the  ^ 
nearest  number,  viz.,  2'45".  If  you  add  two  thirds,  viz.,  I'll",  the  sum  will  be 
2'58";  and  here's  the  aphelion  of  Venus  at  2'58".  Accordingly,  it  will  mark  the 
pitch  or  the  note  e,  but  five  octaves  higher.  And  the  perihelial  movement  of 
Mercury,  which  is  3'0",  does  not  exceed  it  by  much  but  is  seven  octaves  higher.  j 

Finally,  divide  the  double  of  T47",  viz.,  3'34",  into  nine  parts  and  subtract  one  ' 

part  of  24"  from  the  whole;  3'10"  will  be  left  for  the  note /,  which  the  3'17"  of  , 
the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  marks  approximately  but  three  octaves  higher;  ( 
and  this  number  is  slightly  greater  than  the  just  number  and  approaches  the 
note/  sharp.  For  if  one  sixteenth  of  3'34",  viz.,  133^^",  is  subtracted  from  3'34", 
then  3'203^"  is  left,  to  which  3'17"  is  very  near.  And  indeed  in  music /sharp  is 
often  employed  in  place  of  /,  as  we  can  see  everywhere. 

Accordingly  all  the  notes  of  the  major  scale  [cantus  duri]  (except  the  note  a 
which  was  not  marked  by  harmonic  division,  in  Book  iii.  Chapter  2)  are  marked 
by  all  the  extreme  movements  of  the  planets,  except  the  perihelial  movements  of 
Venus  and  the  Earth  [292]  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mercury,  whose  num¬ 
ber,  2'34",  approaches  the  note  c  sharp.  For  subtract  from  the  2'41"  of  d  one 
sixteenth  or  10",  and  2'30"  remains  for  the  note  c  sharp.  Thus  only  the  perihelial 
movement  of  Venus  and  the  Earth  are  missing  froni  this  scale,  as  you  may  see 
in  the  table. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1037 


§ 


o3 


On  the  other  hand,  if  the  beginning  of  the  scale  is  made  at  2'15",  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Saturn,  and  we  must  express  the  note  G  in  those  degrees:  then  for 
the  note  A  is  2'32",  which  closely  approaches  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mer¬ 
cury;  for  the  note  b  flat,  2'42",  which  is  approximately  the  perihelial  movement 
of  Jupiter,  by  the  equipollence  of  octaves;  for  the  note  c,  3'0",  approximately  the 
perihelial  movement  of  Mercury  and  Venus;  for  the  note  d,  3'23''  and  the  aphe¬ 
lial  movement  of  Mars  is  not  much  graver,  viz,,  3'17",  so  that  here  the  num¬ 
ber  is  about  as  much  less  than  its  note  as  previously  the  same  number  was 
greater  than  its  note;  for  the  note  e  flat,  3'36",  which  the  aphelial  movement  of 
the  Earth  approximates;  for  the  note  e,  3'50",  and  the  perihelial  movement  of 
the  Earth  is  3'49";  but  the  aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  again  occupies  g.  In 
this  way,  all  the  notes  except  /  are  expressed  within  one  octave  of  the  minor 
scale  by  most  of  the  aphelial  and  perihelial  movements  of  the  planets,  especially 
by  those  which  were  previously  omitted,  as  you  see  in  the  table. 


Previously,  however,  /  sharp  was  marked  and  a  omitted;  now  a  is  marked, 
/sharp  is  omitted;  for  the  harmonic  division  in  Chapter  2  also  omitted  the  note/. 

Accordingly,  the  musical  scale  or  system  of  one  octave  with  all  its  pitches,  by 
means  of  which  natural  song^  is  transposed  in  music,  has  been  expressed  in  the 
heavens  by  a  twofold  way  and  in  two  as  it  were  modes  of  song.  There  is  this  sole 
difference:  in  our  harmonic  sectionings  both  ways  start  together  from  one  and 
the  same  terminus  G;  but  here,  in  the  planetary  movements,  that  which  was 
previously  b  now  becomes  G  in  the  minor  mode. 

^Natural  song:  music  in  the  basic  major  or  minor  system  without  accidentals.  E.  C.,  Jr. 


1038 


KEPLER 


In  the  celestial  movementSy  as  follows: 


-7JY- - -O- 

/  *  1  ^ 

y  CD  ^ 

: .  o  o  .  = 

o  Q  --  -  — 

O  00  o 

(N  (N  (N 
O  CO 


o 

TtH 


CO  (N  o  O 

O  iC  00  CO 

<N  1-1  O  05 


s 

00 


00  CO  O  CO 

CM  CO  05 

1>  lO  rJH  c<l 


(N  O  01 

lO  00 
rH  O  05 


00 


By  harmonic  sectioningSy  as  follows: 


ibo  P-': 


1221 


o 

(N 

05 


00 

(N 

1> 


O 


CO 

05 

(N 


s 

O 


O 

(N 

05 


O  O  O  lO  o 

(M  tJH  LO  t-i  00 

CO  rtl  CO  <N  O 


For  as  in  music  2160  :  1800,  or  6  :  5,  so  in  that  system  which  the  heavens  ex¬ 
press,  1728  : 1440,  namely,  also  6  : 5;  and  so  for  most  of  the  remaining,  2160  : 1800, 
1620,  1440,  1350,  1080  as  1728  :  1440,  1296,  1152,  1080,  864. 

Accordingly  you  won^t  wonder  any  more  that  a  very  excellent  order  of  sounds 
or  pitches  in  a  musical  system  or  scale  has  been  set  up  by  men,  since  you  see 
that  they  are  doing  nothing  else  in  this  business  except  to  play  the  apes  of  God 
the  Creator  and  to  act  out,  as  it  were,  a  certain  drama  of  the  ordination  of  the 
celestial  movements. 

But  there  still  remains  another  way  whereby  we  may  understand  the  two¬ 
fold  musical  scale  in  the  heavens,  where  one  and  the  same  system  but  a  twofold 
tuning  [tensio]  is  embraced,  one  at  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus,  the  other 
at  the  perihelial,  because  the  variety  of  movements  of  this  planet  is  of  the  least 
magnitude,  as  being  such  as  is  comprehended  within  the  magnitude  of  the 
diesis,  the  least  concord.  And  the  aphelial  tuning  [tensio]y  as  above,  has  been 
given  to  the  aphelial  movements  of  Saturn,  the  Earth,  Venus,  and  (relatively 
speaking)  Jupiter,  in  G,  e,  5,  but  to  the  perihelial  movements  of  Mars  and  (rela¬ 
tively  speaking)  Saturn  and,  as  is  apparent  at  first  glance,  to  those  of  Mercury, 
in  c,  Cy  and  b.  On  the  other  hand,  the  perihelial  tuning  supplies  a  pitch  even  for 
the  aphelial  movements  of  Mars,  Mercury,  and  (relatively  speaking)  Jupiter, 
but  to  the  perihelial  movements  of  Jupiter,  Venus,  and  (relatively  speaking) 
Saturn,  and  to  a  certain  extent  to  that  of  the  Earth  and  indubitably  to  that  of 
Mercury  too.  For  let  us  suppose  that  now  not  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus 
but  the  3'3"  of  the  perihelial  gets  the  pitch  of  e;  it  is  approached  very  closely  by 
the  3'0"  of  the  perihelial  movement  of  Mercury,  through  a  double  octave,  at 
the  end  of  Chapter  4.  But  if  18"  or  one  tenth  of  this  perihelial  movement  of 
Venus  is  subtracted,  2'45"  remains,  the  perihelion  of  Jupiter,  which  occupies  the 
pitch  of  d;  and  if  one  fifteenth  or  12"  is  added,  the  sum  will  be  3'15",  approxi¬ 
mately  the  perihelion  of  Mars  which  occupies  the  pitch  of  /;  and  thus  in  6,  the 
perihelial  movement  of  Saturn  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  have  ap¬ 
proximately  the  same  tuning.  But  one  eighth,  or  23",  if  multiplied  by  5,  gives 
1'55",  which  is  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth;  and,  although  it  does  not 
square  with  the  foregoing  in  the  same  scale,  as  it  does  not  give  the  interval  5  :  8 
below  e  nor  24  :  25  above  G,  nevertheless  if  now  the  perihelial  movement  of 
Venus  and  so  too  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mercury,  outside  of  the  order,  occupy 
the  pitch  e-fiat  instead  of  e,  then  there  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth  will 
occupy  the  pitch  of  G,  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mercury  is  in  concord, 
because  I'l",  or  one  third  of  3'3",  if  multiplied  by  5,  gives  5'5",  half  of  which,  or 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1039 


2'32",  approximates  the  aphelion  of  Mercury,  which  in  this  extraordinary  ad¬ 
justment  will  occupy  the  pitch  of  c.  Therefore,  all  these  movements  are  of  the 
same  tuning  with  respect  to  one  another;  but  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus 
together  with  the  three  (or  five)  prior  movements,  viz.^  in  the  same  harmonic 
mode,  divides  the  scale  differently  from  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  same  in  its 
tuning,  viz,,  in  the  major  mode  \denere  duro].  Moreover,  the  perihelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Venus,  together  with  the  two  posterior  movements,  divides  the  same 
scale  differently,  viz.,  not  into  concords  but  merely  into  a  different  order  of  con¬ 
cords,  namely  one  which  belongs  to  the  minor  mode  [generis  mollis]. 

But  it  is  sufficient  to  have  laid  before  the  eyes  in  this  chapter  what  is  the  case 
casually,  but  it  will  be  disclosed  in  Chapter  9  by  the  most  lucid  demonstrations 
why  each  and  every  one  of  these  things  was  made  in  this  fashion  and  what  the 
causes  were  not  merely  of  harmony  but  even  of  the  very  least  discord. 

6.  In  the  Extreme  Planetary  Movements  the  Musical  Modes 
OR  Tones  Have  Somehow  Been  Expressed 

[294]  This  follows  from  the  aforesaid  and  there  is  no  need  of  many  words; 
for  the  single  planets  somehow  mark  the  pitches  of  the  system  with  their  peri¬ 
helial  movement,  in  so  far  as  it  has  been  appointed  to  the  single  planets  to  tra¬ 
verse  a  certain  fixed  interval  in  the  musical  scale  comprehended  by  the  definite 
notes  of  it  or  the  pitches  of  the  system,  and  beginning  at  that  note  or  pitch  of 
each  planet  which  in  the  preceding  chapter  fell  to  the  aphelial  movement  of  that 
planet:  G  to  Saturn  and  the  Earth,  h  to  Jupiter,  which  can  be  transposed  higher 
to  G,  /-sharp  to  Mars,  e  to  Venus,  a  to  Mercury  in  the  higher  octave.  See  the 
single  movements  in  the  familiar  terms  of  notes.  They  do  not  form  articulately 
the  intermediate  positions,  which  you  here  see  filled  by  notes,  as  they  do  the 
extremes,  because  they  struggle  from  one  extreme  to  the  opposite  not  by  leaps 
and  intervals  but  by  a  continuum  of  tunings  and  actually  traverse  all  the  means 
(which  are  potentially  infinite) — which  cannot  be  expressed  by  me  in  any  other 
way  than  by  a  continuous  series  of  intermediate  notes.  Venus  remains  approxi¬ 
mately  in  unison  and  does  not  equal  even  the  least  of  the  concordant  intervals 
in  the  difference  of  its  tension. 


- 

---  1 

-|5-h -  ^  - 

■  1 1  ^  

- - O-P - P  o-J 

Saturn 

Jupiter 

Mars  approx. 

ii  S  Earth 

/  o  o 

A 

,  - 

^  C>  ^ ^ 

^  O  ^  o  ^ 

V 

\1 

1  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Venus  1 

1 2)  Mercury  1 

1  ^  Moon 

[In  Modern  notation: 


— E,  C.  Jr,1 


1040 


KEPLER 


But  the  signature  of  two  accidentals  (flats)  in  a  common  staff  and  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  skeletal  outline  of  the  octave  by  the  inclusion  of  a  definite  concordant 
interval  are  a  certain  first  beginning  of  the  distinction  of  Tones  or  Modes 
[modorum].  Therefore  the  musical  Modes  have  been  distributed  among  the 
planets.  But  I  know  that  for  the  formation  and  determination  of  distinct  Modes 
many  things  are  requisite,  which  belong  to  human  song,  as  containing  (a)  distinct 
[order  of]  intervals;  and  so  I  have  used  the  word  somehow. 

But  the  harmonist  will  be  free  to  choose  his  opinion  as  to  which  Mode  each 
planet  expresses  as  its  own,  since  the  extremes  have  been  assigned  to  it  here. 
From  among  the  familiar  Modes,  I  should  give  to  Saturn  the  Seventh  or  Eighth, 
because  if  you  place  its  key-note  at  G,  the  perihelial  movement  ascends  to  6; 
to  Jupiter,  the  First  or  Second  Mode,  because  its  aphelial  movement  has  been 
fitted  to  G  and  its  perihelial  movement  arrives  at  h  flat;  to  Mars,  the  Fifth  or 
Sixth  Mode,  not  only  because  Mars  comprehends  approximately  the  perfect 
fifth,  which  interval  is  common  to  all  the  Modes,  but  principally  because  when 
it  is  reduced  with  the  others  to  a  common  system,  it  attains  c  with  its  perihelial 
movement  and  touches  /  with  its  aphelial,  which  is  the  key-note  of  the  Fifth  or 
Sixth  Mode  or  Tone;  I  should  give  the  Third  or  Fourth  Mode  to  the  Earth,  be¬ 
cause  its  movement  revolves  within  a  semitone,  while  the  first  interval  of  those 
Modes  is  a  semitone;  but  to  Mercury  will  belong  indifferently  all  the  Modes  or 
Tones  on  account  of  the  greatness  of  its  range;  to  Venus,  clearly  none  on  account 
of  the  smallness  of  its  range;  but  on  account  of  the  common  system  the  Third 
and  Fourth  Mode,  because  with  reference  to  the  other  planets  it  occupies  e. 
(The  Earth  sings  MI,  FA,  MI  so  that  you  may  infer  even  from  the  syllables  that 
in  this  our  domicile  Misery  and  FAmine  obtain.)^ 

7.  The  Universal  Consonances  of  All  Six  Planets,  Like  Common 
Four-Part  Counterpoint,  Can  Exist 
[295]  But  now,  Urania,  there  is  need  for  louder  sound  while  I  climb  along  the 
harmonic  scale  of  the  celestial  movements  to  higher  things  where  the  true 
archetype  of  the  fabric  of  the  world  is  kept  hidden.  Follow  after,  ye  modern 
musicians,  and  judge  the  thing  according  to  your  arts,  which  were  unknown  to 
antiquity.  Nature,  which  is  never  not  lavish  of  herself,  after  a  lying-in  of  two 
thousand  years,  has  finally  brought  you  forth  in  these  last  generations,  the  first 
true  images  of  the  universe.  By  means  of  your  concords  of  various  voices,  and 
through  your  ears,  she  has  whispered  to  the  human  mind,  the  favorite  daughter 
of  God  the  Creator,  how  she  exists  in  the  innermost  bosom. 

(Shall  I  have  committed  a  crime  if  I  ask  the  single  composers  of  this  genera¬ 
tion  for  some  artistic  motet  instead  of  this  epigraph?  The  Royal  Psalter  and  the 
other  Holy  Books  can  supply  a  text  suited  for  this.  But  alas  for  you!  No  more 
than  six  are  in  concord  in  the  heavens.  For  the  moon  sings  here  monody  sepa¬ 
rately,  like  a  dog  sitting  on  the  Earth.  Compose  the  melody;  I,  in  order  that  the 
book  may  progress,  promise  that  I  will  watch  carefully  over  the  six  parts.  To 
him  who  more  properly  expresses  the  celestial  music  described  in  this  work, 
Clio  will  give  a  garland,  and  Urania  will  betroth  Venus  his  bride.) 

It  has  been  unfolded  above  what  harmonic  ratios  two  neighbouring  planets 
would  embrace  in  their  extreme  movements.  But  it  happens  very  rarely  that 
two,  especially  the  slowest,  arrive  at  their  extreme  intervals  at  the  same  time ; 
For  example,  the  apsides  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  about  81°  apart.  According- 
^See  note  on  hexachordal  system. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1041 


ly,  while  this  distance  between  them  measures  out  the  whole  zodiac  by  definite 
twenty-year  leaps  eight  hundred  years  pass  by,  and  nonetheless  the  leap 
which  concludes  the  eighth  century,  does  not  carry  precisely  to  the  very  ap¬ 
sides;  and  if  it  digresses  much  further,  another  eight  hundred  years  must  be 
awaited,  that  a  more  fortunate  leap  than  that  one  may  be  sought;  and  the  whole 
route  must  be  repeated  as  many  times  as  the  measure  of  digression  is  contained 
in  the  length  of  one  leap.  Moreover,  the  other  single  pairs  of  planets  have  periods 
like  that,  although  not  so  long.  But  meanwhile  there  occur  also  other  con¬ 
sonances  of  two  planets,  between  movements  whereof  not  both  are  extremes  but 
one  or  both  are  intermediate;  and  those  consonances  exist  as  it  were  in  different 
tunings  [tensionihus].  For,  because  Saturn  tends  from  G  to  6,  and  slightly  further, 
and  Jupiter  from  6  to  d  and  further;  therefore  between  Jupiter  and  Saturn  there 
can  exist  the  following  consonances,  over  and  above  the  octave:  the  major  and 
minor  third  and  the  perfect  fourth,  either  one  of  the  thirds  through  the  tuning 
which  maintains  the  amplitude  of  the  remaining  one,  but  the  perfect  fourth 
through  the  amplitude  of  a  major  whole  tone.  For  there  will  be  a  perfect  fourth 
not  merely  from  G  of  Saturn  to  cc  of  Jupiter  but  also  from  A  of  Saturn  to  dd  of 
Jupiter  and  through  all  the  intermediates  between  the  G  and  A  of  Saturn  and 
the  cc  and  dd  of  Jupiter.  But  the  octave  and  the  perfect  fifth  exist  solely  at  the 
points  of  the  apsides.  But  Mars,  which  got  a  greater  interval  as  its  own,  received 
it  in  order  that  it  should  also  make  an  octave  with  the  upper  planets  through 
some  amplitude  of  tuning.  Mercury  received  an  interval  great  enough  for  it  to 
set  up  almost  all  the  consonances  with  all  the  planets  within  one  of  its  periods, 
which  is  not  longer  than  the  space  of  three  months.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Earth,  and  Venus  much  more  so,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  their  intervals, 
limit  the  consonances,  which  they  form  not  merely  with  the  others  but  with  one 
another  in  especial,  to  visible  fewness.  But  if  three  planets  are  to  concord  in  one 
harmony,  many  periodic  returns  are  to  be  awaited;  nevertheless  there  are  many 
consonances,  so  that  they  may  so  much  the  more  easily  take  place,  while  each 
nearest  consonance  follows  after  its  neighbour,  and  very  often  threefold  con¬ 
sonances  are  seen  to  exist  between  Mars,  the  Earth,  and  Mercury.  But  the  con¬ 
sonances  of  four  planets  now  begin  to  be  scattered  throughout  centuries,  and 
those  of  five  planets  throughout  thousands  of  years. 

But  that  all  six  should  be  in  concord  [296]  has  been  fenced  about  by  the  longest 
intervals  of  time;  and  I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  this 
to  occur  twice  by  precise  evolving  or  whether  that  points  to  a  certain  beginning 
of  time,  from  which  every  age  of  the  world  has  flowed. 

But  if  only  one  sextuple  harmony  can  occur,  or  only  one  notable  one  among 
many,  indubitably  that  could  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  the  Creation.  Therefore  we 
must  ask,  in  exactly  how  many  forms  are  the  movements  of  all  six  planets  re¬ 
duced  to  one  common  harmony?  The  method  of  inquiry  is  as  follows:  let  us 
begin  with  the  Earth  and  Venus,  because  these  two  planets  do  not  make  more 
than  two  consonances  and  (wherein  the  cause  of  this  thing  is  comprehended) 
by  means  of  very  short  intensifications  of  the  movements. 

Therefore  let  us  set  up  two,  as  it  were,  skeletal  outlines  of  harmonies,  each 
skeletal  outline  determined  by  the  two  extreme  numbers  wherewith  the  limits 

^That  is  to  say,  since  Saturn  and  Jupiter  have  one  revolution  with  respect  to  one  another 
every  twenty  years,  they  are  81®  apart  once  every  twenty  years,  while  the  end-positions  of 
this  81®  interval  traverse  the  ecliptic  in  leaps,  so  to  speak,  and  coincide  with  the  apsides  ap¬ 
proximately  once  in  eight  hundred  years.  C.  G.  W. 


1042 


KEPLER 

of  the  tunings  are  designated,  and  let  us  search  out  what  fits  in  with  them  from 
the  variety  of  movements  granted  to  each  planet. 

Harmonies  of  all  the  Planets,  or  Universal  Harmonies  in  the  Major  Mode 

[Modem  notation 


In  order  that  b  may  he  in  concord 
-O - 


e7 

b6 

g® 

e® 


6 


lOI 


1221 


b3 

g3 


B 

G 


In  order  that  c  may  he  in  concord 


g” 

e® 

es 


g^ 

c4 


% 


G 


At  gravest 
Tuning 


2'14" 

1'47" 


At  Gravest 
tuning 

380'20" 

204'16" 

228'12" 

190'10" 

95'5" 


57'3" 

38'2" 

28'32" 


4'45" 


1'47" 


At  most  acute 
Tuning 


380'20" 

285'15" 

292'48" 

228'12" 

234'16" 

lOO'lO" 

195'14" 

95'5" 

97'37" 

57'3" 

58'34" 

35'39" 

36'36" 

28'32" 

2917" 

4'34'' 


r49" 

At  most  acute 
tuning 

312'21" 

234'16" 

195'14" 

9r37" 


58'34" 

39'3" 

29'17" 


4'53" 


r49" 


5\Sva 


4  X  8t>a" 


2x8i;a—: 
Q  * 


OJ 


% 


m 


E.  a,  Jr.) 

[Modern  notation 
5x8va  I 


4x8t>a‘ 


i 


"PI 


$ 


2x8z;a‘“l 


8va 

m 


i 


3 


E.  C.,  Jr.l 


1043 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

Saturn  joins  in  this  universal  consonance  with  its  aphelial  movement,  the  Earth 
with  its  aphelial,  Venus  approximately  with  its  aphelial;  at  highest  tuning,  Venus 
joins  with  its  perihelial;  at  mean  tuning,  Saturn  joins  with  its  perihelial,  Jupiter  with 
its  aphelial,  Mercury  with  its  perihelial.  So  Saturn  can  join  in  with  two  movements, 
Mars  with  two,  Mercury  with  four.  But  with  the  rest  remaining,  the  perihelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Saturn  and  the  aphelial  of  Jupiter  are  not  allowed.  But  in  their  place,  Mars 
joins  in  with  perihelial  movement. 

The  remaining  planets  join  in  with  single  movements,  Mars  alone  with  two,  and 
Mercury  with  four. 

[297]  Accordingly,  the  second  skeletal  outline  will  be  that  wherein  the  other 
possible  consonance,  5  :  8,  exists  between  the  Earth  and  Venus.  Here  one  eighth 
of  the  94'50"  of  the  diurnal  aphelial  movement  of  Venus  or  1 1'51"  +  ,  if  multiplied 
by  5,  equals  the  59'16"  of  the  movement  of  the  Earth;  and  similar  parts  of  the 
97'37"  of  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus  are  equal  to  the  61'!''  of  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  Earth.  Accordingly,  the  other  planets  are  in  concord  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  diurnal  movements: 


Harmonies  of  all  the  Planets,  or  Universal  Harmonies 
in  the  Minor  Mode 


In  order  that  b  may  he  in  concord 


At  gravest 
tuning 


_  379'20" 

S  -  284'32" 

g6  237'4" 

ei,6  .  by-  189'40" 

^  eb®  bc^  94'50" 


At  most  acute 
tuning 


295'56" 

244'4" 

195'14" 

97'37" 


6 

bb^ 


59T6" 

35'35" 


61T" 

36'37" 


c  3  ■■  ■  O'  —  29'38" 

^  -b  ■■■  ---7:-: 


30'31" 


% 


bb^ 


b  c? 


4'35" 


[Modern  notation: 


Here  again,  in  the  mean  tuning  Saturn  joins  in  with  its  perihelial  movement,  Jupiter 
with  its  aphelial,  Mercury  with  its  perihelial.  But  at  highest  tuning  approximately 
the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth  joins  in. 


1044 


KEPLER 


that  c  may  be  in  concord 

At  gravest 
tuning 

- 0 

379'20V 

316'5" 

237'4'' 

189'40" 

-4o - - 

94'50" 

At  most  acute 
tuning 


325'26" 

244/4" 


195'14" 

162'43" 

97'37" 


6 


59'16"  61'1" 


29'38"  30'31" 


[Modern  notation: 


f 

5x8L>a . 

)  1  ‘ 

1  i  hrr^ 

b 

- 

_ 

4x8L>a 


-i 

y  1  ba — — 

-A 

nrb-v - 

P - - — 

2x8ua'"; 
n  Q  ' 


H 

— 1 

k 

A 

^ - 

>w. 

%va . *: 


E.  C.,  Jr.] 


An  here,  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  and  the  perihelia!  movement  of 
Saturn  removed,  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mercury  is  practically  admitted  besides 
the  perihelial.  The  rest  remain. 

Therefore  astronomical  experience  bears  witness  that  the  universal  conso¬ 
nances  of  all  the  movements  can  take  place,  and  in  the  two  modes  [generum]^  the 
major  and  minor,  and  in  both  genera  of  form,  or  (if  I  may  say  so)  in  respect  to 
two  pitches  and  in  any  one  of  the  four  cases,  with  a  certain  latitude  of  tuning 
and  also  with  a  certain  variety  in  the  particular  consonances  of  Saturn,  Mars, 
and  Mercury,  of  each  with  the  rest;  and  that  is  not  afforded  by  the  intermediate 
movements  alone,  but  by  all  the  extreme  movements  too,  except  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Mars  and  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter;  because  since  the 
former  occupies/  sharp;  and  the  latter,  d  Venus,  which  occupies  perpetually 
the  intermediate  e  flat  or  e,  does  not  allow  those  neighbouring  dissonances  in  the 
universal  consonance,  as  she  would  do  if  she  had  space  to  go  beyond  e  or  e  flat. 
This  difficulty  is  caused  by  the  wedding  of  the  Earth  and  Venus,  or  the  male  and 
the  female.  These  two  planets  divide  the  kinds  [genera]  of  consonances  into  the 
major  and  masculine  and  the  minor  and  feminine,  according  as  the  one  spouse 
has  gratified  the  other — namely,  either  the  Earth  is  in  its  aphelion,  as  if  pre¬ 
serving  [298]  its  marital  dignity  and  performing  works  worthy  of  a  man,  with 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1045 


Venus  removed  and  pushed  away  to  her  perihelion  as  to  her  distaff;  or  else  the 
Earth  has  kindly  allowed  her  to  ascend  into  aphelion  or  the  Earth  itself  has 
descended  into  its  perihelion  towards  Venus  and  as  it  were,  into  her  embrace, 
for  the  sake  of  pleasure,  and  has  laid  aside  for  a  while  its  shield  and  arms  and 
all  the  works  befitting  a  man;  for  at  that  time  the  consonance  is  minor. 

But  if  we  command  this  contradictory  Venus  to  keep  quiet,  Le.,  if  we  con¬ 
sider  what  the  consonances  not  of  all  but  merely  of  the  five  remaining  planets 
can  be,  excluding  the  movement  of  Venus,  the  Earth  still  wanders  around  its  g 
string  and  does  not  ascend  a  semitone  above  it.  Accordingly  5^,  5,  c,  d,  and  e 
can  be  in  concord  with  whereupon,  as  you  see,  Jupiter,  marking  the  d  string 
with  its  perihelial  movement,  is  brought  in.  Accordingly,  the  difficulty  about 
Mars’  aphelial  movement  remains.  For  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth, 
which  occupies  does  not  allow  it  on/ sharp;  but  the  perihelial  movement,  as 
was  said  above  in  Chapter  v,  is  in  discord  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars 
by  about  half  a  diesis. 


Harmonies  of  the  Five  Planets,  with  Venus  Left  Out 


Major  mode  (Genus  durum) 


d7 
U  b6 


9  in  d® 
discord 


&  ^ 
b3 

crS 


isz: 


Ql  di 
bl 


-cr 


At  gravest 
tuning 

342'18" 

285'15" 

228'12" 

171'9" 

95'5" 


At  most  acute 
tuning 

351'24" 

292'48" 

234'16" 

175'42" 

97'37" 


57'3" 

35'39" 


58'34" 
36'36"  - 


28'31" 


29/17// 


5'21'- 


5'30'^ 

4'35'' 


[Modern  notation: 


f 

5  X  ^va  1 

1 — Q - 

K- - ^  1 

2  X  ^va  : 


jQ. 


(O 


b  B 
G 


2'13" 

1/47// 


E.  C.,  Jr.] 


Here  at  the  most  grave  tuning,  Saturn  and  the  Earth  join  in  with  their  aphelial 
movements;  at  the  mean  tuning,  Saturn  with  its  perihelial  and  Jupiter  with  its  aphelial; 
at  the  most  acute,  Jupiter  with  its  perihelial. 


1046 


KEPLER 


Minor  mode  (Genus  molle) 


d7 

b® 

g® 


9  in  d® 
discord 
e® 


cf 


g^ 

b3 


t 


o  ■■ 


di 


b  B 
G 


At  gravest 
tuning 

At  most  acute 
tuning 

342'18'' 

273'50'' 

228'12" 

351'24" 

280'57" 

234'16" 

171'9" 

95'5" 

175'42" 

97^37" 

57'3" 

34'14" 

58'34" 

35'8" 

28'31" 

29/17// 

5'21" 

5'30" 

2'8" 

1'47" 

2'12" 

1'50" 

[Modern  notation: 


5  X  8va 


Here  the  aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  is  not  allowed,  but  at  the  most  acute 
tuning  Saturn  practically  joins  in  with  its  perihelial  movement. 


But  there  can  also  exist  the  following  harmony  of  the  four  planets,  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  Mars,  and  Mercury,  wherein  too  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  is 
present,  but  it  is  without  latitude  of  tuning. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1047 


In  order'  that  b  maybe  in  concord 


d^ 

r:>  - 

335'50" 

b6 

£2 

279'52" 

209'52" 

d6 

167'55" 

^  b3  - 0-:  34'59" 


26' 14" 


21 


di 


5'15" 


b  B  )  '  o  .  _  2'11" 


In  order  that  a  may  be  in  concord 


8 


d7 

a® 


Q.: 

- o- 


z=:4P:-.o 

d6 


& 


a^ 


■O' 


% 


di 


321 


[Modem  notation: 


[Modern  notation: 
5\Sva'~~\ 


E.  C.,  Jr.] 


1048 


KEPLER 

Accordingly  the  movements  of  the  heavens  are  nothing  except  a  certain  ever¬ 
lasting  polyphony  (intelligible,  not  audible)  with  dissonant  tunings,  like  certain 
syncopations  or  cadences  (wherewith  men  imitate  these  natural  dissonances), 
which  tends  towards  fixed  and  prescribed  clauses — the  single  clauses  having  six 
terms  (like  voices) —  and  which  marks  out  and  distinguishes  the  immensity  of 
time  with  those  notes.  Hence  it  is  no  longer  a  surprise  that  man,  the  ape  of  his 
Creator,  should  finally  have  discovered  the  art  of  singing  polyphonically  [per 
concentum],  which  was  unknown  to  the  ancients,  namely  in  order  that  he  might 
play  the  everlastingness  of  all  created  time  in  some  short  part  of  an  hour  by 
means  of  an  artistic  concord  of  many  voices  and  that  he  might  to  some  extent 
taste  the  satisfaction  of  God  the  Workman  with  His  o^vn  works,  in  that  very 
sweet  sense  of  delight  elicited  from  this  music  which  imitates  God. 


Note:  The  comparison  Kepler  draws  between  the  celestial  harmonies  and  the  polyphonic 
music  of  his  time  may  be  clarified  by  a  simple  example  for  four  voices  from — Palestrina, 
0  Crux: 


Cadence 


As  wall  be  observed  each  of  the  four  voices  (as  it  would  also  be  with  the  six  to  which  Kepler 
refers)  moves  from  one  consonant  chord  to  another  while  following  a  graceful  melodic  line. 
Sometimes  bits  of  scales  or  passing  tones  are  added  to  give  a  voice  more  melodic  freedom  ex¬ 
pressiveness.  For  the  same  reason  a  voice  may  remain  on  the  same  note  while  the  other  voices 
change  to  a  new  chord.  When  this  becomes  a  dissonance  (called  a  syncopation)  in  the  new 
chord  it  usually  resolves  by  moving  one  step  downward  to  a  tone  that  is  consonant  with  the 
other  voices.  As  in  this  example  each  section  or  “caluse”  ends  with  a  cadence. 

E.  C.,  Jb. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1049 


8.  In  the  Celestial  Harmonies  Which  Planet  Sings  Soprano, 

Which  Alto,  Which  Tenor,  and  Which  Bass? 

Although  these  words  are  applied  to  human  voices,  while  voices  or  sounds  do 
not  exist  in  the  heavens,  on  account  of  the  very  great  tranquillity  of  movements, 
and  not  even  the  subjects  in  which  we  find  the  consonances  are  comprehended 
under  the  true  genus  of  movement,  since  we  were  considering  the  movements 
solely  as  apparent  from  the  sun,  and  finally,  although  there  is  no  such  cause  in 
the  heavens,  as  in  human  singing,  for  requiring  a  definite  number  of  voices  in 
order  to  make  consonance  (for  first  there  was  the  number  of  the  six  planets  re¬ 
volving  around  the  sun,  from  the  number  of  the  five  intervals  taken  from  the 
regular  figures,  and  then  afterwards — in  the  order  of  nature,  not  of  time — the 
congruence  of  the  movements  was  settled):  I  do  not  know  why  but  nevertheless 
this  wonderful  congruence  with  human  song  has  such  a  strong  effect  upon  me 
that  I  am  compelled  to  pursue  this  part  of  the  comparison,  also,  even  without 
any  solid  natural  cause.  For  those  same  properties  which  in  Book  iii,  [300] 
Chapter  16,  custom  ascribed  to  the  bass  and  nature  gave  legal  grounds  for  so 
doing  are  somehow  possessed  by  Saturn  and  Jupiter  in  the  heavens;  and  we 
find  those  of  the  tenor  in  Mars,  those  of  the  alto  are  present  in  the  Earth  and 
Venus,  and  those  of  the  soprano  are  possessed  by  Mercury,  if  not  with  equality 
of  intervals,  at  least  proportionately.  For  howsoever  in  the  following  chapter 
the  eccentricities  of  each  planet  are  deduced  from  their  proper  causes  and 
through  those  eccentricities  the  intervals  proper  to  the  movements  of  each, 
none  the  less  there  comes  from  that  the  follomng  wonderful  result  (I  do  not 
know  whether  it  is  occasioned  by  the  procurement  and  mere  tempering  of  neces¬ 
sities):  (1)  as  the  bass  is  opposed  to  the  alto,  so  there  are  two  planets  which  have 
the  nature  of  the  alto,  two  that  of  the  bass,  just  as  in  any  Mode  of  song  there  is 
one  [bass  and  one  alto]  on  either  side,  while  there  are  single  representatives  of 
the  other  single  voices.  (2)  As  the  alto  is  practically  supreme  in  a  very  narrow 
range  [in  angustiis]  on  account  of  necessary  and  natural  causes  unfolded  in 
Book  III,  so  the  almost  innermost  planets,  the  Earth  and  Venus,  have  the  nar¬ 
rowest  intervals  of  movements,  the  Earth  not  much  more  than  a  semitone, 
Venus  not  even  a  diesis.  (3)  And  as  the  tenor  is  free,  but  none  the  less  progresses 
with  moderation,  so  Mars  alone — with  the  single  exception  of  Alercury — can 
make  the  greatest  interval,  namely  a  perfect  fifth.  (4)  And  as  the  bass  makes 
harmonic  leaps,  so  Saturn  and  Jupiter  have  intervals  which  are  harmonic,  and 
in  relation  to  one  another  pass  from  the  octave  to  the  octave  and  perfect  fifth. 
(5)  And  as  the  soprano  is  the  freest,  more  than  all  the  rest,  and  likewise  the 
swiftest,  so  Mercury  can  traverse  more  than  an  octave  in  the  shortest  period. 
But  this  is  altogether  per  accidens;  now  let  us  hear  the  reasons  for  the  eccen¬ 
tricities. 

9.  The  Genesis  of  the  Eccentricities  in  the  Single  Planets 

FROM  THE  Procurement  of  the  Consonances 
between  their  Movements 

Accordingly,  since  we  see  that  the  universal  harmonies  of  all  six  planets  can¬ 
not  take  place  b}^  chance,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  extreme  movements,  all 
of  which  we  see  concur  in  the  universal  harmonies — except  two,  which  concur  in 
harmonies  closest  to  the  universal — and  since  much  less  can  it  happen  by  chance 


1050  KEPLER 

that  all  the  pitches  of  the  system  of  the  octave  (as  set  up  in  Book  iii)  by  means 
of  harmonic  divisions  are  designated  by  the  extreme  planetary  movements, 
but  least  of  all  that  the  very  subtle  business  of  the  distinction  of  the  celestial 
consonances  into  two  modes,  the  major  and  minor,  should  be  the  outcome  of 
chance,  without  the  special  attention  of  the  Artisan:  accordingly  it  follows  that 
the  Creator,  the  source  of  all  wisdom,  the  everlasting  approver  of  order,  the 
eternal  and  superexistent  geyser  of  geometry  and  harmony,  it  follows,  I  say, 
that  He,  the  Artisan  of  the  celestial  movements  Himself,  should  have  conjoined 
to  the  five  regular  solids  the  harmonic  ratios  arising  from  the  regular  plane 
figures,  and  out  of  both  classes  should  have  formed  one  most  perfect  archetype 
of  the  heavens:  in  order  that  in  this  archetype,  as  through  the  five  regular  solids 
the  shapes  of  the  spheres  shine  through  on  which  the  six  planets  are  carried,  so 
too  through  the  consonances,  which  are  generated  from  the  plane  figures,  and 
deduced  from  them  in  Book  in,  the  measures  of  the  eccentricities  in  the  single 
planets  might  be  determined  so  as  to  proportion  the  movements  of  the  planetary 
bodies;  and  in  order  that  there  should  be  one  tempering  together  of  the  ratios 
and  the  consonances,  and  that  the  greater  ratios  of  the  spheres  should  yield 
somewhat  to  the  lesser  ratios  of  the  eccentricities  necessary  for  procuring  the 
consonances,  and  conversely  those  in  especial  of  the  harmonic  ratios  which  had 
a  greater  kinship  with  each  solid  figure  should  be  adjusted  to  the  planets —  in 
so  far  as  that  could  be  effected  by  means  of  consonances.  And  in  order  that, 
finally,  in  that  way  both  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  and  the  eccentricities  of  the 
single  planets  might  be  born  of  the  archetype  simultaneously,  while  from  the 
amplitude  of  the  spheres  and  the  bulk  of  the  bodies  the  periodic  times  of  the 
single  planets  might  result. 

[301]  While  I  struggle  to  bring  forth  this  process  into  the  light  of  human  intel¬ 
lect  by  means  of  the  elementary  form  customary  with  geometers,  may  the 
Author  of  the  heavens  be  favourable,  the  Father  of  intellects,  the  Bestower  of 
mortal  senses.  Himself  immortal  and  superblessed,  and  may  He  prevent  the 
darkness  of  our  mind  from  bringing  forth  in  this  work  anything  unworthy  of 
His  Majesty,  and  may  He  effect  that  we,  the  imitators  of  God  by  the  help  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  should  rival  the  perfection  of  His  works  in  sanctity  of  life,  for  which 
He  choose  His  church  throughout  the  Earth  and,  by  the  blood  of  His  Son, 
cleansed  it  from  sins,  and  that  we  should  keep  at  a  distance  all  the  discords  of 
enmity,  all  contentions,  rivalries,  anger,  quarrels,  dissensions,  sects,  envy,  pro¬ 
vocations,  and  irritations  arising  through  mocking  speech  and  the  other  works 
of  the  flesh;  and  that  along  with  myself,  all  who  possess  the  spirit  of  Christ  will 
not  only  desire  but  will  also  strive  by  deeds  to  express  and  make  sure  their  call¬ 
ing,  by  spurning  all  crooked  morals  of  all  kinds  which  have  been  veiled  and 
painted  over  with  the  cloak  of  zeal  or  of  the  love  of  truth  or  of  singular  erudition 
or  modesty  over  against  contentious  teachers,  or  with  any  other  showy  garment. 
Holy  Father,  keep  us  safe  in  the  concord  of  our  love  for  one  another,  that  we  may 
be  one,  just  as  Thou  art  one  with  They  Son,  Our  Lord,  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  just  as  through  the  sweetest  bonds  of  harmonies  Thou  hast  made  all  Thy 
works  one;  and  that  from  the  bringing  of  Thy  people  into  concord  the  body  of 
Thy  Church  may  be  beuilt  up  in  the  Earth,  as  Thou  didst  erect  the  heavens 
themselves  out  of  harmonies. 


1051 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 
Prior  Reasons 

L  Axiom.  It  is  reasonable  that^  wherever  in  general  it  could  have  been  done,  all  pos- 
sible  harmonies  were  due  to  have  been  set  up  between  the  extreme  movements  of  the 
planets  taken  singly  and  by  twos^  in  order  that  that  variety  should  adorn  the  world. 

II.  Axiom  The  five  intervals  between  the  six  spheres  to  some  extent  were  due  to  cor¬ 
respond  to  the  ratio  of  the  geometrical  spheres  which  inscribe  and  circumscribe  the 
five  regular  solids,  and  in  the  same  order  which  is  natural  to  the  figures. 

Concerning  this,  see  Chapter  1  and  the  Mysterium  Cosmographicum  and  the 
Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy. 

III.  Proposition.  The  intervals  between  the  Earth  and  Mars,  and  between  the 
Earth  and  Venus,  were  due  to  be  least,  in  proportion  to  their  spheres,  and  thereby 
approximately  equal;  middling  and  approximately  equal  between  Saturn  and 
Jupiter,  and  between  Venus  and  Mercury;  but  greatest  between  Jupiter  and  Mars. 

For  by  Axiom  ii,  the  planets  corresponding  in  position  to  the  figures  which 
make  the  least  ratio  of  geometrical  spheres  ought  likewise  to  make  the  least 
ratio;  but  those  which  correspond  to  the  figures  of  middling  ratio  ought  to  make 
the  greatest;  and  those  which  correspond  to  the  figures  of  greatest  ratio,  the 
greatest.  But  the  order  holding  between  the  figures  of  the  dodechahedron  and 
the  icosahedron  is  the  same  as  that  between  the  pairs  of  planets.  Mars  and  the 
Earth,  and  the  Earth  and  Venus,  and  the  order  of  the  cube  and  octahedron  is 
the  same  as  that  of  the  pair  Saturn  and  Jupiter  and  that  of  the  pair  Venus  and 
Mercury;  and,  finally,  the  order  of  the  tetrahedron  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
pair  Jupiter  and  Mars  (see  Chapter  3).  Therefore,  the  least  ratio  will  hold  be¬ 
tween  the  planetary  spheres  first  mentioned,  while  that  between  Saturn  and 
Jupiter  is  approximately  equal  to  that  between  Venus  and  Mercury;  and,  fi¬ 
nally,  the  greatest  between  the  spheres  of  Jupiter  and  Mars. 

IV.  Axiom.  All  the  planets  ought  to  have  their  eccentricities  diverse,  no  less  than  a 
movement  in  latitude,  and  in  proportion  to  those  eccentricities  also  their  distances 
from  the  sun,  the  source  of  movement,  diverse. 

As  the  essence  of  movement  consists  not  in  being  but  in  becoming,  so  too  the 
form  or  figure  of  the  region  which  any  planet  traverses  in  its  movement  does  not 
become  solid  immediately  from  the  start  but  in  the  succession  of  time  acquires 
at  last  not  only  length  but  also  breadth  and  depth  (its  perfect  ternary  of  di¬ 
mensions);  and,  gradually,  thus,  by  the  interweaving  and  piling  up  of  many 
circuits,  the  form  of  a  concave  sphere  comes  to  be  represented — just  as  out  of 
the  silk-worm's  thread,  by  the  interweaving  and  heaping  together  of  many  cir¬ 
cles,  the  cocoon  is  built. 

V.  Proposition.  Two  diverse  consonances  were  to,  have  been  attributed  to  each  pair 
of  neighbouring  planets. 

For,  by  Axiom  iv,  any  planet  has  a  longest  and  a  shortest  distance  from  the 
sun,  wherefore,  by  Chapter  3,  it  will  have  both  a  slowest  movement  and  a 
fastest.  Therefore,  there  are  two  primary  comparisons  of  the  extreme  move¬ 
ments,  one  of  the  diverging  movements  in  the  two  planets,  and  the  other  of  the 
converging.  Now  it  is  necessary  that  they  be  diverse  from  one  another,  because  the 
ratio  of  the  diverging  movements  will  be  greater,  that  of  the  converging,  lesser. 
But,  moreover,  diverse  consonances  had  to  exist  by  way  of  diverse  pairs  of 
planets,  so  that  this  variety  should  make  for  the  adornment  of  the  world — by 
Axiom  I — and  also  because  the  ratios  of  the  intervals  between  two  planets  are 


1 


1052  KEPLER  \ 

diverse,  by  Proposition  iii.  But  to  each  definite  ratio  of  the  spheres  there  cor-  ' 

respond  harmonic  ratios,  in  quantitative  kinship,  as  has  been  demonstrated  in  » 

Chapter  5  of  this  book.  ' 

VI.  Proposition.  The  two  least  consonances,  4  :  5  and  6  :  6,  do  not  have  a  place 
between  two  planets. 

For 

5:4  =  1,000:800 

and  I 

6  :  5  =  1,000  :833. 

But  the  spheres  circumscribed  around  the  dodecahedron  and  icosahedron 
have  a  greater  ratio  to  the  inscribed  spheres  than  1,000  :  795,  etc.,  and  these 
two  ratios  indicate  the  intervals  between  the  nearest  planetary  spheres,  or 
the  least  distances.  For  in  the  other  regular  solids  the  spheres  are  farther 
distant  from  one  another.  But  now  the  ratio  of  the  movements  is  even  greater 
than  the  ratios  of  the  intervals,  unless  the  ratio  of  the  eccentricities  to  the 
spheres  is  vast  — by  Article  xiii  of  Chapter  3.  Therefore  the  least  ratio  of  the 
movements  is  greater  than  4  :  5  and  5  :  6.  Accordingly,  these  consonances, 
being  hindered  by  the  regular  solids,  receive  no  place  among  the  planets. 

VII.  Proposition.  The  consonance  of  the  perfect  fourth  can  have  no  place  be-  . 
tween  the  converging  movements  of  two  planets,  unless  the  ratios  of  the  extreme 
movements  proper  to  them  are,  if  compounded,  more  than  a  perfect  fifth. 

For  let  3:4  be  the  ratio  between  the  converging  movements.  And  first, 
let  there  be  no  eccentricity,  no  ratio  of  movements  proper  to  the  single  planets, 
but  both  the  converging  and  the  mean  movements  the  same;  then  it  follows 
that  the  corresponding  intervals,  which  by  this  hypothesis  will  be  the  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  spheres,  constitute  the  power  of  this  ratio,  viz.,  4480  :  5424 
(by  Chapter  3).  But  this  ratio  is  already  less  than  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of 
any  regular  figure;  and  so  the  whole  inner  sphere  would  be  cut  by  the  regular 
planes  of  the  figure  inscribed  in  any  outer  sphere.  But  this  is  contrary  to 
Axiom  II. 

Secondly,  let  there  be  some  composition  of  the  ratios  between  the  extreme 
movements,  and  let  the  ratio  of  the  converging  movements  be  3  :  4  or  75  :  100, 
but  let  the  ratio  of  the  corresponding  intervals  be  1,000  :  795,  since  no  regular 
figure  has  a  lesser  ratio  of  spheres.  And  because  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  move¬ 
ments  exceeds  this  ratio  of  the  intervals  by  the  excess  750  :  795,  then  if  this 
excess  is  divided  into  the  ratio  1,000  :  795,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Chapter 
3,  the  result  will  be  9434  :  7950,  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  spheres. 
Therefore  the  square  of  this  ratio,  viz.,  8901  :  6320,  i.e.,  10,000  :  7,100  is  the  I 
ratio  of  the  spheres.  Divide  this  by  1000  :  795,  the  ratio  of  the  converging 
intervals,  the  result  will  be  7100  :  7950,  about  a  major  whole  tone.  The  com-  , 
pound  of  the  two  ratios  which  the  mean  movements  have  to  the  converging 
movements  on  either  side  must  be  at  least  so  great,  in  order  that  the  perfect 
fourth  may  be  possible  between  the  converging  movements.  Accordingly,  the 
compound  ratio  of  the  diverging  extreme  intervals  to  the  converging  extreme 
intervals  is  about  the  square  root  of  this  ratio,  i.e.,  two  tones,  and  again  the 
converging  intervals  are  the  square  of  this,  i.e.,  more  than  a  perfect  fifth. 
Accordingly,  if  the  compound  of  the  proper  movements  of  two  neighbouring 
planets  is  less  than  a  perfect  fifth,  a  perfect  fourth  will  not  be  possible  be¬ 
tween  their  converging  movements.  | 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1053 

VIII.  Proposition.  The  consonances  1  : 2  and  1  :  5,  i.e.,  the  octave  and  the  oc¬ 
tave  plus  a  fifth  were  due  to  Saturn  and  Jupiter. 

For  they  are  the  first  and  highest  of  the  planets  and  have  obtained  the 
first  figure,  the  cube,  by  Chapter  1  of  this  book;  and  these  consonances  are 
first  in  the  order  of  nature  and  are  chief  in  the  two  families  of  figures,  the 
bisectorial  or  tetragonal  and  the  triangular,  by  what  has  been  said  in  Book  i. 
But  that  which  is  chief,  the  octave  1  : 2,  is  approximately  greater  than  the 
ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  cube,  [303]  which  is  1  :  V3 ;  wherefore  it  is  fitted 
to  become  the  lesser  ratio  of  the  movements  of  the  planets  on  the  cube,  by 
Chapter  3,  Article  xiii;  and,  as  a  consequence,  1  :  3  serves  as  the  greater  ratio. 

But  this  is  also  the  same  as  what  follows:  for  if  some  consonance  is  to  some 
ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  figures,  as  the  ratio  of  the  movements  apparent 
from  the  sun  is  to  the  ratio  of  the  mean  intervals,  such  a  consonance  will  duly 
be  attributed  to  the  movements.  But  it  is  natural  that  the  ratio  of  the  diverging 
movements  should  be  much  greater  than  the  ratio  of  the  %th  powers  of  the 
spheres,  according  to  the  end  of  Chapter  3,  i.e.,  it  approaches  the  square  of 
the  ratio  of  the  spheres;  and  moreover  1  : 3  is  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the 
spheres  of  the  cube,  which  we  call  the  ratio  of  1  :  V^.  Therefore,  the  ratio 
of  the  diverging  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  is  1  :  3.  (See  above,  Chap¬ 
ter  2,  for  many  other  kinships  of  these  ratios  with  the  cube.) 

IX.  Proposition.  The  private  ratios  of  the  extreme  movements  of  Saturn  and 
Jupiter  compounded  were  due  to  be  approximately  2  :  3,  a  perfect  fifth. 

This  follows  from  the  preceding;  if  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  is 
triple  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn,  and  conversely  the  aphelial  movement 
of  Jupiter  is  double  the  perihelial  of  Saturn,  then  1  : 2  and  1  : 3  compounded 
inversely  give  2:3. 

X.  Axiom.  When  choice  is  free  in  other  respects,  the  private  ratio  of  movements, 
which  is  prior  in  nature  or  of  a  more  excellent  mode  or  even  which  is  greater,  is 
due  to  the  higher  planet. 

XI.  Proposition.  The  ratio  of  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  to  the  perihelial 
was  due  to  he  4  :  5,  a  major  third,  hut  that  of  Jupiter* s  movements  5  :  6,  a  minor 
third. 

For  as  compounded  together  they  are  equivalent  to  2  : 3;  but  2  : 3  can  be 
divided  harmonically  no  other  way  than  into  4  :  5  and  5  : 6.  Accordingly 
God  the  composer  of  harmonies  divided  harmonically  the  consonance  2:3, 
(by  Axiom  i)  and  the  harmonic  part  of  it  which  is  greater  and  of  the  more 
excellent  major  mode,  as  masculine.  He  gave  to  Saturn  the  greater  and  higher 
planet,  and  the  lesser  ratio  5  :  6  to  the  lower  one,  Jupiter  (by  Axiom  x). 

XII.  Proposition.  The  great  consonance  of  1  :‘4,  the  double  octave,  was  due  to 
Venus  and  Mercury. 

For  as  the  cube  is  the  first  of  the  primary  figures,  so  the  octahedron  is  the  first 
of  the  secondary  figures,  by  Chapter  1  of  this  book.  And  as  the  cube  considered 
geometrically  is  outer  and  the  octahedron  is  inner,  i.e.,  the  latter  can  be  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  former,  so  also  in  the  world  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  the  beginning 
of  the  upper  and  outer  planets,  or  from  the  outside;  and  Mercury  and  Venus  are 
the  beginning  of  the  inner  planets,  or  from  the  inside,  and  the  octahedron  has 
been  placed  between  their  circuits:  (see  Chapter  3).  Therefore,  from  among 
the  consonances,  one  which  is  primary  and  cognate  to  the  octahedron  is  due  to 
Venus  and  Mercury.  Furthermore,  from  among  the  consonances,  after  1  :  2  and 


1054 


KEPLER 


1  : 3,  there  follows  in  natural  order  1:4;  and  that  is  cognate  to  1  :  2,  the  con¬ 
sonance  of  the  cube,  because  it  has  arisen  from  the  same  cut  of  figures,  viz,^  the 
tetragonal,  and  is  commensurable  with  it,  viz.^  the  double  of  it;  while  the  octa¬ 
hedron  is  also  akin  to,  and  commensurable  with  the  cube.  Moreover,  1  : 4  is 
cognate  to  the  octahedron  for  a  special  reason,  on  account  of  the  number  four 
being  in  that  ratio,  while  a  quadrangular  figur^lies  concealed  in  the  octahedron 
and  the  ratio  of  its  spheres  is  said  to  be  1  :  V^. 

Accordingly  the  consonance  1  : 4  is  a  continued  power  of  this  ratio,  in  the 
ratio  of  the  squares,  i.c.,  the  4th  power  of  1  :  (see  Chapter  2).  Therefore, 

1  : 4  was  due  to  Venus  and  Mercury.  And  because  in  the  cube  1  :  2  has  been 
made  the  smaller  consonance  of  the  two,  since  the  outermost  position  is  over 
against  it,  in  the  octahedron  there  will  be  1  : 4,  the  greater  consonance  of  the 
two,  as  the  innermost  position  is  over  against  it.  But  too,  this  is  the  reason  why 
1  : 4  has  here  been  given  as  the  greater  consonance,  not  as  the  smaller.  ^  For 
since  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  octahedron  is  the  ratio  of  1  :  then  if  it 

is  postulated  that  the  inscription  of  the  octahedron  among  the  planets  is  perfect 
(although  it  is  not  perfect,  but  penetrates  Mercury’s  sphere  to  some  extent — 
which  is  of  advantage  to  us) :  accordingly,  the  ratio  of  the  converging  movements 
must  be  less  than  the  ^th  powers  of  1  :  V3 ;  but  indeed  1  : 3  is  plainly  the 
square  of  the  ratio  1  :  and  is  thus  greater  than  the  exact  ratio;  all  the  more 

then  will  1  :  4  be  greater  than  the  exact  ratio,  as  greater  than  1:3.  Therefore, 
not  even  the  square  root  of  1  :  4  is  allowed  between  the  converging  movements. 
Accordingly,  1  :  4  cannot  be  less  than  the  octahedric ;  so  it  will  be  greater. 

Further:  1  : 4  is  akin  to  the  octahedric  square,  where  the  ratio  of  the  in¬ 
scribed  and  circumscribed  circles  is  j.  :  V2,  just  as  1  :  3  is  akin  to  the  cube, 
where  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  is  1  :  V3^.  For  as  1  :  3  is  a  power  of  1  :  V3 ,  viz.,  its 
square,  [304]  so  too  here  1  :  4  is  a  power  of  1  :  viz.,  twice  its  square,  i.e.,  its 

quadruple  power.  Wherefore,  if  1  :  3  was  due  to  have  been  the  greater  con¬ 
sonance  of  the  cube  (by  Proposition  VII),  accordingly  1  :  4  ought  to  become  the 
greater  consonance  of  its  octahedron. 

XIII.  Proposition.  The  greater  consonance  of  approximately  1  : 8,  the  triple 
octave,  and  the  smaller  consonance  of  5  :  24,  the  minor  third  and  double  octave,  were 
due  to  the  extreme  movements  of  J upiter  and  Mars. 

For  the  cube  has  obtained  1  :  2  and  1:3,  while  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the 
tetrahedron,  which  is  situated  between  Jupiter  and  Mars,  called  the  triple  ratio, 
is  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  cube,  which  is  called  the  ratio  of 
1  :  V3^-  Therefore,  it  was  proper  that  ratios  of  movements  which  are  the  squares 
of  the  cubic  ratios  should  be  applied  to  the  tetrahedron.  But  of  the  ratios  1  :  2 
and  1  :  3  the  following  ratios  are  the  squares:  1  :  4  and  1  :  9,  But  1  :  9  is  not  har¬ 
monic,  and  1  :  4  has  already  been  used  up  in  the  octahedron.  Accordingly,  con¬ 
sonances  neighbouring  upon  these  ratios  were  to  have  been  taken,  by  Axiom  i. 
But  the  lesser  ratio  1  :  8  and  the  greater  1  :  10  are  the  nearest.  Choice  between 
these  ratios  is  determined  by  kinship  with  the  tetrahedron,  which  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  pentagon,  since  1  :  10  is  of  a  pentagonal  cut,  but  the  te¬ 
trahedron  has  greater  kinship  with  1  ;  8  for  many  reasons  (see  Chapter  2). 

Further,  the  following  also  makes  for  1  :  8:  just  as  1  : 3  is  the  greater  con¬ 
sonance  of  the  cube  and  1  :  4  the  greater  consonance  of  the  octahedron,  because 

'^Smaller  (lesser)  and  greater  consonances  are  equivalent  to  our  modern  “more  closely 
spaced^  and  “more  widely  spaced”  consonances.  E.  C.,  Jr. 


1055 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

they  are  powers  of  the  ratios  between  the  spheres  of  the  figures,  so  too  1  :  8  was 
due  to  be  the  greater  consonance  of  the  tetrahedron,  because  as  its  body  is 
double  that  of  the  octahedron  inscribed  in  it,  as  has  been  said  in  Chapter  1,  so 
too  the  term  8  in  the  tetrahedral  ratio  is  double  the  term  4  in  the  tetrahedral 
ratio. 

Further,  just  as  1  :  2  the  smaller  consonance  of  the  cube,  is  one  octave,  and 
1  :  4,  the  greater  consonance  of  the  octahedron,  is  two  octaves,  so  already  1  :  8, 
the  greater  consonance  of  the  tetrahedron,  was  due  to  be  three  octaves.  More¬ 
over,  more  octaves  were  due  to  the  tetrahedron  than  to  the  cube  and  octa¬ 
hedron,  because,  since  the  smaller  tetrahedral  consonance  is  necessarily  greater 
than  all  the  lesser  consonances  in  the  other  figures  (for  the  ratio  of  the  tetra¬ 
hedral  spheres  is  greater  than  all  the  spheres  of  figures) :  too  the  greater  tetra¬ 
hedral  consonance  was  due  to  exceed  the  greater  consonances  of  the  others  in 
number  of  octaves.  Finally,  the  triple  of  octave  intervals  has  kinship  with  the 
triangular  form  of  the  tetrahedron,  and  has  a  certain  perfection,  as  follows: 
every  three  is  perfect;  since  even  the  octuple,  the  term  [of  the  triple  octave],  is 
the  first  cubic  number  of  perfect  quantity,  namely  of  three  dimensions. 

A  greater  consonance  neighbouring  upon  1  :  4  or  6  :  24  is  5  :  24,  while  a  lesser 
is  6  :  20  or  3  :  10.  But  again  3  :  10  is  of  the  pentagonal  cut,  which  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  tetrahedron.  But  on  account  of  the  numbers  3  and  4  (from 
which  the  numbers  12,  24  arise)  5  :  24  has  kinship  with  the  tetrahedron.  For  we 
are  here  neglecting  the  other  lesser  terms,  viz,^  5  and  3,  because  their  lightest  de¬ 
gree  of  kinship  is  with  figures,  as  it  is  possible  to  see  in  Chapter  2.  Moreover,  the 
ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  tetrahedron  is  triple;  but  the  ratio  of  the  converging 
intervals  too  ought  to  be  approximately  so  great,  by  Axiom  ii.  By  Chapter  3, 
the  ratio  of  the  converging  movements  approaches  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  %th 
powers  of  the  intervals,  but  the  %th  power  of  3  : 1  is  approximately  1000  :  193. 
Accordingly,  whereof  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  is  1000,  the  [perihelial]  of 
Jupiter  will  be  slightly  greater  than  193  but  much  less  than  333,  which  is  one 
third  of  1,000.  Accordingly,  not  the  consonance  10  :  3,  z.e.,  1,000  :  333,  but  the 
consonance  24  :  5,  z.e.,  1,000  :  208,  takes  place  between  the  converging  move¬ 
ments  of  Jupiter  and  Mars. 

XIV.  Proposition.  The  private  ratio  of  the  extreme  movements  of  Mars  was  due 
to  he  greater  than  3  :  4,  the  perfect  fourth ^  and  approximately  18  :  25, 

For  let  there  be  the  exact  consonances  5  : 24  and  1  :  8  or  3  :  24,  which  are  com¬ 
monly  attributed  to  Jupiter  and  Mars  (Proposition  xiii).  Compound  inversely 
5  :  24,  the  lesser  with  3  :  24,  the  greater;  3  :  5  results  as  the  compound  of  both 
ratios.  But  the  proper  ratio  of  Jupiter  alone  has  been  found  to  be  5  :  6,  in  Pro¬ 
position  XI,  above.  Then  compound  this  inversely  with  the  composition  3  :  5, 
Z.6.,  compound  30  :  25  and  18  :  30;  there  results  as  the  proper  ratio  of  Mars  18  : 
25,  which  is  greater  than  18  :  24  or  3  :  4.  But  it  will  become  still  greater,  if,  on 
account  of  the  ensuing  reasons,  the  common  greater  consonance  1  : 8  is  in¬ 
creased. 

XV.  Proposition.  The  consonances  2  :  5,  the  fifth;  6 : 8,  the  minor  sixth;  and  3 : 5, 
the  major  sixth  were  to  have  been  distributed  among  the  converging  movements  of 
Mars  and  the  Earthy  the  Earth  and  Venus ,  Venus  and  Mercury^  and  in  that  order. 

For  the  dodecahedron  and  the  icosahedron,  the  figures  interspaced  between 
Mars,  the  Earth,  and  Venus  have  the  least  ratio  between  their  circumscribed 
and  inscribed  spheres.  [305]  Therefore  from  among  possible  consonances  the 


1056 


KEPLER 

least  are  due  to  them,  as  being  cognate  for  this  reason,  and  in  order  that  Axiom  ii 
may  have  place.  But  the  least  consonances  of  all,  viz.^  5  :  6  and  4  :  5,  are  not 
possible,  by  Proposition  iv.  Therefore,  the  nearest  consonances  greater  than 
they,  vtz.f  3  :  4  or  2  :  3  or  5  :  8  or  3  :  5  are  due  to  the  said  figures. 

Again,  the  figure  placed  betAveen  Venus  and  Mercury,  viz.,  the  octahedron, 
has  the  same  ratio  of  its  spheres  as  the  cube.  But  by  Proposition  vii,  the  cube 
received  the  ocatve  as  the  lesser  consonance  existing  between  the  converging 
movements.  Therefore,  by  proportionality,  so  great  a  consonance,  viz.,  1  :  2, 
would  be  due  to  the  octahedron  as  the  lesser  consonance,  if  no  diversity  inter¬ 
vened.  But  the  following  diversity  intervenes:  if  compounded  together,  the  pri¬ 
vate  ratios  of  the  single  movements  of  the  cubic  planets,  viz.,  Saturn  and  Jupiter, 
did  not  amount  to  more  than  2:3;  w^hile,  if  compounded,  the  ratios  of  the  single 
movements  of  the  octahedral  planets,  viz.,  Venus  and  Mercury  will  amount  to 
more  than  2  :  3,  as  is  apparent  easily,  as  follows:  For,  as  the  proportion  between 
the  cube  and  octahedron  would  require  if  it  were  alone,  let  the  lesser  octahedral 
ratio  be  greater  than  the  ratios  here  given,  and  thereby  clearly  as  great  as  was 
the  cubic  ratio,  viz.,  1:2;  but  the  greater  consonance  was  1  :  4,  by  Proposition 
XII.  Therefore  if  the  lesser  consonance  1: 2  is  divided  into  the  one  we  have  just 
laid  down,  1  :  2,  still  remains  as  the  compound  of  the  proper  movements  of  Ve¬ 
nus  and  Mercury;  but  1  :  2  is  greater  than  2  : 3  the  compound  of  the  proper 
movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter;  and  indeed  a  greater  eccentricity  follows  up¬ 
on  this  greater  compound,  by  Chapter  3,  but  a  lesser  ratio  of  the  converging 
movements  follows  upon  the  greater  eccentricity,  by  the  same  Chapter  3.  Where¬ 
fore  by  the  addition  of  a  greater  eccentricity  to  the  proportion  between  the  cube 
and  the  octahedron  it  comes  about  that  a  lesser  ratio  than  1  :  2  is  also  required 
betAveen  the  converging  movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury.  Moreover,  it  was  in 
keeping  with  Axiom  i  that,  with  the  consonance  of  the  octave  given  to  the 
planets  of  the  cube,  another  consonance  which  is  very  near  (and  by  the  earlier 
.demonstration  less  than  1  :  2)  should  be  joined  to  the  planets  of  the  octahedron. 
But  3  :  5  is  proximately  less  than  1  :  2,  and  as  the  greatest  of  the  three  it  Avas 
due  to  the  figure  having  the  greatest  ratio  of  its  spheres,  viz.,  the  octahedron. 
Accordingly,  the  lesser  ratios,  5  :  8  and  2  :  3  or  3  :  4,  were  left  for  the  icosahedron 
and  dodecahedron,  the  figures  having  a  lesser  ratio  of  their  spheres. 

But  these  remaining  ratios  have  been  distributed  between  the  tAvo  remaining 
planets,  as  follows.  For  as,  from  among  the  figures,  though  of  equal  ratios  be¬ 
tween  their  spheres,  the  cube  has  received  the  consonance  1  :  2,  AA^hile  the  octa¬ 
hedron  the  lesser  consonance  3  : 5,  in  that  the  compound  ratio  of  the  private 
movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury  exceeded  the  compound  ratio  of  the  private 
movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter;  so  also  although  the  dodecahedron  has  the 
same  ratio  of  its  spheres  as  the  icosahedron,  a  lesser  ratio  Avas  due  to  it  than  to 
the  icosahedron,  but  very  close  on  account  of  a  similar  reason,  viz.,  because  this 
figure  is  betAveen  the  Earth  and  Mars,  which  had  a  great  eccentricity  in  the 
foregoing.  But  Venus  and  Mercury,  as  Ave  shall  hear  in  the  folloAving,  have 
the  least  eccentricities.  But  since  the  octahedron  has  3  :  5,  the  icosahedron, 
whose  species  are  in  a  lesser  ratio,  has  the  next  slightly  lesser,  viz.,  5:8;  ac¬ 
cordingly,  either  2  :  3,  which  remains,  or  3  :  4  was  left  for  the  dodecahedron, 
but  more  likely  2:3,  as  being  nearer  to  the  icosahedral  5  : 8;  since  they  are 
similar  figures. 

But  3  :  4  indeed  was  not  possible.  For  although,  in  the  foregoing,  the  private 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1057 


ratio  of  the  extreme  movements  of  Mars  was  great  enough,  yet  the  Earth — as 
has  already  been  said  and  will  be  made  clear  in  what  follows — contributed  its 
own  ratio,  which  was  too  small  for  the  compound  ratio  of  both  to  exceed  the 
perfect  fifth.  Accordingly,  Proposition  vii,  3  : 4  could  not  have  place.  And  all 
the  more  so,  because — as  will  follow  in  Proposition  xvii — the  ratio  of  the  con¬ 
verging  intervals  was  due  to  be  greater  than  1,000  :  795. 

XVL  Proposition.  The  private  ratios  of  movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  if 
compounded  together,  were  due  to  make  approximately  5  : 12, 

For  divide  the  lesser  harmonic  ratio  attributed  in  Proposition  xv  to  this  pair 
jointly  into  the  greater  of  them,  1  :  4  or  3  :  12,  by  Proposition  xii;  there  results 
5  :  12,  the  compound  ratio  of  the  private  movements  of  both.  And  so  the  private 
ratio  of  the  extreme  movements  of  Mercury  alone  is  less  than  5  :  12,  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  private  movement  of  Venus.  Understand  this  of  these  first  reasons. 
For  below,  by  the  second  reasons,  through  the  addition  of  some  variation  to 
the  joint  consonances  of  both,  it  results  that  only  the  private  ratio  of  Mercury 
is  perfectly  5  :  12. 

XVII.  Proposition.  The  consonance  between  the  diverging  movements  of  Venus 
and  the  Earth  could  not  be  less  than  5  : 12, 

For  in  the  private  ratio  of  its  movements  Mars  alone  has  received  more 
than  the  perfect  fourth  and  more  than  18  :  25,  by  Proposition  xiv.  But  their 
lesser  consonance  is  the  perfect  fifth,  [306]  by  Proposition  xv.  Accordingly, 
the  ratio  compounded  of  these  two  parts  is  12  :  25.  But  its  own  private  ratio 
is  due  to  the  Earth,  by  Axiom  iv.  Therefore,  since  the  consonance  of  the 
diverging  movements  is  made  up  out  of  the  said  three  elements,  it  will  be 
greater  than  12  :  25.  But  the  nearest  consonance  greater  than  12  :  25,  i,e,, 
60  :  125,  is  5  :  12,  viz,,  60  :  144.  Wherefore,  if  there  is  need  of  a  consonance 
for  this  greater  ratio  of  the  two  planets,  by  Axiom  i,  it  cannot  be  less  than 
60  :  144  or  5  : 12. 

Therefore  up  to  now  all  the  remaining  pairs  of  planets  have  received  their 
two  consonances  by  necessary  reasons;  the  pair  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  alone 
has  as  yet  been  allotted  only  one  consonance,  5  : 8,  by  the  axioms  so  far  em¬ 
ployed.  Therefore,  we  must  now  take  a  new  start  and  inquire  into  its  re¬ 
maining  consonance,  viz,,  the  greater,  or  the  consonance  of  the  diverging 
movements. 


Posterior  Reasons 

XVIII.  Axiom.  The  universal  consonances  of  movements  were  to  be  constituted 
by  a  tempering  of  the  six  movements,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  extreme  movements. 
This  is  proved  by  Axiom  i. 

XIX.  Axiom.  The  universal  consonances  had  to  come  out  the  same  within  a 
certain  latitude  of  movements,  namely,  in  order  that  they  should  occur  the  more 
frequently. 

For  if  they  had  been  limited  to  indivisible  points  of  the  movements,  it 
could  have  happened  that  they  would  never  occur,  or  very  rarely. 

XX.  Axiom.  As  the  most  natural  division  of  the  kinds  [generum]  of  consonances 
is  into  major  and  minor,  as  has  been  proved  in  Book  8,  so  the  universal  consonances 
of  both  kinds  had  to  be  procured  between  the  extreme  movements  of  the  planets, 
XXL  Axiom.  Diverse  species  of  both  kinds  of  consonances  had  to  be  instituted, 
so  that  the  beauty  of  the  world  might  well  be  composed  out  of  all  possible  forms  of 


1058  KEPLER 

variety — and  hy  means  of  the  extreme  movements,  at  least  by  means  of  some  ex-- 
treme  movements. 

By  Axiom  i. 

XXII.  Proposition.  The  extreme  movements  of  the  'planets  had  to  designate 
pitches  or  strings  [chordas]  of  the  octave  system,  or  notes  [claves]  of  the  musical 
scale. 

For  the  genesis  and  comparison  of  consonances  beginning  from  one  common 
term  has  generated  the  musical  scale,  or  the  division  of  the  octave  into  its 
pitches  or  tones  [sonos],  as  has  been  proved  in  Book  3.  Accordingly,  since 
varied  consonances  between  the  extremes  of  movements  are  required,  by 
Axioms  I,  XX,  and  xxi,  wherefore  the  real  division  of  some  celestial  system 
or  harmonic  scale  by  the  extremes  of  movements  is  required. 

XXIII .  Proposition.  It  was  necessary  for  there  to  be  one  pair  of  planets,  be¬ 
tween  the  movements  of  which  no  consonances  could  exist  except  the  major  sixth 
3  :  5  and  the  minor  sixth  6  :  8. 

For  since  the  division  into  kinds  of  consonances  was  necessary,  by  Axiom  xx, 
and  by  means  of  the  extreme  movements  at  the  apsides,  by  xxii,  because 
solely  the  extremes,  viz.,  the  slowest  and  the  fastest,  need  the  determination 
of  a  manager  and  orderer,  the  intermediate  tensions  come  of  themselves, 
without  any  special  care,  with  the  passage  of  the  planet  from  the  slowest  move¬ 
ment  to  the  fastest:  accordingly,  this  ordering  could  not  take  place  otherwise 
than  by  having  the  diesis  or  24  :  25  designated  by  the  extremes  of  the  two 
planetary  movements,  in  that  the  kinds  of  consonances  are  distinguished  by 
the  diesis,  as  was  unfolded  in  Book  3. 

But  the  diesis  is  the  difference  either  between  two  thirds,  4  :  5  and  5  :  6, 
or  between  two  sixths,  3  :  5  and  5:8,  or  between  those  ratios  increased  by 
one  or  more  octave  intervals.  But  the  two  thirds,  4  :  5  and  5  :  6,  did  not  have 
place  between  two  planets,  by  Proposition  vi,  and  neither  the  thirds  nor  the 
sixths  increased  by  the  interval  of  an  octave  have  been  found,  except  5  :  12 
in  the  pair  of  Mars  and  the  Earth,  and  still  not  otherwise  than  along  with  the 
related  2  :  3,  and  so  the  intermediate  ratios  5  :  8  and  3  :  5  and  1  :  2  were  alike 
admitted.  Therefore,  it  remains  that  the  two  sixths,  3  : 5  and  5  :  8,  were  to 
be  given  to  one  pair  of  planets.  But  too  the  sixths  alone  were  to  be  granted 
to  the  variation  of  their  movements,  in  such  fashion  that  they  would  neither 
expand  their  terms  to  the  proximately  greater  interval  of  one  octave,  1  :  2, 
[307]  nor  contract  them  to  the  narrows  of  the  proximately  lesser  interval  of 
the  fifth,  2  :  3.  For,  although  it  is  true  that  the  same  two  planets,  which  make 
a  perfect  fifth  with  their  extreme  converging  movements,  can  also  make 
sixths  and  thus  traverse  the  diesis  too,  still  this  would  not  smell  of  the  singular 
providence  of  the  Orderer  of  movements.  For  the  diesis,  the  least  interval — 
which  is  potentially  latent  in  all  the  major  intervals  comprehended  by  the 
extreme  movements — is  itself  at  that  time  traversed  by  the  intermediate 
movements  varied  by  continuous  tension,  but  it  is  not  determined  by  their 
extremes,  since  the  part  is  always  less  than  the  whole,  viz.,  the  diesis  than 
the  greater  interval  3  :  4  which  exists  between  2  :  3  and  1  :  2  and  which  whole 
would  be  here  assumed  to  be  determined  by  the  extreme  movements. 
XXIV.  Proposition.  The  two  planets  which  shift  the  kind  [genus]  of  harmony, 
which  is  the  difference  between  the  private  ratios  of  the  extreme  movements,  ought 
to  make  a  diesis,  and  the  private  ratio  of  one  ought  to  be  greater  than  a  diesis, 


1059 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

and  they  ought  to  make  one  of  the  sixths  with  their  aphelial  movements  and  the 
other  with  their  perihelial. 

For,  since  the  extremes  of  the  movements  make  two  consonances  differing 
by  a  single  diesis,  that  can  take  place  in  three  ways.  For  either  the  movement 
of  one  planet  will  remain  constant  and  the  movement  of  the  other  will  vary 
by  a  diesis,  or  both  will  vary  by  half  a  diesis  and  make  3  : 5,  a  major  sixth, 
when  the  upper  is  at  its  aphelion  and  the  lower  in  its  perihelion,  and  when 
they  move  out  of  those  intervals  and  advance  towards  one  another,  the  upper 
into  its  perihelion  and  the  lower  into  its  aphelion,  they  make  5  : 8,  a  minor 
sixth;  or,  finally,  one  varies  its  movement  from  aphelion  to  perihelion  more 
than  the  other  does,  and  there  is  an  excess  of  one  diesis,  and  thus  there  is  a 
major  sixth  between  the  two  aphelia,  and  a  minor  sixth  between  the  two 
perihelia.  But  the  first  way  is  not  legitimate,  for  one  of  these  planets  would 
be  without  eccentricity,  contrary  to  Axiom  iv.  The  second  way  was  less 
beautiful  and  less  expedient;  less  beautiful,  because  less  harmonic,  for  the 
private  ratios  of  the  movements  of  the  two  planets  would  have  been  out  of 
tune  [inconcinnae]j  for  whatever  is  less  than  a  diesis  is  out  of  tune;  moreover 
it  occasions  one  single  planet  to  labour  under  this  ill-concordant  small  differ¬ 
ence — except  that  indeed  it  could  not  take  place,  because  in  this  way  the 
extreme  movements  would  have  wandered  from  the  pitches  of  the  system 
or  the  notes  [clavibus]  of  the  musical  scale,  contrary  to  Proposition  xxii. 
Moreover,  it  would  have  been  less  expedient,  because  the  sixths  would  have 
occurred  only  at  those  moments  in  which  the  planets  would  have  been  at  the 
contrary  apsides;  there  would  have  been  no  latitude  within  which  these  sixths 
and  the  universal  consonances  related  to  them  could  have  occurred;  accord¬ 
ingly,  these  universal  consonances  would  have  been  very  rare,  with  all  the 
[harmonic]  positions  of  the  planets  reduced  to  the  narrow  limits  of  definite 
and  single  points  on  their  orbits,  contrary  to  Axiom  xix.  Accordingly,  the  third 
way  remains:  that  both  of  the  planets  should  vary  their  own  private  move¬ 
ments,  but  one  more  than  the  other,  by  one  full  diesis  at  the  least. 

XXV.  Proposition.  The  higher  of  the  planets  which  shift  the  kind  of  harmony 
ought  to  have  the  ratio  of  its  privte  movements  less  than  a  minor  whole  tone  9  : 10; 
while  the  lower j  less  than  a  semitone  15  : 16. 

For  they  will  make  3  :  5  either  with  their  aphelial  movements  or  with  their 
perihelial,  by  the  foregoing  proposition.  Not  with  their  perihelial,  for  then  the 
ratio  of  their  aphelial  movements  would  be  5  :  8.  Accordingly,  the  lower  planet 
would  have  its  private  ratio  one  diesis  more  than  the  upper  would,  by  the  same 
foregoing  proposition.  But  that  is  contrary  to  Axiom  x.  Accordingly,  they  make 
3  :  5  with  their  aphelial  movements,  and  with  their  perihelial  5  : 8,  which  is 
24  :  25  less  than  the  other.  But  if  the  aphelial  movements  make  3  :  5,  a  major 
sixth,  therefore,  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  upper  together  with  the  peri¬ 
helial  of  the  lower  will  make  more  than  a  major  sixth;  for  the  lower  planet  will 
compound  directly  its  full  private  ratio. 

In  the  same  way,  if  the  perihelial  movements  make  5  :  8,  a  minor  sixth,  the 
perihelial  movement  of  the  upper  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  lower  will 
make  less  than  a  minor  sixth;  for  the  lower  planet  will  compound  inversely  its 
full  private  ratio.  But  if  the  private  ratio  of  the  lower  equalled  the  semitone 
15  :  16,  then  too  a  perfect  fifth  could  occur  over  and  above  the  sixths,  because 
the  minor  sixth,  diminished  by  a  semitone,  because  the  perfect  fifth;  but  this  is 


1060 


KEPLER 


contrary  to  Proposition  xxiii.  Accordingly,  the  lower  planet  has  less  than  a 
semitone  in  its  own  interval.  And  because  the  private  ratio  of  the  upper  is  one 
diesis  greater  than  the  private  ratio  of  the  lower,  but  the  diesis  compounded 
with  the  semitone  makes  9  :  10  the  minor  whole  tone. 

XXVI.  Proposition.  On  the  'planets  which  shift  the  kind  of  harmonyy  the  upper 
was  due  to  have  either  a  diesis  squared^  676  :  625 y  i.e.,  approximately  12  :  IS y  as 
[308]  the  interval  made  by  its  extreme  movements y  or  the  semitone  15  : 16 y  or  some¬ 
thing  intermediate  differing  by  the  comma  80  : 81  either  from  the  former  or  the 
latter;  while  the  lower  planety  either  the  simple  diesis  2Ji. :  25 y  or  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  semitone  and  a  diesis y  which  is  125  : 128 y  i.e.,  approximately  4^  :  4S;  or, 
finally  and  similarly y  something  intermediate  differing  either  from  the  former  or 
from  the  latter  by  the  comma  80  :  81  y  viz.,  the  upper  planet  ought  to  make  the  diesis 
squared  diminished  by  a  commay  and  the  lower y  the  simple  diesis  diminished  by  a 
comma. 

For,  by  Proposition  xxv,  the  private  ratio  of  the  upper  ought  to  be  greater 
than  a  diesis,  but  by  the  preceding  proposition  less  than  the  [minor]  whole  tone 
9  :  10.  But  indeed  the  upper  planet  ought  to  exceed  the  lower  by  one  diesis,  by 
Proposition  xxiv.  And  harmonic  beauty  persuades  us  that,  even  if  the  private 
ratios  of  these  planets  cannot  be  harmonic,  on  account  of  their  smallness,  they 
should  at  least  be  from  among  the  concordant  [ex  concinnis]  if  that  is  possible, 
by  Axiom  i.  But  there  are  only  two  concords  less  than  9  :  10,  the  [minor]  whole 
tone,  viz.y  the  semitone  and  the  diesis;  but  they  differ  from  one  another  not  by 
the  diesis  but  by  some  smaller  interval,  125  :  128.  Accordingly,  the  upper  can¬ 
not  have  the  semitone;  nor  the  lower,  the  diesis;  but  either  the  upper  will  have 
the  semitone  15  :  16,  and  the  lower,  125  :  128,  f.e.,  42  :  43;  or  else  the  lower  will 
have  the  diesis  24  :  25,  but  the  upper  the  diesis  squared,  approximately  12  :  13. 
But  since  the  laws  of  both  planets  are  equal,  therefore,  if  the  nature  of  the  con¬ 
cordant  had  to  be  violated  in  their  private  ratios,  it  had  to  be  violated  equally 
in  both,  so  that  the  difference  between  their  private  intervals  could  remain  an 
exact  diesis,  which  is  necessary  for  distinguishing  the  kinds  of  consonances,  by 
Proposition  xxiv.  But  the  nature  of  the  concordant  was  then  violated  equally 
in  both,  if  the  interval  whereby  the  private  ratio  of  the  upper  planet  fell  short 
of  the  diesis  squared  and  exceeded  the  semitone  is  the  same  interval  whereby  the 
private  ratio  of  the  lower  planet  fell  short  of  a  simple  diesis  and  exceeded  the 
interval  125  :  128. 

Furthermore,  this  excess  or  defect  was  due  to  be  the  comma  80  : 81,  because, 
once  more,  no  other  inte^rval  was  designated  by  the  harmonic  ratios,  and  in 
order  that  the  comma  might  be  expressed  among  the  celestial  movements  as 
it  is  expressed  in  harmonics,  namely,  by  the  mere  excess  and  defect  of  the 
intervals  in  respect  to  one  another.  For  in  harmonics  the  comma  distin¬ 
guishes  between  major  and  minor  whole  tones  and  does  not  appear  in  any 
other  way. 

It  remains  for  us  to  inquire  which  ones  of  the  intervals  set  forth  are  preferable 
— whether  the  diesis,  the  simple  diesis  for  the  lower  planet  and  the  diesis  squared 
for  the  upper,  or  the  semitone  for  the  upper  and  125  :  128  for  the  lower.  And  the 
dieses  win  by  the  following  arguments:  For  although  the  semitone  has  been 
variously  expressed  in  the  musical  scale,  yet  its  allied  ratio  125  :  128  has  not 
been  expressed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  diesis  has  been  expressed  variously  and 
the  diesis  squared  somehow,  viz.y  in  the  resolution  of  whole  tones  into  dieses, 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1061 


semitones,  and  lemmas;  for  then,  as  has  been  said  in  Book  iii.  Chapter  8,  two 
dieses  proximately  succeed  one  another  in  two  pitches.  The  other  argument  is 
that  in  the  distinction  into  kinds,  the  laws  of  the  diesis  are  proper  but  not  at  all 
those  of  the  semitone.  Accordingly,  there  had  to  be  greater  consideration  of 
the  diesis  than  of  the  semitone.  It  is  inferred  from  everything  that  the  private 
ratio  of  the  upper  planet  ought  to  be  2916  :  3125  or  approximately  14  :  15,  and 
that  of  the  lower,  243  :  250  or  approximately  35  :  36. 

It  is  asked  whether  the  Highest  Creative  Wisdom  has  been  occupied  in  mak¬ 
ing  these  tenuous  little  reckonings.  I  answer  that  it  is  possible  that  many  reasons 
are  hidden  from  me,  but  if  the  nature  of  harmony  has  not  allowed  weightier 
reasons — since  we  are  dealing  with  ratios  which  descend  below  the  magnitude 
of  all  concords — it  is  not  absurd  that  God  has  followed  even  those  reasons, 
wherever  they  appear  tenuous,  since  He  has  ordained  nothing  without  cause. 
It  would  be  far  more  absurd  to  assert  that  God  has  taken  at  random  these 
magnitudes  below  the  limits  prescribed  for  them,  the  minor  whole  tone;  and  it 
is  not  sufficient  to  say:  He  took  them  of  that  magnitude  because  He  chose  to  do 
so.  For  in  geometrical  things,  which  are  subject  to  free  choice,  God  chose  nothing 
without  a  geometrical  cause  of  some  sort,  as  is  apparent  in  the  edges  of  leaves, 
in  the  scales  of  fishes,  in  the  skins  of  beasts  and  their  spots  and  the  order  of  the 
spots,  and  similar  things. 

;?^VII.  Proposition.  The  ratio  of  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  ought  to 
have  been  greater  than  a  major  sixth  between  the  aphelial  movements;  less  than  a 
minor  sixth  between  the  perihelial  movements. 

By  Axiom  xx  it  was  necessary  to  distinguish  the  kinds  of  consonances.  But 
by  Proposition  xxiii  that  could  not  be  done  except  through  the  sixths.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  since  by  Proposition  xv  the  Earth  and  Venus,  planets  next  to  one 
another  and  icosahedral,  had  received  the  minor  sixth,  5  :  8,  it  was  necessary  for 
the  other  sixth,  3  :  5,  to  be  assigned  to  them,  but  not  between  the  converging 
or  diverging  extremes,  but  between  the  extremes  of  the  same  field,  one  sixth 
[309]  between  the  aphelial,  and  the  other  between  the  perihelial,  by  Proposi¬ 
tion  XXIV.  Furthermore,  the  consonance  3  :  5  is  cognate  to  the  icosahedron,  since 
both  are  of  the  pentagonal  cut.  See  Chapter  2. 

Behold  the  reason  why  exact  consonances  are  found  between  the  aphelial 
and  perihelial  movements  of  these  two  planets, ‘but  not  between  the  converging, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  upper  planets. 

XXVHI.  Proposition.  The  private  ratio  of  movements  fitting  the  Earth  was  ap~ 
proximately  14  :  Id ^  Venus ^  approximately  35  :S6, 

For  these  two  planets  had  to  distinguish  the  kinds  of  consonances,  by  the  pre¬ 
ceding  proposition;  therefore, by  Proposition  xxvi,  the  Earth  as  the  higher  was 
due  to  receive  the  interval  2916  :  3125,  z.e.,  approximately  14  : 15,  but  Venus 
as  the  lower  the  interval  243  :  250,  ^.e.,  approximately  35  :  36. 

Behold  the  reason  why  these  two  planets  have  such  small  eccentricities  and, 
in  proportion  to  them,  small  intervals  or  private  ratios  of  the  extreme  move¬ 
ments,  although  nevertheless  the  next  higher  planet.  Mars,  and  the  next  lower, 
Mercury,  have  marked  eccentricities  and  the  greatest  of  all.  And  astronomy  con¬ 
firms  the  truth  of  this;  for  in  Chapter  4  the  Earth  clearly  had  14  :  15,  but 
Venus  34  :  35,  which  astronomical  certitude  can  barely  discern  from  35  :  36  in 
this  planet. 

XXIX.  Proposition.  The  greater  consonance  of  the  movements  of  Mars  and  the 


1062  KEPLER 

Earthy  viz.,  that  of  the  diverging  movements j  could  not  he  from  among  the  con-- 
sonances  greater  than  6  : 12, 

Above,  in  Proposition  xvii,  it  was  not  any  one  of  the  lesser  ratios ;  but  now 
it  is  not  any  one  of  the  greater  ratios  either.  For  the  other  common  or  lesser 
consonance  of  these  two  planets  is  2  :  3,  when  the  private  ratio  of  Mars,  which 
by  Proposition  xiv  exceeds  18  :  25,  makes  more  than  12  :  25,  i.e.,  60  :  125.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  compound  the  private  ratio  of  the  Earth  14  :  15,  i.e.,  56  :  60,  by  the 
preceding  proposition.  The  compound  ratio  is  greater  than  56  :  125,  which  is 
approximately  4  : 9,  viz.,  slightly  greater  than  an  octave  and  a  major  whole  tone. 
But  the  next  greater  consonance  than  the  octave  and  whole  tone  is  5  :  12,  the 
octave  and  minor  third. 

Note  that  I  do  not  say  that  this  ratio  is  neither  greater  nor  smaller  than  5  :  12; 
but  I  say  that  if  it  is  necessary  for  it  to  be  harmonic,  no  other  consonance  will 
belong  to  it. 

XXX.  Proposition.  The  private  ratio  of  movements  of  Mercury  was  due  to  be 
greater  than  all  the  other  private  ratios. 

For  by  Proposition  xvi  the  private  movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury  com¬ 
pounded  together  were  due  to  make  about  5  :  12.  But  the  private  ratio  of  Venus, 
taken  separately,  is  only  243  ;  250,  i.e,y  1458  :  1500.  But  if  it  is  compounded  in¬ 
versely  with  5  :  12,  Le.,  625  ;  1500,  Mercury  singly  is  left  with  625  :  1458,  which 
is  greater  than  an  octave  and  a  major  whole  tone;  although  the  private  ratio  of 
Mars,  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  those  among  the  remaining  planets,  is  less  than 
2  :  3,  i,e,j  the  perfect  fifth. 

And  thereby  the  private  ratios  of  Venus  and  Mercury,  the  lowest  planets,  if 
compounded  together,  are  approximately  equal  to  the  compounded  private  ra¬ 
tios  of  the  four  higher  planets,  because,  as  will  now  be  apparent  immediately,  the 
compounded  private  ratios  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  exceed  2:3;  those  of  Mars  fall 
somewhat  short  of  2  : 3:  all  compounded,  4  :  9,  z.e.,  60  :  135.  Compound  the 
Earth’s  14  :  15,  i,e,,  56  :  60,  the  result  will  be  56  :  135,  which  is  slightly  greater 
than  5  :  12,  which  just  now  was  the  compound  of  the  private  ratios  of  Venus 
and  Mercury.  But  this  has  not  been  sought  for  nor  taken  from  any  separate  and 
singular  archetype  of  beauty  but  comes  of  itself,  by  the  necessity  of  the  causes 
bound  together  by  the  consonances  hitherto  established. 

XXXI.  Proposition.  The  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth  had  to  harmonize  with 
the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn^  through  some  certain  number  of  octaves. 

For,  by  Proposition  xviii,  it  was  necessary  for  there  to  be  universal  conson¬ 
ances,  wherefore  also  there  had  to  be  a  consonance  of  Saturn  with  the  Earth  and 
Venus.  But  if  one  of  the  extreme  movements  of  Saturn  had  harmonized  with 
neither  of  the  Earth’s  and  Venus’,  this  would  have  been  less  harmonic  than  if 
both  of  its  extreme  movements  had  harmonized  with  these  planets,  by  Axiom  i. 
Therefore  both  of  Saturn’s  extreme  movements  had  to  harmonize,  the  aphelial 
with  one  of  these  two  planets,  the  perihelial  with  the  other,  since  nothing  would 
hinder,  as  was  the  case  with  the  first  planet.  Accordingly  these  consonances  will 
be  either  identisonanP  [identisonae]  or  diversisonant  [diver sisonae]^  i,e,y  either  of 
continued  double  proportion  or  of  some  other.  But  both  of  them  cannot  be  of 
some  other  proportion,  for  between  the  terms  3  :  5  (which  determine  the  greater 
consonance  between  the  aphelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus,  by  Propo¬ 
sition  xxvii)  two  harmonic  means  cannot  be  set  up;  for  the  sixth  cannot  be 

^“Identisonant  consonances”  are  such  as  3  :  5,  3  : 10,  3  :  20,  etc. 


HARMONIES  OF  TPIE  WORLD 


1063 

divided  into  three  intervals  (see  Book  iii).  Accordingly,  Saturn  could  not,  [310] 
by  means  of  both  its  movements,  make  an  octave  with  the  harmonic  means 
between  3  and  5;  but  in  order  that  its  movements  should  harmonize  with  the 
3  of  the  earth  and  the  5  of  Venus,  it  is  necessary  that  one  of  those  terms  should 
harmonize  identically,  or  through  a  certain  number  of  octaves,  with  the  others, 
viz,^  with  one  of  the  said  planets.  But  since  the  identisonant  consonances  are 
more  excellent,  they  had  to  be  established  between  the  more  excellent  extreme 
movements,  between  the  aphelial,  because  too  they  have  the  position  of  a 
principle  on  account  of  the  altitude  of  the  planets  and  because  the  Earth  and 
Venus  claim  as  their  private  ratio  somehow  and  as  a  prerogative  the  conso¬ 
nance  3  :  5,  with  which  as  their  greater  consonance  we  are  now  dealing.  For  al¬ 
though,  by  Proposition  xxii,  this  consonance  belongs  to  the  perihelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Venus  and  some  intermediate  movement  of  the  Earth,  yet  the  start  is 
made  at  the  extreme  movements  and  the  intermediate  movements  come  after 
the  beginnings. 

Now,  since  on  one  side  we  have  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  at  its  great¬ 
est  altitude,  on  the  other  side  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth  rather  than 
Venus  is  to  be  joined  with  it,  because  of  these  two  planets  which  distinguish  the 
kinds  of  harmony,  the  Earth,  again,  has  the  greater  altitude.  There  is  also 
another  nearer  cause:  the  posterior  reasons — with  which  we  are  now  dealing — 
take  away  from  the  prior  reasons  but  ony  with  respect  to  minima,  and  in  har¬ 
monics  that  is  with  respect  to  all  intervals  less  than  concords.  But  by  the  prior 
reasons  the  aphelial  movement  not  of  Venus  but  of  the  Earth,  will  approximate 
the  consonance  of  some  number  of  octaves  to  be  established  with  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Saturn.  For  compound  together,  first,  4  : 5  the  private  ratio  of 
Saturn^s  movements,  from  the  aphelion  to  the  perihelial  of  Saturn  (Propo¬ 
sition  xi),  secondly,  the  1  :  2  of  the  converging  movements  of  Saturn  and 
Jupiter,  Le,,  from  the  perihelion  of  Saturn  to  the  aphelion  of  Jupiter 
(by  Proposition  viii),  thirdly,  the  1  :  8  of  the  diverging  movements  of  Jupiter 
and  Mars,  i.e.^  from  the  aphelion  of  Jupiter  to  the  perihelion  of  Mars  (by 
Proposition  xiv),  fourthly,  the  2  :  3  of  the  converging  movements  of  Mars  and 
the  Earth,  i.6.,  from  the  perihelion  of  Mars  to  the  aphelion  of  the  Earth  (by 
Proposition  xv) :  you  will  find  between  the  aphelion  of  Saturn  and  the  perihelion 
of  the  Earth  the  compound  ratio  1  ;  30,  which  falls  short  of  1  :  32,  or  five  octaves, 
by  only  30  : 32,  i.e.,  15  :  16  or  a  semitone.  And  so,  if  a  semitone,  divided  into 
particles  smaller  than  the  least  concord,  is  compounded  with  these  four  elements 
there  will  be  a  perfect  consonance  of  five  octaves  between  the  aphelial  move¬ 
ments  of  Saturn  and  the  Earth,  which  have  been  set  forth.  But  in  order  for  the 
same  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  to  make  some  number  of  octaves  with  the 
aphelial  movement  of  Venus,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  snatch  approxi¬ 
mately  a  whole  perfect  fourth  from  the  prior  reasons;  for  if  you  compound  3  :  5, 
which  exists  between  the  aphelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus,  with  the 
ratio  1 :  30  compounded  of  the  four  prior  elements,  then  as  it  were  from  the 
prior  reasons,  1  :  50  is  found  between  the  aphelial  movements  of  Saturn  and 
Venus:  This  interval  differs  from  1  :  32,  or  five  octaves,  by  32  :  50,  Le.,  16  :  25, 
which  is  a  perfect  fifth  and  a  diesis;  and  from  six  octaves,  or  1  :  64,  it  differs 
by  50  :  64,  z.e.,  25  :  32,  or  a  perfect  fourth  minus  a  diesis.  Accordingly,  an 
indentisonant  consonance  was  due  to  be  established,  not  between  the  aphe¬ 
lial  movements  of  Venus  and  Saturn  but  between  those  of  Venus  and  the 


1064 


KEPLER 


Earth,  so  that  Saturn  might  keep  a  diversisonant  consonance  with  Venus. 
XXXII.  Proposition.  In  the  universal  consonances  of  planets  of  the  minor  scale 
the  exact  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  could  not  harmonize  precisely  with  the  other 
planets. 

For  the  Earth  by  its  aphelial  movement  does  not  concur  in  the  universal 
consonance  of  the  minor  scale,  because  the  aphelial  movements  of  the  Earth 
and  Venus  make  the  interval  3  :  5,  which  is  of  the  major  scale  (by  Proposition 
xvii).  But  by  its  aphelial  movement  Saturn  makes  an  identisonant  consonance 
with  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth  (by  Proposition  xxxi).  Therefore, 
neither  does  Saturn  concur  by  its  aphelial  movement.  Nevertheless,  in  place  of 
the  aphelial  movement  there  follows  some  faster  movement  of  Saturn,  very  near 
to  the  aphelial,  and  also  in  the  minor  scale — as  was  apparent  in  Chapter  7. 
XXXIII.  Proposition.  The  major  kind  of  consonances  and  musical  scale  is 
akin  to  the  aphelial  movements;  the  minor  to  the  perihelial. 

For  although  a  major  consonance  {dura  harmonia]  is  set  up  not  only  between 
the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus  but 
also  between  the  lower  aphelial  movements  and  the  lower  movements  of  Venus 
as  far  as  its  perihelion;  and,  conversely,  there  is  a  minor  consonance  not  merely 
between  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus  and  the  perihelial  of  the  Earth  but 
also  between  the  higher  movements  of  Venus  as  far  as  the  aphelion  and  the 
higher  movements  of  the  Earth  (by  Propositions  xx  and  xxiv).  Accordingly, 
the  major  scale  is  designated  properly  only  in  the  aphelial  movements,  the 
minor,  only  in  the  perihelial. 

XXXIV.  Proposition.  The  major  scale  is  more  akin  to  the  upper  of  the  two 
planets,  the  minor,  to  the  lower. 

[311]  For,  because  the  major  scale  is  proper  to  the  aphelial  movements,  the 
minor,  to  the  perihelial  (by  the  preceding  proposition),  w’hile  the  aphelial  are 
slower  and  graver  than  the  perihelial;  accordingly,  the  major  scale  is  proper  to 
the  slower  movements,  the  minor  to  the  faster.  But  the  upper  of  the  two  planets 
is  more  akin  to  the  slow  movements,  the  lower,  to  the  fast,  because  slowness  of 
the  private  movement  always  follows  upon  altitude  in  the  world.  Therefore,  of 
two  planets  which  adjust  themselves  to  both  modes,  the  upper  is  more  akin  to 
the  major  mode  of  the  scale,  the  lower,  to  the  minor.  Further,  the  major  scale 
employs  the  major  intervals  4  :  5  and  3  :  5,  and  the  minor,  the  minor  ones, 
5  :  6  and  5:8.  But,  moreover,  the  upper  planet  has  both  a  greater  sphere  and 
slower,  i.e.,  greater  movements  and  a  lengthier  circuit;  but  those  things  which 
agree  greatly  on  both  sides  are  rather  closely  united. 

XXXV.  Proposition.  Saturn  and  the  Earth  embrace  the  major  scale  more  closely 
Jupiter  and  Venus,  the  minor. 

For,  first,  the  Earth,  as  compared  with  Venus  and  as  designating  both  scales 
along  with  Venus,  is  the  upper.  Accordingly,  by  the  preceding  proposition,  the 
hiarth  embraces  the  major  scale  chiefly;  Venus,  the  minor.  But  with  its  aphelial 
movement  Saturn  harmonizes  with  the  Earth^s  aphelial  movement,  through  an 
octave  (by  Proposition  xxxi):  wherefore  too  (by  Proposition  xxxiii)  Saturn 
embraces  the  major  scale.  Secondly,  by  the  same  proposition,  Saturn  by  means 
of  its  aphelial  movement  nurtures  more  the  major  scale  and  (by  Proposition 
xxxii)  spits  out  the  minor  scale.  Accordingly,  it  is  more  closely  related  to  the 
major  scale  than  to  the  minor,  because  the  scales  are  properly  designated  by 
the  extreme  movements. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1065 


Now  as  regards  Jupiter,  in  comparison  with  Saturn  it  is  lower;  therefore  as 
the  major  scale  is  due  to  Saturn,  so  the  minor  is  due  to  Jupiter,  by  the  preceding 
proposition. 

XXXVI.  Proposition.  The  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  had  to  concord  with 
the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus  in  one  scale  but  not  also  in  the  same  consonance; 
and  all  the  less  sOj  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth, 

For,  because  the  minor  scale  chiefly  was  due  to  Jupiter,  by  the  preceding 
proposition,  while  the  perihelial  movements  are  more  akin  to  the  minor  scale 
(by  Proposition  xxx),  accordingly,  by  its  perihelial  movement  Jupiter  had  to 
designate  the  key  of  the  minor  scale,  viz.^  its  definite  pitch  or  key-note  [phthon’- 
gum].  But  too  the  perihelial  movements  of  Venus  and  the  Earth  designate  the 
same  scale  (by  Proposition  xxviii) ;  therefore  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter 
was  to  be  associated  with  their  perihelial  movements  in  the  same  tuning,  but  it 
could  not  constitute  a  consonance  with  the  perihelial  movements  of  Venus.  For, 
because  (by  Proposition  viii)  it  had  to  make  about  1  :  3  with  the  aphelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Saturn,  z.e.,  the  note  [clavem]  d  of  that  system,  wherein  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Saturn  strikes  the  note  G,  but  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus  the 
note  e:  accordingly,  it  approached  the  note  e  within  an  interval  of  least  conso¬ 
nance.  For  the  least  consonance  is  5  :  6,  but  the  interval  between  d  and  e  is  much 
smaller,  viz,,  9  :  10,  a  whole  tone.  And  although  in  the  perihelial  tension  [tensione] 
Venus  is  raised  from  the  d  of  the  aphelial  tension  yet  this  elevation  is  less  than  a 
diesis,  (by  Proposition  xxviii).  But  the  diesis  (and  hence  any  smaller  interval) 
if  compounded  with  a  minor  whole  tone  does  not  yet  equal  5  :  6  the  interval  of 
least  consonance.  Accordingly,  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  could  not 
observe  1  :  3  or  thereabouts  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  and  at  the 
same  time  harmonize  with  Venus.  Nor  with  the  Earth.  For  if  the  perihelial 
movement  of  Jupiter  had  been  adjusted  to  the  key  of  the  perihelial  movement 
of  Venus  in  the  same  tension  in  such  fashion  that  below  the  quantity  of  least 
concord  it  should  preserve  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  the  interval 
1  :  3,  viz,,  by  differing  from  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus  by  a  minor  whole 
tone,  9  :  10  or  36  : 40  (besides  some  octaves)  towards  the  low.  Now  the  peri¬ 
helial  movement  of  the  Earth  differs  from  the  same  perihelial  movement  of 
Venus  by  5  :  8,  i.e,,  by  25  :  40.  And  so  the  perihelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and 
Jupiter  differ  by  25  :  36,  over  and  above  some  number  of  octaves.  But  that  is 
not  harmonic,  because  it  is  the  square  of  5  :  6,  or  a  perfect  fifth  diminished  by 
one  diesis. 

XXXVII.  Proposition.  It  was  necessary  for  an  interval  equal  to  the  interval  of 
Venus  to  accede  to  the  2  :  3  of  the  compounded  private  consonances  of  Saturn  arid 
Jupiter  and  to  1  :  3  the  great  consonance  common  to  them. 

For  with  its  aphelial  movement  Venus  assists  in  the  proper  designation  of  the 
major  scale;  with  its  perihelial,  that  of  the  minor  scale,  by  Propositions  xxvii 
and  xxxiii.  But  by  its  aphelial  movement  Saturn  had  to  be  in  concord  also  with 
the  major  scale  and  thus  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus,  by  Proposition 
XXXV,  but  Jupiter's  perihelial  with  the  perihelial  of  Venus,  by  the  preceding 
proposition.  Accordingly,  as  great  as  Venus  makes  its  interval  from  aphelial  to 
perihelial  to  be,  so  great  an  interval  must  also  accede  to  that  movement  of 
Jupiter  which  makes  1  :  3  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn — to  the  very 
perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter.  But  the  consonance  of  the  converging  move¬ 
ments  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  is  precisely  1  :  2,  by  Proposition  viii.  Accordingly, 


1066  KEPLER 

if  the  interval  1  : 2  is  divided  into  the  interval  [312]  greater  than  1  : 3,  there 
results,  as  the  compound  of  the  private  ratios  of  both,  something  which  is  pro¬ 
portionately  greater  than  2:3. 

Above,  in  Proposition  xxvi,  the  private  ratio  of  the  movements  of  Venus  was 
243  :  250  or  approximately  35  :36;  but  in  Chapter  4,  between  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Saturn  and  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  there  wa^  found  a 
slightly  greater  excess  beyond  1  :  3,  viz,j  betAveen  26  :  27  and  27  :  28.  But  the 
quantity  here  prescribed  is  absolutely  equalled,  by  the  addition  of  a  single 
second  to  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  as¬ 
tronomy  can  discern  that  difference. 

XXXVIII.  Proposition.  The  increment  24S  :  250  to  2  :  5,  the  compound  of  the 
private  ratios  of  Saturn  and  J upiter,  which  was  up  to  now  being  established  by  the 
prior  reasons y  was  to  be  distributed  among  the  planets  in  such  fashion  that  of  it  the 
comma  80  :  81  should  accede  to  Saturn  and  the  remainder ^  19^683  :  20,000  or  ap¬ 
proximately  62  :  63,  to  J upiter. 

It  f  olloAvs  from  Axiom  xix  that  this  was  to  have  been  distributed  between  both 
planets  so  that  each  could  with  some  latitude  concur  in  the  universal  consonan¬ 
ces  of  the  scale  akin  to  itself.  But  the  interval  243  :  250  is  smaller  than  all  con¬ 
cords:  accordingly  no  harmonic  rules  remain  whereby  it  may  be  divided  into  two 
concordant  parts,  with  the  single  exception  of  those  of  which  there  was  need  in 
the  division  of  24  :  25,  the  diesis,  above  in  Proposition  xxvi ;  namely,  in  order 
that  it  may  be  divided  into  the  comma  80  :  81  (which  is  a  primary  one  of  those 
intervals  which  are  subordinate  to  the  concordant)  and  into  the  remainder 
19,683  :  20,000,  which  is  slightly  greater  than  a  comma,  viz,,  approximately 
62  :  63.  But  not  two  but  one  comma  had  to  be  taken  away,  lest  the  parts  should 
become  too  unequal,  since  the  private  ratios  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  ap¬ 
proximately  equal  (according  to  Axiom  x  extended  even  to  concords  and  parts 
smaller  than  those)  and  also  because  the  comma  is  determined  by  the  intervals 
of  the  major  whole  tone  and  minor  whole  tone,  not  so  two  commas.  Further¬ 
more,  to  Saturn  the  higher  and  mightier  planet  was  due  not  that  part  Avhich  was 
greater,  although  Saturn  had  the  greater  private  consonance  4  :  5,  but  that  one 
which  is  prior  and  more  beautiful,  i.e.,  more  harmonic.  For  in  Axiom  x  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  priority  and  harmonic  perfection  comes  first,  and  the  considera¬ 
tion  of  quantity  comes  last,  because  there  is  no  beauty  in  quantity  of  itself. 
Thus  the  movements  of  Saturn  become  64  :  81,  an  adulterine^  major  third,  as 
we  have  called  them  in  Book  iii.  Chapter  12,  but  those  of  Jupiter,  6,561  :  8,000. 

I  do  not  know  whether  it  should  be  numbered  among  the  causes  of  the  addi¬ 
tion  of  a  comma  to  Saturn  that  the  extreme  intervals  of  Saturn  can  constitute 
the  ratio  8  :  9,  the  major  whole  tone,  or  whether  that  resulted  without  further 
ado  from  the  preceding  causes  of  the  movements.  Accordingly,  you  here  have, 
in  place  of  a  corollary,  the  reason  why,  above  in  Chapter  4,  the  intervals  of 
Saturn  were  found  to  embrace  approximately  a  major  Avhole  tone. 

XXXIX.  Proposition.  Saturn  could  not  harmonize  with  its  exact  perihelial 
movement  in  the  universal  consonances  of  the  planets  of  the  major  scale,  nor  J  upiter 
with  its  exact  aphelial  movement. 

For  since  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn  had  to  harmonize  exactly  with  the 
aphelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  (by  Proposition  xxxi),  that  move¬ 
ment  of  Saturn  which  is  4  :  5  or  one  major  third  faster  than  its  aphelial  will  also 

^See  footnote  to  Intervals  Compared  with  Harmonic  Ratios ^  1026. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1067 


harmonize  with  them.  For  the  aphelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  make 
a  major  sixth,  which,  by  the  demonstrations  of  Book  iii,  is  divisible  into  a  per¬ 
fect  fourth  and  a  major  third,  therefore  the  movement  of  Saturn,  which  is  still 
faster  than  this  movement  already  harmonized  but  none  the  less  below  the 
magnitude  of  a  concordant  interval,  will  not  exactly  harmonize.  But  such  a 
movement  is  Saturn’s  perihelial  movement  itself,  because  it  differs  from  its  aphe¬ 
lial  movement  by  more  than  the  interval  4  :  5,  viz.^  one  comma  or  80  :  81  more 
(which  is  less  than  the  least  concord),  by  Proposition  xxxviii.  Accordingly  the 
perihelial  movement  of  Saturn  does  not  exactly  harmonize.  But  neither  does  the 
aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  do  so  precisely.  For  while  it  does  not  harmonize 
precisely  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  Saturn,  it  harmonizes  at  a  distance  of 
a  perfect  octave  (by  Proposition  viii),  wherefore,  according  to  what  has  been 
said  in  Book  iii,  it  cannot  precisely  harmonize. 

XL.  Proposition.  It  was  necessary  to  add  the  lemma  of  Plato  to  1  :  8 ^  or  the  triple 
octave,  the  joint  consonance  of  the  diverging  movements  of  Jupiter  and  Mars  estab¬ 
lished  by  the  prior  reasons. 

For  because,  by  Proposition  xxxi,  there  had  to  be  1  : 32,  i.e,,  12  :  384,  be¬ 
tween  the  aphelial  movements  of  Saturn  and  the  Earth,  but  there  had  to  be 

3  : 2,  i.e,,  384  : 256,  from  the  aphelion  of  the  Earth  to  the  perihelion  of  Mars 
[313]  (by  Proposition  xv),  and  from  the  aphelion  of  Saturn  to  its  perihelion, 

4  :  5  or  12  :  15  with  its  increment  (by  Proposition  xxxviii);  finally,  from  the 
perihelion  of  Saturn  to  the  aphelion  of  Jupiter  1  :  2  or  15  :  30  (by  Proposition 
viii) ;  accordingly,  there  remains  30  :  256  from  the  aphelion  of  Jupiter  to  the 
perihelion  of  Mars,  by  the  subtraction  of  the  increment  of  Saturn.  But  30  :  256 
exceeds  32  :  256  by  the  interval  30  :  32,  i.e.,  15  :  16  or  240  :  256,  which  is  a 
semitone.  Accordingly,  if  the  increment  of  Saturn,  which  (by  Proposition 
xxxviii)  had  to  be  80  :  81,  i.e.,  240  :  243,  is  compounded  inversely  with 
240  :  243,  the  result  is  243  :  256;  but  that  is  the  lemma  of  Plato, i  viz.,  approxi¬ 
mately  19  :  20,  see  Book  iii.  Accordingly,  Plato’s  lemma  had  to  be  com¬ 
pounded  with  the  1:8. 

And  so  the  great  ratio  of  Jupiter  and  Mars,  viz.,  of  the  diverging  movements, 
ought  to  be  243  :  2,048,  which  is  somehow  a  mean  between  243  : 2,187  and 
243  :  1,944,  i.e.,  between  1  :  9  and  1  : 8,  whereof  proportionality  required  the 
first,  above;  and  a  nearer  harmonic  concord,  the  second. 

XLI.  Proposition.  The  private  ratio  of  the  movements  of  Mars  has  necessarily 
been  made  the  square  of  the  harmonic  ratio  5  :  6,  viz.,  25  :  36. 

For,  because  the  ratio  of  the  diverging  movements  of  Jupiter  and  Mars  had 
to  be  243  ;  2,048,  i.e.,  729  :  6,144,  by  the  preceding  proposition,  but  that  of  the 
converging  movements  5  :  24,  i.e.,  1,280  :  6,144  (by  Proposition  xiii),  therefore 
the  compound  of  the  private  ratios  of  both  was  necessarily  729  : 1,280  or  72,900  : 
128,000.  But  the  private  ratio  of  Jupiter  alone  had  to  be  6,561  : 8,000,  i.e., 
104,976  :  128,000  (by  Proposition  xxviii).  Therefore,  if  the  compound  ratio  of 
both  is  divided  by  this,  the  private  ratio  of  Mars  will  be  left  as  72,900  :  104,976, 
i.e.,  25  :  36,  the  square  root  of  which  is  5  :  6. 

In  another  fashion,  as  follows:  There  is  1  :  32  or  120  : 3,840  from  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Saturn  to  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  Earth,  but  from  that 
same  movement  to  the  perihelial  of  Jupiter  there  is  1  :  3  or  120  :  360,  with  its 
increment.  But  from  this  to  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  is  5  :  24  or  360  : 
1,728.  Accordingly,  from  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  to  the  aphelial  move- 

^Timaeus,  36, 


1068  KEPLER 

ment  of  the  Earth,  there  remains  1,728  : 3,840  minus  the  increment  of  the  ratio 
of  the  diverging  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter.  But  from  the  same  aphelial 
movement  of  the  Earth  to  the  perihelial  of  Mars  there  is  3  : 2,  Le.,  3,840  : 2,500. 
Therefore  between  the  aphelial  and  perihelial  movements  of  Mars  there  remains 
the  ratio  1,728  :  2,560,  i.e.,  27  : 40  or  81  :  120,  minus  the  said  increment.  But 
81  :  120  is  a  comma  less  than  80  :  120  or  2  :  3.  Therefore,  if  a  comma  is  taken 
away  from  2  :  3,  and  the  said  increment  (which  by  Proposition  xxxviii  is  equal 
to  the  private  ratio  of  Venus)  is  taken  away  too,  the  private  ratio  of  Mars  is 
left.  But  the  private  ratio  of  Venus  is  the  diesis  diminished  by  a  comma,  by 
Proposition  xxvi.  But  the  comma  and  the  diesis  diminished  by  a  comma  make 
a  full  diesis  or  24  :  25.  Therefore  if  you  divide  2  :  3,  Le.,  24  :  36  by  the  diesis 
24  :  25,  Mars^  private  ratio  of  25  :  36  is  left,  as  before,  the  square  root  of  which, 
or  5  :  6,  goes  to  the  intervals,  by  Chapter  3. 

Behold  again  the  reason  why — above,  in  Chapter  4 — the  extreme  intervals  of 
Mars  have  been  found  to  embrace  the  harmonic  ratio  5  :  6. 

XLII.  Proposition.  The  great  ratio  of  Mars  and  the  Earthy  or  the  common  ratio 
of  the  diverging  movements,  has  been  necessarily  made  to  be  64  •  125,  smaller  than 
the  consonance  5  : 12  established  by  the  prior  reasons. 

For  the  private  ratio  of  Mars  had  to  be  a  perfect  fifth,  from  which  a  diesis 
has  been  taken  away,  by  the  preceding  proposition.  But  the  common  or  minor 
ratio  of  the  converging  movements  of  Mars  and  the  Earth  had  to  be  a  perfect 
fifth  or  2  :  3,  by  Proposition  xv.  Finally,  the  private  ratio  of  the  Earth  is  the 
diesis  squared,  from  which  a  comma  is  taken  away,  by  Propositions  xxvi  and 
xxviii.  But  out  of  these  elements  is  compounded  the  major  ratio  or  that  of  the 
diverging  movements  of  Mars  and  the  Earth — and  it  is  two  perfect  fifths  (or 
4  :  9,  i.e.,  108  :  243)  plus  a  diesis  diminished  by  a  comma,  i.e.,  plus  243  :  250; 
namely,  it  is  108  :  250  or  54  :  125,  i.e.,  608  :  1,500.  But  this  is  smaller  than 
625  : 1,500,  i.e.,  than  5  : 12,  in  the  ratio  602  :  625,  which  is  approximately  36  :  37, 
smaller  than  625  : 1,500,  i.e.,  than  5  : 12,  in  the  ratio  602  :  625,  which  is  approxi¬ 
mately  36  :  37,  smaller  than  the  least  concord. 

XLIII.  Proposition.  The  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  could  not  harmonize  in 
some  universal  consonance;  nevertheless  it  was  necessary  for  it  to  be  in  concord  to 
some  extent  in  the  scale  of  the  minor  mode. 

For,  because  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  has  the  pitch  d  of  acute 
tuning  in  the  minor  mode,  and  the  consonance  5  :  24  ought  to  have  existed 
between  that  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars,  therefore,  the  aphelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Mars  occupies  the  adulterine  pitch  of  the  same  acute  tuning.  I  say 
adulterine  for,  although  in  Book.iii,  Chapter  12,  the  adulterine  consonances 
were  reviewed  and  deduced  from  the  composition  of  systems,  certain  ones 
which  exist  in  the  simple  natural  system  were  omitted.  [314]  And  so,  after  the 
line  which  ends  81  :  120,  the  reader  may  add:  if  you  divide  into  it  4  :  5  or  32  :  40, 
there  remains  27  :  32,  the  subminor  sixth,  ^  which  exists  between  d  and  /  ore  and 
or  a  and  c  of  even  the  simple  octave.  And  in  the  ensuing  table,  the  following 
should  be  in  the  first  line;  for  5  :  6  there  is  27  :  32,  which  is  deficient. 

From  that  it  is  clear  that  in  the  natural  system  the  true  note  [clavem]  f,  as 
regulated  by  my  principles,  constitutes  a  deficient  or  adulterine  minor  sixth  with 
the  note  d.  Accordingly  since  between  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  set 

^Here  “sixth”  (jsexta)  should  probably  be  "third”  (teriia).  E.  C.,  Jr. 

*C  and  e  do  not  produce  a  subminor  third  in  the  "natural  system.”  E.  C.,  Jr. 


1069 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

up  in  the  true  note  d  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  there  is  a  perfect 
minor  sixth  over  and  above  the  double  octave,  but  not  the  diminished  (by 
Proposition  xiii),  it  follows  that  with  its  aphelial  movement  Mars  designates 
the  pitch  which  is  one  comma  higher  than  the  true  note/;  and  so  it  will  concord 
not  absolutely  but  merely  to  a  certain  extent  in  this  scale.  But  it  does  not  enter 
into  either  the  pure  or  the  adulterine  universal  harmony.  For  the  perihelial 
movement  of  Venus  occupies  the  pitch  of  e  in  this  tuning  [tensionem].  But  there 
is  dissonance  between  e  and/,  on  account  of  their  nearness.  Therefore,  Mars  is 
in  discord  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  one  of  the  planets,  viz.,  Venus.  But 
too  it  is  in  discord  with  the  other  movements  of  Venus;  they  are  diminished  by 
a  comma  less  than  a  diesis:  wherefore,  since  there  is  a  semitone  and  a  comma  be¬ 
tween  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus  and  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mer¬ 
cury,  accordingly,  between  the  aphelion  of  Venus  and  the  aphelion  of  Mars 
there  will  be  a  semitone  and  a  diesis  (neglecting  the  octaves),  f.e.,  a  minor  whole 
tone,  which  is  still  a  dissonant  interval.  Now  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars 
concords  to  that  extent  in  the  scale  of  the  minor  mode,  but  not  in  that  of  the 
major.  For  since  the  aphelial  movement  of  Venus  concords  with  the  e  of  the 
major  mode,  while  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  (neglecting  the  octaves)  has 
been  made  a  minor  whole  tone  higher  than  e,  then  necessarily  the  aphelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Mars  in  this  tuning  would  fall  midway  between  / and/ sharp  and  would 
make  with  g  (which  in  this  tuning  would  be  occupied  by  the  aphelial  movement 
of  the  Earth)  the  plainly  discordant  interval  25  : 27,  viz.^  a  major  whole  tone 
diminished  by  a  diesis. 

In  the  same  way,  it  will  be  proved  that  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars  is  also 
in  discord  with  the  movements  of  the  Earth.  For  because  it  makes  a  semitone 
and  comma  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus,  f.e.,  14  :  15  (by  what  has 
been  said),  but  the  perihelial  movements  of  the  Earth  and  Venus  make  a  minor 
sixth  5  :  8  or  15  : 24  (by  Proposition  xxvii).  Accordingly,  the  aphelial  move¬ 
ment  of  Mars  together  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth  (the  octaves 
added  to  it)  will  make  14  :  24  or  7  : 12,  a  discordant  interval  and  one  not  har¬ 
monic,  like  7  :  6.  For  any  interval  between  5  :  6  and  8  :  9  is  dissonant  and  dis¬ 
cordant,  as  6  :  7  in  this  case.  But  no  other  movement  of  the  Earth  can  harmo¬ 
nize  with  the  aphelial  movement  of  Mars.  For  it  was  said  above  that  it  makes  the 
discordant  interval  25  :  27  with  the  Earth  (neglecting  the  octaves) ;  but  all  from 
6  :  7  or  24  :  28  to  25  :  27  are  smaller  than  the  least  harmonic  interval. 

XLIV.  Corollary.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  from  the  above  Proposition  XLIII 
concerning  Jupiter  and  Mars,  and  from  Proposition  XXXIX  concerning  Saturn 
and  J  upiter,  and  from  Proposition  XXXVI  concerning  Jupiter  and  the  Earthy  and 
from  Proposition  XXXII  concerning  Saturn,  why — in  Chapter  5,  above — it  was 
found  that  all  the  extreme  movements  of  the  planets  had  not  been  adjusted  perfectly 
to  one  natural  system  or  musical  scale,  and  that  all  those  which  had  been  adjusted 
to  a  system  of  the  same  tuning  did  not  distinguish  the  pitches  [loca]  of  that  system 
in  a  natural  way  or  effect  a  purely  natural  succession  of  concordant  intervals.  For 
the  reasons  are  prior  whereby  the  single  planets  came  into  possession  of  their  single 
consonances;  those  whereby  all  the  planets,  of  the  universal  consonances;  and  finally, 
those  whereby  the  universal  consonances  of  the  two  modes,  the  major  and  the  minor: 
when  all  those  have  been  posited,  an  omniform  adjustment  to  one  natural  system 
is  prevented.  But  if  those  causes  had  not  necessarily  come  first,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
either  one  system  and  one  tuning  of  it  would  have  embraced  the  extreme  movements 


1070 


KEPLER 


of  all  the  'planets;  or,  if  there  was  need  of  two  systems  for  the  two  modes  of  song,  the 
major  and  minor,  the  very  order  of  the  natural  scale  would  have  been  expressed  not 
merely  in  one  mode,  the  major,  hut  also  in  the  remaining  minor  mode.  Accordingly, 
here  in  Chapter  5,  you  have  the  promised  causes  of  the  discords  through  least  inter¬ 
vals  and  intervals  smaller  than  all  concords. 

XLV.  Proposition.  It  was  necessary  for  an  interval  equal  to  the  interval  of 
Venus  to  be  added  to  the  common  major  consonance  of  Venus  a'nd  Mercury,  the 
double  octave,  and  also  the  private  consonance  of  Mercury,  which  were  established 
above  in  Propositions  XII  and  XIII  by  the  prior  reasons,  [315]  in  order  that  the 
private  ratio  of  Mercury  should  be  a  perfect  5  : 12  and  that  thus  Mercury  should 
with  both  its  movements  harmonize  with  the  single  perihelial  movement  of  Venus. 

For,  because  the  aphelial  movement  of  Saturn,  the  highest  and  outmost 
planet,  circumscribed  around  its  regular  solid,  had  to  harmonize  with  the  ap¬ 
helial  movement  of  the  Earth,  the  highest  movement  of  the  Earth,  which  di¬ 
vides  the  classes  of  figures;  it  follows  by  the  laws  of  opposites  that  the  perihelial 
movement  of  Mercury  as  the  innermost  planet,  inscribed  in  its  figure,  the  lowest 
and  nearest  to  the  sun,  should  harmonize  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  the 
Earth,  with  the  lowest  movement  of  the  Earth,  the  common  boundary:  the  for¬ 
mer  in  order  to  designate  the  major  mode  of  consonances,  the  latter  the  minor 
mode,  by  Propositions  xxxiii  and  xxxiv.  But  the  perihelial  movement  of  Venus 
had  to  harmonize  with  the  perihelial  movement  of  the  Earth  in  the  consonance 
5  :  3,  by  Proposition  xxvii;  therefore  too  the  perihelial  movement  of  Mercury 
had  to  be  tempered  with  the  perihelial  of  Venus  in  one  scale.  But  by  Proposition 
XII  the  consonance  of  the  diverging  movements  of  Venus  and  Mercury  was  de¬ 
termined  by  the  prior  reasons  to  be  1  :  4;  therefore,  now  by  these  posterior  rea¬ 
sons  it  was  to  be  adjusted  by  the  accession  of  the  total  interval  of  Venus.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  not  from  further  on,  from  the  aphelion,  but  from  the  perihelion  of  Venus 
to  the  perihelion  of  Mercury  there  is  a  perfect  double  octave.  But  the  con¬ 
sonance  3  :  5  of  the  converging  movements  is  perfect,  by  Proposition  xv.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  if  1  :  4  is  divided  by  3  :  5,  there  remains  to  Mercury  singly  the  private 
ratio  5  :  12,  perfect  too,  but  not  further  (by  Proposition  xvi,  through  the  prior 
reasons)  diminished  by  the  private  ratio  of  Venus. 

Another  reason.  Just  as  only  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  touched  nowhere  on  the 
outside  by  the  dodecahedron  and  icosahedron  wedded  together,  so  only  Mer¬ 
cury  is  untouched  on  the  inside  by  these  same  solids,  since  they  touch  Mars  on 
the  inside,  the  Earth  on  both  sides,  and  Venus  on  the  outside.  Accordingly,  just 
as  something  equal  to  the  private  ratio  of  Venus  has  been  added  distributively 
to  the  private  ratios  of  movements  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  which  are  supported 
by  the  cube  and  tetrahedron;  so  now  something  as  great  was  due  to  accede  to 
the  private  ratio  of  solitary  Mercury,  which  is  comprehended  by  the  associated 
figures  of  the  cube  and  tetrahedron;  because,  as  the  octahedron,  a  single  figure 
among  the  secondary  figures,  does  the  job  of  two  among  the  primary,  the  cube 
and  tetrahedron  (concerning  which  see  Chapter  1),  so  too  among  the  lower 
planets  there  is  one  Mercury  in  place  of  two  of  the  upper  planets,  viz.,  Saturn 
and  Jupiter. 

Thirdly,  just  as  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  highest  planet  Saturn  had  to 
harmonize,  in  some  number  of  octaves,  i.e.,  in  the  continued  double  ratio,  1  :  32, 
with  the  aphelial  movement  of  the  higher  and  nearer  of  the  two  planets  which 
shift  the  mode  of  consonance  (by  Proposition  xxxi) ;  so,  vice  versa,  the  perihelial 


HAR^[ONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1071 


movement  of  the  lowest  planet  Mercury,  again  through  some  number  of  octaves, 
i.e,j  in  the  continued  double  ratio,  1  : 4,  had  to  harmonize  with  the  perihelial 
movement  of  the  lower  and  similarly  nearer  of  the  two  planets  which  shift  the 
mode  of  consonance. 

Fourthly,  of  the  three  upper  planets,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  the  single 
but  extreme  movements  concord  with  the  universal  consonances;  accordingly 
both  extreme  movements  of  the  single  lower  planet,  viz..  Mercury,  had  to  con¬ 
cord  with  the  same;  for  the  middle  planets,  the  Earth  and  Venus,  had  to  shift 
the  mode  of  consonances,  by  Propositions  xxxiii  and  xxxiv. 

Finally,  in  the  three  pairs  of  the  upper  planets  perfect  consonances  have  been 
found  between  the  converging  movements,  but  adjusted  [fermentatae]  con¬ 
sonances  between  the  diverging  movements  and  private  ratios  of  the  single 
planets;  accordingly,  in  the  two  pairs  of  the  lower  planets,  conversely,  perfect 
consonances  had  to  be  found  not  between  the  converging  movements  chiefly, 
nor  between  the  diverging,  but  between  the  movements  of  the  same  field.  And 
because  two  perfect  consonances  were  due  to  the  Earth  and  Venus,  therefore 
two  perfect  consonances  were  due  to  Venus  and  Mercury  also.  And  the  Earth 
and  Venus  had  to  receive  as  perfect  a  consonance  between  their  aphelial  move¬ 
ments  as  between  their  perihelial,  because  they  had  to  shift  the  mode  of  their 
consonance;  but  Venus  and  Mercury,  as  not  shifting  the  mode  of  their  con¬ 
sonance,  did  not  also  require  perfect  consonances  between  both  pairs,  the 
aphelial  movements  and  the  perihelial;  but  there  came  in  place  of  the  perfect 
consonance  of  the  aphelial  movements,  as  being  already  adjusted  the  perfect 
consonance  of  the  converging  movements,  so  that  just  as  Venus,  the  higher  of 
the  lower  planets,  has  the  least  private  ratio  of  all  the  private  ratios  of  move¬ 
ments  (by  Proposition  xxvi),  and  Mercury,  the  lower  of  the  lower,  has  re¬ 
ceived  the  greatest  ratio  of  all  the  private  ratios  of  movements  (by  Proposition 
xxx),  so  too  the  private  ratio  of  Venus  should  be  the  most  imperfect  of  all  the 
private  ratios  or  the  farthest  removed  from  consonances,  while  the  private  ratio 
of  Mercury  should  be  most  perfect  of  all  the  private  ratios,  i.e.,  an  absolute 
consonance  without  adjustment,  and  that  finally  the  relations  should  be  every¬ 
where  opposite. 

For  He  Who  is  before  the  ages  and  on  into  the  ages  thus  adorned  the  great  things 
of  His  wisdom:  nothing  excessive,  nothing  defective,  no  room  for  any  censure.  How 
lovely  are  his  works!  All  things,  in  twos,  one  [316]  against  one,  none  lacking  its  op¬ 
posite.  He  has  strengthened  the  goods — adornment  and  propriety — of  each  and 
every  one  and  established  them  in  the  best  reasons,  and  who  will  be  satiated  seeing 
their  glory? 

XLVI.  Axiom.  If  the  interspacing  of  the  solid  figures  between  the  planetary  spheres 
is  free  and  unhindered  by  the  necessities  of  antecedent  causes,  then  it  ought  to  follow 
to  perfection  the  proportionality  of  geometrical  inscriptions  and  circumscriptions, 
and  thereby  the  conditions  of  the  ratio  of  the  inscribed  to  the  circumscribed  spheres. 

For  nothing  is  more  reasonable  than  that  physical  inscription  should  exactly 
represent  the  geometrical,  as  the  work,  its  pattern. 

XLVII.  Proposition.  If  the  inscription  of  the  regular  solids  among  the  planets 
was  free,  the  tetrahedron  was  due  to  touch  with  its  angles  precisely  the  perihelial 
sphere  of  J upiter  above  it,  and  with  centres  of  its  planes  precisely  the  aphelial  sphere 
of  Mars  below  it.  But  the  cube  and  the  octahedron,  each  placing  its  angles  in  the  peri¬ 
helial  sphere  of  the  planet  above,  were  due  to  penetrate  the  sphere  of  the  inside  planet 


1072 


KEPLER 


with  the  centres  of  their  planes ^  in  such  fashion  that  those  centres  should  turn  within 
the  aphelial  and  perihelial  spheres:  on  the  other  hand,  the  dodecahedron  and  icosahe¬ 
dron,  grazing  with  their  angles  the  perihelial  spheres  of  their  planets  on  the  outside, 
were  due  not  quite  to  touch  with  the  centres  of  their  planes  the  aphelial  spheres  of 
their  inner  planets.  Finally,  the  dodecahedral  echinus,  placing  its  angles  in  the  peri¬ 
helial  sphere  of  Mars,  was  due  to  come  very  close  to  the  aphelial  sphere  of  Venus 
with  the  midpoints  of  its  converted  sides  which  interdistinguish  two  solid  rays. 

For  the  tetrahedron  is  the  middle  one  of  the  primary  figures,  both  in  genesis 
and  in  situation  in  the  world;  accordingly,  it  was  due  to  remove  equally  both 
regions,  that  of  Jupiter  and  that  of  Mars.  And  because  the  cube  was  above  it 
and  outside  it,  and  the  dodecahedron  was  below  it  and  within  it,  therefore  it 
was  natural  that  their  inscription  should  strive  for  the  contrariety  wherein  the 
tetrahedron  held  a  mean,  and  that  the  one  of  them  should  make  an  excessive 
inscription,  and  the  other  a  defective,  viz.,  the  one  should  somewhat  penetrate 
the  inner  sphere,  the  other  not  touch  it.  And  because  the  octahedron  is  cognate 
to  the  cube  and  has  an  equal  ratio  of  spheres,  but  the  icosahedron  to  the  dode¬ 
cahedron,  accordingly,  whatever  the  cube  has  of  perfection  of  inscription,  the 
same  was  due  to  the  octahedron  also,  and  whatever  the  dodecahedron,  the  same 
to  the  icosahedron  too.  And  the  situation  of  the  octahedron’s  similar  to  the  situ¬ 
ation  of  the  cube,  but  that  of  the  icosahedron  to  the  situation  of  the  dodecahe¬ 
dron,  because  as  the  cube  occupies  the  one  limit  to  the  outside,  so  the  octahedron 
occupies  the  remaining  limit  to  the  inside  of  the  world,  but  the  dodecahedron 
and  icosahedron  are  midway:  accordingly  even  a  similar  inscription  was  proper, 
in  the  case  of  the  dodecahedron,  one  penetrating  the  sphere  of  the  inner  planet, 
in  that  of  the  icosahedron,  one  falling  short  of  it. 

But  the  echinus,  which  represents  the  icosahedron  with  the  apexes  of  its  angles 
and  the  dodecahedron  with  the  bases,  was  due  to  fill,  embrace,  or  dispose  both 
regions,  that  between  Mars  and  the  Earth  with  the  dodecahedron  as  well  as 
that  between  the  Earth  and  Venus  with  the  icosahedron.  But  the  preceding 
axiom  makes  clear  which  of  the  opposites  was  due  to  which  association.  For  the 
tetrahedron,  which  has  a  rational  inscribed  sphere,  has  been  allotted  the  middle 
position  among  the  primary  figures  and  is  surrounded  on  both  sides  by  figures  of 
incommensurable  spheres,  whereof  the  outer  is  the  cube,  the  inner  the  dode¬ 
cahedron,  by  Chapter  1  of  this  book.  But  this  geometrical  quality,  viz.,  the 
rationality  of  the  inscribed  sphere,  represents  in  nature  the  perfect  inscription 
of  the  planetary  sphere.  Accordingly,  the  cube  and  its  allied  figure  have  their 
inscribed  spheres  rational  only  in  square,  i.e.,  in  power  alone;  accordingly,  they 
ought  to  represent  a  semiperfect  inscription,  where,  even  if  not  the  extremity  of 
the  planetary  sphere,  yet  at  least  something  on  the  inside  and  rightfully  a  mean 
between  the  aphelial  and  perihelial  spheres — if  that  is  possible  through  other 
reasons — is  touched  by  the  centres  of  the  planes  of  the  figures.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  dodecahedron  and  its  allied  figure  have  their  inscribed  spheres  clearly 
irrational  both  in  the  length  of  the  radius  and  in  the  square;  accordingly,  they 
ought  to  represent  a  clearly  imperfect  inscription  and  one  touching  absolutely 
nothing  of  the  planetary  sphere,  i.e.,  falling  short  and  not  reaching  as  far  as  the 
aphelial  sphere  of  the  planet  with  the  centres  of  its  planes. 

Although  the  echinus  is  cognate  to  the  dodecahedron  and  its  allied  figure, 
nevertheless  it  has  a  property  similar  to  the  tetrahedron.  For  the  radius  of  the 
sphere  inscribed  in  its  inverted  sides  is  indeed  incommensurable  with  the  radius 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1073 


of  the  circumscribed  sphere,  but  it  is,  however,  commensurable  with  the  length 
of  the  distance  between  two  neighbouring  angles.  And  so  the  perfection  of  the 
commensurability  of  rays  is  approximately  as  great  as  in  the  tetrahedron;  but 
elsewhere  the  imperfection  is  as  great  as  in  the  [317]  dodecahedron  and  its  allied 
figure.  Accordingly  it  is  reasonable  too  that  the  physical  inscription  belonging 
to  it  should  be  neither  absolutely  tetrahedral  nor  absolutely  dodecahedral  but 
of  an  intermediate  kind ;  in  order  that  (because  the  tetrahedron  was  due  to  touch 
the  extremity  of  the  sphere  with  its  planes,  and  the  dodecahedron,  to  fall  short 
of  it  by  a  definite  interval)  this  wedge-shaped  figure  with  the  inverted  sides 
should  stand  between  the  icosahedral  space  and  the  extremity  of  the  inscribed 
sphere  and  should  nearly  touch  this  extremity — if  nevertheless  this  figure  was 
to  be  admitted  into  association  with  the  remaining  five,  and  if  its  laws  could  be 
allowed,  with  the  laws  of  the  others  remaining.  Nay,  why  do  I  say  ^^could  be 
allowed^  7  For  they  could  not  do  without  them.  For  if  an  inscription,  which  w^as 
loose  and  did  not  come  into  contact  fitted  the  dodecahedron,  what  else  could 
confine  that  indefinite  looseness  within  the  limits  of  a  fixed  magnitude,  except 
this  subsidiary  figure  cognate  to  the  dodecahedron  and  icosahedron,  and  which 
comes  almost  into  contact  with  its  inscribed  sphere  and  does  not  fall  short  (if 
indeed  it  does  fall  short)  any  more  than  the  tetrahedron  exceeds  and  penetrates 
— with  which  magnitude  we  shall  deal  in  the  following. 

This  reason  for  the  association  of  the  echinus  with  the  two  cognate  figures 
{viz,j  in  order  that  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  Mars  and  Venus,  which  they  had 
left  indefinite,  should  be  made  determinate)  is  rendered  very  probable  by  the 
fact  that  1,000,  the  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  of  the  Earth,  is  found  to  be 
practically  a  mean  proportional  between  the  perihelial  sphere  of  Mars  and  the 
aphelial  sphere  of  Venus;  as  if  the  interval,  which  the  echinus  assigns  to  the 
cognate  figures,  has  been  divided  between  them  as  proportionally  as  possible. 
XLVIII.  Proposition.  The  inscription  of  the  regular  solid  figures  between  the 
planetary  spheres  was  not  the  work  of  pure  freedom;  for  with  respect  to  very  small 
magnitudes  it  was  hindered  by  the  consonances  established  between  the  extreme 
movements. 

For,  by  Axioms  i  and  ii,  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  each  figure  was  not  due  to 
be  expressed  immediately  by  itself,  but  by  means  of  it  the  consonances  most 
akin  to  the  ratios  of  the  spheres  were  first  to  be  sought  and  adjusted  to  the 
extreme  movements. 

Then,  in  order  that,  by  Axioms  xviii  and  xx,  the  universal  consonances  of 
the  two  modes  could  exist,  it  was  necessary  for  the  greater  consonances  of  the 
single  pairs  to  be  readjusted  somewhat,  by  means  of  the  posterior  reasons.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  in  order  that  those  things  might  stand,  and  be  maintained  by  their 
own  reasons,  intervals  were  required  which  are  somewhat  discordant  with  those 
which  arise  from  the  perfect  inscription  of  figures  between  the  spheres,  by  the 
laws  of  movements  unfolded  in  Chapter  3.  In  order  that  it  be  proved  and  made 
manifest  how’  much  is  taken  away  from  the  single  planets  by  the  consonances 
established  by  their  proper  reasons;  come,  let  us  build  up,  out  of  them,  the  in¬ 
tervals  of  the  planets  from  the  sun,  by  a  new  form  of  calculation  not  previously 
tried  by  anyone. 

Now  there  will  be  three  heads  to  this  inquiry:  First,  from  the  two  extreme 
movements  of  each  planet  the  similar  extreme  intervals  between  it  and  the  sun 
will  be  investigated,  and  by  means  of  them  the  radius  of  the  sphere  in  those  di- 


1074 


KEPLER 


mensions,  of  the  extreme  intervals,  which  are  proper  to  each  planet.  Secondly, 
by  means  of  the  same  extreme  movements,  in  the  same  dimensions  for  all,  the 
mean  movements  and  their  ratio  will  be  investigated.  Thirdly,  by  means  of  the 
ratio  of  the  mean  movements  already  disclosed,  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  or  mean 
intervals  and  also  one  ratio  of  the  extreme  intervals,  will  be  investigated;  and 
the  ratio  of  the  mean  intervals  will  be  compared  with  the  ratios  of  the  figures. 

As  regards  the  first:  we  must  repeat,  from  Chapter  3,  Article  vi,  that  the 
ratio  of  the  extreme  movements  is  the  inverse  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  corre¬ 
sponding  intervals  from  the  sun.  Accordingly,  since  the  ratio  of  the  squares  is 
the  square  of  the  ratio  of  its  sides,  therefore,  the  numbers,  whereby  the  extreme 
movements  of  the  single  planets  are  expressed,  will  be  considered  as  squares 
and  the  extraction  of  their  roots  will  give  the  extreme  intervals,  whereof  it  is 
easy  to  take  the  arithmetic  mean  as  the  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  and  the  ec¬ 
centricity.  Accordingly  the  consonances  so  far  established  have  prescribed: 


[31 8]  PZane^s  Props. 

Ratios  of 
movements 

The  roots  either 
prolonged  or  of 
their  multiples 

Therefore  the 
semidiameter 
of  the  sphere 

Eccen¬ 

tricity 

In  dimensions 
whereof  the 
semidiameter 
of  the  sphere 
is  100,000 

Saturn  by  xxxviii 

64  ;81 

80  :90 

85 

5 

5,882 

Jupiter  by  xxxviii 

6,561  : 8,000 

81,000  : 89,444 

85,222 

4,222 

4,954 

Mars  by  xli 

25  :36 

50  :60 

55 

5 

9,091 

Earth  by  xxviii 

2,916  : 3,125 

93,531  : 96,825 

95,178 

1,647 

1,730 

Venus  by  xxviii 

243  : 250 

9,859  : 10,000 

99,295 

705 

710 

Mercury  by  xlv 

5  : 12 

63,250  : 98,000 

80,625 

17,375 

21,551 

For  the  second  of  the  things  proposed,  we  again  have  need  of  Chapter  3, 
Article  xii,  where  it  was  shown  that  the  number  which  expresses  the  movement 
which  is  as  a  mean  in  the  ratio  of  the  extremes  is  less  than  their  arithmetic  mean, 
also  less  than  the  geometric  mean  by  half  the  difference  between  the  geometric 
and  arithmetic  means.  And  because  we  are  investigating  all  the  mean  move¬ 
ments  in  the  same  dimensions,  therefore  let  all  the  ratios  hitherto  established 
between  different  twos  and  also  all  the  private  ratios  of  the  single  planets  be  set 
out  in  the  measure  of  the  least  common  divisible.  Then  let  the  means  be  sought: 
the  arithmetic,  by  taking  half  the  difference  between  the  extreme  movements 
of  each  planet,  the  geometric,  by  the  multiplication  of  one  extreme  into  the 
other  and  extracting  the  square  root  of  the  product;  then  by  subtracting  half  the 
difference  of  the  means  from  the  geometric  mean,  let  the  number  of  the  mean 
movement  be  constituted  in  the  private  dimensions  of  each  planet,  which  can 
easily,  by  the  rule  of  ratios,  be  converted  into  the  common  dimensions. 

[319]  Therefore,  from  the  prescribed  consonances,  the  ratio  of  the  mean 
diurnal  movements  has  been  found,  viz.^  the  ratio  between  the  numbers  of  the 
degrees  and  minutes  of  each  planet.  It  is  easy  to  explore  how  closely  that  ap¬ 
proaches  to  astronomy. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1075 


Private 

Number  of  the  mean 

Numbers 

ratios 

Continued  means  of 

Halves 

movement  in 

Harmonic 

of  the 

of  the 

the  single  planets 

of  the 

dimensions 

ratios 

extreme 

single 

differ¬ 

of  two 

movements 

planets 

Arithmetic  Geometric 

ence 

Private 

Common 

1 

b 

139,968 

64| 

72.50  72.00 

.25 

71.75 

156,917 

1 

b 

177,147 

8l) 

2 

■21 

354,294 

6,561] 

7,280.5  7,244.9 

17.8 

7,227.1 

390,263 

5 

21 

432,000 

8,000 J 

24 

<? 

2,073,600 

25] 

30.50  30.00 

.25 

29.75 

2,467,584 

2 

cf 

2,985,984 

36  J 

32 

3 

6 

4,478,976 

2,916] 

3,020.500  3,018.692 

.904 

3,017.788 

4,635,322 

5 

6 

4,800,000 

3,125j 

5 

8 

9 

7,464,960 

243] 

246.500  246.475 

.0125 

246.4625 

7,571,328 

1 

3 

9 

7,680,000 

250 J 

.5 

S 

12,800,000 

5] 

8.500  7.746 

.377 

7.369 

18,864,680 

.4 

e 

30,720,000 

12] 

The  third  head  of  things  proposed  requires  Chapter  3,  Article  viii.  For  when 
the  ratio  of  the  mean  diurnal  movements  of  the  single  planets  has  been  found, 
it  is  possible  to  find  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  too.  For  the  ratio  of  the  mean  move¬ 
ments  is  the  ^^th  power  of  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  spheres.  But,  too,  the  ratio 
of  the  cube  numbers  is  the  %th  power  of  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  those  same 
square  roots,  given  in  the  table  of  Clavius,  which  he  subjoined  to  his  Practical 
Geometry,  Wherefore,  if  the  numbers  of  our  mean  movements  (curtailed,  if  need 
be,  of  an  equal  number  of  ciphers)  are  sought  among  the  cube  numbers  of  that 
table,  they  will  indicate  on  the  left,  under  the  heading  of  the  squares,  the  num¬ 
bers  of  the  ratio  of  the  spheres;  then  the  eccentricities  ascribed  above  to  the 
single  planets  in  the  private  ratio  of  the  semidiameters  of  each  may  easily  be 
converted  by  the  rule  of  ratios  into  dimensions  common  to  all,  so  that,  by  their 
addition  to  the  semidiameters  of  the  spheres  and  subtraction  from  them,  the 
extreme  intervals  of  the  single  planets  from  the  sun  may  be  established.  Now 
we  shall  give  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  terrestrial  sphere  the  round  number 
100,000,  as  is  the  practice  in  astronomy,  and  with  the  following  design:  because 
this  number  or  its  square  or  its  cube  is  always  made  up  of  mere  ciphers;  and  so 
too  we  shall  raise  the  mean  movement  of  the  Earth  to  the  number  10,000,000,- 
000  and  by  the  rule  of  ratios  make  the  number  of  the  mean  movement  of  any 
planet  be  to  the  number  of  the  mean  movement  of  the  Earth,  as  10,000,000,000 
is  to  the  new  measurement.  And  so  the  business  can  be  carried  on  with  only  five 


1076  KEPLER 

cube  roots,  by  comparing  those  single  cube  roots  with  the  one  number  of  the 
Earth. 


Numbers  of  the 
mean  movements 


In  the  original 

In  the  new 
dimensions 
found  in 
inverse  order 
among  the 

dimensions 

cubes 

b 

156,917 

29,539,960 

21 

390,263 

11,877,400 

(S' 

2,467,584 

1,878,483 

6 

4,635,322 

1,000,000 

9 

7,571,328 

612,220 

9 

18,864,680 

245,714 

Numbers  of 
the  ratio  of 
the  spheres 
found  among 
the  squares 
9,556 

Semi'" 
diameters 
as  above 

85 

Eccentricities 
in  dimensions 
Private 
as 

above  Common 
5  562 

Extreme  intervals 
resulting 

Aphelion  Perihelion 

10,118  8,994 

5,206 

85,222 

4,222 

258 

5,464 

4,948 

1,523 

55 

5 

138 

1,661 

1,384 

1,000 

95,178 

1,647 

17 

1,017 

983 

721 

99,295 

705 

5 

726 

716 

392 

80,625 

17,375 

85 

476 

308 

Accordingly,  it  is  apparent  in  the  last  column  what  the  numbers  turn  out  to 
be  whereby  the  converging  intervals  of  two  planets  are  expressed.  All  of  them 
approach  very  near  to  those  intervals,  which  I  found  from  Brahe^s  observations. 
In  Mercury  alone  is  there  some  small  difference.  For  astronomy  is  seen  to  give 
the  following  intervals  to  it:  470,  388,  306,  all  shorter.  It  seems  that  the  reason 
for  the  dissonance  may  be  referred  either  to  the  fewness  of  the  observations  or 
to  the  magnitude  of  the  eccentricity.  (See  Chapter  3).  But  I  hurry  on  to  the  end 
of  the  calculation. 

For  now  it  is  easy  to  compare  the  ratio  of  the  spheres  of  the  figures  with  the 
ratio  of  the  converging  intervals. 

[320]  For  if  the  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  circumscribed  around  the  figure 


Then  the  semidiameter  of  the  sphere  Although  by  the 


which  is  commonly  or  circle  consonances 


100,000 

becomes: 

inscribed  in: 

instead  of: 

becomes: 

the  interval 

!  is: 

In  the  cube 

8,994 

b 

[Saturn] 

57,735 

5,194 

Mean 

21 

5,206 

In  the  tetrahedron 

4,948 

21 

[Jupiter] 

33,333 

1,649 

Aphelial 

cT 

1,661 

In  the  dodecahedron  1,384 

d’ 

[Mars] 

79,465 

1,100 

Aphelial 

6 

1,018 

In  the  icosahedron 

983 

6 

[Earth] 

79,465 

781 

Aphelial 

9 

726 

In  the  echinus 

1,384 

& 

[Mars] 

52,573 

728 

Aphelial 

9 

726 

In  the  octahedron 

716 

9 

[Venus 

57,735 

413 

Mean 

9 

392 

In  the  square  in 
the  octahedron 

716 

9 

[Venus] 

70,711 

506 

Aphelial 

9 

476 

or  476 

9 

[Mercury] 

70,711 

336 

Perihelia! 

9 

308 

That  is  to  say,  the  planes  of  the  cube  extend  down  slightly  below  the  middle 
circle  of  Jupiter;  the  octahedral  planes,  not  quite  to  the  middle  circle  of  Mer¬ 
cury;  the  tetrahedral,  slightly  below  the  highest  circle  of  Mars;  the  sides  of  the 
echinus,  not  quite  to  the  highest  circle  of  Venus;  but  the  planes  of  the  dodeca- 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1077 


hedron  fall  far  short  of  the  aphelial  circle  of  the  Earth ;  the  planes  of  the  icosa- 
dron  also  fall  short  of  the  aphelial  circle  of  Venus,  and  approximately  propor¬ 
tionally;  finally,  the  square  in  the  octahedron  is  quite  inept,  and  not  unjustly, 
for  what  are  plane  figures  doing  among  solids?  Accordingly,  you  see  that  if  the 
planetary  intervals  are  deduced  from  the  harmonic  ratios  of  movements  hither¬ 
to  demonstrated,  it  is  necessary  that  they  turn  out  as  great  as  these  allow,  but 
not  as  great  as  the  laws  of  free  inscription  prescribed  in  Proposition  xlv  would 
require:  because  this  kog^os  yecofierpiKos  [geometrical  adornment]  of  perfect  in¬ 
scription  was  not  fully  in  accordance  with  that  other  KoSpov  bippoviKov  hdexopevov 
[possible  harmonic  adornment] — to  use  the  words  of  Galen,  taken  from  the 
epigraph  to  this  Book  v.  So  much  was  to  be  demonstrated  by  the  calculation  of 
numbers,  for  the  elucidation  of  the  prescribed  proposition. 

I  do  not  hide  that  if  I  increase  the  consonance  of  the  diverging  movements  of 
Venus  and  Mercury  by  the  private  ratio  of  the  movements  of  Venus,  and,  as  a 
consequence,  diminish  the  private  ratio  of  Mercury  by  the  same,  then  by  this 
process  I  produce  the  following  intervals  between  Mercury  and  the  sun:  469, 
388,307,  which  are  very  precisely  represented  by  astronomy.  But,  in  the  first 
place,  I  cannot  defend  that  diminishing  by  harmonic  reasons.  For  the  aphelial 
movement  of  Mercury  will  not  square  with  that  musical  scale,  nor  in  the  planets 
which  are  opposite  in  the  world  is  the  planetary  principle  [ratio]  of  opposition 
of  all  conditions  kept.  Finally,  the  mean  diurnal  movement  of  Mercury  becomes 
too  great,  and  thereby  the  periodic  time,  which  is  the  most  certain  fact  in  all 
astronomy,  is  shortened  too  much.  And  so  I  stay  within  the  harmonic  polity 
here  employed  and  confirmed  throughout  the  whole  of  Chapter  9.  But  none  the 
less  with  this  example  I  call  you  all  forth,  as  many  of  you  as  have  happened  to 
read  this  book  and  are  steeped  in  the  mathematical  disciplines  and  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  highest  philosophy:  work  hard  and  either  pluck  up  one  of  the  conso¬ 
nances  applied  everywhere,  interchange  it  with  some  other,  and  test  whether  or 
not  you  will  come  so  near  to  the  astronomy  posited  in  Chapter  4,  or  else  try  by 
reasons  whether  or  not  you  can  build  with  the  celestial  movements  something 
better  and  more  expedient  and  destroy  in  part  or  in  whole  the  layout  applied 
by  me.  But  let  whatever  pertains  to  the  glory  of  Our  Lord  and  Founder  be 
equally  permissible  to  you  by  way  of  this  book,  and  up  to  this  very  hour  I 
myself  have  taken  the  liberty  of  everywhere  changing  those  things  which  I  was 
able  to  discover  on  earlier  days  and  which  were  the  conceptions  of  a  sluggish  care 
or  hurrying  ardour. 

[321]  XLIX.  Envoi.  It  was  good  that  in  the  genesis  of  the  intervals  the  solid  figures 
should  yield  to  the  harmonic  ratios ^  and  the  major  consonances  of  two  planets  to  the 
universal  consonances  of  all,  in  so  far  as  this  was  necessary. 

With  good  fortune  we  have  arrived  at  49,  the  square  of  7;  so  that  this  may 
come  as  a  kind  of  Sabbath,  since  the  six  solid  eights  of  discourse  concerning  the 
construction  of  the  heavens  has  gone  before.  Moreover,  I  have  rightly  made  an 
envoi  which  could  be  placed  first  among  the  axioms:  because  God  also,  enjoying 
the  works  of  His  creation,  “saw  all  things  which  He  had  made^  and  behold !  they 
were  very  good.” 

There  are  two  branches  to  the  envoi:  First,  there  is  a  demonstration  concern¬ 
ing  consonances  in  general,  as  follows:  For  where  there  is  choice  among  different 
things  which  are  not  of  equal  weight,  there  the  more  excellent  are  to  be  put  first 
and  the  more  vile  are  to  be  detracted  from,  in  so  far  as  that  is  necessary,  as  the 


1078 


KEPLER 


very  word  6  kSSplos,  which  signifies  adornment^  seems  to  argue.  But  inasmuch  as 
life  is  more  excellent  than  the  body,  the  form  than  the  material,  by  so  much 
does  harmonic  adornment  excel  the  geometrical. 

For  as  life  perfects  the  bodies  of  animate  things,  because  they  have  been 
born  for  the  exercise  of  life — as  follows  from  the  archetype  of  the  world,  which 
is  the  divine  essence — ^so  movement  measures  the  regions  assigned  to  the 
planets,  each  that  of  its  own  planet:  because  that  region  was  assigned  to  the 
planet  in  order  that  it  should  move.  But  the  five  regular  solids,  by  their  very 
name,  pertain  to  the  intervals  of  the  regions  and  to  the  number  of  them  and  the 
bodies;  but  the  consonances  to  the  movements.  Again,  as  matter  is  diffuse  and 
indefinite  of  itself,  the  form  definite,  unified,  and  determinant  of  the  material,  so 
too  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  geometric  ratios,  but  few  consonances.  For 
although  among  the  geometrical  ratios  there  are  definite  degrees  of  determina¬ 
tions,  formation,  and  restriction,  and  no  more  than  three  can  exist  from  the 
ascription  of  spheres  to  the  regular  solids;  but  nevertheless  an  accident  common 
to  all  the  rest  follows  upon  even  these  geometrical  ratios:  an  infinite  possible 
section  of  magnitudes  is  presupposed,  which  those  ratios  whose  terms  are  mu¬ 
tually  incommensurable  somehow  involve  in  actuality  too.  But  the  harmonic 
ratios  are  all  rational,  the  terms  of  all  are  commensurable  and  are  taken  from  a 
definite  and  finite  species  of  plane  figures.  But  infinity  of  section  represents  the 
material,  while  commensurability  or  rationality  of  terms  represents  the  form. 
Accordingly,  as  material  desires  the  form,  as  the  rough-hewn  stone,  of  a  just 
magnitude  indeed,  the  form  of  a  human  body,  so  the  geometric  ratios  of  figures 
desire  the  consonances — not  in  order  to  fashion  and  form  those  consonances, 
but  because  this  material  squares  better  with  this  form,  this  quantity  of  stone 
with  this  statue,  even  this  ratio  of  regular  solids  with  this  consonance — there¬ 
fore  in  order  so  that  they  are  fashioned  and  formed  more  fully,  the  material  by 
its  form,  the  stone  by  the  chisel  into  the  form  of  an  animate  being;  but  the  ratio 
of  the  spheres  of  the  figure  by  its  own,  i.e.,  the  near  and  fitting,  consonance. 

The  things  which  have  been  said  up  to  now  will  become  clearer  from  the  his¬ 
tory  of  my  discoveries.  Since  I  had  fallen  into  this  speculation  twenty-four  years 
ago,  I  first  inquired  whether  the  single  planetary  spheres  are  equal  distances 
apart  from  one  another  (for  the  spheres  are  apart  in  Copernicus,  and  do  not 
touch  one  another),  that  is  to  say,  I  recognized  nothing  more  beautiful  than  the 
ratio  of  equality.  But  this  ratio  is  without  head  or  tail:  for  this  material  equality 
furnished  no  definite  number  of  mobile  bodies,  no  definite  magnitude  for  the  in¬ 
tervals.  Accordingly,  I  meditated  upon  the  similarity  of  the  intervals  to  the 
spheres,  z.e.,  upon  the  proportionality.  But  the  same  complaint  followed.  For 
although  to  be  sure,  intervals  which  were  altogether  unequal  were  produced  be¬ 
tween  the  spheres,  yet  they  were  not  unequally  equal,  as  Copernicus  wishes,  and 
neither  the  magnitude  of  the  ratio  nor  the  number  of  the  spheres  was  given.  I 
passed  on  to  the  regular  plane  figures:  [322]  intervals  were  formed  from  them  by 
the  ascription  of  circles.  I  came  to  the  five  regular  solids:  here  both  the  number 
of  the  bodies  and  approximately  the  true  magnitude  of  the  intervals  was  dis¬ 
closed,  in  such  fashion  that  I  summoned  to  the  perfection  of  astronomy  the  dis¬ 
crepancies  remaining  over  and  above.  Astronomy  was  perfect  these  twenty 
years;  and  behold!  there  was  still  a  discrepancy  between  the  intervals  and  the 
regular  solids,  and  the  reasons  for  the  distribution  of  unequal  eccentricities 
among  the  planets  were  not  disclosed.  That  is  to  say,  in  this  house  the  world,  I 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1079 


was  asking  not  only  why  stones  of  a  more  elegant  form  but  also  what  form 
would  fit  the  stones,  in  my  ignorance  that  the  Sculptor  had  fashioned  them  in 
the  very  articulate  image  of  an  animated  body.  So,  gradually,  especially  during 
these  last  three  years,  I  came  to  the  consonances  and  abandoned  the  regular 
solids  in  respect  to  minima,  both  because  the  consonances  stood  on  the  side  of 
the  form  which  the  finishing  touch  would  give,  and  the  regular  solids,  on  that 
of  the  material — ^which  in  the  world  is  the  number  of  bodies  and  the  rough-hewn 
amplitude  of  the  intervals — and  also  because  the  consonances  gave  the  eccen¬ 
tricities,  which  the  regular  solids  did  not  even  promise — that  is  to  say,  the  con¬ 
sonances  made  the  nose,  eyes,  and  remaining  limbs  a  part  of  the  statue,  for 
which  the  regular  solids  had  prescribed  merely  the  outward  magnitude  of  the 
rough-hewn  mass. 

Wherefore,  just  as  neither  the  bodies  of  animate  beings  are  made  nor  blocks 
of  stone  are  usually  made  after  the  pure  rule  of  some  geometrical  figure,  but 
something  is  taken  away  from  the  outw^ard  spherical  figure,  however  elegant  it 
may  be  (although  the  just  magnitude  of  the  bulk  remains),  so  that  the  body  may 
be  able  to  get  the  organs  necessary  for  life,  and  the  stone  the  image  of  the  ani¬ 
mate  being;  so  too  as  the  ratio  which  the  regular  solids  had  been  going  to  pre¬ 
scribe  for  the  planetary  spheres  is  inferior  and  looks  only  towards  the  body  and 
material,  it  has  to  yield  to  the  consonances,  in  so  far  as  that  was  necessary  in 
order  for  the  consonances  to  be  able  to  stand  closely  by  and  adorn  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  globes. 

The  other  branch  of  the  envois  which  concerns  universal  consonances,  has  a 
proof  closely  related  to  the  first.  (As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  in  part  assumed 
above,  in  xviii,  among  the  Axioms.)  For  the  finishing  touch  of  perfection,  as  it 
were,  is  due  rather  to  that  which  perfects  the  w^orld  more;  and  conversely  that 
thing  which  occupies  a  second  position  is  to  be  detracted  from,  if  either  is  to  be 
detracted  from.  But  the  universal  harmony  of  all  perfects  the  world  more  than 
the  single  twin  consonances  of  different  neighbouring  tw^os.  For  harmony  is  a 
certain  ratio  of  unity;  accordingly  the  planets  are  more  united,  if  they  all  are  in 
concord  together  in  one  harmony,  than  if  each  two  concord  separately  in  two 
consonances.  Wherefore,  in  the  conflict  of  both,  either  one  of  the  two  single  con¬ 
sonances  of  two  planets  was  due  to  yield,  so  that  the  universal  harmonies  of  all 
could  stand.  But  the  greater  consonances,  those  of  the  diverging  movements, 
were  due  to  yield  rather  than  the  lesser,  those  of  the  converging  movements. 
For  if  the  divergent  movements  diverge,  then  they  look  not  tow^ards  the  planets 
of  the  given  pair  but  towards  other  neighbouring  planets,  and  if  the  converging 
movements  converge,  then  the  movements  of  one  planet  are  converging  toward 
the  movement  of  the  other,  conversely:  for  example,  in  the  pair  Jupiter  and 
Mars  the  aphelial  movement  of  Jupiter  verges  toward  Saturn,  the  perihelial  of 
Mars  towards  the  Earth:  but  the  perihelial  movement  of  Jupiter  verges  toward 
Mars,  the  aphelial  of  Mars  toward  Jupiter.  Accordingly  the  consonance  of  the 
converging  movements  is  more  proper  to  Jupiter  and  Mars;  the  consonance  of 
the  diverging  movements  is  somehow  more  foreign  to  Jupiter  and  Mars.  But 
the  ratio  of  union  which  brings  together  neighbouring  planets  by  twos  and  twos 
is  less  disturbed  if  the  consonance  which  is  more  foreign  and  more  removed  from 
them  should  be  adjusted  than  if  the  private  ratio  should  be,  viz.^  the  one  which 
exists  between  the  more  neighbouring  movements  of  neighbouring  planets. 
None  the  less  this  adjustment  was  not  very  great.  For  the  proportionality  has 


1080 


KEPLER 


been  found  in  which  may  stand  the  universal  consonances  of  all  the  planets  may 
exist  (and  these  in  two  distinct  modes),  and  in  which  (with  a  certain  latitude  of 
tuning  merely  equal  to  a  comma)  may  also  be  embraced  the  single  consonances 
of  two  neighbouring  planets;  the  consonances  of  the  converging  movements  in 
four  pairs,  perfect,  of  the  aphelial  movements  in  one  pair,  of  the  perihelial  move¬ 
ments  in  two  pairs,  likewise  perfect;  the  consonances  of  the  diverging  move¬ 
ments  in  four  pairs,  these,  however,  within  the  difference  of  one  diesis  (the  very 
small  interval  by  which  the  human  voice  [323]  in  figured  song  nearly  always 
errs;  the  single  consonance  of  Jupiter  and  Mars,  this  between  the  diesis  and  the 
semitone.  Accordingly  it  is  apparent  that  this  mutual  yielding  is  everywhere 
very  good. 

Accordingly  let  this  do  for  our  envoi  concerning  the  work  of  God  the  Creator. 
It  now  remains  that  at  last,  with  my  eyes  and  hands  removed  from  the  tablet  of 
demonstrations  and  lifted  up  towards  the  heavens,  I  should  pray,  devout  and 
supplicating,  to  the  Father  of  lights:  0  Thou  Who  dost  by  the  light  of  nature  pro¬ 
mote  in  us  the  desire  for  the  light  of  grace,  that  by  its  means  Thou  mayest  transport 
us  into  the  light  of  glory,  I  give  thanks  to  Thee,  0  Lord  Creator,  Who  hast  delighted 
me  with  Thy  makings  and  in  the  works  of  Thy  hands  have  I  exulted.  Behold!  now,  I 
have  completed  the  work  of  my  profession,  having  employed  as  much  power  of  mind 
as  Thou  didst  give  to  me;  to  the  men  who  are  going  to  read  those  demonstrations  I 
have  made  manifest  the  glory  of  Thy  works,  as  much  of  its  infinity  as  the  narrows  of 
my  intellect  could  apprehend.  My  mind  has  been  given  over  to  philosophizing  most 
correctly:  if  there  is  anything  unworthy  of  Thy  designs  brought  forth  by  me — a  worm 
born  and  nourished  in  a  wallowing  place  of  sins — breathe  into  me  also  that  which 
Thou  dost  wish  men  to  know,  that  I  may  make  the  correction:  If  I  have  been  allured 
into  rashness  by  the  wonderful  beauty  of  Thy  works,  or  if  I  have  loved  my  own  glory 
among  men,  while  I  am  advancing  in  the  work  destined  for  Thy  glory,  be  gentle  and 
merciful  and  pardon  me;  and  finally  deign  graciously  to  effect  that  these  demonstra¬ 
tions  give  way  to  Thy  glory  and  the  salvation  of  souls  and  nowhere  be  an  obstacle  to 
that. 


10.  Epilogue  Concerning  the  Sun,  by  way  of  Conjecture^ 

From  the  celestial  music  to  the  hearer,  from  the  Muses  to  Apollo  the  leader 
of  the  Dance,  from  the  six  planets  revolving  and  making  consonances  to  the  Sun 
at  the  centre  of  all  the  circuits,  immovable  in  place  but  rotating  into  itself.  For 
although  the  harmony  is  most  absolute  between  the  extreme  planetary  move¬ 
ments,  not  with  respect  to  the  true  speeds  through  the  ether  but  with  respect  to 
the  angles  which  are  formed  by  joining  with  the  centre  of  the  sun  the  termini  of 
the  diurnal  arcs  of  the  planetary  orbits;  while  the  harmony  does  not  adorn  the 
termini,  i.e.,  the  single  movements,  in  so  far  as  they  are  considered  in  themselves 
but  only  in  so  far  as  by  being  taken  together  and  compared  with  one  another, 
they  become  the  object  of  some  mind;  and  although  no  object  is  ordained  in 
vain,  without  the  existence  of  some  thing  which  may  be  moved  by  it,  while 
those  angles  seem  to  presuppose  some  action  similar  to  our  eyesight  or  at  least 
to  that  sense-perception  whereby,  in  Book  iv,  the  sublunary  nature  perceived 
the  angles  of  rays  formed  by  the  planets  on  the  Earth:  still  it  is  not  easy  for 
dwellers  on  the  Earth  to  conjecture  what  sort  of  sight  is  present  in  the  sun, 
what  eyes  there  are,  or  what  other  instinct  there  is  for  perceiving  those  angles 

^See  Kepler^s  commentary  on  this  epilogue  in  the  Epitome,  page  850-51. 


1081 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 

even  without  eyes  and  for  evaluating  the  harmonies  of  the  movements  entering 
into  the  antechamber  of  the  mind  by  whatever  doorway,  and  finally  what  mind 
there  is  in  the  sun.  None  the  less,  however  those  things  may  be,  this  composi¬ 
tion  of  the  six  primary  spheres  around  the  sun,  cherishing  it  with  their  per¬ 
petual  revolutions  and  as  it  were  adoring  it  (just  as,  separately,  four  moons  ac¬ 
company  the  globe  of  Jupiter,  two  Saturn,  but  a  single  moon  by  its  circuit  en¬ 
compasses,  cherishes,  fosters  the  Earth  and  us  its  inhabitants,  and  ministers  to 
us)  and  this  special  business  of  the  harmonies,  which  is  a  most  clear  footprint 
of  the  highest  providence  over  solar  affairs,  now  being  added  to  that  considera¬ 
tion,  [324]  wrings  from  me  the  following  confession:  not  only  does  light  go  out 
from  the  sun  into  the  whole  world,  as  from  the  focus  or  eye  of  the  world,  as  life 
and  heat  from  the  heart,  as  every  movement  from  the  King  and  mover,  but  con¬ 
versely  also  by  royal  law  these  returns,  so  to  speak,  of  every  lovely  harmony  are 
collected  in  the  sun  from  every  province  in  the  world,  nay,  the  forms  of  move¬ 
ments  by  twos  flow  together  and  are  bound  into  one  harmony  by  the  work  of 
some  mind,  and  are  as  it  were  coined  money  from  silver  and  gold  bullion;  finally, 
the  curia,  palace,  and  praetorium  or  throne-room  of  the  whole  realm  oi  nature 
are  in  the  sun,  whatsoever  chancellors,  palatines,  prefects  the  Creator  has  given 
to  nature:  for  them,  whether  created  immediately  from  the  beginning  or  to  be 
transported  hither  at  some  time,  has  He  made  ready  those  seats.  For  even  this 
terrestrial  adornment,  with  respect  to  its  principal  part,  for  quite  a  long  while 
lacked  the  contemplators  and  enjoyers,  for  whom  however  it  had  been  ap¬ 
pointed;  and  those  seats  were  empty.  Accordingly  the  reflection  struck  my 
mind,  what  did  the  ancient  Pythagoreans  in  Aristotle  mean,  who  used  to  call 
the  centre  of  the  world  (which  they  referred  to  as  the  “fire^'  but  understood  by 
that  the  sun)  ^^the  watchtower  of  Jupiter,^^  Alos  ^v\aKr}v\  what,  likewise,  was 
the  ancient  interpreter  pondering  in  his  mind  when  he  rendered  the  verse  of 
the  Psalm  as:  ^‘He  has  placed  His  tabernacle  in  the  sun.^' 

But  also  I  have  recently  fallen  upon  the  hymn  of  Proclus  the  Platonic  philoso¬ 
pher  (of  whom  there  has  been  much  mention  in  the  preceding  books),  which 
was  composed  to  the  Sun  and  filled  full  with  venerable  mysteries,  if  you  excise 
that  one  k\W  (hear  me)  from  it;  although  the  ancient  interpreter  already  cited 
has  explained  this  to  some  extent,  viz.j  in  invoking  the  sun,  he  understands  Him 
Who  has  placed  His  tabernacle  in  the  sun.  For  Proclus  lived  at  a  time  in  which 
it  was  a  crime,  for  which  the  rulers  of  the  world  and  the  people  itself  inflicted  all 
punishments,  to  profess  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  God  Our  Savior,  and  to  contemn  the 
gods  of  the  pagan  poets  (under  Constantine,  Maxentius,  and  Julian  the  Apos¬ 
tate).  Accordingly  Proclus,  who  from  his  Platonic  philosophy  indeed,  by  the 
natural  light  of  the  mind,  had  caught  a  distant  glimpse  of  the  Son  of  God,  that 
true  light  which  lighteth  every  man  coming  into  this  world,  and  who  already 
knew  that  divinity  must  never  be  sought  with  a  superstitious  mob  in  sensible 
things,  nevertheless  perf erred  to  seem  to  look  for  God  in  the  sun  rather  than 
in  Christ  a  sensible  man,  in  order  that  at  the  same  time  he  might  both  deceive 
the  pagans  by  honoring  verbally  the  Titan  of  the  poets  and  devote  himself  to 
his  philosophy,  by  drawing  away  both  the  pagans  and  the  Christians  from  sen¬ 
sible  beings,  the  pagans  from  the  visible  sun,  the  Christians  from  the  Son  of 
Mary,  because,  trusting  too  much  to  the  natural  light  of  reason,  he  spit  out 
the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation;  and  finally  that  at  the  same  time  he  might  take 
over  from  them  and  adopt  into  his  own  philosophy  whatever  the  Christians 


1082 


KEPLER 


had  which  was  most  divine  and  especially  consonant  with  Platonic  philosophy.^ 
And  so  the  accusation  of  the  teaching  of  the  Gospel  concerning  Christ  is  laid 
against  this  hymn  of  Proclus,  in  its  own  matters:  let  that  Titan  keep  as  his 
private  possessions  rjpia  [golden  reins]  and  Ta^iieivv  ^aous,  neo-aarlrjVy  aWepos 
ebpr)Vj  Kodpov  KpadioLov  kpL(j)eyye(x  kvkXov  [a  treasury  of  light,  a  seat  at  the  midpart 
of  the  ether,  a  radiant  circle  at  the  heart  of  the  world],  which  visible  aspect 
Copernicus  too  bestows  upon  him;  let  him  even  keep  his  TraXivvoaTovs  5t0p€ts 
[cyclical  chariot-drivings],  although  according  to  the  ancient  Pythagoreans  he 
does  not  possess  them  but  in  their  place  to  KevTpov,  Aids  (l)v\aKr}v  [the  centre,  the 
watchtower  of  Zeus] — which  doctrine,  misshapen  by  the  forgetfulness  of  ages, 
as  by  a  flood,  was  not  recognized  by  their  follower  Proclus;  let  him  also  keep 
his  yeveSXrjv  BXaaTT)aaaav  [offspring  born]  of  himself,  and  whatever  else  is  of 
nature;  in  turn,  let  the  philosophy  of  Proclus  yield  to  Christian  doctrines,  [325] 
let  the  sensible  sun  yield  to  the  Son  of  Mary,  the  Son  of  God,  Whom  Proclus 
addresses  under  the  name  of  the  Titan,  fwap/ccos,  w  ava,  Trrjyrjs  avTos  KXrjSa 
[0  lord,  who  dost  hold  the  key  of  the  life-supporting  spring],  and  that  TrQiVTa  reijs 
€TrX7]<Tas  eXep<jivo6lo  Trpovoirjs  [thou  didst  fulfill  all  things  with  thy  mind-awakening 
foresight],  and  that  immense  power  over  the  poLpacov  [fates],  and  things  which 
were  read  of  in  no  philosophy  before  the  promulgation  of  the  GospeP,  the 
demons  dreading  him  as  their  threatening  scourge,  the  demons  lying  in  ambush 
for  souls,  o(t>pa  v<j>iT^vovs  XaddlvTO  irarpos  'K€pL<j)kyyeos  avXrjs  [in  order  that  they 
might  escape  the  notice  of  the  light-filled  hall  of  the  lofty  father];  and  who 
except  the  Word  of  the  Father  is  that  eUcov  irayy ever qlo  Oeov,  ov  (fx^epros  dir'  dppTjTov 
yever^pos  iravaaro  (ttolx^lojp  dpvpaydos  eir  dXXrjXoLaiv  Ioptcop  [image  of  the  all-beget¬ 
ting  father,  upon  whose  manifestation  from  an  ineffable  mother  the  sin  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  changing  into  one  another  ceased],  according  to  the  following:  The  Earth 
was  unwrought  and  a  chaotic  mass,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  abyss, 
and  God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness,  the  waters  from  the  waters,  the  sea  from 
the  dry  land;  and:  all  things  were  made  by  the  very  Word,  Who  except  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  the  Son  of  God,  \l/vxljop  dpayoiyevs  [the  shepherd  of  souls],  to  whom  iKeairi 
TToXvddKpvos  [the  prayer  of  a  tearful  suppliant]  is  to  be  offered,  in  order  that  He 
cleanse  us  from  sins  and  wash  us  of  the  filth  frjs  yevedXrjs  [of  generation] — as  if 
Proclus  acknowledged  the  fomes  of  original  sin — and  guard  us  from  punish¬ 
ment  and  evil,  irprjvpdp  06ov  bppa  diKrjs  [by  making  mild  the  quick  eye  of  justice], 
namely,  the  wrath  of  the  Father?  And  the  other  things  we  read  of,  which 
are  as  it  were  taken  from  the  hymn  of  Zacharias  (or,  accordingly,  was  that 
hymn  a  part  of  the  Metroacef)  AxXvv  diroaKeddacas  oXealpfiporop  loXox^vrov 
[dispersing  the  poisonous,  man-destroying  mist],  viz.,  in  order  that  He  may 
give  to  souls  living  in  darkness  and  the  shadows  of  death  the  0aos  dyvov 
[holy  light]  and  bXfiov  d<xTv<j>eXLKT6v  dir'  kvaefiipkpaTeirjs  [unshaken  happiness  from 

qt  was  the  judgment  of  the  ancients  concerning  his  book  Metroace  that  in  it  he  set  forth, 
not  without  divine  rapture,  his  universal  doctrine  concerning  God;  and  by  the  frequent  tears 
of  the  author  apparent  in  it  all  suspicion  was  removed  from  the  hearers.  None  the  less  this 
same  man  wrote  against  the  Christians  eighteen  epichiremata,  to  which  John  Philoponus  op¬ 
posed  himself,  reproaching  Proclus  with  ignorance  of  Greek  thought,  which  none  the  less  he 
had  undertaken  to  defend.  That  is  to  say,  Proclus  concealed  those  things  which  did  not  make 
for  his  own  philosophy. 

2  Nevertheless  in  Suidas  some  similar  things  are  attributed  to  ancient  Orpheus,  nearly 
equal  to  Moses,  as  if  his  pupil;  see  too  the  hymns  of  Orpheus,  on  which  Proclus  wrote  com¬ 
mentaries. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD  1083 

lovely  piety];  for  that  is  to  serve  God  in  holiness  and  justice  all  our  days. 

Accordingly,  let  us  separate  out  these  and  similar  things  and  restore  them  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  Church  to  which  they  belong.  But  let  us  see  what 
the  principal  reason  is  why  there  has  been  mention  made  of  the  hymn.  For  this 
same  sun  which  vxpodev  apixvirjs  pO/xa  irXbvaLov  e^oreuet  [sluices  the  rich  flow  of 
harmony  from  on  high] — so  too  Orpheus  Koafxov  rov  kvappovLov  bpbpov  €\ko)v  [mak¬ 
ing  move  the  harmonious  course  of  the  world] — the  same,  concerning  whose 
stock  Phoebus  about  to  rise  Kidapfj  vTd  OkaKeXa  peXiro^v  ebva^a  peya  Kvpa 
fiapv<p\(TL(TpoLo  yevedXrjs  [sings  marvellous  things  on  his  lyre  and  lulls  to  sleep 
the  heavy-sounding  surge  of  generation]  and  in  whose  dance  Paean  is  the  part¬ 
ner,  TXrjaas  appovlrjs  TravaTrjpovos  evpea  Kodpv  [striking  the  wide  sweep  of  inno¬ 
cent  harmony] — him,  I  say,  does  Proclus  at  once  salute  in  the  first  verse  of 
the  hymn  as  irdpos  voepov  paaiXea  [king  of  intellectual  fire].  By  that  commence¬ 
ment,  at  the  same  time,  he  indicates  what  the  Pythagoreans  understood  by  the 
word  of  fire  (so  that  it  is  surprising  that  the  pupil  should  disagree  with  the 
masters  in  the  position  of  the  centre)  and  at  the  same  time  he  transfers  his  whole 
hymn  from  the  body  of  the  sun  and  its  quality  and  light,  v/hich  are  sensibles, 
to  the  intelligibles,  and  he  has  assigned  to  that  irvp  voepos  [intellectual  fire]  of 
his — perhaps  the  artisan  fire  of  the  Stoics — to  that  created  God  of  Plato,  that 
chief  or  self-ruling  mind,  a  royal  throne  in  the  solar  body,  confounding  into 
one  the  creature  and  Him  through  Whom  all  things  have  been  created.  But 
we  Christians,  who  have  been  taught  to  make  better  distinctions,  know  that 
this  eternal  and  uncreated  ^^Word,”  Which  was  '‘with  God’^  and  Which  is 
contained  by  no  abode,  although  He  is  within  all  things,  excluded  by  none, 
although  He  is  outside  of  all  things,  took  up  into  unity  of  person  flesh  out 
of  the  womb  of  the  most  glorious  Virgin  Mary,  and,  when  the  ministry  of  His 
flesh  was  finished,  occupied  as  His  royal  abode  the  heavens,  wherein  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  excellence  over  and  above  the  other  parts  of  the  world,  viz.,  through  His 
glory  and  majesty.  His  celestial  Father  too  is  recognized  to  dwell,  and  has  also 
promised  to  His  faithful,  mansions  in  that  house  of  His  Father:  as  for  the  re¬ 
mainder  concerning  that  abode,  we  believe  it  superfluous  to  inquire  into  it  too 
curiously  or  to  forbid  the  senses  or  natural  reasons  to  investigate  that  which  the 
eye  has  not  seen  nor  the  ear  heard  and  into  which  the  heart  of  man  has  not 
ascended;  but  we  duly  subordinate  the  created  mind — of  whatsoever  excellence 
it  may  be — to  its  Creator,  and  we  introduce  neither  God-intelligences  with 
Aristotle  and  the  pagan  philosophers  nor  armies  of  innumerable  planetary 
spirits  with  the  Magi,  nor  do  we  propose  that  they  are  either  to  be  adored  or 
summoned  to  intercourse  with  us  by  theurgic  superstitions,  for  we  have  a  care¬ 
ful  fear  of  that;  but  we  freely  inquire  by  natural  reasons  what  sort  of  thing 
each  mind  is,  especially  if  in  the  heart  of  the  world  [326]  there  is  any  mind 
bound  rather  closely  to  the  nature  of  things  and  performing  the  function  of  the 
soul  of  the  world — or  if  also  some  intelligent  creatures,  of  a  nature  different 
from  human  perchance  do  inhabit  or  will  inhabit  the  globe  thus  animated  (see 
my  book  on  the  New  Star,  Chapter  24,  "On  the  Soul  of  the  World  and  Some  of 
Its  Functions^^.  But  if  it  is  permissible,  using  the  thread  of  analogy  as  a  guide, 
to  traverse  the  labyrinths  of  the  mysteries  of  nature,  not  ineptly,  I  think,  will 
someone  have  argued  as  follows:  The  relation  of  the  six  spheres  to  their  common 
centre,  thereby  the  centre  of  the  whole  world,  is  also  the  same  as  that  of  biavoia 
[discussive  intellection]  to  vovs  [intuitive  intellection],  according  as  these  facul- 


iOS4 


KEPLER 


ties  are  distinguished  by  Aristotle,  Plato,  Proclus,  and  the  rest;  and  the  relation 
of  the  single  planets’  revolutions  in  place  around  the  sun  to  the  d^ieraOeSov 
[unvarying]  rotation  of  the  sun  in  the  central  space  of  the  whole  system  (con¬ 
cerning  which  the  sun-spots  are  evidence;  this  has  been  demonstrated  in  the 
Commentaries  on  the  Movement  of  Mars)  is  the  same  as  the  relation  of  rd 
btavo-qTiKov  to  to  voepov,  that  of  the  manifold  discourses  of  ratiocination  to  the 
most  simple  intellection  of  the  mind.  For  as  the  sun  rotating  into  itself  moves  all 
the  planets  by  means  of  the  form  emitted  from  itself,  so  too — as  the  philosophers 
teach — mind,  by  understanding  itself  and  in  itself  all  things,  stirs  up  ratiocina¬ 
tions,  and  by  dispersing  and  unrolling  its  simplicity  into  them,  makes  every¬ 
thing  to  be  understood.  And  the  movements  of  the  planets  around  the  sun  at 
their  centre  and  the  discourses  of  ratiocinations  are  so  interwoven  and  bound 
together  that,  unless  the  Earth,  our  domicile,  measured  out  the  annual  circle, 
midway  between  the  other  spheres — changing  from  place  to  place,  from  station 
to  station — never  would  human  ratiocination  have  worked  its  way  to  the  true 
intervals  of  the  planets  and  to  the  other  things  dependent  from  them,  never 
would  it  have  constituted  astronomy.  (See  the  Optical  Part  of  Astronomy, 
Chapter  9.) 

On  the  other  hand,  in  a  beautiful  correspondence,  simplicity  of  intellection 
follows  upon  the  stillness  of  the  sun  at  the  centre  of  the  world,  in  that  hitherto 
we  have  always  worked  under  the  assumption  that  those  solar  harmonies  of 
movements  are  defined  neither  by  the  diversity  of  regions  nor  by  the  amplitude 
of  the  expanses  of  the  world.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  any  mind  observes  from  the 
sun  those  harmonies,  that  mind  is  without  the  assistance  afforded  by  the  move¬ 
ment  and  diverse  stations  of  his  abode,  by  means  of  which  it  may  string  together 
ratiocinations  and  discourse  necessary  for  measuring  out  the  planetary  intervals. 
Accordingly,  it  compares  the  diurnal  movements  of  each  planet,  not  as  they  are 
in  their  own  orbits  but  as  they  pass  through  the  angles  at  the  centre  of  the  sun. 
And  so  if  it  has  knowledge  of  the  magnitude  of  the  spheres,  this  knowledge  must 
be  present  in  it  a  priori,  without  any  toil  of  ratiocination:  but  to  what  extent 
that  is  true  of  human  minds  and  of  sublunary  nature  has  been  made  clear  above, 
from  Plato  and  Proclus. 

Under  these  circumstances,  it  will  not  have  been  surprising  if  anyone  who 
has  been  thoroughly  warmed  by  taking  a  fairly  liberal  draft  from  that  bowl  of 
Pythagoras  which  Proclus  gives  to  drink  from  in  the  very  first  verse  of  the  hymn, 
and  who  has  been  made  drowsy  by  the  very  sweet  harmony  of  the  dance  of  the 
planets  begins  to  dream  (by  telling  a  story  he  may  imitate  Plato’s  Atlantis  and, 
by  dreaming,  Cicero’s  Scipio):  throughout  the  remaining  globes,  which  follow 
after  from  place  to  place,  there  have  been  disseminated  discursive  or  ratiocina- 
tive  faculties,  whereof  that  one  ought  assuredly  to  be  judged  the  most  excellent 
and  absolute  which  is  in  the  middle  position  among  those  globes,  viz,,  in  man’s 
earth,  while  there  dwells  in  the  sun  simple  intellect,  ttDp  voepov,  or  vovs,  the 
source,  whatsoever  it  may  be,  of  every  harmony. 

For  if  it  was  Tycho  Brahe’s  opinion  concerning  that  bare  wilderness  of  globes 
that  it  does  not  exist  fruitlessly  in  the  world  but  is  filled  with  inhabitants:  with 
how  much  greater  probability  shall  we  make  a  conjecture  as  to  God’s  works  and 
designs  even  for  the  other  globes,  from  that  variety  which  we  discern  in  this 
globe  of  the  Earth.  For  He  Who  created  the  species  which  should  inhabit  the 
waters,  beneath  which  however  there  is  no  room  for  the  air  [327]  which  living 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 


1085 


things  draw  in;  AVho  sent  birds  supported  on  wings  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
air;  Who  gave  white  bears  and  white  wolves  to  the  snowy  regions  of  the  North, 
and  as  food  for  the  bears  the  whale,  and  for  the  wolves,  birds^  eggs;  Who  gave 
lions  to  the  deserts  of  burning  Libya  and  camels  to  the  wide-spread  plains  of 
Syria,  and  to  the  lions  an  endurance  of  hunger,  and  to  the  camels  an  endurance 
of  thirst:  did  He  use  up  every  art  in  the  globe  of  the  Earth  so  that  He  was  un¬ 
able,  every  goodness  so  that  he  did  not  wish,  to  adorn  the  other  globes  too  with 
their  fitting  creatures,  as  either  the  long  or  short  revolutions,  or  the  nearness 
or  removal  of  the  sun,  or  the  variety  of  eccentricities  or  the  shine  or  darkness 
of  the  bodies,  or  the  properties  of  the  figures  wherewith  any  region  is  supported 
persuaded? 

Behold,  as  the  generations  of  animals  in  this  terrestrial  globe  have  an  image 
of  the  male  in  the  dodecahedron,  of  the  female  in  the  icosahedron — whereof  the 
dodecahedron  rests  on  the  terrestrial  sphere  from  the  outside  and  the  icosahe¬ 
dron  from  the  inside:  what  will  we  suppose  the  remaining  globes  to  have,  from 
the  remaining  figures?  For  whose  good  do  four  moons  encircle  Jupiter,  two 
Saturn,  as  does  this  our  moon  this  our  domicile?  But  in  the  same  way  we  shall 
ratiocinate  concerning  the  globe  of  the  sun  also,  and  we  shall  as  it  were  in¬ 
corporate  conjectures  drawn  from  the  harmonies,  et  cetera — which  are  weighty 
of  themseh^es — with  other  conjectures  which  are  more  on  the  side  of  the  bodily, 
more  suited  for  the  apprehension  of  the  vulgar.  Is  that  globe  empty  and  the 
others  full,  if  everything  else  is  in  due  correspondence?  If  as  the  Earth  breathes 
forth  clouds,  so  the  sun  black  smoke?  If  as  the  Earth  is  moistened  and  grows 
under  showers,  so  the  sun  shines  with  those  combusted  spots,  while  clear  flame- 
lets  sparkle  in  its  all  fiery  body.  For  whose  use  is  all  this  equipment,  if  the  globe 
is  empty?  Indeed,  do  not  the  senses  themselves  cry  out  that  fiery  bodies  dwell 
here  which  are  receptive  of  simple  intellects,  and  that  truly  the  sun  is,  if  not  the 
king,  at  least  the  queen  irvpos  voepov  [of  intellectual  fire]? 

Purposely  I  break  off  the  dream  and  the  very  vast  speculation,  merely  crying 
out  with  the  royal  Psalmist:  Great  is  our  Lord  and  great  His  virtue  and  of  His 
wisdom  there  is  no  number:  praise  Him^  ye  heavens^  praise  Him^  ye  sun^  moon^  and 
planetSj  use  every  sense  for  perceiving ^  every  tongue  for  declaring  your  Creator, 
Praise  Him^  ye  celestial  harmonies^  praise  Him,  ye  judges  of  the  harmonies  un¬ 
covered  (and  you  before  all,  old  happy  Mastlin,  for  you  used  to  animate  these 
cares  with  words  of  hope) :  and  thou  my  soul,  praise  the  Lord  thy  Creator,  as  long 
as  I  shall  he:  for  out  of  Him  and  through  Him  and  in  Him  are  all  things,  Kal  rd 
aiadr^rd  Kal  rd  voepd  [both  the  sensible  and  the  intelligible];  for  both  whose  whereof  we 
are  utterly  ignorant  and  those  which  we  know  are  the  least  part  of  them;  because  there 
is  still  more  beyond.  To  Him  be  praise,  honour,  and  glory,  world  without  end.  Amen, 

THE  END 

This  work  was  completed  on  the  17th  or  27th  day  of  May,  1618;  but  Book  v 
was  reread  (while  the  type  was  being  set)  on  the  9th  or  19th  of  February,  1619. 
At  Linz,  the  capital  of  Austria — above  the  Enns. 


PRINTED  IN  U.  S.  A. 


CLL'IOV/  wr  'fo  «aiVinKK/-H 

'"HJ'to  ukunfrKSWVJ  trfW  7<rf‘w^I( 

♦*7/S  'alnfrf  *r.*lcnrr<»rfit  ij>l  Hnn  m  biui 

ttrkmiil<|  b.flfncp^^ti^'*^  ■"^■*  <*$  ^jnua  nf  u  ^41 

flblWuiKuo  i'U  <v#''Jiiiji 

e^^Vr lip  ;2tU  ithriOr  't/ft  lo  ‘tii,)1^ 

’JSj!7f-5«V|^*o^ViiJ>0  W  ,KfT  w  iWrt'WS'wrtifffi 

■iWlftnriaitrn'rtri^  to  <ifH»itli(tr/fW  Hxirir  w 

Vj^  1(1  ’tiOAo^v  jM]  w  ;»1» 

t'r^Moq'qw  vnft  itlKwi'tifW  rwua?)  ^ 

^  •  _  ■  - 'fit.  .  <•• 

^/^<(!1tfi'»'fiul  tKjtitu  IfitiiitH  .f  nitJj  Hl'vUiiMhUi  VliYWljih^isj  <♦?)  tA  JiltUifir** 
«(ii  — rrii  ibailt  .lai  Oi.l  f  Hi  ftfririM  atlf  1u  ^twrtb'idii'wMl/afd  ni'^ti^i  Mt  Ig 

iliil  ItfU  itli  lu!!  <■•(!  ifrtni  vu^({D  luHiiciiiai  |ilO  u^ 
uib^t  .▼''jul  ivi  -  •‘Lt!s  gm*’^***^  tlly/  It-tb 

•<>tf':  ,,*i;iI*Q'it  .;.'ti  *i:*-»i'o  wm  7uu7  oh 

tWV'iftr  ifjKV  -iouA^Ai  iO  'I  It  t6fMtiu>b  inff  ^fJ  lunf/S'^yifitf  i*4bb  <at»)ii*^ 
‘^"'TT'ni  fli  »(■  i(flit>t  i/f  ti(Tv  t<>kbi  fT^tc  Dfft  h  sftt  tt^i/naatro^  i>)uobmiilia 

vjiiJIfcfA  j'U)  tMi>*^'-'/“  vr.-Avi  >  ,M*|<i>nn7C3  'lil#  akVjT'jfr«^»t*’^i;V'»diWi(TX)ittuifSV» 

.'(tUk/rt  onTtTj  Ml;'*  mtJ  m 

A)Ij  ;I^4i  ‘fJ-ltt  ‘  ?tjij  «I  iitfi' l.r 

^if.f«irt<t  'iFl  ".•  •  I  m  isf 

iPr/Oi^.  h»r  li  in  A/  tffu-'^  flillf  {Ji/l!  mJofm  i^tlrf Hil“  ditti) 

-iiiij^'iil'ih*'fiiJv  ,  i.M/^^b'ilni.iiiiXo'j.i^M^jH  dnri/ 

Aidi/k)  ‘.'itt  'tJ  ,U»!:t*i  iijM*  irfj  ]♦.  «  -xliftd 

v^ii?  >if i(j  y^ii  -a  ijitj  jtW  ol>  IfepiiiBnl 

4/I/iofllf  f.  ntt«iid.l  xifri.*  ittrfj  (Hi/r'^bidfaihr! 

fi  rihrtihrfni 

SHhrv  I  ,lJOMiij|i  Mirj  HJIV  ^-wv  mitliaji  t • 

\i3  \  lU-  )»i\l  i.-HTti  vtd<>'Wd.  •'WiViT'lrsrfe  ilitiflflitel'l^dt  n&  ’dli'ir'tdb 

(jW'iIvViaM  >n\  xii7};i\oi  jjjuA  .ijn'niwm*^  Wi,  v.w»  \pi«a  a*M  ,bht>k<lq 
,nJlH  »iOiq'',yviA<|iir*gA  b  ,miW 

a|fi5^ttiiibT:iui"dJ%{^  iimjiot  ^fT  iVi  wiiJ  uO't  bfliif  brt»/v> 

av.  ihVt  ^  biw5(iqoiild''4rtt»'^‘A?rteJ»i-iik» 

Lt  >v.w^  Hu  M  flt  'lyvli  *S!M*'»rt»  wrtf  *n:\\  %  Vtt* 

yiityin  1  iii-M*  dift  'iA> lU*  J'r^Trt'AAia^dn 

'^n  wiji\'isA^i\»'M\?R{!^\  rt>  Aii'iAm  yAdMIiho  imMffijf'yjtifWWyra* 

•  ‘  ..  '  •  »-  -  .  '4iil  -r  ^  *  .i  ■  .*  .  I  ;  - 


_  I  V,  .  ..,  IJ’idil-ailT  •  l  ■.•...4(J•  .t«^  f  - 

!  tr  i,.  !•(  •’“  •ts-f''  ■'  •.:  .  iii-  'SI  ',  '  ^  ;  ';■■  r^  .«,. 

V;QbfiQ -tuH  tKIAIi  ;yiii/i  >D  tiniKtlJT-fiiTvltiTA  uif!  noiiaiolijaioSKri/  dtuw  liifr  | 
.01^1  j^^ruk'ii  laUUM^i  ilKiioill  uv  i  ISH  miiia  >  Kiri&fiqi^^niSHluiwi  |iAt>'>i  tJtn 


^  I 

W' 

I 


:l  l»- 


I  ff'^  •KiCf 

*  ‘‘li;  ’ jif  tb.  rtrr  I  Ib 
t  X*_  .  .t  llUlt  tv  • 


JUitaS^^fiVuKie 
11 

W  lu  I  :  '1  I !  I  i  i 


U)if{iiU  oiii  .laUilaL 

'•  •-  i..  ,  ^^J 

11  Hi  ifii^ 

r  t>.  P,  *if  J^fTI  »*  kjf  jjj 


I 


) 


i.  . 


•  ■'Um-.:..-' 


^•  TCrS  0J>-  '■  •/ 


.  <* 

V  = 


f  .  • 


T  V 


}< 


‘r  • 

I  '  •  Vi '  •  1*^  '•  ^ 

^•‘'  ’  .  -  ■^4l.|» «',■(>■.:  '■  ••' 

•  -  .■•-.  '■  .  .  if.''-?  ,  •  .  , 

/  .  •fVS-'*}-  ;.  ■ 

....  a . .'/ 1  •  n 

Jji^-  > 


*■  ",^*  *  “'w  A  F  c./ 


I 1 


i>::' 


'f  r* 

.*  I  »j 

rj.'  ■• 


lilOITOitl 't 


,:i 

"  '  -  '  V  -'.  S' 


V- 


Lii.  .'  V  J  k  '  *  yK 


t  THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


> 

> 

% 

P" 


i^ 

i^ 


2^ 

s^ 

i _ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


^  ry  r.^  y~*’'  w-^  *^g 


^  TH£  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


^55? 

J-S?- 

5^ 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


