GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


25420 


2 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G786  WESTERN  WORLD 
v.33  Pascal. 


OCT  'H 


1932 


REFERENCE  BOOK 

limited  circulation 


Archbishop  Mitty  High  School 
Media  Center 
5000  Mitty  Way 
San  Jose,  CA  95129 


Rill  RC 

1.  All  pupil  ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  LIBRAS 

use  the  library 

2.  Reserve( 
one  period,  o 
should  be  retu 
following  scho* 

3.  All  other  books  may  be  retained  for  two 
weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for. 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


7814 


<&  <&£. 


' 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012 


http://archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest33ency 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


55- 

PASCAL 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants :  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


24900 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 


PENSEES 

SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

BY  BLAISE  PASCAL 


ARCHBiSKIP  MiTTY  KiC,.  SCHOOL 


5000  Mitty  Avenue 

San  Jose,  CA  95129-1897 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  text  and  annotations  of  Pensees,  translated 
by  W.  F.  Trotter,  in  this  edition  are  derived  from  the  edition  in 
Everyman’s  Library  by  permission  of  J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons  Ltd.,  London, 
and  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.,  Inc.,  New  York. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

x952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 
Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10340 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


6  fl  14 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Blaise  Pascal,  1623-1662 


Pascal  was  born  at  Clermont  Ferrand  in  Auvergne,  June  19,  1623.  His  father,  Etienne 
Pascal,  had  been  trained  as  a  lawyer  in  Paris  and  held  the  post  of  President  of  the 
Court  of  Aids  at  Clermont.  His  mother,  the  pious  Antoinette  Begon,  died  in  1626, 
leaving  her  husband  to  care  for  Gilberte,  Blaise,  and  the  baby,  Jacqueline. 

In  1631  Etienne  Pascal  sold  his  post,  moved  to  Paris,  and  set  about  the  education 
of  his  son.  His  method,  according  to  Gilberte,  "was  to  keep  the  child  always  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  his  work."  The  boy  was  first  to  learn  to  think  for  himself,  stimulated  by  the 
observations,  questions,  and  conversation  of  his  father.  Later,  after  he  had  mastered 
Greek  and  Latin,  he  was  to  be  allowed  to  study  geometry.  But  at  the  age  of  twelve  the 
boy  began  geometry  by  himself  and  is  supposed  to  have  achieved  the  equivalent 
of  Euclid’s  first  thirty-two  theorems  before  his  father  noticed  his  precocity. 

The  elder  Pascal  always  associated  with  men  of  eminence  in  science  and  the  arts, 
and  in  his  company  the  young  Pascal  was  introduced  to  Father  Mersenne’s  circle  and 
became  acquainted  with  Desargues,  Fermat,  and  Roberval.  Following  a  geometrical 
method  of  Desargues,  Pascal  completed  before  he  was  sixteen  a  work  on  conic  sec¬ 
tions  that  was  widely  circulated,  though  never  published,  which,  according  to  his 
own  account,  embraced  the  work  of  Apollonius.  Though  his  health  was  seriously 
affected  by  the  intensity  of  his  intellectual  work,  a  few  years  later  he  achieved  a  still 
greater  reputation  by  his  invention  of  the  first  calculating  machine. 

Although  the  Pascal  family  had  been  regular  and  respectful  in  their  religious  prac¬ 
tice,  religion  was  not  especially  important  in  their  lives  until  1646  when  they  became 
acquainted  with  Jansenism.  Pascal,  then  only  twenty-three,  had  his  attention  directed 
to  religious  and  theological  questions,  and  he  seems  to  have  been  influential  in  con¬ 
verting  his  whole  family  to  the  Jansenist  version  of  Catholicism.  His  sister,  Jacque¬ 
line,  decided  to  renounce  the  world,  and  on  the  death  of  her  father  in  1651  she  entered 
the  Jansenist  convent  of  Port  Royal. 

Pascal  himself  continued  his  scientific  and  mathematical  researches.  The  same  year 
that  he  began  to  think  about  Jansenism  he  performed  his  variations  on  Torricelli’s 
experiment,  which  resulted  in  his  New  Experiments  concerning  the  Vacuum  (1647).  This 
in  turn  led  to  his  investigation  of  the  action  of  fluids  under  pressure  of  air  which  estab¬ 
lished  his  reputation  as  one  of  the  founders  of  hydrodynamics.  By  1651  he  had 
apparently  completed  most  of  the  work  for  his  Great  Experiment  concerning  the  Equili¬ 
brium  of  Fluids,  although  it  was  not  published  until  1663.  Upon  the  death  of  his  father, 
he  laid  aside  to  some  extent  his  scientific  researches,  frequented  polite  society  with 
his  friends,  the  young  Due  de  Roannez  and  the  Chevalier  de  Mere,  shared  their  inter¬ 
ests,  and  read  Epictetus  and  Montaigne.  Puzzling  over  a  problem  posed  by  De  Mere 
concerning  the  division  of  stakes  in  a  game  of  chance,  he  began  to  investigate  the 
theory  of  probability.  His  results  appeared  in  1654  ln  the  correspondence  with  Fermat 
and  in  the  Treatise  on  the  Arithmetical  Triangle. 

By  1654  Pascal  felt  "an  extreme  aversion  for  the  beguilements  of  the  world."  The 
contrast  between  his  life  and  that  of  Jacqueline,  whom  he  visited  the  same  year  at  Port 
Royal,  intensified  his  dissatisfaction.  His  growing  decision  to  retire  from  the  world 
was  confirmed  on  November  23,  1654,  when  he  experienced  what  is  known  as  his 
"second  conversion."  The  written  memorial  of  that  experience,  which  he  wore  there  - 


v 


vi  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

after  as  a  kind  of  amulet,  records  that  from  ten-thirty  until  twelve-thirty  that  night  he 
knew  "the  God  of  Abraham,  God  of  Isaac,  God  of  Jacob,  not  of  philosophers  and 
scientists,"  and  that  he  resolved  "total  submission  to  Jesus  Christ  and  to  my  director." 
The  following  January  he  went  on  retreat  at  Port  Royal,  and,  although  he  did  not 
actually  become  one  of  its  famous  solitaries,  he  was  henceforth  identified  with  its 
interests. 

Pascal’s  talents  were  soon  employed  by  the  Jansenists.  In  1655  Antoine  Arnauld,  the 
official  theologian  of  Port  Royal,  was  condemned  by  the  Sorbonne,  and  it  was  con¬ 
sidered  expedient  to  enlist  public  opinion  for  the  Jansenists  against  their  Jesuit  ad¬ 
versaries.  Perhaps  at  the  suggestion  of  Arnauld  himself,  Pascal  began  his  'Provincial 
Letters ,  which,  from  January,  1656  to  April,  1657,  captivated  Paris  by  their  style  as  well 
as  their  polemic.  He  was  also  asked  to  work  upon  a  manual  of  geometry  for  use  in  the 
Port  Royal  schools,  and  it  is  probably  in  connection  with  this  that  he  wrote  his  essay 
On  Geometrical  Demonstration . 

Afflicted  with  ill-health  since  infancy,  Pascal’s  suffering  had  become  so  acute  in 
1658  that  any  sustained  effort  became  increasingly  difficult.  In  one  attempt  to  distract 
his  mind  from  a  persistent  toothache,  he  turned  to  the  problem  of  the  cycloid,  which 
had  occupied  his  friend,  Roberval,  as  well  as  many  other  mathematicians  of  the  time. 
Before  publishing  his  results,  he  proposed  his  theorems  for  public  competition. 
Wallis  and  Lalouere  among  others  accepted  the  challenge,  but  only  Pascal  was  able 
to  provide  the  complete  solution. 

Although  he  considered  geometry  the  "highest  exercise  of  the  mind,"  as  he  wrote 
Fermat,  "it  is  only  a  trade,  .  .  .  and  I  am  steeped  in  studies  so  far  from  that  mentality, 
that  scarcely  do  I  remember  that  there  is  any  such."  After  the  cure  of  his  niece  at  Port 
Royal  in  1656,  which  was  known  as  the  Miracle  of  the  Holy  Thorn,  Pascal  began 
reading  and  collecting  material  for  what  he  planned  to  be  an  Apology  for  the  Christian 
Religion.  He  put  down  his  thoughts  "upon  the  first  scrap  of  paper  that  came  to  hand 
...  a  few  words  and  very  often  parts  of  words  only."  These  fragments,  found  after  his 
death,  compose  what  has  come  to  be  known  as  his  Pensees ,  which  were  first  edited  by 
the  Jansenists  in  1670  and  constantly  re-edited  thereafter. 

As  death  approached,  Pascal’s  life  became  more  austere.  He  gave  his  possessions  to 
the  poor  and  continually  strove  for  complete  detachment  from  those  he  loved.  "It  is 
unjust  that  anyone  should  attach  himself  to  me  ...  for  I  am  not  an  end  and  aim  of 
anyone,"  he  wrote  on  a  paper  he  kept  always  about  him  to  fix  his  resolve.  In  June,  1662, 
he  gave  shelter  to  a  poor  family  which  developed  small-pox.  Rather  than  dispossess 
them,  he  moved  to  the  house  of  Gilberte,  where  he  was  seized  with  a  violent  illness 
which  lingered  for  two  months.  He  died  August  19,  at  the  age  of  thirty-nine. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 

Biographical  Note,  Page  v 

THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS,  Page  i 

Translated  by  Thomas  M’Crie 

PENSEES,  Page  171 

Translated  by  W.  F.  Trotter 

SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES,  Page  355 

Translated  by  Richard  Scofield 


CONTENTS 

THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 


Letter  I,  p.  i  Letter  II,  p.  7 
REPLY  of  the  "Provincial”  to  the  First  Two  Letters,  p.  13 
Letter  III,  p.  14  Letter  IV,  p.  19  Letter  V,  p.  27 

Letter  VI,  p.  36  Letter  VII,  p.  44  Letter  VIII,  p.  53 

Letter  IX,  p.  62  Letter  X,  p.  71  Letter  XI,  p.  81 

Letter  XII,  p.  90  Letter  XIII,  p.  99  Letter  XIV,  p.  108 

Letter  XV,  p.  117  Letter  XVI,  p.  127  Letter  XVII,  p.  141 
Letter  XVIII,  p.  153 

FRAGMENT  of  a  Nineteenth  Provincial  Letter, 
Addressed  to  Father  Annat,  p.  167 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 


3RC 

LETTER  I 


Paris,  January  23,  1656 
Sir, 

We  were  entirely  mistaken.  It  was  only  yesterday  that  I  was  undeceived.  Until 
that  time  I  had  laboured  under  the  impression  that  the  disputes  in  the  Sorbonne 
were  vastly  important,  and  deeply  affected  the  interests  of  religion.  The  frequent 
convocations  of  an  assembly  so  illustrious  as  that  of  the  Theological  Faculty  of 
Paris,  attended  by  so  many  extraordinary  and  unprecedented  circumstances,  led 
one  to  form  such  high  expectations  that  it  was  impossible  to  help  coming  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  subject  was  most  extraordinary.  You  will  be  greatly  surprised, 
however,  when  you  learn  from  the  following  account  the  issue  of  this  grand  dem¬ 
onstration,  which,  having  made  myself  perfectly  master  of  the  subject,  I  shall  be 
able  to  tell  you  in  very  few  words. 

Two  questions,  then,  were  brought  under  examination;  the  one  a  question  of 
fact,  the  other  a  question  of  right. 

The  question  of  fact  consisted  in  ascertaining  whether  M.  Arnauld  was  guilty 
of  presumption,  for  having  asserted  in  his  second  letter  that  he  had  carefully 
perused  the  book  of  Jansenius,  and  that  he  had  not  discovered  the  propositions 
condemned  by  the  late  pope;  but  that,  nevertheless,  as  he  condemned  these  prop¬ 
ositions  wherever  they  might  occur,  he  condemned  them  in  Jansenius,  if  they 
were  really  contained  in  that  work. 

The  question  here  was,  if  he  could,  without  presumption,  entertain  a  doubt  that 
these  propositions  were  in  Jansenius,  after  the  bishops  had  declared  that  they  were. 

The  matter  having  been  brought  before  the  Sorbonne,  seventy-one  doctors  un¬ 
dertook  his  defence,  maintaining  that  the  only  reply  he  could  possibly  give  to  the 
demands  made  upon  him  in  so  many  publications,  calling  on  him  to  say  if  he 
held  that  these  propositions  were  in  that  book,  was  that  he  had  not  been  able  to 
find  them,  but  that  if  they  were  in  the  book,  he  condemned  them  in  the  book. 

Some  even  went  a  step  farther  and  protested  that,  after  all  the  search  they  had 
made  into  the  book,  they  had  never  stumbled  upon  these  propositions,  and  that 
they  had,  on  the  contrary,  found  sentiments  entirely  at  variance  with  them.  They 
then  earnestly  begged  that,  if  any  doctor  present  had  discovered  them,  he  would 
have  the  goodness  to  point  them  out;  adding  that  what  was  so  easy  could  not 
reasonably  be  refused,  as  this  would  be  the  surest  way  to  silence  the  whole  of 
them,  M.  Arnauld  included;  but  this  proposal  has  been  uniformly  declined.  So 
much  for  the  one  side. 


2 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

On  the  other  side  are  eighty  secular  doctors  and  some  forty  mendicant  friars, 
who  have  condemned  M.  Arnauld’s  proposition,  without  choosing  to  examine 
whether  he  has  spoken  truly  or  falsely — who,  in  fact,  have  declared  that  they  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  veracity  of  his  proposition,  but  simply  with  its  temerity. 

Besides  these,  there  were  fifteen  who  were  not  in  favor  of  the  censure,  and  who 
are  called  Neutrals. 

Such  was  the  issue  of  the  question  of  fact,  regarding  which,  I  must  say,  I  give 
myself  very  little  concern.  It  does  not  affect  my  conscience  in  the  least  whether 
M.  Arnauld  is  presumptuous  or  the  reverse;  and  should  I  be  tempted,  from  curi¬ 
osity,  to  ascertain  whether  these  propositions  are  contained  in  Jansenius,  his  book 
is  neither  so  very  rare  nor  so  very  large  as  to  hinder  me  from  reading  it  over  from 
beginning  to  end,  for  my  own  satisfaction,  without  consulting  the  Sorbonne  on 
the  matter. 

Were  it  not,  however,  for  the  dread  of  being  presumptuous  myself,  I  really 
think  that  I  would  be  disposed  to  adopt  the  opinion  which  has  been  formed  by  the 
most  of  my  acquaintances,  who,  though  they  have  believed  hitherto  on  common 
report  that  the  propositions  were  in  Jansenius,  begin  now  to  suspect  the  contrary, 
owing  to  this  strange  refusal  to  point  them  out — a  refusal  the  more  extraordinary 
to  me  as  I  have  not  yet  met  with  a  single  individual  who  can  say  that  he  has  dis¬ 
covered  them  in  that  work.  I  am  afraid,  therefore,  that  this  censure  will  do  more 
harm  than  good,  and  that  the  impression  which  it  will  leave  on  the  minds  of  all 
who  know  its  history  will  be  just  the  reverse  of  the  conclusion  that  has  been  come 
to.  The  truth  is  the  world  has  become  sceptical  of  late  and  will  not  believe  things 
till  it  sees  them.  But,  as  I  said  before,  this  point  is  of  very  little  moment,  as  it  has 
no  concern  with  religion. 

The  question  of  right,  from  its  affecting  the  faith,  appears  much  more  impor¬ 
tant,  and,  accordingly,  I  took  particular  pains  in  examining  it.  You  will  be  re¬ 
lieved,  however,  to  find  that  it  is  of  as  little  consequence  as  the  former. 

The  point  of  dispute  here  was  an  assertion  of  M.  Arnauld’s  in  the  same  letter, 
to  the  effect  "that  the  grace,  without  which  we  can  do  nothing,  was  wanting  to 
St.  Peter  at  his  fall."  You  and  I  supposed  that  the  controversy  here  would  turn 
upon  the  great  principles  of  grace;  such  as  whether  grace  is  given  to  all  men?  Or 
if  it  is  efficacious  of  itself?  But  we  were  quite  mistaken.  You  must  know  I  have  be¬ 
come  a  great  theologian  within  this  short  time;  and  now  for  the  proofs  of  it! 

To  ascertain  the  matter  with  certainty,  I  repaired  to  my  neighbor,  M.  N - , 

doctor  of  Navarre,  who,  as  you  are  aware,  is  one  of  the  keenest  opponents  of  the 
Jansenists,  and,  my  curiosity  having  made  me  almost  as  keen  as  himself,  I  asked 
him  if  they  would  not  formally  decide  at  once  that  "grace  is  given  to  all  men," 
and  thus  set  the  question  at  rest.  But  he  gave  me  a  sore  rebuff  and  told  me  that 
that  was  not  the  point;  that  there  were  some  of  his  party  who  held  that  grace  was 
not  given  to  all;  that  the  examiners  themselves  had  declared,  in  a  full  assembly  of 
the  Sorbonne,  that  that  opinion  was  problematical;  and  that  he  himself  held  the 
same  sentiment,  which  he  confirmed  by  quoting  to  me  what  he  called  that  cele¬ 
brated  passage  of  St.  Augustine:  "We  know  that  grace  is  not  given  to  all  men." 

I  apologized  for  having  misapprehended  his  sentiment  and  requested  him  to 
say  if  they  would  not  at  least  condemn  that  other  opinion  of  the  Jansenists  which 
is  making  so  much  noise:  "That  grace  is  efficacious  of  itself,  and  invincibly  deter¬ 
mines  our  will  to  what  is  good."  But  in  this  second  query  I  was  equally  unfor- 


LETTER  I 


3 

tunate.  “You  know  nothing  about  the  matter,"  he  said;  “that  is  not  a  heresy — it 
is  an  orthodox  opinion;  all  the  Thomists  maintain  it;  and  I  myself  have  defended 
it  in  my  Sorbonic  thesis." 

I  did  not  venture  again  to  propose  my  doubts,  and  yet  I  was  as  far  as  ever  from 
understanding  where  the  difficulty  lay;  so,  at  last,  in  order  to  get  at  it,  I  begged 
him  to  tell  me  where,  then,  lay  the  heresy  of  M.  Arnauld’s  proposition.  “It  lies 
here,"  said  he,  “that  he  does  not  acknowledge  that  the  righteous  have  the  power 
of  obeying  the  commandments  of  God,  in  the  manner  in  which  we  understand 
it." 

On  receiving  this  piece  of  information,  I  took  my  leave  of  him;  and,  quite 

proud  at  having  discovered  the  knot  of  the  question,  I  sought  M.  N - ,  who  is 

gradually  getting  better  and  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  conduct  me  to  the  house 
of  his  brother-in-law,  who  is  a  Jansenist,  if  ever  there  was  one,  but  a  very  good 
man  notwithstanding.  Thinking  to  insure  myself  a  better  reception,  I  pretended 
to  be  very  high  on  what  I  took  to  be  his  side,  and  said:  “Is  it  possible  that  the  Sor- 
bonne  has  introduced  into  the  Church  such  an  error  as  this,  'that  all  the  righteous 
have  always  the  power  of  obeying  the  commandments  of  God?’ " 

“What  say  you?"  replied  the  doctor.  “Call  you  that  an  error — a  sentiment  so 
Catholic  that  none  but  Lutherans  and  Calvinists  impugn  it?" 

“Indeed!"  said  I,  surprised  in  my  turn;  “so  you  are  not  of  their  opinion?" 

“No,"  he  replied;  “we  anathematize  it  as  heretical  and  impious." 

Confounded  by  this  reply,  I  soon  discovered  that  I  had  overacted  the  Jansenist, 
as  I  had  formerly  overdone  the  Molinist.  But,  not  being  sure  if  I  had  rightly  un¬ 
derstood  him,  I  requested  him  to  tell  me  frankly  if  he  held  “that  the  righteous 
have  always  a  real  power  to  observe  the  divine  precepts?"  Upon  this,  the  good 
man  got  warm  (but  it  was  with  a  holy  zeal)  and  protested  that  he  would  not  dis¬ 
guise  his  sentiments  on  any  consideration — that  such  was,  indeed,  his  belief,  and 
that  he  and  all  his  party  would  defend  it  to  the  death,  as  the  pure  doctrine  of  St. 
Thomas,  and  of  St.  Augustine  their  master. 

This  was  spoken  so  seriously  as  to  leave  me  no  room  for  doubt;  and  under  this 
impression  I  returned  to  my  first  doctor  and  said  to  him,  with  an  air  of  great  satis¬ 
faction,  that  I  was  sure  there  would  be  peace  in  the  Sorbonne  very  soon;  that  the 
Jansenists  were  quite  at  one  with  them  in  reference  to  the  power  of  the  righteous 
to  obey  the  commandments  of  God;  that  I  could  pledge  my  word  for  them  and 
could  make  them  seal  it  with  their  blood. 

“Hold  there!"  said  he.  “One  must  be  a  theologian  to  see  the  point  of  this  ques¬ 
tion.  The  difference  between  us  is  so  subtle  that  it  is  with  some  difficulty  we  can 
discern  it  ourselves — you  will  find  it  rather  too  much  for  your  powers  of  compre¬ 
hension.  Content  yourself,  then,  with  knowing  that  it  is  very  true  the  Jansenists 
will  tell  you  that  all  the  righteous  have  always  the  power  of  obeying  the  com¬ 
mandments;  that  is  not  the  point  in  dispute  between  us;  but  mark  you,  they  will 
not  tell  you  that  that  power  is  proximate.  That  is  the  point." 

This  was  a  new  and  unknown  word  to  me.  Up  to  this  moment  I  had  managed 
to  understand  matters,  but  that  term  involved  me  in  obscurity;  and  I  verily  be¬ 
lieve  that  it  has  been  invented  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  mystify.  I  requested 
him  to  give  me  an  explanation  of  it,  but  he  made  a  mystery  of  it,  and  sent  me 
back,  without  any  further  satisfaction,  to  demand  of  the  Jansenists  if  they  would 
admit  this  proximate  power.  Having  charged  my  memory  with  the  phrase  (as  to  my 


4  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

understanding,  that  was  out  of  the  question),  I  hastened  with  all  possible  expedi¬ 
tion,  fearing  that  I  might  forget  it,  to  my  Jansenist  friend  and  accosted  him,  im¬ 
mediately  after  our  first  salutations,  with:  "Tell  me,  pray,  if  you  admit  the  proxi¬ 
mate  power?"  He  smiled,  and  replied,  coldly:  "Tell  me  yourself  in  what  sense  you 
understand  it,  and  I  may  then  inform  you  what  I  think  of  it."  As  my  knowledge 
did  not  extend  quite  so  far,  I  was  at  a  loss  what  reply  to  make;  and  yet,  rather  than 
lose  the  object  of  my  visit,  I  said  at  random:  "Why,  I  understand  it  in  the  sense  of 
the  Molinists."  "To  which  of  the  Molinists  do  you  refer  me?"  replied  he,  with 
the  utmost  coolness.  I  referred  him  to  the  whole  of  them  together,  as  forming  one 
body,  and  animated  by  one  spirit. 

"You  know  very  little  about  the  matter,"  returned  he.  "So  far  are  they  from  be¬ 
ing  united  in  sentiment  that  some  of  them  are  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other. 
But,  being  all  united  in  the  design  to  ruin  M.  Arnauld,  they  have  resolved  to  agree 
on  this  term  proximate ,  which  both  parties  might  use  indiscriminately,  though 
they  understand  it  diversely,  that  thus,  by  a  similarity  of  language  and  an  appar¬ 
ent  conformity,  they  may  form  a  large  body  and  get  up  a  majority  to  crush  him 
with  the  greater  certainty." 

This  reply  filled  me  with  amazement;  but,  without  imbibing  these  impressions 
of  the  malicious  designs  of  the  Molinists,  which  I  am  unwilling  to  believe  on  his 
word,  and  with  which  I  have  no  concern,  I  set  myself  simply  to  ascertain  the  vari¬ 
ous  senses  which  they  give  to  that  mysterious  word  proximate.  "I  would  enlighten 
you  on  the  subject  with  all  my  heart,"  he  said;  "but  you  would  discover  in  it  such 
a  mass  of  contrariety  and  contradiction  that  you  would  hardly  believe  me.  You 
would  suspect  me.  To  make  sure  of  the  matter,  you  had  better  learn  it  from  some 
of  themselves;  and  I  shall  give  you  some  of  their  addresses.  You  have  only  to 
make  a  separate  visit  to  one  called  M.  le  Moine  and  to  Father  Nicolai." 

"I  have  no  acquaintance  wfith  any  of  these  persons,"  said  I. 

"Let  me  see,  then,"  he  replied,  "if  you  know  any  of  those  whom  I  shall  name 
to  you;  they  all  agree  in  sentiment  with  M.  le  Moine." 

I  happened,  in  fact,  to  know  some  of  them. 

"Well,  let  us  see  if  you  are  acquainted  with  any  of  the  Dominicans  whom  they 
call  the  'New  Thomists,’  for  they  are  all  the  same  with  Father  Nicolai." 

I  knew  some  of  them  also  whom  he  named;  and,  resolved  to  profit  by  this 
council  and  to  investigate  the  matter,  I  took  my  leave  of  him  and  went  immedi¬ 
ately  to  one  of  the  disciples  of  M.  le  Moine.  I  begged  him  to  inform  me  what  it 
was  to  have  the  proximate  power  of  doing  a  thing. 

"It  is  easy  to  tell  you  that,"  he  replied;  "it  is  merely  to  have  all  that  is  necessary 
for  doing  it  in  such  a  manner  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  performance." 

"And  so,"  said  I,  "to  have  the  proximate  power  of  crossing  a  river,  for  example, 
is  to  have  a  boat,  boatmen,  oars,  and  all  the  rest,  so  that  nothing  is  wanting?" 

"Exactly  so,"  said  the  monk. 

"And  to  have  the  proximate  power  of  seeing ,"  continued  I,  "must  be  to  have 
good  eyes  and  the  light  of  day;  for  a  person  with  good  sight  in  the  dark  would 
not  have  the  proximate  power  of  seeing,  according  to  you,  as  he  would  want  the 
light,  without  which  one  cannot  see?" 

"Precisely,"  said  he. 

"And  consequently,"  returned  I,  "when  you  say  that  all  the  righteous  have  the 
proximate  power  of  observing  the  commandments  of  God,  you  mean  that  they 


LETTER  I 


5 

have  always  all  the  grace  necessary  for  observing  them,  so  that  nothing  is  wanting 
to  them  on  the  part  of  God." 

"Stay  there,"  he  replied;  "they  have  always  all  that  is  necessary  for  observing 
the  commandments,  or  at  least  for  asking  it  of  God." 

"I  understand  you,"  said  I;  "they  have  all  that  is  necessary  for  praying  to  God  to 
assist  them,  without  requiring  any  new  grace  from  God  to  enable  them  to  pray." 

"You  have  it  now,"  he  rejoined. 

"But  is  it  not  necessary  that  they  have  an  efficacious  grace,  in  order  to  pray  to 
God?" 

"No,"  said  he;  "not  according  to  M.  le  Moine." 

To  lose  no  time,  I  went  to  the  Jacobins,  and  requested  an  interview  with  some 
whom  I  knew  to  be  New  Thomists,  and  I  begged  them  to  tell  me  what  proximate 
power  was.  "Is  it  not,"  said  I,  "that  power  to  which  nothing  is  wanting  in  order  to 
act?" 

"No,  "said  they. 

"Indeed!  fathers,"  said  I;  "if  anything  is  wanting  to  that  power,  do  you  call  it 
proximate?  Would  you  say,  for  instance,  that  a  man  in  the  night-time,  and  without 
any  light,  had  the  proximate  power  of  seeing?" 

"Yes,  indeed,  he  would  have  it,  in  our  opinion,  if  he  is  not  blind." 

"I  grant  that,"  said  I;  "but  M.  le  Moine  understands  it  in  a  different  manner." 

"Very  true,"  they  replied;  "but  so  it  is  that  we  understand  it." 

"I  have  no  objections  to  that,"  I  said;  "for  I  never  quarrel  about  a  name,  pro¬ 
vided  I  am  apprised  of  the  sense  in  which  it  is  understood.  But  I  perceive  from 
this  that,  when  you  speak  of  the  righteous  having  always  the  proximate  power 
of  praying  to  God,  you  understand  that  they  require  another  supply  for  praying, 
without  which  they  will  never  pray." 

"Most  excellent!"  exclaimed  the  good  fathers,  embracing  me;  "exactly  the 
thing;  for  they  must  have,  besides,  an  efficacious  grace  bestowed  upon  all,  and 
which  determines  their  wills  to  pray;  and  it  is  heresy  to  deny  the  necessity  of  that 
efficacious  grace  in  order  to  pray." 

"Most  excellent!"  cried  I,  in  return;  "but,  according  to  you,  the  Jansenists  are 
Catholics,  and  M.  le  Moine  a  heretic;  for  the  Jansenists  maintain  that,  while  the 
righteous  have  power  to  pray,  they  require  nevertheless  an  efficacious  grace;  and 
this  is  what  you  approve.  M.  le  Moine,  again,  maintains  that  the  righteous  may 
pray  without  efficacious  grace;  and  this  is  what  you  condemn." 

"Ay,"  said  they;  "but  M.  le  Moine  calls  that  power  proximate  power ." 

"How  now!  fathers,"  I  exclaimed;  "this  is  merely  playing  with  words,  to  say 
that  you  are  agreed  as  to  the  common  terms  which  you  employ,  while  you  differ 
with  them  as  to  the  sense  of  these  terms." 

The  fathers  made  no  reply;  and  at  this  juncture,  who  should  come  in  but  my 
old  friend,  the  disciple  of  M.  le  Moine!  I  regarded  this  at  the  time  as  an  extraor¬ 
dinary  piece  of  good  fortune;  but  I  have  discovered  since  then  that  such  meet¬ 
ings  are  not  rare — that,  in  fact,  they  are  constantly  mixing  in  each  other’s  society. 

"I  know  a  man,"  said  I,  addressing  myself  to  M.  le  Moine’s  disciple,  "who 
holds  that  all  the  righteous  have  always  the  power  of  praying  to  God,  but  that, 
notwithstanding  this,  they  will  never  pray  without  an  efficacious  grace  which  de¬ 
termines  them,  and  which  God  does  not  always  give  to  all  the  righteous.  Is  he  a 
heretic?" 


6 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

’’Stay,”  said  the  doctor;  ’’you  might  take  me  by  surprise.  Let  us  go  cautiously 
to  work.  Distinguo.  If  he  call  that  power  proximate  power ,  he  will  be  a  Thomist,  and 
therefore  a  Catholic;  if  not,  he  will  be  a  Jansenist  and,  therefore,  a  heretic.” 

”He  calls  it  neither  proximate  nor  non-proximate,"  said  I. 

’’Then  he  is  a  heretic,”  quoth  he;  ”1  refer  you  to  these  good  fathers  if  he 
is  not.” 

I  did  not  appeal  to  them  as  judges,  for  they  had  already  nodded  assent;  but  I 
said  to  them:  ”He  refuses  to  admit  that  word  proximate ,  because  he  can  meet  with 
nobody  who  will  explain  it  to  him.” 

Upon  this  one  of  the  fathers  was  on  the  point  of  offering  his  definition  of  the 
term,  when  he  was  interrupted  by  M.  le  Moine’s  disciple,  who  said  to  him:  ”Do 
you  mean,  then,  to  renew  our  broils?  Have  we  not  agreed  not  to  explain  that  word 
proximate ,  but  to  use  it  on  both  sides  without  saying  what  it  signifies?”  To  this 
the  Jacobin  gave  his  assent. 

I  was  thus  let  into  the  whole  secret  of  their  plot;  and,  rising  to  take  my  leave  of 
them,  I  remarked:  ’’Indeed,  fathers,  I  am  much  afraid  this  is  nothing  better  than 
pure  chicanery;  and,  whatever  may  be  the  result  of  your  convocations,  I  venture 
to  predict  that,  though  the  censure  should  pass,  peace  will  not  be  established.  For 
though  it  should  be  decided  that  the  syllables  of  that  word  proximate  should  be 
pronounced,  who  does  not  see  that,  the  meaning  not  being  explained,  each  of 
you  will  be  disposed  to  claim  the  victory?  The  Jacobins  will  contend  that  the  word 
is  to  be  understood  in  their  sense;  M.  le  Moine  will  insist  that  it  must  be  taken  in 
his;  and  thus  there  will  be  more  wrangling  about  the  explanation  of  the  word 
than  about  its  introduction.  For,  after  all,  there  would  be  no  great  danger  in  adopt¬ 
ing  it  without  any  sense,  seeing  it  is  through  the  sense  only  that  it  can  do  any 
harm.  But  it  would  be  unworthy  of  the  Sorbonne  and  of  theology  to  employ  equivo¬ 
cal  and  captious  terms  without  giving  any  explanation  of  them.  In  short,  fathers, 
tell  me,  I  entreat  you,  for  the  last  time,  what  is  necessary  to  be  believed  in  order  to 
be  a  good  Catholic?” 

’’You  must  say,”  they  all  vociferated  simultaneously,  ’’that  all  the  righteous 
have  the  proximate  power ,  abstracting  from  it  all  sense — from  the  sense  of  the  Thom- 
ists  and  the  sense  of  other  divines.” 

’’That  is  to  say,”  I  replied,  in  taking  leave  of  them,  ’’that  I  must  pronounce 
that  word  to  avoid  being  the  heretic  of  a  name.  For,  pray,  is  this  a  Scripture  word?” 
”No,”  said  they.  ”Is  it  a  word  of  the  Fathers,  the  Councils,  or  the  Popes?”  ”No.” 
”Is  the  word,  then,  used  by  St.  Thomas?”  ”No.”  ’’What  necessity,  therefore,  is 
there  for  using  it  since  it  has  neither  the  authority  of  others  nor  any  sense  of  it¬ 
self?”  ’’You  are  an  opinionative  fellow,”  said  they;  ’’but  you  shall  say  it,  or  you 
shall  be  a  heretic,  and  M.  Arnauld  into  the  bargain;  for  we  are  the  majority,  and, 
should  it  be  necessary,  we  can  bring  a  sufficient  number  of  Cordeliers  into  the 
field  to  carry  the  day.” 

On  hearing  this  solid  argument,  I  took  my  leave  of  them,  to  write  you  the  fore¬ 
going  account  of  my  interview,  from  which  you  will  perceive  that  the  following 
points  remain  undisputed  and  uncondemned  by  either  party.  First,  That  grace  is 
not  given  to  all  men.  Second \  That  all  the  righteous  have  always  the  power  of  obey¬ 
ing  the  divine  commandments.  Third,  That  they  require,  nevertheless,  in  order  to 
obey  them,  and  even  to  pray,  an  efficacious  grace,  which  invincibly  determines 
their  will.  Fourth,  That  this  efficacious  grace  is  not  always  granted  to  all  the  right- 


LETTER  II 


7 

eous,  and  that  it  depends  on  the  pure  mercy  of  God.  So  that,  after  all,  the  truth  is 
safe,  and  nothing  runs  any  risk  but  that  word  without  the  sense,  proximate. 

Happy  the  people  who  are  ignorant  of  its  existence!  happy  those  who  lived  be¬ 
fore  it  was  born!  for  I  see  no  help  for  it,  unless  the  gentlemen  of  the  Acadamy,  by 
an  act  of  absolute  authority,  banish  that  barbarous  term,  which  causes  so  many 
divisions,  from  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  Sorbonne.  Unless  this  be  done,  the 
censure  appears  certain;  but  I  can  easily  see  that  it  will  do  no  other  harm  than 
diminish  the  credit  of  the  Sorbonne,  and  deprive  it  of  that  authority  which  is  so 
necessary  to  it  on  other  occasions. 

Meanwhile,  I  leave  you  at  perfect  liberty  to  hold  by  the  word  proximate  or  not, 
just  as  you  please;  for  I  love  you  too  much  to  persecute  you  under  that  pretext.  If 
this  account  is  not  displeasing  to  you,  I  shall  continue  to  apprise  you  of  all  that 
happens.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  II 


Paris,  January  29,  1656 


Sir, 

]ust  as  I  had  sealed  up  my  last  letter,  I  received  a  visit  from  our  old  friend  M. 

N - .  Nothing  could  have  happened  more  luckily  for  my  curiosity;  for  he  is 

thoroughly  informed  in  the  questions  of  the  day  and  is  completely  in  the  secret  of 
the  Jesuits,  at  whose  houses,  including  those  of  their  leading  men,  he  is  a  constant 
visitor.  After  having  talked  over  the  business  which  brought  him  to  my  house,  I 
asked  him  to  state,  in  a  few  words,  what  were  the  points  in  dispute  between  the 
two  parties. 

He  immediately  complied,  and  informed  me  that  the  principal  points  were  two 
— the  first  about  the  proximate  power ,  and  the  second  about  sufficient  grace.  I  have  en¬ 
lightened  you  on  the  first  of  these  points  in  my  former  letter  and  shall  now  speak 
of  the  second. 

In  one  word,  then,  I  found  that  their  difference  about  sufficient  grace  may  be 
defined  thus:  The  Jesuits  maintain  that  there  is  a  grace  given  generally  to  all  men, 
subject  in  such  a  way  to  free-will  that  the  will  renders  it  efficacious  or  inefficacious 
at  its  pleasure,  without  any  additional  aid  from  God  and  without  wanting  any¬ 
thing  on  his  part  in  order  to  act  effectively;  and  hence  they  term  this  grace  suf¬ 
ficient,  because  it  suffices  of  itself  for  action.  The  Jansenists,  on  the  other  hand,  will 
not  allow  that  any  grace  is  actually  sufficient  which  is  not  also  efficacious;  that  is, 
that  all  those  kinds  of  grace  which  do  not  determine  the  will  to  act  effectively  are 
insufficient  for  action ;  for  they  hold  that  a  man  can  never  act  without  efficacious  grace. 

Such  are  the  points  in  debate  between  the  Jesuits  and  the  Jansenists;  and  my 
next  object  was  to  ascertain  the  doctrine  of  the  New  Thomists.  "It  is  rather  an 
odd  one,"  he  said;  "they  agree  with  the  Jesuits  in  admitting  a  sufficient  grace  given 
to  all  men;  but  they  maintain,  at  the  same  time,  that  no  man  can  act  with  this 
grace  alone,  but  that,  in  order  to  do  this,  he  must  receive  from  God  an  efficacious 
grace  which  really  determines  his  will  to  the  action,  and  which  God  does  not  grant 
to  all  men."  "So  that,  according  to  this  doctrine,"  said  I,  "this  grace  is  sufficient 
without  being  sufficient."  "Exactly  so,"  he  replied;  "for  if  it  suffices,  there  is  no 


8  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

need  of  anything  more  for  acting;  and  if  it  does  not  suffice,  why — it  is  not  suf¬ 
ficient/' 

"But,”  asked  I,  "where,  then,  is  the  difference  between  them  and  the  Jansen- 
ists?”  "They  differ  in  this,”  he  replied,  "that  the  Dominicans  have  this  good  qual¬ 
ification,  that  they  do  not  refuse  to  say  that  all  men  have  the  sufficient  grace."  "I 
understand  you,”  returned  I;  "but  they  say  it  without  thinking  it;  for  they  add 
that,  in  order  to  act,  we  must  have  an  efficacious  grace  which  is  not  given  to  all;  con¬ 
sequently,  if  they  agree  with  the  Jesuits  in  the  use  of  a  term  which  has  no  sense, 
they  differ  from  them  and  coincide  with  the  Jansenists  in  the  substance  of  the 
thing.”  "That  is  very  true,”  said  he.  "How,  then,”  said  I,  "are  the  Jesuits  united 
with  them?  and  why  do  they  not  combat  them  as  well  as  the  Jansenists,  since  they 
will  always  find  powerful  antagonists  in  these  men,  who,  by  maintaining  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  the  efficacious  grace  which  determines  the  will,  will  prevent  them  from 
establishing  that  grace  which  they  hold  to  be  of  itself  sufficient?” 

"The  Dominicans  are  too  powerful,”  he  replied,  "and  the  Jesuits  are  too  poli¬ 
tic,  to  come  to  an  open  rupture  with  them.  The  Society  is  content  with  having 
prevailed  on  them  so  far  as  to  admit  the  name  of  sufficient  grace ,  though  they  un¬ 
derstand  it  in  another  sense;  by  which  manoeuvre  they  gain  this  advantage,  that 
they  will  make  their  opinion  appear  untenable,  as  soon  as  they  judge  it  proper  to 
do  so.  And  this  will  be  no  difficult  matter;  for,  let  it  be  once  granted  that  all  men 
have  the  sufficient  graces,  nothing  can  be  more  natural  than  to  conclude  that  the 
efficacious  grace  is  not  necessary  to  action — the  sufficiency  of  the  general  grace 
precluding  the  necessity  of  all  others.  By  saying  sufficient  we  express  all  that  is  nec¬ 
essary  for  action;  and  it  will  serve  little  purpose  for  the  Dominicans  to  exclaim 
that  they  attach  another  sense  to  the  expression;  the  people,  accustomed  to  the 
common  acceptation  of  that  term,  would  not  even  listen  to  their  explanation. 
Thus  the  Society  gains  a  sufficient  advantage  from  the  expression  which  has  been 
adopted  by  the  Dominicans,  without  pressing  them  any  further;  and  were  you 
but  acquainted  with  what  passed  under  Popes  Clement  VIII  and  Paul  V,  and  knew 
how  the  Society  was  thwarted  by  the  Dominicans  in  the  establishment  of  the  suf¬ 
ficient  grace,  you  would  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  it  avoids  embroiling  itself  in 
quarrels  with  them  and  allows  them  to  hold  their  own  opinion,  provided  that  of 
the  Society  is  left  untouched;  and  more  especially,  when  the  Dominicans  coun¬ 
tenance  its  doctrine,  by  agreeing  to  employ,  on  all  public  occasions,  the  term  suf¬ 
ficient  grace. 

"The  Society,”  he  continued,  "is  quite  satisfied  with  their  complaisance.  It  does 
not  insist  on  their  denying  the  necessity  of  efficacious  grace,  this  would  be  urging 
them  too  far.  People  should  not  tyrannize  over  their  friends;  and  the  Jesuits  have 
gained  quite  enough.  The  world  is  content  with  words;  few  think  of  searching 
into  the  nature  of  things;  and  thus  the  name  of  sufficient  grace  being  adopted  on 
both  sides,  though  in  different  senses,  there  is  nobody,  except  the  most  subtle 
theologians,  who  ever  dreams  of  doubting  that  the  thing  signified  by  that  word  is 
held  by  the  Jacobins  as  well  as  by  the  Jesuits;  and  the  result  will  show  that  these 
last  are  not  the  greatest  dupes.” 

I  acknowledged  that  they  were  a  shrewd  class  of  people,  these  Jesuits;  and, 
availing  myself  of  his  advice,  I  went  straight  to  the  Jacobins,  at  whose  gate  I  found 
one  of  my  good  friends,  a  staunch  Jansenist  (for  you  must  know  I  have  got  friends 
among  all  parties),  who  was  calling  for  another  monk,  different  from  him  whom 


LETTER  II 


9 

I  was  in  search  of.  I  prevailed  on  him,  however,  after  much  entreaty,  to  accom¬ 
pany  me,  and  asked  for  one  of  my  New  Thomists.  He  was  delighted  to  see  me 
again.  “How  now!  my  dear  father,”  I  began,  “it  seems  it  is  not  enough  that  all 
men  have  a  proximate  power ,  with  which  they  can  never  act  with  effect;  they  must 
have  besides  this  a  sufficient  grace,  with  which  they  can  act  as  little.  Is  not  that  the 
doctrine  of  your  school?”  “It  is,”  said  the  worthy  monk;  “and  I  was  upholding  it 
this  very  morning  in  the  Sorbonne.  I  spoke  on  the  point  during  my  whole  half- 
hour;  and,  but  for  the  sand-glass ,  I  bade  fair  to  have  reversed  that  wicked  proverb, 
now  so  current  in  Paris:  ’He  votes  without  speaking,  like  a  monk  in  the  Sor¬ 
bonne/  ”  “What  do  you  mean  by  your  half-hour  and  your  sand-glass ?”  I  asked; 
“do  they  cut  your  speeches  by  a  certain  measure?”  “Yes,”  said  he,  “they  have  done 
so  for  some  days  past.”  “And  do  they  oblige  you  to  speak  for  half  an  hour?” 
“No;  we  may  speak  as  little  as  we  please.”  “But  not  as  much  as  you  please,”  said 
I.  “O  what  a  capital  regulation  for  the  boobies!  what  a  blessed  excuse  for  those 
who  have  nothing  worth  the  saying!  But,  to  return  to  the  point,  father;  this  grace 
given  to  all  men  is  sufficient ,  is  it  not?”  “Yes,”  said  he.  “And  yet  it  has  no  effect 
without  efficacious  grace?"  “None  whatever,”  he  replied.  “And  all  men  have  the 
sufficient,”  continued  I,  “and  all  have  not  the  efficacious?”  “Exactly,”  said  he. 
“That  is,”  returned  I,  “all  have  enough  of  grace,  and  all  have  not  enough  of  it — 
that  is,  this  grace  suffices,  though  it  does  not  suffice — that  is,  it  is  sufficient  in 
name  and  insufficient  in  effect!  In  good  sooth,  father,  this  is  particularly  subtle 
doctrine!  Have  you  forgotten,  since  you  retired  to  the  cloister,  the  meaning  at¬ 
tached,  in  the  world  you  have  quitted,  to  the  word  sufficient ?  don’t  you  remember 
that  it  includes  all  that  is  necessary  for  acting?  But  no,  you  cannot  have  lost  all 
recollection  of  it;  for,  to  avail  myself  of  an  illustration  which  will  come  home  more 
vividly  to  your  feelings,  let  us  suppose  that  you  were  supplied  with  no  more  than 
two  ounces  of  bread  and  a  glass  of  water  daily,  would  you  be  quite  pleased  with 
your  prior  were  he  to  tell  you  that  this  would  be  sufficient  to  support  you,  under 
the  pretext  that,  along  with  something  else,  which  however,  he  would  not  give 
you,  you  would  have  all  that  would  be  necessary  to  support  you?  How,  then  can 
you  allow  yourselves  to  say  that  all  men  have  sufficient  grace  for  acting,  while  you 
admit  that  there  is  another  grace  absolutely  necessary  to  acting  which  all  men  have 
not?  Is  it  because  this  is  an  unimportant  article  of  belief,  and  you  leave  all  men  at 
liberty  to  believe  that  efficacious  grace  is  necessary  or  not,  as  they  choose?  Is  it  a 
matter  of  indifference  to  say,  that  with  sufficient  grace  a  man  may  really  act?” 
“How!”  cried  the  good  man;  “indifference!  it  is  heresy — formal  heresy.  The  ne¬ 
cessity  of  efficacious  grace  for  acting  effectively,  is  a  point  of  faith — it  is  heresy  to 
deny  it.” 

“Where  are  we  now?”  I  exclaimed;  “and  which  side  am  I  to  take  here?  If  I  deny 
the  sufficient  grace,  I  am  a  Jansenist.  If  I  admit  it,  as  the  Jesuits  do,  in  the  way  of 
denying  that  efficacious  grace  is  necessary,  I  shall  be  a  heretic,  say  you.  And  if  I 
admit  it,  as  you  do,  in  the  way  of  maintaining  the  necessity  of  efficacious  grace,  I 
sin  against  common  sense,  and  am  a  blockhead,  say  the  Jesuits.  What  must  I  do, 
thus  reduced  to  the  inevitable  necessity  of  being  a  blockhead,  a  heretic,  or  a  Jan¬ 
senist?  And  what  a  sad  pass  are  matters  come  to,  if  there  are  none  but  the  Jansen - 
ists  who  avoid  coming  into  collision  either  with  the  faith  or  with  reason,  and  who 
save  themselves  at  once  from  absurdity  and  from  error!” 

My  Jansenist  friend  took  this  speech  as  a  good  omen  and  already  looked  upon 


IO  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

me  as  a  convert.  He  said  nothing  to  me,  however;  but,  addressing  the  monk: 
"Pray,  father,"  inquired  he,  "what  is  the  point  on  which  you  agree  with  the  Jesu¬ 
its?"  "We  agree  in  this,"  he  replied,  "that  the  Jesuits  and  we  acknowledge  the 
sufficient  grace  given  to  all."  "But,"  said  the  Jansenist,  "there  are  two  things  in 
this  expression  sufficient  grace — there  is  the  sound,  which  is  only  so  much  breath; 
and  there  is  the  thing  which  it  signifies,  which  is  real  and  effectual.  And,  therefore, 
as  you  are  agreed  with  the  Jesuits  in  regard  to  the  word  sufficient  and  opposed  to 
them  as  to  the  sense,  it  is  apparent  that  you  are  opposed  to  them  in  regard  to  the 
substance  of  that  term,  and  that  you  only  agree  with  them  as  to  the  sound.  Is  this 
what  you  call  acting  sincerely  and  cordially?" 

"But,"  said  the  good  man,  "what  cause  have  you  to  complain,  since  we  de¬ 
ceive  nobody  by  this  mode  of  speaking?  In  our  schools  we  openly  teach  that  we 
understand  it  in  a  manner  different  from  the  Jesuits." 

"What  I  complain  of,"  returned  my  friend,  "is,  that  you  do  not  proclaim  it 
everywhere,  that  by  sufficient  grace  you  understand  the  grace  which  is  not  suffi¬ 
cient.  You  are  bound  in  conscience,  by  thus  altering  the  sense  of  the  ordinary 
terms  of  theology,  to  tell  that,  when  you  admit  a  sufficient  grace  in  all  men,  you 
understand  that  they  have  not  sufficient  grace  in  effect.  All  classes  of  persons  in 
the  world  understand  the  word  sufficient  in  one  and  the  same  sense;  the  New  Thom- 
ists  alone  understand  it  in  another  sense.  All  the  women,  who  form  one-half  of 
the  world,  all  courtiers,  all  military  men,  all  magistrates,  all  lawyers,  merchants, 
artisans,  the  whole  populace — in  short,  all  sorts  of  men,  except  the  Dominicans, 
understand  the  word  sufficient  to  express  all  that  is  necessary.  Scarcely  any  one  is 
aware  of  this  singular  exception.  It  is  reported  over  the  whole  earth,  simply  that 
the  Dominicans  hold  that  all  men  have  the  sufficient  graces.  What  other  conclusion 
can  be  drawn  from  this,  than  that  they  hold  that  all  men  have  all  the  graces  neces¬ 
sary  for  action;  especially  when  they  are  seen  joined  in  interest  and  intrigue  with 
the  Jesuits,  who  understand  the  thing  in  that  sense?  Is  not  the  uniformity  of  your 
expressions,  viewed  in  connection  with  this  union  of  party,  a  manifest  indication 
and  confirmation  of  the  uniformity  of  your  sentiments? 

"The  multitude  of  the  faithful  inquire  of  theologians:  What  is  the  real  condi¬ 
tion  of  human  nature  since  its  corruption?  St.  Augustine  and  his  disciples  reply 
that  it  has  no  sufficient  grace  until  God  is  pleased  to  bestow  it.  Next  come  the 
Jesuits,  and  they  say  that  all  have  the  effectually  sufficient  graces.  The  Domini¬ 
cans  are  consulted  on  this  contrariety  of  opinion;  and  what  course  do  they  pur¬ 
sue?  They  unite  with  the  Jesuits;  by  this  coalition  they  make  up  a  majority;  they 
secede  from  those  who  deny  these  sufficient  graces;  they  declare  that  all  men  pos¬ 
sess  them.  Who,  on  hearing  this,  would  imagine  anything  else  than  that  they  gave 
their  sanction  to  the  opinion  of  the  Jesuits?  And  then  they  add  that,  nevertheless, 
these  said  sufficient  graces  are  perfectly  useless  without  the  efficacious,  which  are 
not  given  to  all! 

"Shall  I  present  you  with  a  picture  of  the  Church  amidst  these  conflicting  senti¬ 
ments?  I  consider  her  very  like  a  man  who,  leaving  his  native  country  on  a  jour¬ 
ney,  is  encountered  by  robbers,  who  inflict  many  wounds  on  him  and  leave  him 
half  dead.  He  sends  for  three  physicians  resident  in  the  neighboring  towns.  The 
first,  on  probing  his  wounds,  pronounces  them  mortal  and  assures  him  that  none 
but  God  can  restore  to  him  his  lost  powers.  The  second,  coming  after  the  other, 
chooses  to  flatter  the  man — tells  him  that  he  has  still  sufficient  strength  to  reach 


LETTER  II 


1 1 

his  home;  and,  abusing  the  first  physician  who  opposed  his  advice,  determines 
upon  his  ruin.  In  this  dilemma,  the  poor  patient,  observing  the  third  medical  gen¬ 
tleman  at  a  distance,  stretches  out  his  hands  to  him  as  the  person  who  should  de¬ 
termine  the  controversy.  This  practitioner,  on  examining  his  wounds,  and  ascer¬ 
taining  the  opinions  of  the  first  two  doctors,  embraces  that  of  the  second,  and 
uniting  with  him,  the  two  combine  against  the  first,  and  being  the  stronger  party 
in  number  drive  him  from  the  field  in  disgrace.  From  this  proceeding,  the  patient 
naturally  concludes  that  the  last  comer  is  of  the  same  opinion  with  the  second; 
and,  on  putting  the  question  to  him,  he  assures  him  most  positively  that  his  strength 
is  sufficient  for  prosecuting  his  journey.  The  wounded  man,  however,  sensible  of 
his  own  weakness,  begs  him  to  explain  to  him  how  he  considered  him  sufficient 
for  the  journey.  'Because,'  replies  his  adviser,  'you  are  still  in  possession  of  your 
legs,  and  legs  are  the  organs  which  naturally  suffice  for  walking.’  'But,’  says  the 
patient,  'have  I  all  the  strength  necessary  to  make  use  of  my  legs?  for,  in  my  pres¬ 
ent  weak  condition,  it  humbly  appears  to  me  that  they  are  wholly  useless.’  'Cer¬ 
tainly  you  have  not,’  replies  the  doctor;  'you  will  never  walk  effectively ,  unless  God 
vouchsafes  some  extraordinary  assistance  to  sustain  and  conduct  you.’  'What!’ 
exclaims  the  poor  man,  'do  you  not  mean  to  say  that  I  have  sufficient  strength  in 
me,  so  as  to  want  for  nothing  to  walk  effectively?’  'Very  far  from  it,’  returns  the 
physician.  'You  must,  then,’  says  the  patient,  'be  of  a  different  opinion  from  your 
companion  there  about  my  real  condition.’  'I  must  admit  that  I  am,’  replies  the 
other. 

"What  do  you  suppose  the  patient  said  to  this?  Why,  he  complained  of  the 
strange  conduct  and  ambiguous  terms  of  this  third  physician.  He  censured  him 
for  taking  part  with  the  second,  to  whom  he  was  opposed  in  sentiment,  and  with 
whom  he  had  only  the  semblance  of  agreement,  and  for  having  driven  away  the 
first  doctor,  with  whom  he  in  reality  agreed ;  and,  after  making  a  trial  of  his  strength, 
and  finding  by  experience  his  actual  weakness,  he  sent  them  both  about  their  bus¬ 
iness,  recalled  his  first  adviser,  put  himself  under  his  care,  and  having,  by  his  ad¬ 
vice,  implored  from  God  the  strength  of  which  he  confessed  his  need,  obtained 
the  mercy  he  sought,  and,  through  divine  help,  reached  his  house  in  peace.’’ 

The  worthy  monk  was  so  confounded  with  this  parable  that  he  could  not  find 
words  to  reply.  To  cheer  him  up  a  little,  I  said  to  him,  in  a  mild  tone:  "But  after 
all,  my  dear  father,  what  made  you  think  of  giving  the  name  of  sufficient  to  a  grace 
which  you  say  it  is  a  point  of  faith  to  believe  is,  in  fact,  insufficient?’’  "It  is  very 
easy  for  you  to  talk  about  it,’’  said  he.  "You  are  an  independent  and  private  man; 
I  am  a  monk  and  in  a  community — cannot  you  estimate  the  difference  between 
the  two  cases?  We  depend  on  superiors;  they  depend  on  others.  They  have  prom¬ 
ised  our  votes — what  would  you  have  to  become  of  me?’’  We  understood  the  hint; 
and  this  brought  to  our  recollection  the  case  of  his  brother  monk,  who,  for  a  simi¬ 
lar  piece  of  indiscretion,  has  been  exiled  to  Abbeville. 

"But,"  I  resumed,  "how  comes  it  about  that  your  community  is  bound  to  ad¬ 
mit  this  grace?"  "That  is  another  question,"  he  replied.  "All  that  I  can  tell  you  is, 
in  one  word,  that  our  order  has  defended,  to  the  utmost  of  its  ability,  the  doctrine 
of  St.  Thomas  on  efficacious  grace.  With  what  ardor  did  it  oppose,  from  the  very 
commencement,  the  doctrine  of  Molina?  How  did  it  labor  to  establish  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  the  efficacious  grace  of  Jesus  Christ?  Don’t  you  know  what  happened  un¬ 
der  Clement  VIII  and  Paul  V,  and  how,  the  former  having  been  prevented  by 


12 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

death,  and  the  latter  hindered  by  some  Italian  affairs  from  publishing  his  bull,  our 
arms  still  sleep  in  the  Vatican?  But  the  Jesuits,  availing  themselves,  since  the  in¬ 
troduction  of  the  heresy  of  Luther  and  Calvin,  of  the  scanty  light  which  the  people 
possess  for  discriminating  between  the  error  of  these  men  and  the  truth  of  the 
doctrine  of  St.  Thomas,  disseminated  their  principles  with  such  rapidity  and  suc¬ 
cess  that  they  became,  ere  long,  masters  of  the  popular  belief;  while  we,  on  our 
part,  found  ourselves  in  the  predicament  of  being  denounced  as  Calvinists  and 
treated  as  the  Jansenists  are  at  present,  unless  we  qualified  the  efficacious  grace 
with,  at  least,  the  apparent  avowal  of  a  sufficient .  In  this  extremity,  what  better 
course  could  we  have  taken  for  saving  the  truth,  without  losing  our  own  credit, 
than  by  admitting  the  name  of  sufficient  grace,  while  we  denied  that  it  was  such 
in  effect?  Such  is  the  real  history  of  the  case.” 

This  was  spoken  in  such  a  melancholy  tone  that  I  really  began  to  pity  the  man; 
not  so,  however,  my  companion.  "Flatter  not  yourselves,”  said  he  to  the  monk, 
"with  having  saved  the  truth;  had  she  not  found  other  defenders,  in  your  feeble 
hands  she  must  have  perished.  By  admitting  into  the  Church  the  name  of  her  ene¬ 
my,  you  have  admitted  the  enemy  himself.  Names  are  inseparable  from  things.  If 
the  term  sufficient  grace  be  once  established,  it  will  be  vain  for  you  to  protest  that 
you  understand  by  it  a  grace  which  is  not  sufficient.  Your  protest  will  be  held  in¬ 
admissible.  Your  explanation  would  be  scouted  as  odious  in  the  world,  where 
men  speak  more  ingenuously  about  matters  of  infinitely  less  moment.  The  Jesuits 
will  gain  a  triumph — it  will  be  their  grace,  which  is  sufficient  in  fact,  and  not  yours, 
which  is  only  so  in  name,  that  will  pass  as  established;  and  the  converse  of  your 
creed  will  become  an  article  of  faith.” 

"We  will  all  suffer  martyrdom  first,”  cried  the  father,  "rather  than  consent  to 
the  establishment  of  sufficient  grace  in  the  sense  of  the  Jesuits.  St.  Thomas,  whom  we 
have  sworn  to  follow  even  to  the  death,  is  diametrically  opposed  to  such  doc¬ 
trine.” 

To  this  my  friend,  who  took  up  the  matter  more  seriously  than  I  did,  replied: 
"Come  now,  father,  your  fraternity  has  received  an  honor  which  it  sadly  abuses. 
It  abandons  that  grace  which  was  confided  to  its  care,  and  which  has  never  been 
abandoned  since  the  creation  of  the  world.  That  victorious  grace,  which  was  wait¬ 
ed  for  by  the  patriarchs,  predicted  by  the  prophets,  introduced  by  Jesus  Christ, 
preached  by  St.  Paul,  explained  by  St.  Augustine,  the  greatest  of  the  fathers,  em¬ 
braced  by  his  followers,  confirmed  by  St.  Bernard,  the  last  of  the  fathers,  support¬ 
ed  by  St.  Thomas,  the  angel  of  the  schools,  transmitted  by  him  to  your  order, 
maintained  by  so  many  of  your  fathers,  and  so  nobly  defended  by  your  monks 
under  Popes  Clement  and  Paul — that  efficacious  grace,  which  had  been  commit¬ 
ted  as  a  sacred  deposit  into  your  hands,  that  it  might  find,  in  a  sacred  and  ever¬ 
lasting  order,  a  succession  of  preachers,  who  might  proclaim  it  to  the  end  of  time 
— is  discarded  and  deserted  for  interests  the  most  contemptible.  It  is  high  time 
for  other  hands  to  arm  in  its  quarrel.  It  is  time  for  God  to  raise  up  intrepid  dis¬ 
ciples  of  the  Doctor  of  grace,  who,  strangers  to  the  entanglements  of  the  world, 
will  serve  God  for  God’s  sake.  Grace  may  not,  indeed,  number  the  Dominicans 
among  her  champions,  but  champions  she  shall  never  want;  for,  by  her  own  al¬ 
mighty  energy,  she  creates  them  for  herself.  She  demands  hearts  pure  and  disen¬ 
gaged;  nay,  she  herself  purifies  and  disengages  them  from  worldly  interests,  in¬ 
compatible  with  the  truths  of  the  Gospel.  Reflect  seriously  on  this,  father;  and 


REPLY 


take  care  that  God  does  not  remove  this  candlestick  from  its  place,  leaving  you  in 
darkness  and  without  the  crown,  as  a  punishment  for  the  coldness  which  you  man¬ 
ifest  to  a  cause  so  important  to  his  Church." 

He  might  have  gone  on  in  this  strain  much  longer,  for  he  was  kindling  as  he 
advanced,  but  I  interrupted  him  by  rising  to  take  my  leave  and  said:  "Indeed,  my 
dear  father,  had  I  any  influence  in  France,  I  should  have  it  proclaimed,  by  sound 
of  trumpet:  ‘Be  IT  known  TO  all  men,  that  when  the  Jacobins  SAY  that  sufficient 
grace  is  given  to  all ,  they  MEAN  that  all  have  not  the  grace  which  actually  suffices!'  After 
which,  you  might  say  it  as  often  as  you  please,  but  not  otherwise."  And  thus 
ended  our  visit. 

You  will  perceive,  therefore,  that  we  have  here  a  politic  sufficiency  somewhat  sim¬ 
ilar  to  proximate  power.  Meanwhile  I  may  tell  you  that  it  appears  to  me  that  both 
the  proximate  power  and  this  same  sufficient  grace  may  be  safely  doubted  by  any¬ 
body,  provided  he  is  not  a  Jacobin. 

I  have  just  come  to  learn,  when  closing  my  letter,  that  the  censure  has  passed .  But 
as  I  do  not  yet  know  in  what  terms  it  is  worded,  and  as  it  will  not  be  published  till 
the  15th  of  February,  I  shall  delay  writing  you  about  it  till  the  next  post.  I  am,  &c. 


Reply  of  the  "provincial"  to  the  first  two  letters  of  his  friend 

February  2,  1656 
Sir, 

Your  two  letters  have  not  been  confined  to  me.  Everybody  has  seen  them,  every¬ 
body  understands  them,  and  everybody  believes  them.  They  are  not  only  in  high 
repute  among  theologians — they  have  proved  agreeable  to  men  of  the  world,  and 
intelligible  even  to  the  ladies. 

In  a  communication  which  I  lately  received  from  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the 
Academy — one  of  the  most  illustrious  names  in  a  society  of  men  who  are  all  il¬ 
lustrious — who  had  seen  only  your  first  letter,  he  writes  me  as  follows:  "I  only 
wish  that  the  Sorbonne,  which  owes  so  much  to  the  memory  of  the  late  cardinal, 
would  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  his  French  Academy.  The  author  of  the 
letter  would  be  satisfied;  for,  in  the  capacity  of  an  academician,  I  would  author¬ 
itatively  condemn,  I  would  banish,  I  would  proscribe — I  had  almost  said  exter¬ 
minate — to  the  extent  of  my  power,  this  proximate  power ,  which  makes  so  much 
noise  about  nothing  and  without  knowing  what  it  would  have.  The  misfortune  is 
that  our  academic  power  is  a  very  limited  and  remote  power.  I  am  sorry  for  it  ;  and 
still  more  sorry  that  my  small  power  cannot  discharge  me  from  my  obligations  to 
you,"  &c. 

My  next  extract  is  from  the  pen  of  a  lady,  whom  I  shall  not  indicate  in  any  way 
whatever.  She  writes  thus  to  a  female  friend  who  had  transmitted  to  her  the  first  of 
your  letters:  "You  can  have  no  idea  how  much  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  letter 
you  sent  me — it  is  so  very  ingenious,  and  so  nicely  written.  It  narrates,  and  yet  it 
is  not  a  narrative;  it  clears  up  the  most  intricate  and  involved  of  all  possible  mat¬ 
ters;  its  raillery  is  exquisite;  it  enlightens  those  who  know  little  about  the  subject 
and  imparts  double  delight  to  those  who  understand  it.  It  is  an  admirable  apology; 
and,  if  they  would  so  take  it,  a  delicate  and  innocent  censure.  In  short,  that  letter 


14  the  provincial  letters 

displays  so  much  art,  so  much  spirit,  and  so  much  judgment,  that  I  burn  with 
curiosity  to  know  who  wrote  it,"  &c. 

You  too,  perhaps,  would  like  to  know  who  the  lady  is  that  writes  in  this  style; 
but  you  must  be  content  to  esteem  without  knowing  her;  when  you  come  to  know 
her,  your  esteem  will  be  greatly  enhanced. 

Take  my  word  for  it,  then,  and  continue  your  letters;  and  let  the  censure  come 
when  it  may,  we  are  quite  prepared  for  receiving  it.  These  words  proximate  power 
and  sufficient  grace ,  with  which  we  are  threatened,  will  frighten  us  no  longer.  We 
have  learned  from  the  Jesuits,  the  Jacobins,  and  M.  le  Moine,  in  how  many  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  they  may  be  turned,  and  how  little  solidity  there  is  in  these  new-fan¬ 
gled  terms,  to  give  ourselves  any  trouble  about  them.  Meanwhile,  I  remain,  &c. 


LETTER  III 


Paris,  February  9,  1658 
Sir, 

I  have  just  received  your  letter;  and,  at  the  same  time,  there  was  brought  me  a 
copy  of  the  censure  in  manuscript.  I  find  that  I  am  as  well  treated  in  the  former 
as  M.  Arnauld  is  ill  treated  in  the  latter.  I  am  afraid  there  is  some  extravagance  in 
both  cases  and  that  neither  of  us  is  sufficiently  well  known  by  our  judges.  Sure  I 
am  that,  were  we  better  known,  M.  Arnauld  would  merit  the  approval  of  the  Sor- 
bonne,  and  I  the  censure  of  the  Academy.  Thus  our  interests  are  quite  at  variance 
with  each  other.  It  is  his  interest  to  make  himself  known,  to  vindicate  his  inno¬ 
cence;  whereas  it  is  mine  to  remain  in  the  dark,  for  fear  of  forfeiting  my  reputa¬ 
tion.  Prevented,  therefore,  from  showing  my  face,  I  must  devolve  on  you  the 
task  of  making  my  acknowledgments  to  my  illustrious  admirers,  while  I  under¬ 
take  that  of  furnishing  you  with  the  news  of  the  censure. 

1  assure  you,  sir,  it  has  filled  me  with  astonishment.  I  expected  to  find  it  con¬ 
demning  the  most  shocking  heresy  in  the  world,  but  your  wonder  will  equal  mine, 
when  informed  that  these  alarming  preparations,  when  on  the  point  of  producing 
the  grand  effect  anticipated,  have  all  ended  in  smoke. 

To  understand  the  whole  affair  in  a  pleasant  way,  only  recollect,  I  beseech  you, 
the  strange  impressions  which,  for  a  long  time  past,  we  have  been  taught  to  form 
of  the  Jansenists.  Recall  to  mind  the  cabals,  the  factions,  the  errors,  the  schisms, 
the  outrages,  with  which  they  have  been  so  long  charged;  the  manner  in  which 
they  have  been  denounced  and  vilified  from  the  pulpit  and  the  press;  and  the  de¬ 
gree  to  which  this  torrent  of  abuse,  so  remarkable  for  its  violence  and  duration, 
has  swollen  of  late  years,  when  they  have  been  openly  and  publicly  accused  of  be¬ 
ing  not  only  heretics  and  schismatics,  but  apostates  and  infidels — with  "denying 
the  mystery  of  transubstantiation,  and  renouncing  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Gospel." 

After  having  published  these  startling  accusations,  it  was  resolved  to  examine 
their  writings,  in  order  to  pronounce  judgement  on  them.  For  this  purpose  the 
second  letter  of  M.  Arnauld,  which  was  reported  to  be  full  of  the  greatest  errors, 
is  selected.  The  examiners  appointed  are  his  most  open  and  avowed  enemies. 
They  employ  all  their  learning  to  discover  something  that  they  might  lay  hold 
upon,  and  at  length  they  produce  one  proposition  of  a  doctrinal  character,  which 
they  exhibit  for  censure. 


LETTER  III 


i5 

What  else  could  any  one  infer  from  such  proceedings  than  that  this  proposi¬ 
tion,  selected  under  such  remarkable  circumstances,  would  contain  the  essence  of 
the  blackest  heresies  imaginable.  And  yet  the  proposition  so  entirely  agrees  with 
what  is  clearly  and  formally  expressed  in  the  passages  from  the  fathers  quoted  by 
M.  Arnauld  that  I  have  not  met  with  a  single  individual  who  could  comprehend 
the  difference  between  them.  Still,  however,  it  might  be  imagined  that  there  was  a 
very  great  difference;  for  the  passages  from  the  fathers  being  unquestionably 
Catholic,  the  proposition  of  M.  Arnauld,  if  heretical,  must  be  widely  opposed  to 
them. 

Such  was  the  difficulty  which  the  Sorbonne  was  expected  to  clear  up.  All  Chris¬ 
tendom  waited,  with  wide-opened  eyes,  to  discover,  in  the  censure  of  these  learned 
doctors,  the  point  of  difference  which  had  proved  imperceptible  to  ordinary  mor¬ 
tals.  Meanwhile  M.  Arnauld  gave  in  his  defences,  placing  his  own  proposition 
and  the  passages  of  the  fathers  from  which  he  had  drawn  it  in  parallel  columns,  so 
as  to  make  the  agreement  between  them  apparent  to  the  most  obtuse  under¬ 
standings. 

He  shows,  for  example,  that  St.  Augustine  says  in  one  passage  that  "Jesus 
Christ  points  out  to  us,  in  the  person  of  St.  Peter,  a  righteous  man  warning  us  by 
his  fall  to  avoid  presumption."  He  cites  another  passage  from  the  same  father,  in 
which  he  says  "that  God,  in  order  to  show  us  that  without  grace  we  can  do  noth¬ 
ing,  left  St.  Peter  without  grace."  He  produces  a  third,  from  St.  Chrysostom,  who 
says,  "that  the  fall  of  St.  Peter  happened,  not  through  any  coldness  towards  Jesus 
Christ,  but  because  grace  failed  him;  and  that  he  fell,  not  so  much  through  his 
own  negligence  as  through  the  withdrawment  of  God,  as  a  lesson  to  the  whole 
Church,  that  without  God  we  can  do  nothing."  He  then  gives  his  own  accused 
proposition,  which  is  as  follows:  "The  fathers  point  out  to  us,  in  the  person  of 
St.  Peter,  a  righteous  man  to  whom  that  grace  without  which  we  can  do  nothing 
was  wanting." 

In  vain  did  people  attempt  to  discover  how  it  could  possibly  be  that  M. 
Arnauld’s  expression  differed  from  those  of  the  fathers  as  much  as  the  truth  from 
error  and  faith  from  heresy.  For  where  was  the  difference  to  be  found?  Could  it  be 
in  these  words:  "that  the  fathers  point  out  to  us,  in  the  person  of  St.  Peter,  a  right¬ 
eous  man"?  St.  Augustine  has  said  the  same  thing  in  so  many  words.  Is  it  because 
he  says  "that  grace  had  failed  him"?  The  same  St.  Augustine  who  had  said  that 
"St.  Peter  was  a  righteous  man,"  says  "that  he  had  not  had  grace  on  that  occasion." 
Is  it,  then,  for  his  having  said  "that  without  grace  we  can  do  nothing"?  Why,  is 
not  this  just  what  St.  Augustine  says  in  the  same  place,  and  what  St.  Chrysostom 
had  said  before  him,  with  this  difference  only,  that  he  expresses  it  in  much  stronger 
language,  as  when  he  says  "that  his  fall  did  not  happen  through  his  own  cold¬ 
ness  or  negligence,  but  through  the  failure  of  grace,  and  the  withdrawment 
of  God"? 

Such  considerations  as  these  kept  everybody  in  a  state  of  breathless  suspense  to 
learn  in  what  this  diversity  could  consist,  when  at  length,  after  a  great  many  meet¬ 
ings,  this  famous  and  long-looked-for  censure  made  its  appearance.  But,  alas!  it 
has  sadly  baulked  our  expectation.  Whether  it  be  that  the  Molinist  doctors  would 
not  condescend  so  far  as  to  enlighten  us  on  the  point,  or  for  some  other  mysterious 
reason,  the  fact  is  they  have  done  nothing  more  than  pronounce  these  words: 
"This  proposition  is  rash,  impious,  blasphemous,  accursed,  and  heretical!" 


1 6  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Would  you  believe  it,  sir,  that  most  people,  finding  themselves  deceived  in 
their  expectations,  have  got  into  bad  humor,  and  begin  to  fall  foul  upon  the  cen¬ 
sors  themselves?  They  are  drawing  strange  inferences  from  their  conduct  in  favour 
of  M.  Arnauld’s  innocence.  "What!”  they  are  saying,  "is  this  all  that  could  be 
achieved,  during  all  this  time,  by  so  many  doctors  joining  in  a  furious  attack  on 
one  individual?  Can  they  find  nothing  in  all  his  works  worthy  of  reprehension, 
but  three  lines,  and  these  extracted,  word  for  word,  from  the  greatest  doctors  of 
the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches?  Is  there  any  author  whatever  whose  writings,  were 
it  intended  to  ruin  him,  would  not  furnish  a  more  specious  pretext  for  the  pur¬ 
pose?  And  what  higher  proof  could  be  furnished  of  the  orthodoxy  of  this  illus¬ 
trious  accused? 

"How  comes  it  to  pass,”  they  add,  "that  so  many  denunciations  are  launched 
in  this  censure,  into  which  they  have  crowded  such  terms  as  ‘poison,  pestilence, 
horror,  rashness,  impiety,  blasphemy,  abomination,  execration,  anathema,  heresy’ 
— the  most  dreadful  epithets  that  could  be  used  against  Arius,  or  Antichrist  him¬ 
self;  and  all  to  combat  an  imperceptible  heresy,  and  that,  moreover,  without  telling 
us  what  it  is?  If  it  be  against  the  words  of  the  fathers  that  they  inveigh  in  this 
style,  where  is  the  faith  and  tradition?  If  against  M.  Arnauld’s  proposition,  let 
them  point  out  the  difference  between  the  two;  for  we  can  see  nothing  but  the 
most  perfect  harmony  between  them.  As  soon  as  we  have  discovered  the  evil  of 
the  proposition,  we  shall  hold  it  in  abhorrence;  but  so  long  as  we  do  not  see  it,  or 
rather  see  nothing  in  the  statement  but  the  sentiments  of  the  holy  fathers,  con¬ 
ceived  and  expressed  in  their  own  terms,  how  can  we  possibly  regard  it  with  any 
other  feelings  than  those  of  holy  veneration?” 

Such  is  the  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  they  are  giving  vent  to  their  feelings. 
But  these  are  by  far  too  deep-thinking  people.  You  and  I,  who  make  no  preten¬ 
sions  to  such  extraordinary  penetration,  may  keep  ourselves  quite  easy  about  the 
whole  affair.  What!  would  we  be  wiser  than  our  masters?  No:  let  us  take  example 
from  them,  and  not  undertake  what  they  have  not  ventured  upon.  We  would  be 
sure  to  get  boggled  in  such  an  attempt.  Why  it  would  be  the  easiest  thing  imagin¬ 
able,  to  render  this  censure  itself  heretical.  Truth,  we  know,  is  so  delicate  that,  if 
we  make  the  slightest  deviation  from  it,  we  fall  into  error;  but  this  alleged  error  is 
so  extremely  finespun  that,  if  we  diverge  from  it  in  the  slightest  degree,  we  fall 
back  upon  the  truth.  There  is  positively  nothing  between  this  obnoxious  propo¬ 
sition  and  the  truth  but  an  imperceptible  point.  The  distance  between  them  is  so 
impalpable  that  I  was  in  terror  lest,  from  pure  inability  to  perceive  it,  I  might,  in 
my  over -anxiety  to  agree  with  the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  place  myself  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  the  doctors  of  the  Church.  Under  this  apprehension,  I  judged  it  expedi¬ 
ent  to  consult  one  of  those  who,  through  policy,  was  neutral  on  the  first  question, 
that  from  him  I  might  learn  the  real  state  of  the  matter.  I  have  accordingly  had  an 
interview  with  one  of  the  most  intelligent  of  that  party,  whom  I  requested  to 
point  out  to  me  the  difference  between  the  two  things,  at  the  same  time  frankly 
owning  to  him  that  I  could  see  none. 

He  appeared  to  be  amused  at  my  simplicity  and  replied,  with  a  smile:  "How 
simple  it  is  in  you  to  believe  that  there  is  any  difference!  Why,  where  could  it  be? 
Do  you  imagine  that,  if  they  could  have  found  out  any  discrepancy  between  M. 
Arnauld  and  the  fathers,  they  would  not  have  boldly  pointed  it  out  and  been 
delighted  with  the  opportunity  of  exposing  it  before  the  public,  in  whose  eyes 


ll 


LETTER  III 

they  are  so  anxious  to  depreciate  that  gentleman?” 

I  could  easily  perceive,  from  these  few  words,  that  those  who  had  been  neutral 
on  the  first  question  would  not  all  prove  so  on  the  second;  but,  anxious  to  hear 
his  reasons,  I  asked:  "Why,  then,  have  they  attacked  this  unfortunate  proposi¬ 
tion?” 

“Is  it  possible,”  he  replied,  “you  can  be  ignorant  of  these  two  things,  which  I 
thought  had  been  known  to  the  veriest  tyro  in  these  matters?  that,  on  the  one 
hand,  M.  Arnauld  has  uniformly  avoided  advancing  a  single  tenet  which  is  not 
powerfully  supported  by  the  tradition  of  the  Church;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
his  enemies  have  determined,  cost  what  it  may,  to  cut  that  ground  from  under 
him;  and,  accordingly,  that  as  the  writings  of  the  former  afforded  no  handle  to  the 
designs  of  the  latter,  they  have  been  obliged,  in  order  to  satiate  their  revenge,  to 
seize  on  some  proposition,  it  mattered  not  what,  and  to  condemn  it  without  tell¬ 
ing  why  or  wherefore.  Do  not  you  know  how  the  Jansenists  keep  them  in  check, 
and  annoy  them  so  desperately  that  they  cannot  drop  the  slightest  word  against 
the  principles  of  the  fathers  without  being  incontinently  overwhelmed  with  whole 
volumes,  under  the  pressure  of  which  they  are  forced  to  succumb?  So  that,  after 
a  great  many  proofs  of  their  weakness,  they  have  judged  it  more  to  the  purpose, 
and  much  less  troublesome,  to  censure  than  to  reply — it  being  a  much  easier  mat¬ 
ter  with  them  to  find  monks  than  reasons.” 

“Why  then,”  said  I,  “if  this  be  the  case,  their  censure  is  not  worth  a  straw;  for 
who  will  pay  any  regard  to  it,  w'hen  they  see  it  to  be  without  foundation,  and 
refuted,  as  it  no  doubt  will  be,  by  the  answers  given  to  it?” 

“If  you  knew  the  temper  of  people,”  replied  my  friend  the  doctor,  “you  would 
talk  in  another  sort  of  way.  Their  censure,  censurable  as  it  is,  will  produce  nearly 
all  its  designed  effect  for  a  time;  and  although,  by  the  force  of  demonstration,  it  is 
certain  that,  in  course  of  time,  its  invalidity  will  be  made  apparent,  it  is  equally 
true  that,  at  first,  it  will  tell  as  effectually  on  the  minds  of  most  people  as  if  it  had 
been  the  most  righteous  sentence  in  the  world.  Let  it  only  be  cried  about  the 
streets:  'Here  you  have  the  censure  of  M.  Arnauld! — here  you  have  the  condemna¬ 
tion  of  the  Jansenists!’  and  the  Jesuits  will  find  their  account  in  it.  How  few  will 
ever  read  it!  How  few,  of  them  who  do  read,  will  understand  it!  How  few  will 
observe  that  it  answers  no  objections!  How  few  will  take  the  matter  to  heart,  or 
attempt  to  sift  it  to  the  bottom!  Mark,  then,  how  much  advantage  this  gives  to 
the  enemies  of  the  Jansenists.  They  are  sure  to  make  a  triumph  of  it,  though  a  vain 
one,  as  usual,  for  some  months  at  least —  and  that  is  a  great  matter  for  them — 
they  will  look  out  afterwards  for  some  new  means  of  subsistence.  They  live  from 
hand  to  mouth,  sir.  It  is  in  this  way  they  have  contrived  to  maintain  themselves 
down  to  the  present  day.  Sometimes  it  is  by  a  catechism  in  which  a  child  is  made 
to  condemn  their  opponents;  then  it  is  by  a  procession,  in  which  sufficient  grace 
leads  the  efficacious  in  triumph;  again  it  is  by  a  comedy,  in  which  Jansenius  is 
represented  as  carried  off  by  devils;  at  another  time  it  is  by  an  almanac;  and  now 
it  is  by  this  censure.” 

“In  good  sooth,”  said  I  “I  was  on  the  point  of  finding  fault  with  the  conduct 
of  the  Molinists;  but  after  what  you  have  told  me,  I  must  say  I  admire  their 
prudence  and  their  policy.  I  see  perfectly  well  that  they  could  not  have  followed  a 
safer  or  more  judicious  course.” 

“You  are  right,”  returned  he;  “their  safest  policy  has  always  been  to  keep  silent; 


1 8  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

and  this  led  a  certain  learned  divine  to  remark,  ’that  the  cleverest  among  them  are 
those  who  intrigue  much,  speak  little,  and  write  nothing.’ 

"It  is  on  this  principle  that,  from  the  commencement  of  the  meetings,  they 
prudently  ordained  that,  if  M.  Arnauld  came  into  the  Sorbonne,  it  must  be  simply 
to  explain  what  he  believed,  and  not  to  enter  the  lists  of  controversy  with  any  one. 
The  examiners,  having  ventured  to  depart  a  little  from  this  prudent  arrangement, 
suffered  for  their  temerity.  They  found  themselves  rather  too  vigourously  refuted 
by  his  second  apology. 

"On  the  same  principle,  they  had  recourse  to  that  rare  and  very  novel  device  of 
the  half-hour  and  the  sand-glass.  By  this  means  they  rid  themselves  of  the  im¬ 
portunity  of  those  troublesome  doctors,  who  might  undertake  to  refute  all  their 
arguments,  to  produce  books  which  might  convict  them  of  forgery,  to  insist  on  a 
reply,  and  reduce  them  to  the  predicament  of  having  none  to  give. 

"It  is  not  that  they  were  so  blind  as  not  to  see  that  this  encroachment  on  liberty, 
which  has  induced  so  many  doctors  to  withdraw  from  the  meetings,  would  do  no 
good  to  their  censure;  and  that  the  protest  of  nullity,  taken  on  this  ground  by  M. 
Arnauld  before  it  was  concluded,  would  be  a  bad  preamble  for  securing  it  a  fav¬ 
ourable  reception.  They  know  very  well  that  unprejudiced  persons  place  fully  as 
much  weight  on  the  judgement  of  seventy  doctors,  who  had  nothing  to  gain  by 
defending  M.  Arnauld,  as  on  that  of  a  hundred  others  who  had  nothing  to  lose  by 
condemning  him.  But,  upon  the  whole,  they  considered  that  it  would  be  of  vast 
importance  to  have  a  censure,  although  it  should  be  the  act  of  a  party  only  in  the 
Sorbonne,  and  not  of  the  whole  body;  although  it  should  be  carried  with  little  or 
no  freedom  of  debate  and  obtained  by  a  great  many  small  manoeuvres  not  exactly 
according  to  order;  although  it  should  give  no  explanation  of  the  matter  in  dis¬ 
pute;  although  it  should  not  point  out  in  what  this  heresy  consists,  and  should 
say  as  little  as  possible  about  it,  for  fear  of  committing  a  mistake.  This  very  silence 
is  a  mystery  in  the  eyes  of  the  simple;  and  the  censure  will  reap  this  singular  ad¬ 
vantage  from  it,  that  they  may  defy  the  most  critical  and  subtle  theologians  to 
find  in  it  a  single  weak  argument. 

"Keep  yourself  easy,  then,  and  do  not  be  afraid  of  being  set  down  as  a  heretic, 
though  you  should  make  use  of  the  condemned  proposition.  It  is  bad,  I  assure 
you,  only  as  occurring  in  the  second  letter  of  M.  Arnauld.  If  you  will  not  believe 
this  statement  on  my  word,  I  refer  you  to  M.  le  Moine,  the  most  zealous  of  the 
examiners,  who,  in  the  course  of  conversation  with  a  doctor  of  my  acquaintance 
this  very  morning,  on  being  asked  by  him  where  lay  the  point  of  difference  in 
dispute,  and  if  one  would  no  longer  be  allowed  to  say  what  the  fathers  had  said 
before  him,  made  the  following  exquisite  reply:  ’This  proposition  would  be  ortho¬ 
dox  in  the  mouth  of  any  other — it  is  only  as  coming  from  M.  Arnauld  that  the 
Sorbonne  has  condemned  it!’  You  must  now  be  prepared  to  admire  the  machin¬ 
ery  of  Molinism,  which  can  produce  such  prodigious  overturnings  in  the  Church 
— that  what  is  Catholic  in  the  fathers  becomes  heretical  in  M.  Arnauld — that 
what  is  heretical  in  the  Semi-Pelagians  becomes  orthodox  in  the  writings  of  the 
Jesuits;  the  ancient  doctrine  of  St.  Augustine  becomes  an  intolerable  innovation, 
and  new  inventions,  daily  fabricated  before  our  eyes,  pass  for  the  ancient  faith  of 
the  Church.’’  So  saying,  he  took  his  leave  of  me. 

This  information  has  satisfied  my  purpose.  I  gather  from  it  that  this  same  heresy 
is  one  of  an  entirely  new  species.  It  is  not  the  sentiments  of  M.  Arnauld  that  are 


LETTER  IV 


l9 

heretical;  it  is  only  his  person.  This  is  a  personal  heresy.  He  is  not  a  heretic  for 
anything  he  has  said  or  written,  but  simply  because  he  is  M.  Arnauld.  This  is  all 
they  have  to  say  against  him.  Do  what  he  may,  unless  he  cease  to  be,  he  will  never 
be  a  good  Catholic.  The  grace  of  St.  Augustine  will  never  be  the  true  grace,  so 
long  as  he  continues  to  defend  it.  It  would  become  so  at  once,  were  he  to  take  it 
into  his  head  to  impugn  it.  That  would  be  a  sure  stroke,  and  almost  the  only  plan 
for  establishing  the  truth  and  demolishing  Molinism;  such  is  the  fatality  attend¬ 
ing  all  the  opinions  which  he  embraces. 

Let  us  leave  them,  then,  to  settle  their  own  differences.  These  are  the  disputes 
of  theologians,  not  of  theology.  We,  who  are  no  doctors,  have  nothing  to  do 
with  their  quarrels.  Tell  our  friends  the  news  of  the  censure,  and  love  me  while 
I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV 


Paris,  February  25,  1656 
Sir, 

Nothing  can  come  up  to  the  Jesuits.  I  have  seen  Jacobins,  doctors,  and  all  sorts 
of  people  in  my  day,  but  such  an  interview  as  I  have  just  had  was  wanting  to  com¬ 
plete  my  knowledge  of  mankind.  Other  men  are  merely  copies  of  them.  As  things 
are  always  found  best  at  the  fountainhead,  I  paid  a  visit  to  one  of  the  ablest  among 
them,  in  company  with  my  trusty  Jansenist — the  same  who  accompanied  me  to 
the  Dominicans.  Being  particularly  anxious  to  learn  something  of  a  dispute  which 
they  have  with  the  Jansenists  about  what  they  call  actual  grace ,  I  said  to  the  wor¬ 
thy  father  that  I  would  be  much  obliged  to  him  if  he  would  instruct  me  on  this 
point — that  I  did  not  even  know  what  the  term  meant  and  would  thank  him  to  ex- 
plainit.  "With  all  my  heart,"  the  Jesuit  replied;  "for  I  dearly  love  inquisitive  people. 
Actual  grace,  according  to  our  definition,  ’is  an  inspiration  of  God,  whereby  He 
makes  us  to  know  His  will  and  excites  within  us  a  desire  to  perform  it.’" 

"And  where,"  said  I,  "lies  your  difference  with  the  Jansenists  on  this  subject?" 

"The  difference  lies  here,"  he  replied;  "we  hold  that  God  bestows  actual  grace 
on  all  men  in  every  case  of  temptation;  for  we  maintain  that  unless  a  person  have, 
whenever  tempted,  actual  grace  to  keep  him  from  sinning,  his  sin,  whatever  it 
may  be,  can  never  be  imputed  to  him.  The  Jansenists,  on  the  other  hand,  affirm 
that  sins,  though  committed  without  actual  grace,  are,  nevertheless,  imputed; 
but  they  are  a  pack  of  fools."  I  got  a  glimpse  of  his  meaning;  but,  to  obtain  from 
him  a  fuller  explanation,  I  observed:  "My  dear  father,  it  is  that  phrase  actual  grace 
that  puzzles  me;  I  am  quite  a  stranger  to  it,  and  if  you  would  have  the  goodness  to 
tell  me  the  same  thing  over  again,  without  employing  that  term,  you  would  in¬ 
finitely  oblige  me." 

"Very  good,"  returned  the  father;  "that  is  to  say,  you  want  me  to  substitute 
the  definition  in  place  of  the  thing  defined;  that  makes  no  alteration  of  the  sense; 
I  have  no  objections.  We  maintain  it,  then,  as  an  undeniable  principle,  that  an 
action  cannot  be  imputed  as  a  sin ,  unless  God  bestow  on  us ,  before  committing  it ,  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  evil  that  is  in  the  action ,  and  an  inspiration  inciting  us  to  avoid  it.  Do  you 
understand  me  now?" 


20 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Astonished  at  such  a  declaration,  according  to  which,  no  sins  of  surprise,  nor 
any  of  those  committed  in  entire  'forgetfulness  of  God,  could  be  imputed,  I 
turned  round  to  my  friend  the  Jansenist  and  easily  discovered  from  his  looks  that 
he  was  of  a  different  way  of  thinking.  But  as  he  did  not  utter  a  word,  I  said  to  the 
monk,  "I  would  fain  wish,  my  dear  father,  to  think  that  what  you  have  now  said 
is  true,  and  that  you  have  good  proofs  for  it.” 

‘'Proofs,  say  you!”  he  instantly  exclaimed:  "I  shall  furnish  you  with  these  very 
soon,  and  the  very  best  sort  too;  let  me  alone  for  that.” 

So  saying,  he  went  in  search  of  his  books,  and  I  took  this  opportunity  of  ask¬ 
ing  my  friend  if  there  was  any  other  person  who  talked  in  this  manner?  "Is 
this  so  strange  to  you?”  he  replied.  "You  may  depend  upon  it  that  neither  the 
fathers,  nor  the  popes,  nor  councils,  nor  Scripture,  nor  any  book  of  devotion 
employ  such  language;  but,  if  you  wish  casuists  and  modern  schoolmen,  he 
will  bring  you  a  goodly  number  of  them  on  his  side.”  "O!  but  I  care  not  a 
fig  about  these  authors,  if  they  are  contrary  to  tradition,”  I  said.  "You  are  right,” 
he  replied. 

As  he  spoke,  the  good  father  entered  the  room,  laden  with  books;  and  present¬ 
ing  to  me  the  first  that  came  to  hand.  "Read  that,”  he  said;  "this  is  The  Summary 
of  Sins ,  by  Father  Bauny — the  fifth  edition  too,  you  see,  which  shows  that  it  is  a 
good  book.” 

"It  is  a  pity,  however,”  whispered  the  Jansenist  in  my  ear,  "that  this  same  book 
has  been  condemned  at  Rome,  and  by  the  bishops  of  France.” 

"Look  at  page  906,”  said  the  father.  I  did  so  and  read  as  follows:  "In  order  to 
sin  and  become  culpable  in  the  sight  of  God,  it  is  necessary  to  know  that  the 
thing  we  wish  to  do  is  not  good,  or  at  least  to  doubt  that  it  is — to  fear  or  to  judge 
that  God  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  action  which  we  contemplate,  but  forbids  it;  and 
in  spite  of  this,  to  commit  the  deed,  leap  the  fence,  and  transgress.” 

"This  is  a  good  commencement,”  I  remarked.  "And  yet,”  said  he,  "mark  how 
far  envy  will  carry  some  people.  It  was  on  that  very  passage  that  M.  Hallier,  before 
he  became  one  of  our  friends,  bantered  Father  Bauny,  by  applying  to  him  these 
words:  Ecce  qui  tollit peccata  mundi — 'Behold  the  man  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of 
the  world!’” 

"Certainly,”  said  I,  "according  to  Father  Bauny,  we  may  be  said  to  behold  a 
redemption  of  an  entirely  new  description.” 

"Would  you  have  a  more  authentic  witness  on  the  point?”  added  he.  "Here  is 
the  book  of  Father  Annat.  It  is  the  last  that  he  wrote  against  M.  Arnauld.  Turn  up 
to  page  34,  where  there  is  a  dog’s  ear,  and  read  the  lines  which  I  have  marked  with 
pencil — they  ought  to  be  written  in  letters  of  gold.”  I  then  read  these  words: 
"He  that  has  no  thought  of  God,  nor  of  his  sins,  nor  any  apprehension  (that  is, 
as  he  explained  it,  any  knowledge)  of  his  obligation  to  exercise  the  acts  of  love  to 
God  or  contrition,  has  no  actual  grace  for  exercising  those  acts;  but  it  is  equally 
true  that  he  is  guilty  of  no  sin  in  omitting  them,  and  that,  if  he  is  damned,  it  will 
not  be  as  a  punishment  for  that  omission.”  And  a  few  lines  below,  he  adds:  "The 
same  thing  may  be  said  of  a  culpable  commission.” 

"You  see,”  said  the  monk,  "how  he  speaks  of  sins  of  omission  and  of  commission. 
Nothing  escapes  him.  What  say  you  to  that?” 

"Say!”  I  exclaimed.  "I  am  delighted!  What  a  charming  train  of  consequences 
do  I  discover  flowing  from  this  doctrine!  I  can  see  the  whole  results  already;  and 


LETTER  IV 


21 


such  mysteries  present  themselves  before  me!  Why,  I  see  more  people,  beyond  all 
comparison,  justified  by  this  ignorance  and  forgetfulness  of  God,  than  by  grace 
and  the  sacraments!  But,  my  dear  father,  are  you  not  inspiring  me  with  a  delusive 
joy?  Are  you  sure  there  is  nothing  here  like  that  sufficiency  which  suffices  not?  I  am 
terribly  afraid  of  the  Distinguo;  I  was  taken  in  with  that  once  already!  Are  you 
quite  in  earnest?” 

"How  now!”  cried  the  monk,  beginning  to  get  angry,  "here  is  no  matter  for 
jesting.  I  assure  you  there  is  no  such  thing  as  equivocation  here.” 

"I  am  not  making  a  jest  of  it,”  said  I;  "but  that  is  what  I  really  dread,  from  pure 
anxiety  to  find  it  true.” 

"Well  then,”  he  said,  "to  assure  yourself  still  more  of  it,  here  are  the  writings 
of  M.  le  Moine,  who  taught  the  doctrine  in  a  full  meeting  of  the  Sorbonne.  He 
learned  it  from  us,  to  be  sure;  but  he  has  the  merit  of  having  cleared  it  up  most 
admirably.  O  how  circumstantially  he  goes  to  work!  He  shows  that,  in  order  to 
make  out  an  action  to  be  a  sin,  all  these  things  must  have  passed  through  the  mind. 
Read,  and  weigh  every  word.”  I  then  read  what  I  now  give  you  in  a  translation 
from  the  original  Latin:  "i.  On  the  one  hand,  God  sheds  abroad  on  the  soul  some 
measure  of  love,  which  gives  it  a  bias  toward  the  thing  commanded;  and  on  the 
other,  a  rebellious  concupiscence  solicits  it  in  the  opposite  direction.  2.  God  inspires 
the  soul  with  a  knowledge  of  its  own  weakness.  3.  God  reveals  the  knowledge  of 
the  physician  who  can  heal  it.  4.  God  inspires  it  with  a  desire  to  be  healed.  5.  God 
inspires  a  desire  to  pray  and  solicit  his  assistance.” 

"And  unless  all  these  things  occur  and  pass  through  the  soul,”  added  the  monk, 
"the  action  is  not  properly  a  sin,  and  cannot  be  imputed,  as  M.  le  Moine  shows  in 
the  same  place  and  in  what  follows.  Would  you  wish  to  have  other  authorities  for 
this?  Here  they  are.” 

"All  modern  ones,  however,”  whispered  my Jansenist  friend. 

"So  I  perceive,”  said  I  to  him  aside;  and  then,  turning  to  the  monk:  "O  my 
dear  sir,”  cried  I,  "what  a  blessing  this  will  be  to  some  persons  of  my  acquaint¬ 
ance!  I  must  positively  introduce  them  to  you.  You  have  never,  perhaps,  met  with 
people  who  had  fewer  sins  to  account  for  all  your  life.  For,  in  the  first  place,  they 
never  think  of  God  at  all;  their  vices  have  got  the  better  of  their  reason;  they  have 
never  known  either  their  weakness  or  the  physician  who  can  cure  it;  they  have 
never  thought  of  ’desiring  the  health  of  their  soul,’  and  still  less  of  'praying  to 
God  to  bestow  it’;  so  that,  according  to  M.  le  Moine,  they  are  still  in  the  state  of 
baptismal  innocence.  They  have  'never  had  a  thought  of  loving  God  or  of  being 
contrite  for  their  sins’;  so  that,  according  to  Father  Annat,  they  have  never  com¬ 
mitted  sin  through  the  want  of  charity  and  penitence.  Their  life  is  spent  in  a 
perpetual  round  of  all  sorts  of  pleasures,  in  the  course  of  which  they  have  not  been 
interrupted  by  the  slightest  remorse.  These  excesses  had  led  me  to  imagine  that 
their  perdition  was  inevitable;  but  you,  father,  inform  me  that  these  same  excesses 
secure  their  salvation.  Blessings  on  you,  my  good  father,  for  this  way  of  justifying 
people!  Others  prescribe  painful  austerities  for  healing  the  soul;  but  you  show 
that  souls  which  may  be  thought  desperately  distempered  are  in  quite  good  health. 
What  an  excellent  device  for  being  happy  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next!  I 
had  always  supposed  that  the  less  a  man  thought  of  God,  the  more  he  sinned;  but, 
from  what  I  see  now,  if  one  could  only  succeed  in  bringing  himself  not  to  think 
upon  God  at  all,  everything  would  be  pure  with  him  in  all  time  coming.  Away 


22 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

with  your  half-and-half  sinners,  who  retain  some  sneaking  affection  for  virtue! 
They  will  be  damned  every  one  of  them,  these  semi-sinners.  But  commend  me  to 
your  arrant  sinners — hardened,  unalloyed,  out-and-out,  thorough-bred  sinners. 
Hell  is  no  place  for  them;  they  have  cheated  the  devil,  purely  by  virtue  of  their 
devotion  to  his  service!’* 

The  good  father,  who  saw  very  well  the  connection  between  these  consequences 
and  his  principle,  dexterously  evaded  them;  and,  maintaining  his  temper,  either 
from  good  nature  or  policy,  he  merely  replied:  "To  let  you  understand  how  we 
avoid  these  inconveniences,  you  must  know  that,  while  we  affirm  that  these  repro¬ 
bates  to  whom  you  refer  would  be  without  sin  if  they  had  no  thoughts  of  conver¬ 
sion  and  no  desires  to  devote  themselves  to  God,  we  maintain  that  they  all  actually 
have  such  thoughts  and  desires,  and  that  God  never  permitted  a  man  to  sin  with¬ 
out  giving  him  previously  a  view  of  the  evil  which  he  contemplated,  and  a  desire, 
either  to  avoid  the  offence,  or  at  all  events  to  implore  his  aid  to  enable  him  to 
avoid  it;  and  none  but  Jansenists  will  assert  the  contrary.** 

"Strange!  father,*’  returned  I;  "is  this,  then,  the  heresy  of  the  Jansenists,  to  deny 
that  every  time  a  man  commits  a  sin  he  is  troubled  with  a  remorse  of  conscience, 
in  spite  of  which,  he  ’leaps  the  fence  and  transgresses,*  as  Father  Bauny  has  it? 
It  is  rather  too  good  a  joke  to  be  made  a  heretic  for  that.  I  can  easily  believe  that  a 
man  may  be  damned  for  not  having  good  thoughts;  but  it  never  would  have 
entered  my  head  to  imagine  that  any  man  could  be  subjected  to  that  doom  for 
not  believing  that  all  mankind  must  have  good  thoughts!  But,  father,  I  hold  my¬ 
self  bound  in  conscience  to  disabuse  you  and  to  inform  you  that  there  are  thou¬ 
sands  of  people  who  have  no  such  desires —  who  sin  without  regret — who  sin  with 
delight — who  make  a  boast  of  sinning.  And  who  ought  to  know  better  about 
these  things  than  yourself?  You  cannot  have  failed  to  have  confessed  some  of 
those  to  whom  I  allude;  for  it  is  among  persons  of  high  rank  that  they  are  most 
generally  to  be  met  with.  But  mark,  father,  the  dangerous  consequences  of  your 
maxim.  Do  you  not  perceive  what  effect  it  may  have  on  those  libertines  who  like 
nothing  better  than  to  find  out  matter  of  doubt  in  religion?  What  a  handle  do  you 
give  them,  when  you  assure  them,  as  an  article  of  faith,  that,  on  every  occasion 
when  they  commit  a  sin,  they  feel  an  inward  presentiment  of  the  evil  and  a  desire 
to  avoid  it?  Is  it  not  obvious  that,  feeling  convinced  by  their  own  experience  of 
the  falsity  of  your  doctrine  on  this  point,  which  you  say  is  a  matter  of  faith,  they 
will  extend  the  inference  drawn  from  this  to  all  the  other  points?  They  will  argue 
that,  since  you  are  not  trustworthy  in  one  article,  you  are  to  be  suspected  in  them 
all;  and  thus  you  shut  them  up  to  conclude  either  that  religion  is  false  or  that  you 
must  know  very  little  about  it.*’ 

Here  my  friend  the  Jansenist,  following  up  my  remarks,  said  to  him:  "You 
would  do  well,  father,  if  you  wish  to  preserve  your  doctrine,  not  to  explain  so 
precisely  as  you  have  done  to  us  what  you  mean  by  actual  grace .  For,  how  could 
you,  without  forfeiting  all  credit  in  the  estimation  of  men,  openly  declare  that 
nobody  sins  without  having  previously  the  knowledge  of  his  weakness ,  and  of  a  physician , 
or  the  desire  of  a  cure ,  and  of  asking  it  of  God?  Will  it  be  believed,  on  your  word,  that 
those  who  are  immersed  in  avarice,  impurity,  blasphemy,  duelling,  revenge,  rob¬ 
bery  and  sacrilege,  have  really  a  desire  to  embrace  chastity,  humility,  and  the  other 
Christian  virtues?  Can  it  be  conceived  that  those  philosophers  who  boasted  so 
loudly  of  the  powers  of  nature,  knew  its  infirmity  and  its  physician?  Will  you 


LETTER  IV  23 

maintain  that  those  who  held  it  as  a  settled  maxim  that  'it  is  not  God  that  bestows 
virtue,  and  that  no  one  ever  asked  it  from  him,’  would  think  of  asking  it  for  them¬ 
selves?  Who  can  believe  that  the  Epicureans,  who  denied  a  divine  providence,  ever 
felt  any  inclination  to  pray  to  God?  men  who  said  that  'it  would  be  an  insult  to 
invoke  the  Deity  in  our  necessities,  as  if  he  were  capable  of  wasting  a  thought  on 
beings  like  us’?  In  a  word,  how  can  it  be  imagined  that  idolaters  and  atheists, 
every  time  they  are  tempted  to  the  commission  of  sin,  in  other  words,  infinitely 
often  during  their  lives,  have  a  desire  to  pray  to  the  true  God,  of  whom  they  are 
ignorant,  that  he  would  bestow  on  them  virtues  of  which  they  have  no  concep¬ 
tion?” 

"Yes,”  said  the  worthy  monk,  in  a  resolute  tone,  ''we  will  affirm  it:  and  sooner 
than  allow  that  any  one  sins  without  having  the  consciousness  that  he  is  doing 
evil,  and  the  desire  of  the  opposite  virtue,  we  will  maintain  that  the  whole  world, 
reprobates  and  infidels  included,  have  these  inspirations  and  desires  in  every  case 
of  temptation.  You  cannot  show  me,  from  the  Scripture  at  least,  that  this  is  not 
the  truth.” 

On  this  remark  I  struck  in,  by  exclaiming:  "What!  father,  must  we  have  re¬ 
course  to  the  Scripture  to  demonstrate  a  thing  so  clear  as  this?  This  is  not  a  point  of 
faith,  nor  even  of  reason.  It  is  a  matter  of  fact:  we  see  it — we  know  it — we  feel  it.” 

But  the  Jansenist,  keeping  the  monk  to  his  own  terms,  addressed  him  as  fol¬ 
lows:  "If  you  are  willing,  father,  to  stand  or  fall  by  Scripture,  I  am  ready  to  meet 
you  there;  only  you  must  promise  to  yield  to  its  authority;  and,  since  it  is  written 
that  'God  has  not  revealed  his  judgements  to  the  Heathen,  but  left  them  to 
wander  in  their  own  ways,’  you  must  not  say  that  God  has  enlightened  those 
whom  the  Sacred  Writings  assure  us  'he  has  left  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death.’  Is  it  not  enough  to  show  the  erroneousness  of  your  principle,  to  find  that 
St.  Paul  calls  himself  'the  chief  of  sinners,’  for  a  sin  which  he  committed  'ignor¬ 
antly,  and  with  zeal’?  Is  it  not  enough,  to  and  from  the  Gospel,  that  those  who 
crucified  Jesus  Christ  had  need  of  the  pardon  which  he  asked  for  them,  although 
they  knew  not  the  malice  of  their  action,  and  would  never  have  committed  it, 
according  to  St.  Paul,  if  they  had  known  it?  Is  it  not  enough  that  Jesus  Christ 
apprises  us  that  there  will  be  persecutors  of  the  Church,  who,  while  making  every 
effort  to  ruin  her,  will  'think  that  they  are  doing  God  service’;  teaching  us  that 
this  sin,  which  in  the  judgement  of  the  apostle,  is  the  greatest  of  all  sins,  may  be 
committed  by  persons  who,  so  far  from  knowing  that  they  were  sinning,  would 
think  that  they  sinned  by  not  committing  it?  In  fine,  it  is  not  enough  that  Jesus 
Christ  himself  has  taught  us  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  sinners,  the  one  of  whom 
sin  with  'knowledge  of  their  Master’s  will,’  and  the  other  without  knowledge; 
and  that  both  of  them  will  be  'chastised,’  although,  indeed,  in  a  different  manner?” 

Sorely  pressed  by  so  many  testimonies  from  Scripture,  to  which  he  had  appealed, 
the  worthy  monk  began  to  give  way;  and,  leaving  the  wicked  to  sin  without  in¬ 
spiration,  he  said:  "You  will  not  deny  that  good  men ,  at  least,  never  sin  unless  God 
give  them” — "You  are  flinching,”  said  I,  interrupting  him;  "you  are  flinching 
now,  my  good  father;  you  abandon  the  general  principle,  and,  finding  that  it  will 
not  hold  good  in  regard  to  the  wicked,  you  would  compound  the  matter,  by 
making  it  apply  at  least  to  the  righteous.  But  in  this  point  of  view  the  application 
of  it  is,  I  conceive,  so  circumscribed  that  it  will  hardly  apply  to  anybody,  and  it  is 
scarcely  worth  while  to  dispute  the  point.” 


24 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

My  friend,  however,  who  was  so  ready  on  the  whole  question,  that  I  am  in¬ 
clined  to  think  he  had  studied  it  all  that  very  morning,  replied:  "This,  father,  is 
the  last  entrenchment  to  which  those  of  your  party  who  are  willing  to  reason  at  all 
are  sure  to  retreat;  but  you  are  far  from  being  safe  even  here.  The  example  of  the 
saints  is  not  a  whit  more  in  your  favour.  Who  doubts  that  they  often  fall  into  sins 
of  surprise,  without  being  conscious  of  them?  Do  we  not  learn  from  the  saints 
themselves  how  often  concupiscence  lays  hidden  snares  for  them;  and  how  gen¬ 
erally  it  happens,  as  St.  Augustine  complains  of  himself  in  his  Confessions ,  that, 
with  all  their  discretion,  they  ’give  to  pleasure  what  they  mean  only  to  give  to 
necessity’? 

"How  usual  is  it  to  see  the  more  zealous  friends  of  truth  betrayed  by  the  heat  of 
controversy  into  sallies  of  bitter  passion  for  their  personal  interests,  while  their 
consciences,  at  the  time,  bear  them  no  other  testimony  than  that  they  are  acting 
in  this  manner  purely  for  the  interests  of  truth,  and  they  do  not  discover  their  mis¬ 
take  till  long  afterwards ! 

"What,  again,  shall  we  say  of  those  who,  as  we  learn  from  examples  in  ecclesias¬ 
tical  history,  eagerly  involve  themselves  in  affairs  which  are  really  bad,  because 
they  believe  them  to  be  really  good;  and  yet  this  does  not  hinder  the  fathers  from 
condemning  such  persons  as  having  sinned  on  these  occasions? 

"And  were  this  not  the  case,  how  could  the  saints  have  their  secret  faults?  How 
could  it  be  true  that  God  alone  knows  the  magnitude  and  the  number  of  our 
offences;  that  no  one  knows  whether  he  is  worthy  of  hatred  or  love;  and  that  the 
best  of  saints,  though  unconscious  of  any  culpability,  ought  always,  as  St.  Paul 
says  of  himself,  to  remain  in  Tear  and  trembling’? 

"You  perceive,  then,  father,  that  this  knowledge  of  the  evil  and  love  of  the 
opposite  virtue,  which  you  imagine  to  be  essential  to  constitute  sin,  are  equally 
disproved  by  the  examples  of  the  righteous  and  of  the  wicked.  In  the  case  of  the 
wicked,  their  passion  for  vice  sufficiently  testifies  that  they  have  no  desire  for 
virtue;  and  in  regard  to  the  righteous,  the  love  which  they  bear  to  virtue  plainly 
shows  that  they  are  not  always  conscious  of  those  sins  which,  as  the  Scripture 
teaches,  they  are  daily  committing. 

"So  true  is  it,  indeed,  that  the  righteous  often  sin  through  ignorance,  that  the 
greatest  saints  rarely  sin  otherwise.  For  how  can  it  be  supposed  that  souls  so 
pure,  who  avoid  with  so  much  care  and  zeal  the  least  things  that  can  be  displeas¬ 
ing  to  God  as  soon  as  they  discover  them,  and  who  yet  sin  many  times  every 
day,  could  possibly  have,  every  time  before  they  fell  into  sin,  'the  knowledge 
of  their  infirmity  on  that  occasion,  and  of  their  physician,  and  the  desire  of 
their  souls’  health,  and  of  praying  to  God  for  assistance,’  and  that,  in  spite 
of  these  inspirations,  these  devoted  souls  'nevertheless  transgress,’  and  commit 
the  sin? 

"You  must  conclude  then,  father,  that  neither  sinners  nor  yet  saints  have  al¬ 
ways  that  knowledge,  or  those  desires  and  inspirations,  every  time  they  offend; 
that  is,  to  use  your  own  terms,  they  have  not  always  actual  grace.  Say  no  longer, 
with  your  modern  authors,  that  it  is  impossible  for  those  to  sin  who  do  not  know 
righteousness;  but  rather  join  with  St.  Augustine  and  the  ancient  fathers  in  saying 
that  it  is  impossible  not  to  sin,  when  we  do  not  know  righteousness:  Necesse  est  ut 
peccet ,  a  quo  ignoratur  justitia .” 

The  good  father,  though  thus  driven  from  both  of  his  positions,  did  not  lose 


LETTER  IV 


25 

courage,  but  after  ruminating  a  little,  "Ha!”  he  exclaimed,  "I  shall  convince  you 
immediately.”  And  again  taking  up  Father  Bauny,  he  pointed  to  the  same  place 
he  had  before  quoted,  exclaiming,  "Look  now — see  the  ground  on  which  he  es¬ 
tablishes  his  opinion!  I  was  sure  he  would  not  be  deficient  in  good  proofs.  Read 
what  he  quotes  from  Aristotle,  and  you  will  see  that,  after  so  express  an  authority, 
you  must  either  burn  the  books  of  this  prince  of  philosophers  or  adopt  our  opin¬ 
ion.  Hear,  then,  the  principles  which  support  Father  Bauny:  Aristotle  states  first, 
'that  an  action  cannot  he  imputed  as  blameworthy ,  if  it  he  involuntary . 

"I  grant  that,”  said  my  friend. 

"This  is  the  first  time  you  have  agreed  together,”  said  I.  "Take  my  advice, 
father,  and  proceed  no  further.” 

"That  would  be  doing  nothing,”  he  replied;  "we  must  know  what  are  the  con¬ 
ditions  necessary  to  constitute  an  action  voluntary.” 

"I  am  much  afraid,”  returned  I,  "that  you  will  get  at  loggerheads  on  that  point.” 

"No  fear  of  that,”  said  he;  "this  is  sure  ground — Aristotle  is  on  my  side.  Hear 
now,  what  Father  Bauny  says:  Tn  order  that  an  action  be  voluntary,  it  must  pro¬ 
ceed  from  a  man  who  perceives,  knows,  and  comprehends  what  is  good  and  what 
is  evil  in  it.  Voluntarium  est — that  is  a  voluntary  action,  as  we  commonly  say  with 
the  philosopher’  (that  is  Aristotle,  you  know,  said  the  monk,  squeezing  my  hand) ; 
'quod  fit  a  principio  cognoscente  singula  in  quihus  est  actio — which  is  done  by  a  person 
knowing  the  particulars  of  the  action;  so  that  when  the  will  is  led  inconsiderately, 
and  without  mature  reflection,  to  embrace  or  reject,  to  do  or  omit  to  do  anything, 
before  the  understanding  has  been  able  to  see  whether  it  would  be  right  or  wrong, 
such  an  action  is  neither  good  nor  evil;  because  previous  to  this  mental  inquisi¬ 
tion,  view,  and  reflection  on  the  good  or  bad  qualities  of  the  matter  in  question, 
the  act  by  which  it  is  done  is  not  voluntary.’  Are  you  satisfied  now?”  said  the  father. 

"It  appears,”  returned  I,  "that  Aristotle  agrees  with  Father  Bauny;  but  that 
does  not  prevent  me  from  feeling  surprised  at  this  statement.  What,  sir!  is  it  not 
enough  to  make  an  action  voluntary  that  the  man  knows  what  he  is  doing,  and 
does  it  just  because  he  chooses  to  do  it?  Must  we  suppose,  besides  this,  that  he 
’perceives,  knows,  and  comprehends  what  is  good  and  evil  in  the  action’?  Why, 
on  this  supposition  there  would  be  hardly  such  a  thing  in  nature  as  voluntary 
actions,  for  no  one  scarcely  thinks  about  all  this.  How  many  oaths  in  gambling, 
how  many  excesses  in  debauchery,  how  many  riotous  extravagances  in  the  carni¬ 
val,  must,  on  this  principle,  be  excluded  from  the  list  of  voluntary  actions,  and 
consequently  neither  good  nor  bad,  because  not  accompanied  by  those  ’mental 
reflections  on  the  good  and  evil  qualities’  of  the  action?  But  is  it  possible,  father, 
that  Aristotle  held  such  a  sentiment?  I  have  always  understood  that  he  was  a  sensi¬ 
ble  man.” 

"I  shall  soon  convince  you  of  that,”  said  the  Jansenist,  and  requesting  a  sight 
of  Aristotle’s  Ethics ,  he  opened  it  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  book,  from  which 
Father  Bauny  had  taken  the  passage  quoted,  and  said  to  the  monk:  "I  excuse  you, 
my  dear  sir,  for  having  believed,  on  the  word  of  Father  Bauny,  that  Aristotle  held 
such  a  sentiment;  but  you  would  have  changed  your  mind  had  you  read  him  for 
yourself.  It  is  true  that  he  teaches,  that  ’in  order  to  make  an  action  voluntary,  we 
must  know  the  particulars  of  that  action’ — singula  in  quihus  est  actio.  But  what  else 
does  he  means  by  that,  than  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  action?  The  examples 
which  he  adduces  clearly  show  this  to  be  his  meaning,  for  they  are  exclusively  con- 


26 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

fined  to  cases  in  which  the  persons  were  ignorant  of  some  of  the  circumstances; 
such  as  that  of  ’a  person  who,  wishing  to  exhibit  a  machine,  discharges  a  dart 
which  wounds  a  bystander;  and  that  of  Merope,  who  killed  her  own  son  instead 
of  her  enemy,’  and  such  like. 

"Thus  you  see  what  is  the  kind  of  ignorance  that  renders  actions  involuntary; 
namely,  that  of  the  particular  circumstances,  which  is  termed  by  divines,  as  you 
must  know,  ignorance  of  the  fact .  But  with  respect  to  ignorance  of  the  right — ignor¬ 
ance  of  the  good  or  evil  in  an  action — which  is  the  only  point  in  question,  let  us 
see  if  Aristotle  agrees  with  Father  Bauny.  Here  are  the  words  of  the  philosopher: 
'All  wicked  men  are  ignorant  of  what  they  ought  to  do,  and  what  they  ought  to 
avoid;  and  it  is  this  very  ignorance  which  makes  them  wicked  and  vicious.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  a  man  cannot  be  said  to  act  involuntarily  merely  because  he  is  ignor¬ 
ant  of  what  it  is  proper  for  him  to  do  in  order  to  fulfil  his  duty.  This  ignorance  in 
the  choice  of  good  and  evil  does  not  make  the  action  involuntary;  it  only  makes 
it  vicious.  The  same  thing  may  be  affirmed  of  the  man  who  is  ignorant  generally 
of  the  rules  of  his  duty;  such  ignorance  is  worthy  of  blame,  not  of  excuse.  And 
consequently,  the  ignorance  which  renders  actions  involuntary  and  excusable  is 
simply  that  which  relates  to  the  fact  and  its  particular  circumstances.  In  this  case 
the  person  is  excused  and  forgiven,  being  considered  as  having  acted  contrary  to 
his  inclination.’ 

"After  this,  father,  will  you  maintain  that  Aristotle  is  of  your  opinion?  And  who 
can  help  being  astonished  to  find  that  a  Pagan  philosopher  had  more  enlightened 
views  than  your  doctors,  in  a  matter  so  deeply  affecting  morals,  and  the  direction 
of  conscience,  too,  as  the  knowledge  of  those  conditions  which  render  actions 
voluntary  or  involuntary,  and  which,  accordingly,  charge  or  discharge  them  as  sin¬ 
ful?  Look  for  no  more  support,  then,  father,  from  the  prince  of  philosophers,  and 
no  longer  oppose  yourselves  to  the  prince  of  theologians,  who  has  thus  decided 
the  point  in  the  first  book  of  his  Retractations ,  chapter  xv:  'Those  who  sin  through 
ignorance,  though  they  sin  without  meaning  to  sin,  commit  the  deed  only  be¬ 
cause  they  will  commit  it.  And,  therefore,  even  this  sin  of  ignorance  cannot  be 
committed  except  by  the  will  of  him  who  commits  it,  though  by  a  will  which  in¬ 
cites  him  to  the  action  merely,  and  not  to  the  sin;  and  yet  the  action  itself  is  never¬ 
theless  sinful,  for  it  is  enough  to  constitute  it  such  that  he  has  done  what  he  was 
bound  not  to  do.”’ 

The  Jesuit  seemed  to  be  confounded  more  with  the  passage  from  Aristotle,  I 
thought,  than  that  from  St.  Augustine;  but  while  he  was  thinking  on  what  he 

could  reply,  a  messenger  came  to  inform  him  that  Madame  la  Marechale  of - , 

and  Madame  the  Marchioness  of - ,  requested  his  attendance.  So,  taking  a 

hasty  leave  of  us,  he  said:  "I  shall  speak  about  it  to  our  fathers.  They  will  find  an 
answer  to  it,  I  warrant  you;  we  have  got  some  long  heads  among  us.’’ 

We  understood  him  perfectly  well;  and,  on  our  being  left  alone,  I  expressed  to 
my  friend  my  astonishment  at  the  subversion  which  this  doctrine  threatened  to 
the  whole  system  of  morals.  To  this  he  replied  that  he  was  quite  astonished  at 
my  astonishment.  "Are  you  not  yet  aware,’’  he  said,  "that  they  have  gone  to  far 
greater  excess  in  morals  than  in  any  other  matter?’’  He  gave  me  some  strange 
illustrations  of  this,  promising  me  more  at  some  future  time.  The  information 
which  I  may  receive  on  this  point  will,  I  hope,  furnish  the  topic  of  my  next  com¬ 
munication.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  V 


27 


LETTER  V 


Paris,  March  20,  1656 
Sir, 

According  to  my  promise,  I  now  send  you  the  first  outlines  of  the  morals 
taught  by  those  good  fathers  the  Jesuits,  "those  men  distinguished  for  learning 
and  sagacity,  who  are  all  under  the  guidance  of  divine  wisdom — a  surer  guide 
than  all  philosophy."  You  imagine,  perhaps,  that  I  am  in  jest,  but  I  am  perfectly 
serious;  or  rather,  they  are  so  when  they  speak  thus  of  themselves  in  their  book 
entitled  The  Image  of  the  First  Century.  I  am  only  copying  their  own  words,  and 
may  now  give  you  the  rest  of  the  eulogy:  "They  are  a  society  of  men,  or  rather  let 
us  call  them  angels,  predicted  by  Isaiah  in  these  words,  ’Go,  ye  swift  and  ready 
angels/  "  The  prediction  is  as  clear  as  day,  is  it  not?  "They  have  the  spirit  of  eagles 
they  are  a  flock  of  phoenixes  (a  late  author  having  demonstrated  that  there  are  a 
great  many  of  these  birds);  they  have  changed  the  face  of  Christendom!"  Of 
course,  we  must  believe  all  this,  since  they  have  said  it;  and  in  one  sense  you  will 
find  the  account  amply  verified  by  the  sequel  of  this  communication,  in  which  I 
propose  to  treat  of  their  maxims. 

Determined  to  obtain  the  best  possible  information,  I  did  not  trust  to  the 
representations  of  our  friend  the  Jansenist,  but  sought  an  interview  with  some  of 
themselves.  I  found  however,  that  he  told  me  nothing  but  the  bare  truth,  and  I 
am  persuaded  he  is  an  honest  man.  Of  this  you  may  judge  from  the  following  ac¬ 
count  of  these  conferences. 

In  the  conversation  I  had  with  the  Jansenist,  he  told  me  so  many  strange  things 
about  these  fathers  that  I  could  with  difficulty  believe  them,  till  he  pointed  them 
out  to  me  in  their  writings;  after  which  he  left  me  nothing  more  to  say  in  their 
defence  than  that  these  might  be  the  sentiments  of  some  individuals  only,  which 
it  was  not  fair  to  impute  to  the  whole  fraternity.  And,  indeed,  I  assured  him  that  I 
knew  some  of  them  who  were  as  severe  as  those  whom  he  quoted  to  me  were 
lax.  This  led  him  to  explain  to  me  the  spirit  of  the  Society,  which  is  not  known 
to  every  one;  and  you  will  perhaps  have  no  objections  to  learning  something 
about  it. 

"You  imagine,"  he  began,  "that  it  would  tell  considerably  in  their  favour  to 
show  that  some  of  their  fathers  are  as  friendly  to  Evangelical  maxims  as  others 
are  opposed  to  them;  and  you  would  conclude  from  that  circumstance,  that  these 
loose  opinions  do  not  belong  to  the  whole  Society.  That  I  grant  you;  for  had  such 
been  the  case,  they  would  not  have  suffered  persons  among  them  holding  senti¬ 
ments  so  diametrically  opposed  to  licentiousness.  But,  as  it  is  equally  true  that 
there  are  among  them  those  who  hold  these  licentious  doctrines,  you  are  bound 
also  to  conclude  that  the  holy  Spirit  of  the  Society  is  not  that  of  Christian  severity, 
for  had  such  been  the  case,  they  would  not  have  suffered  persons  among  them 
holding  sentiments  so  diametrically  opposed  to  that  severity." 

"And  what,  then,"  I  asked,  "can  be  the  design  of  the  whole  as  a  body?  Perhaps 
they  have  no  fixed  principle,  and  every  one  is  left  to  speak  out  at  random  what¬ 
ever  he  thinks." 

"That  cannot  be,"  returned  my  friend;  "such  an  immense  body  could  not  sub- 


28 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

sist  in  such  a  haphazard  sort  of  way,  or  without  a  soul  to  govern  and  regulate  its 
movements;  besides,  it  is  one  of  their  express  regulations  that  none  shall  print  a 
page  without  the  approval  of  their  superiors." 

"But,"  said  I,  "how  can  these  same  superiors  give  their  consent  to  maxims  so 
contradictory?" 

"That  is  what  you  have  yet  to  learn,"  he  replied.  "Know  then  that  their  object 
is  not  the  corruption  of  manners — that  is  not  their  design.  But  as  little  is  it  their 
sole  aim  to  reform  them — that  would  be  bad  policy.  Their  idea  is  briefly  this: 
They  have  such  a  good  opinion  of  themselves  as  to  believe  that  it  is  useful,  and  in 
some  sort  essentially  necessary  to  the  good  of  religion,  that  their  influence  should 
extend  everywhere,  and  that  they  should  govern  all  consciences.  And  the  Evan¬ 
gelical  or  severe  maxims  being  best  fitted  for  managing  some  sorts  of  people, 
they  avail  themselves  of  these  when  they  find  them  favourable  to  their  purpose. 
But  as  these  maxims  do  not  suit  the  views  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  people,  they 
waive  them  in  the  case  of  such  persons,  in  order  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  all 
the  world.  Accordingly,  having  to  deal  with  persons  of  all  classes  and  of  all  dif¬ 
ferent  nations,  they  find  it  necessary  to  have  casuists  assorted  to  match  this  diver¬ 
sity. 

"On  this  principle,  you  will  easily  see  that,  if  they  had  none  but  the  looser  sort 
of  casuists,  they  would  defeat  their  main  design,  which  is  to  embrace  all;  for  those 
that  are  truly  pious  are  fond  of  a  stricter  discipline.  But  as  there  are  not  many  of 
that  stamp,  they  do  not  require  many  severe  directors  to  guide  them.  They  have  a 
few  for  the  select  few;  while  whole  multitudes  of  lax  casuists  are  provided  for  the 
multitudes  that  prefer  laxity. 

"It  is  in  virtue  of  this  ’obliging  and  accommodating,  conduct,'  as  Father  Petau 
calls  it,  that  they  may  be  said  to  stretch  out  a  helping  hand  to  all  mankind.  Should 
any  person  present  himself  before  them,  for  example,  fully  resolved  to  make  resti¬ 
tution  of  some  ill-gotten  gains,  do  not  suppose  that  they  would  dissuade  him 
from  it.  By  no  means;  on  the  contrary,  they  would  applaud  and  confirm  him  in 
such  a  holy  resolution.  But  suppose  another  should  come  who  wishes  to  be  ab¬ 
solved  without  restitution,  and  it  will  be  a  particularly  hard  case  indeed,  if  they 
cannot  furnish  him  with  means  of  evading  the  duty,  of  one  kind  or  another,  the 
lawfulness  of  which  they  will  be  ready  to  guarantee. 

"By  this  policy  they  keep  all  their  friends,  and  defend  themselves  against  all  their 
foes;  for,  when  charged  with  extreme  laxity,  they  have  nothing  more  to  do  than 
produce  their  austere  directors,  with  some  books  which  they  have  written  on  the 
severity  of  the  Christian  code  of  morals;  and  simple  people,  or  those  who  never 
look  below  the  surface  of  things,  are  quite  satisfied  with  these  proofs  of  the  falsity 
of  the  accusation. 

"Thus  are  they  prepared  for  all  sorts  of  persons,  and  so  ready  are  they  to  suit 
the  supply  to  the  demand  that,  when  they  happen  to  be  in  any  part  of  the  world 
where  the  doctrine  of  a  crucified  God  is  accounted  foolishness,  they  suppress  the 
offence  of  the  cross  and  preach  only  a  glorious  and  not  a  suffering  Jesus  Christ. 
This  plan  they  followed  in  the  Indies  and  in  China,  where  they  permitted  Chris¬ 
tians  to  practise  idolatry  itself,  with  the  aid  of  the  following  ingenious  contri¬ 
vance:  they  made  their  converts  conceal  under  their  clothes  an  image  of  Jesus 
Christ,  to  which  they  taught  them  to  transfer  mentally  those  adorations  which 
they  rendered  ostensibly  to  the  idol  of  Cachinchoam  and  Keum-fucum.  This 


LETTER  V 


29 

charge  is  brought  against  them  by  Gravina,  a  Dominican,  and  is  fully  established 
by  the  Spanish  memorial  presented  to  Philip  IV,  king  of  Spain,  by  the  Cordeliers 
of  the  Philippine  Islands,  quoted  by  Thomas  Hurtado,  in  his  Martyrdom  of  the 
Faith ,  page  427.  To  such  a  length  did  this  practice  go  that  the  Congregation  De 
Propaganda  were  obliged  expressly  to  forbid  the  Jesuits,  on  pain  of  excommunica¬ 
tion,  to  permit  the  worship  of  idols  on  any  pretext  whatever,  or  to  conceal  the 
mystery  of  the  cross  from  their  catechumens;  strictly  enjoining  them  to  admit 
none  to  baptism  who  were  not  thus  instructed,  and  ordering  them  to  expose  the 
image  of  the  crucifix  in  their  churches:  all  of  which  is  amply  detailed  in  the  decree 
of  that  Congregation,  dated  the  9th  of  July,  1646,  and  signed  by  Cardinal  Capponi. 

"Such  is  the  manner  in  which  they  have  spread  themselves  over  the  whole 
earth,  aided  by  the  doctrine  of  probable  opinions ,  which  is  at  once  the  source  and  the 
basis  of  all  this  licentiousness.  You  must  get  some  of  themselves  to  explain  this 
doctrine  to  you.  They  make  no  secret  of  it,  any  more  than  of  what  you  have  al¬ 
ready  learned;  with  this  difference  only,  that  they  conceal  their  carnal  and  worldly 
policy  under  the  garb  of  divine  and  Christian  prudence;  as  if  the  faith,  and  tradi¬ 
tion,  its  ally,  were  not  always  one  and  the  same  at  all  times  and  in  all  places;  as  if 
it  were  the  part  of  the  rule  to  bend  in  conformity  to  the  subject  which  it  was 
meant  to  regulate;  and  as  if  souls,  to  be  purified  from  their  pollutions,  had  only 
to  corrupt  the  law  of  the  Lord,  in  place  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,  which  is  clean  and 
pure,  converting  the  soul  which  lieth  in  sin,’  and  bringing  it  into  conformity  with 
its  salutary  lessons! 

"Go  and  see  some  of  these  worthy  fathers,  I  beseech  you,  and  I  am  confident 
that  you  will  soon  discover,  in  the  laxity  of  their  moral  system,  the  explanation 
of  their  doctrine  about  grace.  You  will  then  see  the  Christian  virtues  exhibited  in 
such  a  strange  aspect,  so  completely  stripped  of  the  charity  which  is  the  life  and 
soul  of  them,  you  will  see  so  many  crimes  palliated  and  irregularities  tolerated 
that  you  will  no  longer  be  surprised  at  their  maintaining  that  'all  men  have  always 
enough  of  grace'  to  lead  a  pious  life,  in  the  sense  of  which  they  understand  piety. 
Their  morality  being  entirely  Pagan,  nature  is  quite  competent  to  its  observance. 
When  we  maintain  the  necessity  of  efficacious  grace,  we  assign  it  another  sort  of 
virtue  for  its  object.  Its  office  is  not  to  cure  one  vice  by  means  of  another;  it  is  not 
merely  to  induce  men  to  practise  the  external  duties  of  religion:  it  aims  at  a  virtue 
higher  than  that  propounded  by  Pharisees,  or  the  greatest  sages  of  Heathenism. 
The  law  and  reason  are  'sufficient  graces’  for  these  purposes.  But  to  disenthral 
the  soul  from  the  love  of  the  world — to  tear  it  from  what  it  holds  most  dear — to 
make  it  die  to  itself — to  lift  it  up  and  bind  it  wholly,  only,  and  forever,  to  God — 
can  be  the  work  of  none  but  an  all-powerful  hand.  And  it  would  be  as  absurd  to 
affirm  that  we  have  the  full  power  of  achieving  such  objects,  as  it  would  be  to 
allege  that  those  virtues,  devoid  of  the  love  of  God,  which  these  fathers  confound 
with  the  virtues  of  Christianity,  are  beyond  our  power." 

Such  was  the  strain  of  my  friend’s  discourse,  which  was  delivered  with  much 
feeling;  for  he  takes  these  sad  disorders  very  much  to  heart.  For  my  own  part,  I 
began  to  entertain  a  high  admiration  for  these  fathers,  simply  on  account  of  the 
ingenuity  of  their  policy;  and,  following  his  advice,  I  waited  on  a  good  casuist  of 
the  Society,  one  of  my  old  acquaintances,  with  whom  I  now  resolved  purposely 
to  renew  my  former  intimacy.  Having  my  instructions  how  to  manage  them,  I 
had  no  great  difficulty  in  getting  him  afloat.  Retaining  his  old  attachment,  he  re- 


30  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

ceived  me  immediately  with  a  profusion  of  kindness;  and,  after  talking  over  some 
indifferent  matters,  I  took  occasion  from  the  present  season  to  learn  something 
from  him  about  fasting  and,  thus,  slip  insensibly  into  the  main  subject.  I  told  him, 
therefore,  that  I  had  difficulty  in  supporting  the  fast.  He  exhorted  me  to  do  vio¬ 
lence  to  my  inclinations;  but,  as  I  continued  to  murmur,  he  took  pity  on  me  and 
began  to  search  out  some  ground  for  a  dispensation.  In  fact  he  suggested  a  num¬ 
ber  of  excuses  for  me,  none  of  which  happened  to  suit  my  case,  till  at  length  he 
bethought  himself  of  asking  me  whether  I  did  not  find  it  difficult  to  sleep  without 
taking  supper.  "Yes,  my  good  father,”  said  I;  "and  for  that  reason  I  am  obliged 
often  to  take  a  refreshment  at  mid-day  and  supper  at  night.” 

"I  am  extremely  happy,”  he  replied,  "to  have  found  out  a  way  of  relieving  you 
without  sin:  go  in  peace — you  are  under  no  obligation  to  fast.  However,  I  would 
not  have  you  depend  on  my  word:  step  this  way  to  the  library.” 

On  going  thither  with  me  he  took  up  a  book,  exclaiming  with  great  rapture, 
"Here  is  the  authority  for  you:  and,  by  my  conscience,  such  an  authority!  It  is 
EscobarY' 

"Who  is  Escobar?”  I  inquired. 

"What!  not  know  Escobar!”  cried  the  monk;  "the  member  of  our  Society  who 
compiled  this  Moral  Theology  from  twenty-four  of  our  fathers,  and  on  this  founds 
an  analogy,  in  his  preface,  between  his  book  and  'that  in  the  Apocalypse  which 
was  sealed  with  seven  seals,’  and  states  that  'Jesus  presents  it  thus  sealed  to  the 
four  living  creatures,  Suarez,  Vasquez,  Molina,  and  Valencia,  in  presence  of  the 
four-and-twenty  Jesuits  who  represent  the  four-and-twenty  elders.’” 

He  read  me,  in  fact,  the  whole  of  that  allegory,  which  he  pronounced  to  be 
admirably  appropriate,  and  which  conveyed  to  my  mind  a  sublime  idea  of  the  ex¬ 
cellence  of  the  work.  At  length,  having  sought  out  the  passage  of  fasting,  "Oh,  here 
it  is!”  he  said;  "treatise  i, example  13, no.  67: 'If  a  man  cannot  sleep  without  taking 
supper,  is  he  bound  to  fast?  Answer:  By  no  means!'  Will  that  not  satisfy  you?” 

"Not  exactly,”  replied  I;  "for  I  might  sustain  the  fast  by  taking  my  refreshment 
in  the  morning,  and  supping  at  night.” 

"Listen,  then,  to  what  follows;  they  have  provided  for  all  that:  'And  what  is  to 
be  said,  if  the  person  might  make  a  shift  with  a  refreshment  in  the  morning  and 
supping  at  night?’  ” 

"That’s  my  case  exactly.” 

"  'Answer:  Still  he  is  not  obliged  to  fast;  because  no  person  is  obliged  to  change 
the  order  of  his  meals.’  ” 

"A  most  excellent  reason!”  I  exclaimed. 

"But  tell  me,  pray,”  continued  the  monk,  "do  you  take  much  wine?” 

"No,  my  dear  father,”  I  answered;  "I  cannot  endure  it.” 

"I  merely  put  the  question,”  returned  he,  "to  apprise  you  that  you  might,  with¬ 
out  breaking  the  fast,  take  a  glass  or  so  in  the  morning,  or  whenever  you  felt  in¬ 
clined  for  a  drop;  and  that  is  always  something  in  the  way  of  supporting  nature. 
Here  is  the  decision  at  the  same  place,  no.  57:  'May  one,  without  breaking  the 
fast,  drink  wine  at  any  hour  he  pleases,  and  even  in  a  large  quantity?  Yes,  he  may: 
and  a  dram  of  hippocrass  too.’  I  had  no  recollection  of  the  hippocrass,”  said  the 
monk;  "I  must  take  a  note  of  that  in  my  memorandum-book.” 

"He  must  be  a  nice  man,  this  Escobar,”  observed  I. 

"Oh!  everybody  likes  him,”  rejoined  the  father;  "he  has  such  delightful  ques- 


LETTER  V 


31 

tions!  Only  observe  this  one  in  the  same  place,  no.  38:  *  If  a  man  doubt  whether 
he  is  twenty-one  years  old,  is  he  obliged  to  fast?  No.  But  suppose  I  were  to  be 
twenty-one  to-night  an  hour  after  midnight,  and  to-morrow  were  the  fast,  would 
I  be  obliged  to  fast  to-morrow?  No;  for  you  were  at  liberty  to  eat  as  much  as  you 
pleased  for  an  hour  after  midnight,  not  being  till  then  fully  twenty-one;  and  there¬ 
fore  having  a  right  to  break  the  fast  day,  you  are  not  obliged  to  keep  it.’  ” 

“Well,  that  is  vastly  entertaining!”  cried  I. 

“Oh,”  rejoined  the  father,  “it  is  impossible  to  tear  one’s  self  away  from  the 
book:  I  spend  whole  days  and  nights  in  reading  it;  in  fact,  I  do  nothing  else.” 

The  worthy  monk,  perceiving  that  I  was  interested,  was  quite  delighted,  and 
went  on  with  his  quotations.  “Now,”  said  he,  “for  a  taste  of  Filiutius,  one  of  the 
four-and-twenty  Jesuits:  Ts  a  man  who  has  exhausted  himself  any  way — by  pro¬ 
fligacy,  for  example — obliged  to  fast?  By  no  means.  But  if  he  has  exhausted  him¬ 
self  expressly  to  procure  a  dispensation  from  fasting,  will  he  be  held  obliged?  He 
will  not,  even  though  he  should  have  had  that  design.’  There  now!  would  you 
have  believed  that?” 

“Indeed,  good  father,  I  do  not  believe  it  yet,”  said  I.  “What!  is  it  no  sin  for  a 
man  not  to  fast  when  he  has  it  in  his  power?  And  is  it  allowable  to  court  occasions 
of  committing  sin,  or  rather,  are  we  not  bound  to  shun  them?  That  would  be  easy 
enough,  surely.” 

“Not  always  so,”  he  replied;  “that  is  just  as  it  may  happen.” 

“Happen,  how?”  cried  I. 

“Oh!”  rejoined  the  monk,  “so  you  think  that  if  a  person  experience  some  in¬ 
convenience  in  avoiding  the  occasions  of  sin,  he  is  still  bound  to  do  so?  Not  so 
thinks  Father  Bauny.  'Absolution,’  says  he,  'is  not  to  be  refused  to  such  as  con¬ 
tinue  in  the  proximate  occasions  of  sin,  if  they  are  so  situated  that  they  cannot 
give  them  up  without  becoming  the  common  talk  of  the  world,  or  subjecting 
themselves  to  personal  inconvenience.’  ” 

“lam  glad  to  hear  it,  father,”  I  remarked;  “and  now  that  we  are  not  obliged  to 
avoid  the  occasions  of  sin,  nothing  more  remains  but  to  say  that  we  may  deliber¬ 
ately  court  them.” 

“Even  that  is  occasionally  permitted,”  added  he;  “the  celebrated  casuist,  Basil 
Ponce,  has  said  so,  and  Father  Bauny  quotes  his  sentiment  with  approbation  in  his 
Treatise  on  Penance ,  as  follows:  'We  may  seek  an  occasion  of  sin  directly  and  de¬ 
signedly — prtmo  et per  se — when  our  own  or  our  neighbour’s  spiritual  or  temporal 
advantage  induces  us  to  do  so.’  ” 

“Truly,”  said  I,  “it  appears  to  be  all  a  dream  to  me,  when  I  hear  grave  divines 
talking  in  this  manner!  Come  now,  my  dear  father,  tell  me  conscientiously,  do 
you  hold  such  a  sentiment  as  that?” 

“No,  indeed,”  said  he,  “I  do  not.” 

“You  are  speaking,  then,  against  your  conscience,”  continued  I. 

“Not  at  all,”  he  replied;  “I  was  speaking  on  that  point  not  according  to  my 
own  conscience,  but  according  to  that  of  Ponce  and  Father  Bauny,  and  them  you 
may  follow  with  the  utmost  safety,  for  I  assure  you  that  they  are  able  men.” 

“What,  father!  because  they  have  put  down  these  three  lines  in  their  books,  will 
it  therefore  become  allowable  to  court  the  occasions  of  sin?  I  always  thought  that 
we  were  bound  to  take  the  Scripture  and  the  tradition  of  the  Church  as  our  only 
rule,  and  not  your  cauists/’ 


32  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"Goodness!”  cried  the  monk,  "I  declare  you  put  me  in  mind  of  these  Jansen- 
ists.  Think  you  that  Father  Bauny  and  Basil  Ponce  are  not  able  to  render  their 
opinion  probable ?" 

"Probable  won't  do  for  me,”  said  I;  "I  must  have  certainty.” 

"I  can  easily  see,”  replied  the  good  father,  "that  you  know  nothing  about  our 
doctrine  of  probable  opinions.  If  you  did,  you  would  speak  in  another  strain.  Ah! 
my  dear  sir,  I  must  really  give  you  some  instructions  on  this  point;  without  know¬ 
ing  this,  positively  you  can  understand  nothing  at  all.  It  is  the  foundation — the 
very  A,  B,  C,  of  our  whole  moral  philosophy.” 

Glad  to  see  him  come  to  the  point  to  which  I  had  been  drawing  him  on,  I  ex¬ 
pressed  my  satisfaction  and  requested  him  to  explain  what  was  meant  by  a  prob¬ 
able  opinion? 

"That,”  he  replied,  "our  authors  will  answer  better  than  I  can  do.  The  general¬ 
ity  of  them,  and,  among  others,  our  four-and-twenty  elders,  describe  it  thus:  ’An 
opinion  is  called  probable  when  it  is  founded  upon  reasons  of  some  consideration. 
Hence  it  may  sometimes  happen  that  a  single  very  grave  doctor  may  render  an 
opinion  probable.'  The  reason  is  added:  Tor  a  man  particularly  given  to  study 
would  not  adhere  to  an  opinion  unless  he  was  drawn  to  it  by  a  good  and  sufficient 
reason.'  ” 

"So  it  would  appear,”  I  observed,  with  a  smile,  "that  a  single  doctor  may  turn 
consciences  round  about  and  upside  down  as  he  pleases,  and  yet  always  land 
them  in  a  safe  position.” 

"You  must  not  laugh  at  it,  sir,”  returned  the  monk;  "nor  need  you  attempt  to 
combat  the  doctrine.  The  Jansenists  tried  this;  but  they  might  have  saved  them¬ 
selves  the  trouble — it  is  too  firmly  established.  Hear  Sanchez,  one  of  the  most 
famous  of  our  fathers:  ’You  may  doubt,  perhaps,  whether  the  authority  of  a  single 
good  and  learned  doctor  renders  an  opinion  probable.  I  answer  that  it  does;  and 
this  is  confirmed  by  Angelus,  Sylvester,  Navarre,  Emanuel  Sa,  &c.  It  is  proved 
thus:  A  probable  opinion  is  one  that  has  a  considerable  foundation.  Now  the 
authority  of  a  learned  and  pious  man  is  entitled  to  very  great  consideration;  be¬ 
cause  (mark  the  reason),  if  the  testimony  of  such  a  man  has  great  influence  in 
convincing  us  that  such  and  such  an  event  occurred,  say  at  Rome,  for  example, 
why  should  it  not  have  the  same  weight  in  the  case  of  a  question  in  morals?’  ” 

"An  odd  comparison  this,”  interrupted  I,  "between  the  concerns  of  the  world 
and  those  of  conscience!” 

"Have  a  little  patience,”  rejoined  the  monk;  "Sanchez  answers  that  in  the  very 
next  sentence:  ’Nor  can  I  assent  to  the  qualification  made  here  by  some  writers, 
namely,  that  the  authority  of  such  a  doctor,  though  sufficient  in  matters  of  human 
right,  is  not  so  in  those  of  divine  right.  It  is  of  vast  weight  in  both  cases.'  ” 

"Well,  father,”  said  I,  frankly,  "I  really  cannot  admire  that  rule.  Who  can  as¬ 
sure  me,  considering  the  freedom  your  doctors  claim  to  examine  everything  by 
reason,  that  what  appears  safe  to  one  may  seem  so  to  all  the  rest?  The  diversity  of 
judgements  is  so  great” — 

"You  don't  understand  it,”  said  he,  interrupting  me;  "no  doubt  they  are 
often  of  different  sentiments,  but  what  signifies  that?  Each  renders  his  own  opin¬ 
ion  probable  and  safe.  We  all  know  well  enough  that  they  are  far  from  being  of 
the  same  mind;  what  is  more,  there  is  hardly  an  instance  in  which  they  ever 
agree.  There  are  very  few  questions,  indeed,  in  which  you  do  not  find  the  one  say- 


LETTER  V 


33 

ing  yes  and  the  other  saying  no.  Still,  in  all  these  cases,  each  of  the  contrary  opinions 
is  probable.  And  hence  Diana  says  on  a  certain  subject:  'Ponce  and  Sanchez 
hold  opposite  views  of  it;  but,  as  they  are  both  learned  men,  each  renders  his 
own  opinion  probable.’” 

"But,  father,”  I  remarked,  "a  person  must  be  sadly  embarrassed  in  choosing 
between  them!”  "Not  at  all,”  he  rejoined;  "he  has  only  to  follow  the  opinion 
which  suits  him  best.”  "What!  if  the  other  is  more  probable?”  "It  does  not  sig¬ 
nify,”  "And  if  the  other  is  the  safer?”  "It  does  not  signify,”  repeated  the  monk; 
"this  is  made  quite  plain  by  Emanuel  Sa,  of  our  Society,  in  his  Aphorisms:  'A  per¬ 
son  may  do  what  he  considers  allowable  according  to  a  probable  opinion,  though 
the  contrary  may  be  the  safer  one.  The  opinion  of  a  single  grave  doctor  is  ail 
that  is  requisite.’  ” 

"And  if  an  opinion  be  at  once  the  less  probable  and  the  less  safe,  it  is  allowable 
to  follow  it,”  I  asked,  "even  in  the  way  of  rejecting  one  which  we  believe  to  be 
more  probable  and  safe?” 

"Once  more,  I  say  yes,”  replied  the  monk.  "Hear  what  Filiutius,  that  great 
Jesuit  of  Rome,  says:  'It  is  allowable  to  follow  the  less  probable  opinion,  even 
though  it  be  the  less  safe  one.  That  is  the  common  judgement  of  modern  authors.’ 
Is  not  that  quite  clear?” 

"Well,  reverend  father,”  said  I,  "you  have  given  us  elbowroom,  at  all  events! 
Thanks  to  your  probable  opinions,  we  have  got  liberty  of  conscience  with  a  wit¬ 
ness!  And  are  you  casuists  allowed  the  same  latitude  in  giving  your  responses?” 

"Oh,  yes,”  said  he,  "we  answer  just  as  we  please;  or  rather,  I  should  say,  just 
as  it  may  please  those  who  ask  our  advice.  Here  are  our  rules,  taken  from  Fathers 
Layman,  Vasquez,  Sanchez,  and  the  four-and-twenty  worthies,  in  the  words  of 
Layman:  'A  doctor,  on  being  consulted,  may  give  an  advice,  not  only  probable 
according  to  his  own  opinion,  but  contrary  to  his  own  opinion,  provided  this 
judgement  happens  to  be  more  favourable  or  more  agreeable  to  the  person  that 
consults  him — si  forte  hcec  favorabilior  seu  exoptatior  sit.  Nay,  I  go  further  and  say 
that  there  would  be  nothing  unreasonable  in  his  giving  those  who  consult  him  a 
judgement  held  to  be  probable  by  some  learned  person,  even  though  he  should 
be  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  that  it  is  absolutely  false.’  ” 

"Well,  seriously,  father,”  I  said,  "your  doctrine  is  a  most  uncommonly  com¬ 
fortable  one!  Only  think  of  being  allowed  to  answer^  or  no ,  just  as  you  please! 
It  is  impossible  to  prize  such  a  privilege  too  highly.  I  see  now  the  advantage  of 
the  contrary  opinions  of  your  doctors.  One  of  them  always  serves  your  turn,  and 
the  other  never  gives  you  any  annoyance.  If  you  do  not  find  your  account  on  the 
one  side,  you  fall  back  on  the  other  and  always  land  in  perfect  safety.” 

"That  is  quite  true,”  he  replied;  "and,  accordingly,  we  may  always  say  with 
Diana,  on  his  finding  that  Father  Bauny  was  on  his  side,  while  Father  Lugo  was 
against  him :  Scepe premente  deo ,  fert  deus  alter  opem.  ”x 

"I  understand  you,”  resumed  I;  "but  a  practical  difficulty  has  just  occurred  to 
me,  which  is  this,  that  supposing  a  person  to  have  consulted  one  of  your  doctors 
and  obtained  from  him  a  pretty  liberal  opinion,  there  is  some  danger  of  his  getting 
into  a  scrape  by  meeting  a  confessor  who  takes  a  different  view  of  the  matter  and 
refuses  him  absolution  unless  he  recant  the  sentiment  of  the  casuist.  Have  you 
not  provided  for  such  a  case  as  that,  father?” 

KDvid,  Appendice ,  xiii.  "If  pressed  by  any  god,  we  will  be  delivered  by  another." 


34  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"Can  you  doubt  it?”  he  replied,  "We  have  bound  them,  sir,  to  absolve  their 
penitents  who  act  according  to  probable  opinions,  under  the  pain  of  mortal  sin, 
to  secure  their  compliance.  ’When  the  penitent,’  says  Father  Bauny,  ’follows  a 
probable  opinion,  the  confessor  is  bound  to  absolve  him,  though  his  opinion 
should  differ  from  that  of  his  penitent.’” 

"But  he  does  not  say  it  would  be  a  mortal  sin  not  to  absolve  him”  said  I. 

"How  hasty  you  are!”  rejoined  the  monk;  "listen  to  what  follows;  he  has  ex¬ 
pressly  decided  that,  ’to  refuse  absolution  to  a  penitent  who  acts  according  to  a 
probable  opinion  is  a  sin  which  is  in  its  nature  mortal.’  And,  to  settle  that  point, 
he  cites  the  most  illustrious  of  our  fathers — Suarez,  Vasquez,  and  Sanchez.” 

"My  dear  sir,”  said  I,  "that  is  a  most  prudent  regulation.  I  see  nothing  to  fear 
now.  No  confessor  can  dare  to  be  refractory  after  this.  Indeed,  I  was  not  aware  that 
you  had  the  power  of  issuing  your  orders  on  pain  of  damnation.  I  thought  that  your 
skill  had  been  confined  to  the  taking  away  of  sins;  I  had  no  idea  that  it  extended  to 
the  introduction  of  new  ones.  But,  from  what  I  now  see,  you  are  omnipotent.” 

"That  is  not  a  correct  way  of  speaking,”  rejoined  the  father.  "We  do  not  intro¬ 
duce  sins;  we  only  pay  attention  to  them.  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark,  two  or 
three  times  during  our  conversation,  that  you  are  no  great  scholastic.” 

"Be  that  as  it  may,  father,  you  have  at  least  answered  my  difficulty.  But  I  have 
another  to  suggest.  How  do  you  manage  when  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  happen 
to  differ  from  any  of  your  casuists?” 

"You  really  know  very  little  of  the  subject,”  he  replied.  "The  Fathers  were  good 
enough  for  the  morality  of  their  own  times;  but  they  lived  too  far  back  for  that  of 
the  present  age,  which  is  no  longer  regulated  by  them,  but  by  the  modern  casuists. 
On  this  Father  Cellot,  following  the  famous  Reginald,  remarks:  ’In  questions  of 
morals,  the  modern  casuists  are  to  be  preferred  to  the  ancient  fathers,  though 
those  lived  nearer  to  the  times  of  the  apostles.’  And  following  out  this  maxim, 
Diana  thus  decides:  ’Are  beneficiaries  bound  to  restore  their  revenue  when  guilty 
of  mal-appropriation  of  it?  The  ancients  would  say  yes,  but  the  moderns  say  no\  let 
us,  therefore,  adhere  to  the  latter  opinion,  which  relieves  from  the  obligation  of 
restitution.’” 

"Delightful  words  these,  and  most  comfortable  they  must  be  to  a  great  many 
people!”  I  observed. 

"We  leave  the  fathers,”  resumed  the  monk,  "to  those  who  deal  with  positive 
divinity.  As  for  us,  who  are  the  directors  of  conscience,  we  read  very  little  of  them 
and  quote  only  the  modern  casuists.  There  is  Diana,  for  instance,  a  most  volumi¬ 
nous  writer;  he  has  prefixed  to  his  works  a  list  of  his  authorities,  which  amount  to 
two  hundred  and  ninety-six,  and  the  most  ancient  of  them  is  only  about  eighty 
years  old.” 

"It  would  appear,  then,”  I  remarked,  "that  all  these  have  come  into  the  world 
since  the  date  of  your  Society?” 

"Thereabouts,”  he  replied. 

"That  is  to  say,  dear  father,  on  your  advent,  St.  Augustine,  St.  Chrysostom,  St. 
Ambrose,  St.  Jerome,  and  all  the  rest,  in  so  far  as  morals  are  concerned,  disap¬ 
peared  from  the  stage.  Would  you  be  so  kind  as  iet  me  know  the  names,  at  least, 
of  those  modern  authors  who  have  succeeded  them?” 

"A  most  able  and  renowned  class  of  men  they  are,”  replied  the  monk.  "Their 
names  are:  Villalobos,  Conink,  Llamas,  Achokier,  Dealkozer,  Dellacruz,  Vera- 


LETTER  V 


35 

cruz,  Ugolin,  Tambourin,  Fernandez,  Martinez,  Suarez,  Henriquez,  Vasquez,  Lo¬ 
pez,  Gomez,  Sanchez,  De  Vechis,  De  Grassis,  De  Grassalis,  De  Pitigianis,  De 
Graphaeis,  Squilanti,  Bizozeri,  Barcola,  De  Bobadilla,  Simanacha,  Perez  de  Lara, 
Aldretta,  Lorca,  De  Scarcia,  Quaranta,  Scophra,  Pedrezza,  Cabrezza,  Bisbe,  Dias, 
De  Clavasio,  Villagut,  Adam  a  Manden,  Iribarne,  Binsfeld,  Volfangi  a  Vorberg, 
Vosthery,  Strevesdorf.” 

"O  my  dear  father!”  cried  I,  quite  alarmed,  "were  all  these  people  Christians?” 

"How!  Christians!”  returned  the  casuist;  "did  I  not  tell  you  that  these  are  the 
only  writers  by  whom  we  now  govern  Christendom?” 

Deeply  affected  as  I  was  by  this  announcement,  I  concealed  my  emotion  from 
the  monk  and  only  asked  him  if  all  these  authors  were  Jesuits? 

"No,”  said  he;  "but  that  is  of  little  consequence;  they  have  said  a  number  of 
good  things  for  all  that.  It  is  true  the  greater  part  of  these  same  good  things  are 
extracted  or  copied  from  our  authors,  but  we  do  not  stand  on  ceremony  with 
them  on  that  score,  more  especially  as  they  are  in  the  constant  habit  of  quoting 
our  authors  with  applause.  When  Diana,  for  example,  who  does  not  belong  to 
our  Society,  speaks  of  Vasquez,  he  calls  him  'that  phoenix  of  genius’;  and  he  de¬ 
clares  more  than  once  'that  Vasquez  alone  is  to  him  worth  all  the  rest  of  men  put 
together’ — instar  omnium .  Accordingly,  our  fathers  often  make  use  of  this  good 
Diana;  and,  if  you  understand  our  doctrine  of  probability,  you  will  see  that  this 
is  no  small  help  in  its  way.  In  fact,  we  are  anxious  that  others  besides  the  Jesuits 
would  render  their  opinions  probable,  to  prevent  people  from  ascribing  them  all 
to  us;  for  you  will  observe  that,  when  any  author,  whoever  he  may  be,  advances  a 
probable  opinion,  we  are  entitled,  by  the  doctrine  of  probability,  to  adopt  it  if 
we  please;  and  yet,  if  the  author  does  not  belong  to  our  fraternity,  we  are  not  re¬ 
sponsible  for  its  soundness.” 

"I  understand  all  that,”  said  I.  "It  is  easy  to  see  that  all  are  welcome  that  come 
your  way,  except  the  ancient  fathers;  you  are  masters  of  the  field,  and  have  only 
to  walk  the  course.  But  I  foresee  three  or  four  serious  difficulties  and  powerful 
barriers  which  will  oppose  your  career.” 

"And  what  are  these?”  cried  the  monk,  looking  quite  alarmed. 

"They  are  the  Holy  Scriptures,”  I  replied,  "the  popes,  and  the  councils,  whom 
you  cannot  gainsay,  and  who  are  all  in  the  way  of  the  Gospel.” 

"Is  that  all?”  he  exclaimed;  "I  declare  you  put  me  in  a  fright.  Do  you  imagine 
that  we  would  overlook  such  an  obvious  scruple  as  that,  or  that  we  have  not  pro¬ 
vided  against  it?  A  good  idea,  forsooth,  to  suppose  that  we  would  contradict 
Scripture,  popes,  and  councils!  I  must  convince  you  of  your  mistake;  for  I  should 
be  sorry  you  should  go  away  with  an  impression  that  we  are  deficient  in  our 
respect  to  these  authorities.  You  have  doubtless  taken  up  this  notion  from  some 
of  the  opinions  of  our  fathers,  which  are  apparently  at  variance  with  their  deci¬ 
sions,  though  in  reality  they  are  not.  But  to  illustrate  the  harmony  between  them 
would  require  more  leisure  than  we  have  at  present;  and,  as  I  would  not  like  you 
to  retain  a  bad  impression  of  us,  if  you  agree  to  meet  with  me  to-morrow,  I  shall 
clear  it  all  up  then.” 

Thus  ended  our  interview,  and  thus  shall  end  my  present  communication, 
which  has  been  long  enough,  besides,  for  one  letter.  I  am  sure  you  will  be  satis¬ 
fied  with  it,  in  the  prospect  of  what  is  forthcoming.  I  am,  &c. 


36 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 


LETTER  VI 


Paris,  April  io,  1656 
Sir, 

I  mentioned,  at  the  close  of  my  last  letter,  that  my  good  friend,  the  Jesuit,  had 
promised  to  show  me  how  the  casuists  reconcile  the  contrarieties  between  their 
opinions  and  the  decisions  of  the  popes,  the  councils,  and  the  Scripture.  This 
promise  he  fulfilled  at  our  last  interview,  of  which  I  shall  now  give  you  an  account. 

“One  of  the  methods,”  resumed  the  monk,  “in  which  we  reconcile  these  ap¬ 
parent  contradictions,  is  by  the  interpretation  of  some  phrase.  Thus,  Pope  Gregory 
XIV  decided  that  assassins  are  not  worthy  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  sanctuary  in 
churches  and  ought  to  be  dragged  out  of  them;  and  yet  our  four-and-twenty 
elders  affirm  that  'the  penalty  of  this  bull  is  not  incurred  by  all  those  that  kill  in 
treachery.’  This  may  appear  to  you  a  contradiction;  but  we  get  over  this  by  in¬ 
terpreting  the  word  assassin  as  follows:  'Are  assassins  unworthy  of  sanctuary  in 
churches?  Yes,  by  the  bull  of  Gregory  XIV  they  are.  But  by  the  word  assassins  we 
understand  those  that  have  received  money  to  murder  one;  and,  accordingly,  such 
as  kill  without  taking  any  reward  for  the  deed,  but  merely  to  oblige  their  friends,  do 
not  come  under  the  category  of  assassins.’  ” 

“Take  another  instance:  It  is  said  in  the  Gospel,  'Give  alms  of  your  superfluity.’ 
Several  casuists,  however,  have  contrived  to  discharge  the  wealthiest  from  the 
obligation  of  alms-giving.  This  may  appear  another  paradox,  but  the  matter  is 
easily  put  to  rights  by  giving  such  an  interpretation  to  the  word  superfluity  that  it 
will  seldom  or  never  happen  that  any  one  is  troubled  with  such  an  article.  This 
feat  has  been  accomplished  by  the  learned  Vasquez,  in  his  Treatise  on  Alms ,  c.  4: 
'What  men  of  the  world  lay  up  to  improve  their  circumstances,  or  those  of  their 
relatives,  cannot  be  termed  superfluity;  and  accordingly,  such  a  thing  as  superfluity 
is  seldom  to  be  found  among  men  of  the  world,  not  even  excepting  kings.’  Diana, 
too,  who  generally  founds  on  our  fathers,  having  quoted  these  words  of  Vasquez, 
justly  concludes,  'that  as  to  the  question  whether  the  rich  are  bound  to  give  alms 
of  their  superfluity,  even  though  the  affirmative  were  true,  it  will  seldom  or  never 
happen  to  be  obligatory  in  practice.’  ” 

“I  see  very  well  how  that  follows  from  the  doctrine  of  Vasquez,”  said  I.  “But 
how  would  you  answer  this  objection,  that,  in  working  out  one’s  salvation,  it 
would  be  as  safe,  according  to  Vasquez,  to  give  no  alms,  provided  one  can  muster 
as  much  ambition  as  to  have  no  superfluity;  as  it  is  safe,  according  to  the  Gospel, 
to  have  no  ambition  at  all,  in  order  to  have  some  superfluity  for  the  purpose  of 
alms-giving?” 

“Why,”  returned  he,  “the  answer  would  be  that  both  of  these  ways  are  safe 
according  to  the  Gospel;  the  one  according  to  the  Gospel  in  its  more  literal  and 
obvious  sense,  and  the  other  according  to  the  same  Gospel  as  interpreted  by  Vas¬ 
quez.  There  you  see  the  utility  of  interpretations.  When  the  terms  are  so  clear, 
however,”  he  continued,  “as  not  to  admit  of  an  interpretation,  we  have  recourse 
to  the  observation  of  favourable  circumstances.  A  single  example  will  illustrate 
this.  The  popes  have  denounced  excommunication  on  monks  who  lay  aside  their 
canonicals;  our  casuists,  notwithstanding,  put  it  as  a  question,  'On  what  occasions 


LETTER  VI 


37 

may  a  monk  lay  aside  his  religious  habits  without  incurring  excommunication?’ 
They  mention  a  number  of  cases  in  which  they  may,  and  among  others  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  Tf  he  has  laid  it  aside  for  an  infamous  purpose,  such  as  to  pick  pockets  or 
to  go  incognito  into  haunts  of  profligacy,  meaning  shortly  after  to  resume  it.’  It  is 
evident  the  bulls  have  no  reference  to  cases  of  that  description.” 

I  could  hardly  believe  that  and  begged  the  father  to  show  me  the  passage  in 
the  original.  He  did  so,  and  under  the  chapter  headed  "Practice  according  to  the 
School  of  the  Society  of  Jesus” — Praxis  ex  Societatis  Jesu  Schola — I  read  these  very 
words:  Si  habitum  dimittat  ut  furetur  occulte ,  vel  fornicetur .  He  showed  me  the  same 
thing  in  Diana,  in  these  terms:  Ut  eat  incognitas  ad  lupanar.  "And  why,  father,”  I 
asked,  "are  they  discharged  from  excommunication  on  such  occasions?” 

"Don’t  you  understand  it?”  he  replied.  "Only  think  what  a  scandal  it  would  be, 
were  a  monk  surprised  in  such  a  predicament  with  his  canonicals  on!  And  have 
you  never  heard,”  he  continued,  "how  they  answer  the  first  bull  contra  sollicitantes 
and  how  our  four-and -twenty,  in  another  chapter  of  the  Practice  according  to  the 
School  of  our  Society,  explain  the  bull  of  Pius  V  contra  clericos ,  &c.?” 

"I  know  nothing  about  all  that,”  said  I. 

"Then  it  is  a  sign  you  have  not  read  much  of  Escobar,”  returned  the  monk. 

"I  got  him  only  yesterday,  father,”  said  I;  "and  I  had  no  small  difficulty,  too,  in 
procuring  a  copy.  I  don’t  know  how  it  is,  but  everybody  of  late  has  been  in  search 
of  him.” 

"The  passage  to  which  I  referred,”  returned  the  monk,  "may  be  found  in 
treatise  i,  example  8,  no.  102.  Consult  it  at  your  leisure  when  you  go  home.” 

I  did  so  that  very  night;  but  it  is  so  shockingly  bad  that  I  dare  not  transcribe  it. 

The  good  father  then  went  on  to  say:  "You  now  understand  what  use  we  make 
of  favourable  circumstances.  Sometimes,  however,  obstinate  cases  will  occur, 
which  will  not  admit  of  this  mode  of  adjustment;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  you 
would  almost  suppose  they  involved  flat  contradictions.  For  example,  three  popes 
have  decided  that  monks  who  are  bound  by  a  particular  vow  to  a  Lenten  life  can¬ 
not  be  absolved  from  it  even  though  they  should  become  bishops.  And  yet  Diana 
avers  that  notwithstanding  this  decision  they  are  absolved.” 

"And  how  does  he  reconcile  that?”  said  I. 

"By  the  most  subtle  of  all  the  modern  methods,  and  by  the  nicest  possible  ap¬ 
plication  of  probability,”  replied  the  monk.  "You  may  recollect  you  were  told  the 
other  day  that  the  affirmative  and  negative  of  most  opinions  have  each,  according 
to  our  doctors,  some  probability — enough,  at  least,  to  be  followed  with  a  safe 
conscience.  Not  that  the  pro  and  con  are  both  true  in  the  same  sense — that  is  im¬ 
possible — but  only  they  are  both  probable  and,  therefore,  safe,  as  a  matter  of 
course.  On  this  principle  our  worthy  friend  Diana  remarks:  'To  the  decision  of 
these  three  popes,  which  is  contrary  to  my  opinion,  I  answer  that  they  spoke  in 
this  way  by  adhering  to  the  affirmative  side — which,  in  fact,  even  in  my  judge¬ 
ment,  is  probable;  but  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  the  negative  may  not  have 
its  probability  too.’  And  in  the  same  treatise,  speaking  of  another  subject  on 
which  he  again  differs  from  a  pope,  he  says:  'The  pope,  I  grant,  has  said  it  as  the 
head  of  the  Church;  but  his  decision  does  not  extend  beyond  the  sphere  of  the 
probability  of  his  own  opinion.’  Now  you  perceive  this  is  not  doing  any  harm  to 
the  opinions  of  the  popes;  such  a  thing  would  never  be  tolerated  at  Rome,  wThere 
Diana  is  in  high  repute.  For  he  does  not  say  that  what  the  popes  have  decided  is 


38  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

not  probable;  but  leaving  their  opinion  within  the  sphere  of  probability,  he  merely 
says  that  the  contrary  is  also  probable.” 

'’That  is  very  respectful,”  said  I. 

"Yes,”  added  the  monk,  "and  rather  more  ingenious  than  the  reply  made  by 
Father  Bauny,  when  his  books  were  censured  at  Rome;  for,  when  pushed  very 
hard  on  this  point  by  M.  Hallier,  he  made  bold  to  write:  'What  has  the  censure  of 
Rome  to  do  with  that  of  France?’  You  now  see  how,  either  by  the  interpretation 
of  terms,  by  the  observation  of  favourable  circumstances,  or  by  the  aid  of  the 
double  probability  of  pro  and  con ,  we  always  contrive  to  reconcile  those  seeming 
contradictions  which  occasioned  you  so  much  surprise,  without  ever  touching  on 
the  decisions  of  Scripture,  councils,  or  popes.” 

''Reverend  father,”  said  I,  "how  happy  the  world  is  in  having  such  men  as  you 
for  its  masters!  And  what  blessings  are  these  probabilities!  I  never  knew  the  reason 
why  you  took  such  pains  to  establish  that  a  single  doctor,  if  a  grave  one ,  might 
render  an  opinion  probable,  and  that  the  contrary  might  be  so  too,  and  that  one 
may  choose  any  side  one  pleases,  even  though  he  does  not  believe  it  to  be  the 
right  side,  and  all  with  such  a  safe  conscience,  that  the  confessor  who  should  re¬ 
fuse  him  absolution  on  the  faith  of  the  casuists  would  be  in  a  state  of  damnation. 
But  I  see  now  that  a  single  casuist  may  make  new  rules  of  morality  at  his  discre¬ 
tion  and  dispose,  according  to  his  fancy,  of  everything  pertaining  to  the  regula¬ 
tion  of  manners.” 

"What  you  have  now  said,”  rejoined  the  father,  "would  require  to  be  modified 
a  little.  Pay  attention  now,  while  I  explain  our  method,  and  you  will  observe  the 
progress  of  a  new  opinion,  from  its  birth  to  its  maturity.  First,  the  grave  doctor 
who  invented  it  exhibits  it  to  the  world,  casting  it  abroad  like  seed,  that  it  may 
take  root.  In  this  state  it  is  very  feeble;  it  requires  time  gradually  to  ripen.  This 
accounts  for  Diana,  who  has  introduced  a  great  many  of  these  opinions,  saying: 
T  advance  this  opinion;  but  as  it  is  new,  I  give  it  time  to  come  to  maturity — 
relinquo  tempori  maturandum.'  Thus  in  a  few  years  it  becomes  insensibly  consoli¬ 
dated;  and,  after  a  considerable  time,  it  is  sanctioned  by  the  tacit  approbation  of 
the  Church,  according  to  the  grand  maxim  of  Father  Bauny,  'that  if  an  opinion 
has  been  advanced  by  some  casuist,  and  has  not  been  impugned  by  the  Church,  it 
is  a  sign  that  she  approves  of  it.’  And,  in  fact,  on  this  principle  he  authenticates 
one  of  his  own  principles  in  his  sixth  treatise,  p.  312.” 

"Indeed,  father!”  cried  I,  "why,  on  this  principle  the  Church  would  approve  of 
all  the  abuses  which  she  tolerates,  and  all  the  errors  in  all  the  books  which  she 
does  not  censure!” 

"Dispute  the  point  with  Father  Bauny,”  he  replied.  "I  am  merely  quoting  his 
words,  and  you  begin  to  quarrel  with  me.  There  is  no  disputing  with  facts,  sir. 
Well,  as  I  was  saying,  when  time  has  thus  matured  an  opinion,  it  thenceforth  be¬ 
comes  completely  probable  and  safe.  Hence  the  learned  Caramuel,  in  dedicating 
his  Fundamental  Theology  to  Diana,  declares  that  this  great  Diana  has  rendered 
many  opinions  probable  which  were  not  so  before — quce  antea  non  erant;  and  that, 
therefore,  in  following  them,  persons  do  not  sin  now,  though  they  would  have 
sinned  formerly — jam  non  peccant ,  licet  ante  peccaverint .” 

"Truly,  father,”  I  observed,  "it  must  be  worth  one’s  while  living  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  your  doctors.  Why,  of  two  individuals  who  do  the  same  actions,  he 
that  knows  nothing  about  their  doctrine  sins,  while  he  that  knows  it  does  no  sin. 


LETTER  VI 


39 

It  seems,  then,  that  their  doctrine  possesses  at  once  an  edifying  and  a  justifying 
virtue!  The  law  of  God,  according  to  St.  Paul,  made  transgressors;  but  this  law  of 
yours  makes  nearly  all  of  us  innocent.  I  beseech  you,  my  dear  sir,  let  me  know  all 
about  it.  I  will  not  leave  you  till  you  have  told  me  all  the  maxims  which  your 
casuists  have  established/’ 

"Alas!”  the  monk  exclaimed,  "our  main  object,  no  doubt,  should  have  been 
to  establish  no  other  maxims  than  those  of  the  Gospel  in  all  their  strictness:  and 
it  is  easy  to  see,  from  the  Rules  for  the  regulation  of  our  manners,  that,  if  we 
tolerate  some  degree  of  relaxation  in  others,  it  is  rather  out  of  complaisance  than 
through  design.  The  truth  is,  sir,  we  are  forced  to  it.  Men  have  arrived  at  such  a 
pitch  of  corruption  nowadays  that,  unable  to  make  them  come  to  us,  we  must  e'en 
go  to  them,  otherwise  they  would  cast  us  off  altogether;  and,  what  is  worse,  they 
would  become  perfect  castaways.  It  is  to  retain  such  characters  as  these  that  our 
casuists  have  taken  under  consideration  the  vices  to  which  people  of  various  con¬ 
ditions  are  most  addicted,  with  the  view  of  laying  down  maxims  which,  while  they 
cannot  be  said  to  violate  the  truth,  are  so  gentle  that  he  must  be  a  very  impractic¬ 
able  subject  indeed  who  is  not  pleased  with  them.  The  grand  project  of  our  So¬ 
ciety,  for  the  good  of  religion,  is  never  to  repulse  any  one,  let  him  be  what  he 
may,  and  so  avoid  driving  people  to  despair. 

"They  have  got  maxims,  therefore,  for  all  sorts  of  persons;  for  beneficiaries,  for 
priests,  for  monks;  for  gentlemen,  for  servants;  for  rich  men,  for  commercial  men; 
for  people  in  embarrassed  or  indigent  circumstances;  for  devout  women,  and 
women  that  are  not  devout;  for  married  people,  and  irregular  people.  In  short, 
nothing  has  escaped  their  foresight.” 

"In  other  words,”  said  I,  "they  have  got  maxims  for  the  clergy,  the  nobility, 
and  the  commons.  Well,  I  am  quite  impatient  to  hear  them.” 

"Let  us  commence,”  resumed  the  father,  ’with  the  beneficiaries.  You  are  aware 
of  the  traffic  with  benefices  that  is  now  carried  on,  and  that,  were  the  matter 
referred  to  St.  Thomas  and  the  ancients  who  had  written  on  it,  there  might  chance 
to  be  some  simoniacs  in  the  Church.  This  rendered  it  highly  necessary  for  our 
fathers  to  exercise  their  prudence  in  finding  out  a  palliative.  With  what  success 
they  have  done  so  will  appear  from  the  following  words  of  Valencia,  who  is  one  of 
Escobar’s  Tour  living  creatures.’  At  the  end  of  a  long  discourse,  in  which  he  sug¬ 
gests  various  expedients,  he  propounds  the  following  at  page  2039, v°b  lll>  which, 
to  my  mind,  is  the  best:  Tf  a  person  gives  a  temporal  in  exchange  for  a  spiritual 
good’ — that  is,  if  he  gives  money  for  a  benefice — ’and  gives  the  money  as  the  price 
of  the  benefice,  it  is  manifest  simony.  But  if  he  gives  it  merely  as  the  motive  which 
inclines  the  will  of  the  patron  to  confer  on  him  the  living,  it  is  not  simony,  even 
though  the  person  who  confers  it  considers  and  expects  the  money  as  the  princi¬ 
pal  object.’  Tanner,  who  is  also  a  member  of  our  Society,  affirms  the  same  thing, 
vol.  iii,  p.1519,  although  he  ’grants  that  St.  Thomas  is  opposed  to  it;  for  he  ex¬ 
pressly  teaches  that  it  is  always  simony  to  give  a  spiritual  for  a  temporal  good,  if 
the  temporal  is  the  end  in  view.’  By  this  means  we  prevent  an  immense  number  of 
simoniacal  transactions;  for  who  would  be  so  desperately  wicked  as  to  refuse, 
when  giving  money  for  a  benefice,  to  take  the  simple  precaution  of  so  directing 
his  intentions  as  to  give  it  as  a  motive  to  induce  the  beneficiary  to  part  with  it,  in¬ 
stead  of  giving  it  as  the  price  of  the  benefice?  No  man,  surely,  can  be  so  far  left  to 
himself  as  that  would  come  to.” 


40  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

*T  agree  with  you  there,"  I  replied;  "all  men,  I  should  think,  have  sufficient  grace 
to  make  a  bargain  of  that  sort." 

"There  can  be  no  doubt  of  it,"  returned  the  monk.  "Such,  then,  is  the  way  in 
which  we  soften  matters  in  regard  to  the  beneficiaries.  And  now  for  the  priests — 
we  have  maxims  pretty  favourable  to  them  also.  Take  the  following,  for  example, 
from  our  four-and-twenty  elders:  ’Can  a  priest,  who  has  received  money  to  say  a 
mass,  take  an  additional  sum  upon  the  same  mass?  Yes,  says  Filiutius,  he  may,  by 
applying  that  part  of  the  sacrifice  which  belongs  to  himself  as  a  priest  to  the  per¬ 
son  who  paid  him  last;  provided  he  does  not  take  a  sum  equivalent  to  a  whole 
mass,  but  only  a  part,  such  as  the  third  of  a  mass.’ " 

"Surely,  father,"  said  I,  "this  must  be  one  of  those  cases  in  which  the  pro  and 
the  con  have  both  their  share  of  probability.  What  you  have  now  stated  cannot 
fail,  of  course,  to  be  probable,  having  the  authority  of  such  men  as  Filiutius  and 
Escobar;  and  yet,  leaving  that  within  the  sphere  of  probability,  it  strikes  me  that 
the  contrary  opinion  might  be  made  out  to  be  probable  too,  and  might  be  sup¬ 
ported  by  such  reasons  as  the  following:  That,  while  the  Church  allows  priests 
who  are  in  poor  circumstances  to  take  money  for  their  masses,  seeing  it  is  but 
right  that  those  who  serve  at  the  altar  should  live  by  the  altar,  she  never  intended 
that  they  should  barter  the  sacrifice  for  money,  and,  still  less,  that  they  should  de¬ 
prive  themselves  of  those  benefits  which  they  ought  themselves,  in  the  first  place, 
to  draw  from  it;  to  which  I  might  add  that,  according  to  St.  Paul,  the  priests  are  to 
offer  sacrifice  first  for  themselves  and  then  for  the  people;  and  that,  accordingly, 
while  permitted  to  participate  with  others  in  the  benefit  of  the  sacrifice,  they  are 
not  at  liberty  to  forego  their  share  by  transferring  it  to  another  for  a  third  of  a 
mass,  or,  in  other  words,  for  the  matter  of  fourpence  or  fivepence.  Verily,  father, 
little  as  I  pretend  to  be  a  grave  man,  I  might  contrive  to  make  this  opinion  prob¬ 
able." 

"It  would  cost  you  no  great  pains  to  do  that,"  replied  the  monk;  "it  is  visibly 
probable  already.  The  difficulty  lies  in  discovering  probability  in  the  converse  of 
opinions  manifestly  good;  and  this  is  a  feat  which  none  but  great  men  can  achieve. 
Father  Bauny  shines  in  this  department.  It  is  really  delightful  to  see  that  learned 
casuist  examining  with  characteristic  ingenuity  and  subtlety  the  negative  and 
affirmative  of  the  same  question,  and  proving  both  of  them  to  be  right!  Thus  in 
the  matter  of  priests,  he  says  in  one  place:  ’No  law  can  be  made  to  oblige  the 
curates  to  say  mass  every  day;  for  such  a  law  would  unquestionably  (baud  dubie) 
expose  them  to  the  danger  of  saying  it  sometimes  in  mortal  sin.’  And  yet,  in  an¬ 
other  part  of  the  same  treatise,  he  says,  ’that  priests  who  have  received  money  for 
saying  mass  every  day  ought  to  say  it  every  day,  and  that  they  cannot  excuse  them¬ 
selves  on  the  ground  that  they  are  not  always  in  a  fit  state  for  the  service;  because 
it  is  in  their  power  at  all  times  to  do  penance,  and  if  they  neglect  this  they  have 
themselves  to  blame  for  it  and  not  the  person  who  made  them  say  mass.’  And  to 
relieve  their  minds  from  all  scruples  on  the  subject,  he  thus  resolves  the  question: 
’May  a  priest  say  mass  on  the  same  day  in  which  he  has  committed  a  mortal  sin  of 
the  worst  kind,  in  the  way  of  confessing  himself  beforehand?’  Villalobos  says  no, 
because  of  his  impurity;  but  Sancius  says:  ’He  may  without  any  sin;  and  I  hold  his 
opinion  to  be  safe,  and  one  which  may  be  followed  in  practice — et  tuta  et  sequenda 
in  praxi.' " 

"Follow  this  opinion  in  practice!"  cried  I.  "Will  any  priest  who  has  fallen  into 


LETTER  VI 


4i 

such  irregularities  have  the  assurance  on  the  same  day  to  approach  the  altar,  on 
the  mere  word  of  Father  Bauny?  Is  he  not  bound  to  submit  to  the  ancient  laws  of 
the  Church,  which  debarred  from  the  sacrifice  forever,  or  at  least  for  a  long  time, 
priests  who  had  committed  sins  of  that  description — instead  of  following  the 
modern  opinions  of  casuists,  who  would  admit  him  to  it  on  the  very  day  that 
witnessed  his  fall?” 

"You  have  a  very  short  memory,”  returned  the  monk.  "Did  I  not  inform  you  a 
little  ago  that,  according  to  our  fathers  Cellot  and  Reginald,  'in  matters  of  moral¬ 
ity  we  are  to  follow,  not  the  ancient  fathers,  but  the  modern  casuists?’  ” 

"I  remember  it  perfectly,”  said  I;  "but  we  have  something  more  here:  we  have 
the  laws  of  the  Church.” 

"True,”  he  replied;  "but  this  shows  you  do  not  know  another  capital  maxim  of 
our  fathers,  'that  the  laws  of  the  Church  lose  their  authority  when  they  have  gone 
into  desuetude — cum  jam  desuetudine  abierunt — as  Filiutius  says.  We  know  the 
present  exigencies  of  the  Church  much  better  than  the  ancients  could  do.  Were 
we  to  be  so  strict  in  excluding  priests  from  the  altar,  you  can  understand  there 
would  not  be  such  a  great  number  of  masses.  Now  a  multitude  of  masses  brings 
such  a  revenue  of  glory  to  God  and  of  good  to  souls  that  I  may  venture  to  say, 
with  Father  Cellot,  that  there  would  not  be  too  many  priests,  'though  not  only  all 
men  and  women,  were  that  possible,  but  even  inanimate  bodies,  and  even  brute 
beasts — bruta  animalia — were  transformed  into  priests  to  celebrate  mass.’  ” 

I  was  so  astounded  at  the  extravagance  of  this  imagination  that  I  could  not 
utter  a  word  and  allowed  him  to  go  on  with  his  discourse.  "Enough,  however, 
about  priests;  I  am  afraid  of  getting  tedious:  let  us  come  to  the  monks .  The  grand 
difficulty  with  them  is  the  obedience  they  owe  to  their  superiors;  now  observe  the 
palliative  which  our  fathers  apply  in  this  case.  Castro  Palao  of  our  Society  has  said: 
'Beyond  all  dispute,  a  monk  who  has  a  probable  opinion  of  his  own,  is  not  bound 
to  obey  his  superior,  though  the  opinion  of  the  latter  is  the  more  probable.  For 
the  monk  is  at  liberty  to  adopt  the  opinion  which  is  more  agreeable  to  himself — 
quce  sibi  gratior  fuerit — as  Sanchez  says.  And  though  the  order  of  his  superior  be 
just,  that  does  not  oblige  you  to  obey  him,  for  it  is  not  just  at  all  points  or  in  every 
respect — non  undequaque  juste  prcecepit — but  only  probably  so;  and,  consequently, 
you  are  only  probably  bound  to  obey  him,  and  probably  not  bound — probabiliter 
obligatus ,  et probabiliter  deobligatus'  ” 

"Certainly,  father,”  said  I,  "it  is  impossible  too  highly  to  estimate  this  precious 
fruit  of  the  double  probability.” 

"It  is  of  great  use  indeed,”  he  replied;  "but  we  must  be  brief.  Let  me  only  give 
you  the  following  specimen  of  our  famous  Molina  in  favour  of  monks  who  are 
expelled  from  their  convents  for  irregularities.  Escobar  quotes  him  thus:  'Molina 
asserts  that  a  monk  expelled  from  his  monastery  is  not  obliged  to  reform  in  order 
to  get  back  again,  and  that  he  is  no  longer  bound  by  his  vow  of  obedience.’  ” 

"Well,  father,”  cried  I,  "this  is  all  very  comfortable  for  the  clergy.  Your  casuists, 
I  perceive,  have  been  very  indulgent  to  them,  and  no  wonder — they  w^ere  legislat¬ 
ing,  so  to  speak,  for  themselves.  I  am  afraid  people  of  other  conditions  are  not  so 
liberally  treated.  Every  one  for  himself  in  this  world.” 

"There  you  do  us  wrong,”  returned  the  monk;  "they  could  not  have  been 
kinder  to  themselves  than  we  have  been  to  them.  We  treat  all,  from  the  highest  to 
the  lowest,  with  an  even-handed  charity,  sir.  And  to  prove  this,  you  tempt  me  to 


42  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

tell  you  our  maxims  for  servants.  In  reference  to  this  class,  we  have  taken  into  con¬ 
sideration  the  difficulty  they  must  experience,  when  they  are  men  of  conscience, 
in  serving  profligate  masters.  For,  if  they  refuse  to  perform  all  the  errands  in  which 
they  are  employed,  they  lose  their  places;  and  if  they  yield  obedience,  they  have 
their  scruples.  To  relieve  them  from  these,  our  four-and-twenty  fathers  have  speci¬ 
fied  the  services  which  they  may  render  with  a  safe  conscience;  such  as  'carrying 
letters  and  presents,  opening  doors  and  windows,  helping  their  master  to  reach 
the  window,  holding  the  ladder  which  he  is  mounting.  All  this/  say  they,  'is  al¬ 
lowable  and  indifferent;  it  is  true  that,  as  to  holding  the  ladder,  they  must  be 
threatened,  more  than  usually,  with  being  punished  for  refusing;  for  it  is  doing  an 
injury  to  the  master  of  a  house  to  enter  it  by  the  window.’  You  perceive  the  judi¬ 
ciousness  of  that  observation,  of  course?” 

''I  expected  nothing  less,”  said  I,  ''from  a  book  edited  by  four-and-twenty  Jes¬ 
uits.” 

"But,”  added  the  monk,  ''Father  Bauny  has  gone  beyond  this;  he  has  taught 
valets  how  to  perform  these  sorts  of  offices  for  their  masters  quite  innocently,  by 
making  them  direct  their  intention,  not  to  the  sins  to  which  they  are  accessary, 
but  to  the  gain  which  is  to  accrue  from  them.  In  his  Summary  of  Sins ,  p.  710,  first 
edition,  he  thus  states  the  matter:  'Let  confessors  observe,’  says  he,  'that  they  can¬ 
not  absolve  valets  who  perform  base  errands,  if  they  consent  to  the  sins  of  their 
masters;  but  the  reverse  holds  true,  if  they  have  done  the  thing  merely  from  a  re¬ 
gard  to  their  temporal  emolument.’  And  that,  I  should  conceive,  is  no  difficult 
matter  to  do;  for  why  should  they  insist  on  consenting  to  sins  of  which  they  taste 
nothing  but  the  trouble?  The  same  Father  Bauny  has  established  a  prime  maxim 
in  favour  of  those  who  are  not  content  with  their  wages:  'May  servants  who  are 
dissatisfied  with  their  wages  use  means  to  raise  them  by  laying  their  hands  on  as 
much  of  the  property  of  their  masters  as  they  may  consider  necessary  to  make  the 
said  wages  equivalent  to  their  trouble?  They  may,  in  certain  circumstances;  as 
when  they  are  so  poor  that,  in  looking  for  a  situation,  they  have  been  obliged  to 
accept  the  offer  made  to  them,  and  when  other  servants  of  the  same  class  are 
gaining  more  than  they,  elsewhere.’  ” 

"Ha,  father!”  cried  I,  "that  is  John  d’Alba’s  passage,  I  declare.” 

''What  John  d’Alba?”  inquired  the  father:  ''what  do  you  mean?” 

"Strange,  father!”  returned  I:  "do  you  not  remember  what  happened  in  this 
city  in  the  year  1647?  Where  in  the  world  were  you  living  at  that  time?” 

"I  was  teaching  cases  of  conscience  in  one  of  our  colleges  far  from  Paris,”  he 
replied. 

"I  see  you  don’t  know  the  story,  father:  I  must  tell  it  to  you.  I  heard  it  related  the 
other  day  by  a  man  of  honour,  whom  I  met  in  company.  He  told  us  that  this  John 
d’Alba,  who  was  in  the  service  of  your  fathers  in  the  College  of  Clermont,  in  the 
Rue  St.  Jacques,  being  dissatisfied  with  his  wages,  had  purloined  something  to 
make  himself  amends;  and  that  your  fathers,  on  discovering  the  theft,  had  thrown 
him  into  prison  on  the  charge  of  larceny.  The  case  was  reported  to  the  court,  if  I 
recollect  right,  on  the  16th  of  April,  1647;  for  he  was  very  minute  in  his  state¬ 
ments,  and  indeed  they  would  hardly  have  been  credible  otherwise.  The  poor  fel¬ 
low,  on  being  questioned,  confessed  to  having  taken  some  pewter  plates,  but 
maintained  that  for  all  that  he  had  not  stolen  them;  pleading  in  his  defence  this 
very  doctrine  of  Father  Bauny,  which  he  produced  before  the  judges,  along  with  a 


LETTER  VI 


43 

pamphlet  by  one  of  your  fathers,  under  whom  he  had  studied  cases  of  conscience, 
and  who  had  taught  him  the  same  thing.  Whereupon  M.  de  Montrouge,  one  of 
the  most  respected  members  of  the  court,  said,  in  giving  his  opinion,  'that  he  did 
not  see  how,  on  the  ground  of  the  writings  of  these  fathers — writings  containing 
a  doctrine  so  illegal,  pernicious,  and  contrary  to  all  laws,  natural,  divine,  and 
human,  and  calculated  to  ruin  all  families,  and  sanction  all  sorts  of  household 
robbery — they  could  discharge  the  accused.  But  his  opinion  was  that  this  too 
faithful  disciple  should  be  whipped  before  the  college  gate,  by  the  hand  of  the 
common  hangman;  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  this  functionary  should  burn  the 
writings  of  these  fathers  which  treated  of  larceny,  with  certification  that  they  were 
prohibited  from  teaching  such  doctrine  in  future,  upon  pain  of  death.’ 

"The  result  of  this  judgement,  which  was  heartily  approved  of,  was  waited  for 
with  much  curiosity,  when  some  incident  occurred  which  made  them  delay  pro¬ 
cedure.  But  in  the  meantime  the  prisoner  disappeared,  nobody  knew  how,  and 
nothing  more  was  heard  about  the  affair;  so  that  John  d’Alba  got  off,  pewter 
plates  and  all.  Such  was  the  account  he  gave  us,  to  which  he  added,  that  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  M.  de  Montrouge  was  entered  on  the  records  of  the  court,  where  any  one 
may  consult  it.  We  were  highly  amused  at  the  story." 

"What  are  you  trifling  about  now?"  cried  the  monk.  "What  does  all  that  sig¬ 
nify?  I  was  explaining  the  maxims  of  our  casuists,  and  was  just  going  to  speak  of 
those  relating  to  gentlemen,  when  you  interrupt  me  with  impertinent  stories." 

"It  was  only  something  put  in  by  the  way,  father,"  I  observed;  "and  besides,  I 
was  anxious  to  apprise  you  of  an  important  circumstance,  which  I  find  you  have 
overlooked  in  establishing  your  doctrine  of  probability." 

"Ay,  indeed!"  exclaimed  the  monk,  "what  defect  can  this  be  that  has  escaped 
the  notice  of  so  many  ingenious  men?" 

"You  have  certainly,"  continued  I,  "contrived  to  place  your  disciples  in  perfect 
safety  so  far  as  God  and  the  conscience  are  concerned;  for  they  are  quite  safe  in 
that  quarter,  according  to  you,  by  following  in  the  wake  of  a  grave  doctor.  You 
have  also  secured  them  on  the  part  of  the  confessors,  by  obliging  priests,  on  the 
pain  of  mortal  sin,  to  absolve  all  who  follow  a  probable  opinion.  But  you  have 
neglected  to  secure  them  on  the  part  of  the  judges;  so  that,  in  following  your 
probabilities,  they  are  in  danger  of  coming  into  contact  with  the  whip  and  the 
gallows.  This  is  a  sad  oversight." 

"You  are  right,"  said  the  monk;  "I  am  glad  you  mentioned  it.  But  the  reason 
is  we  have  no  such  power  over  magistrates  as  over  the  confessors,  who  are  obliged 
to  refer  to  us  in  cases  of  conscience,  in  which  we  are  the  sovereign  judges." 

"So  I  understand,"  returned  I;  "but  if,  on  the  one  hand,  you  are  the  judges  of 
the  confessors,  are  you  not,  on  the  other  hand,  the  confessors  of  the  judges?  Your 
power  is  very  extensive.  Oblige  them,  on  pain  of  being  debarred  from  the  sacra¬ 
ments,  to  acquit  all  criminals  who  act  on  a  probable  opinion;  otherwise  it  may 
happen,  to  the  great  contempt  and  scandal  of  probability,  that  those  whom  you 
render  innocent  in  theory  may  be  whipped  or  hanged  in  practice.  Without  some¬ 
thing  of  this  kind,  how  can  you  expect  to  get  disciples?" 

"The  matter  deserves  consideration,"  said  he;  "it  will  never  do  to  neglect  it.  I 
shall  suggest  it  to  our  father  Provincial.  You  might,  however,  have  reserved  this 
advice  to  some  other  time,  without  interrupting  the  account  I  was  about  to  give 
you  of  the  maxims  which  we  have  established  in  favour  of  gentlemen;  and  I  shall 


44  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

not  give  you  any  more  information,  except  on  condition  that  you  do  not  tell  me 
any  more  stories." 

This  is  all  you  shall  have  from  me  at  present;  for  it  would  require  more  than 
the  limits  of  one  letter  to  acquaint  you  with  all  that  I  learned  in  a  single  conver¬ 
sation.  Meanwhile  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII 


Paris,  April  25,  1656 
Sir, 

Having  succeeded  in  pacifying  the  good  father,  who  had  been  rather  discon¬ 
certed  by  the  story  of  John  d’Alba,  he  resumed  the  conversation,  on  my  assuring 
him  that  I  would  avoid  all  such  interruptions  in  future,  and  spoke  of  the  maxims 
of  his  casuists  with  regard  to  gentlemen,  nearly  in  the  following  terms: 

"You  know,"  he  said,  "that  the  ruling  passion  of  persons  in  that  rank  of  life  is 
’the  point  of  honor,’  which  is  perpetually  driving  them  into  acts  of  violence  ap¬ 
parently  quite  at  variance  with  Christian  piety;  so  that,  in  fact,  they  would  be  al¬ 
most  all  of  them  excluded  from  our  confessionals,  had  not  our  fathers  relaxed  a 
little  from  the  strictness  of  religion,  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  weakness 
of  humanity.  Anxious  to  keep  on  good  terms  both  with  the  Gospel,  by  doing  their 
duty  to  God,  and  with  the  men  of  the  world,  by  showing  charity  to  their  neighbour, 
they  needed  all  the  wisdom  they  possessed  to  devise  expedients  for  so  nicely  ad¬ 
justing  matters  as  to  permit  these  gentlemen  to  adopt  the  methods  usually  re¬ 
sorted  to  for  vindicating  their  honour,  without  wounding  their  consciences,  and 
thus  reconcile  two  things  apparently  so  opposite  to  each  other  as  piety  and  the 
point  of  honour.  But,  sir,  in  proportion  to  the  utility  of  the  design,  was  the  diffi¬ 
culty  of  the  execution.  You  cannot  fail,  I  should  think,  to  realize  the  magnitude 
and  arduousness  of  such  an  enterprise?" 

"It  astonishes  me,  certainly,"  said  I,  rather  coldly. 

"It  astonishes  you,  forsooth!"  cried  the  monk.  "I  can  well  believe  that;  many 
besides  you  might  be  astonished  at  it.  Why,  don’t  you  know  that,  on  the  one 
hand,  the  Gospel  commands  us  ’not  to  render  evil  for  evil,  but  to  leave  vengeance 
to  God’;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  laws  of  the  world  forbid  our  enduring 
an  affront  without  demanding  satisfaction  from  the  offender,  and  that  often  at 
the  expense  of  his  life?  You  have  never,  I  am  sure,  met  with  anything  to  all  ap¬ 
pearance  more  diametrically  opposed  than  these  two  codes  of  morals;  and  yet, 
when  told  that  our  fathers  have  reconciled  them,  you  have  nothing  more  to  say 
than  simply  that  this  astonishes  you!" 

"I  did  not  sufficiently  explain  myself,  father.  I  should  certainly  have  considered 
the  thing  perfectly  impracticable,  if  I  had  not  known,  from  what  I  have  seen  of 
your  fathers,  that  they  are  capable  of  doing  with  ease  what  is  impossible  to  other 
men.  This  led  me  to  anticipate  that  they  must  have  discovered  some  method  for 
meeting  the  difficulty — a  method  which  I  admire  even  before  knowing  it,  and 
which  I  pray  you  to  explain  to  me." 

"Since  that  is  your  view  of  the  matter,"  replied  the  monk,  "I  cannot  refuse  you. 
Know  then,  that  this  marvellous  principle  is  our  grand  method  of  directing  the  in - 


LETTER  VII 


45 

tention — the  importance  of  which,  in  our  moral  system,  is  such  that  I  might  al¬ 
most  venture  to  compare  it  with  the  doctrine  of  probability.  You  have  had  some 
glimpses  of  it  in  passing,  from  certain  maxims  which  I  mentioned  to  you.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  when  I  was  showing  you  how  servants  might  execute  certain  troublesome 
jobs  with  a  safe  conscience,  did  you  not  remark  that  it  was  simply  by  diverting 
their  intention  from  the  evil  to  which  they  were  accessary  to  the  profit  which  they 
might  reap  from  the  transaction?  Now  that  is  what  we  call  directing  the  intention. 
You  saw,  too,  that,  were  it  not  for  a  similar  divergence  of  the  mind,  those  who 
give  money  for  benefices  might  be  downright  simoniacs.  But  I  will  now  show  you 
this  grand  method  in  all  its  glory,  as  it  applies  to  the  subject  of  homicide — a  crime 
which  it  justifies  in  a  thousand  instances;  in  order  that,  from  this  startling  result, 
you  may  form  an  idea  of  all  that  it  is  calculated  to  effect.” 

”1  foresee  already,”  said  I,  "that,  according  to  this  mode,  everything  will  be 
permitted;  it  will  stick  at  nothing.” 

"You  always  fly  from  the  one  extreme  to  the  other,”  replied  the  monk:  "prithee 
avoid  that  habit.  For,  just  to  show  you  that  we  are  far  from  permitting  everything, 
let  me  tell  you  that  we  never  suffer  such  a  thing  as  a  formal  intention  to  sin,  with 
the  sole  design  of  sinning;  and  if  any  person  whatever  should  persist  in  having  no 
other  end  but  evil  in  the  evil  that  he  does,  we  break  with  him  at  once:  such  con¬ 
duct  is  diabolical.  This  holds  true,  without  exception  of  age,  sex,  or  rank.  But 
when  the  person  is  not  of  such  a  wretched  disposition  as  this,  we  try  to  put  in 
practice  our  method  of  directing  the  intention ,  which  simply  consists  in  his  propos¬ 
ing  to  himself,  as  the  end  of  his  actions,  some  allowable  object.  Not  that  we  do 
not  endeavour,  as  far  as  we  can,  to  dissuade  men  from  doing  things  forbidden; 
but  when  we  cannot  prevent  the  action,  we  at  least  purify  the  motive,  and  thus 
correct  the  viciousness  of  the  means  by  the  goodness  of  the  end.  Such  is  the  way 
in  which  our  fathers  have  contrived  to  permit  those  acts  of  violence  to  which  men 
usually  resort  in  vindication  of  their  honour.  They  have  no  more  to  do  than  to 
turn  off  their  intention  from  the  desire  of  vengeance,  which  is  criminal,  and  direct 
it  to  a  desire  to  defend  their  honour,  which,  according  to  us,  is  quite  warrantable. 
And  in  this  way  our  doctors  discharge  all  their  duty  towards  God  and  towards 
man.  By  permitting  the  action,  they  gratify  the  world;  and  by  purifying  the  in¬ 
tention,  they  give  satisfaction  to  the  Gospel.  This  is  a  secret,  sir,  which  was  en¬ 
tirely  unknown  to  the  ancients;  the  world  is  indebted  for  the  discovery  entirely  to 
our  doctors.  You  understand  it  now,  I  hope?” 

"Perfectly  well,”  was  my  reply.  "To  men  you  grant  the  outward  material  effect 
of  the  action;  and  to  God  you  give  the  inward  and  spiritual  movement  of  the  in¬ 
tention;  and  by  this  equitable  partition,  you  form  an  alliance  between  the  laws  of 
God  and  the  laws  of  men.  But,  my  dear  sir,  to  be  frank  with  you,  I  can  hardly 
trust  your  premisses,  and  I  suspect  that  your  authors  will  tell  another  tale.” 

"You  do  me  injustice,”  rejoined  the  monk;  "I  advance  nothing  but  what  I  am 
ready  to  prove,  and  that  by  such  a  rich  array  of  passages  that  altogether  their  num¬ 
ber,  their  authority,  and  their  reasonings,  will  fill  you  with  admiration.  To  show 
you,  for  example,  the  alliance  which  our  fathers  have  formed  between  the  maxims 
of  the  Gospel  and  those  of  the  world,  by  thus  regulating  the  intention,  let  me  refer 
you  to  Reginald:  'Private  persons  are  forbidden  to  avenge  themselves;  for  St. 
Paul  says  to  the  Romans  (12),  "Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil”;  and  Ecclesi- 
asticus  says  (28),  "He  that  taketh  vengeance  shall  draw  on  himself  the  venge- 


46  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

ance  of  God,  and  his  sins  will  not  be  forgotten.”  Besides  all  that  is  said  in  the 
Gospel  about  forgiving  offences,  as  in  chapters  6  and  18  of  St.  Matthew/  ” 

"Well,  father,  if  after  that  he  says  anything  contrary  to  the  Scripture,  it  will  not 
be  from  lack  of  scriptural  knowledge,  at  any  rate.  Pray,  how  does  he  conclude?” 

"You  shall  hear,”  he  said.  "From  all  this  it  appears  that  a  military  man  may 
demand  satisfaction  on  the  spot  from  the  person  who  has  injured  him — not,  in¬ 
deed,  with  the  intention  of  rendering  evil  for  evil,  but  with  that  of  preserving  his 
honour — 'non  ut  malum  pro  malo  reddat ,  sed  ut  conservet  honor em'  See  you  how  care¬ 
fully  they  guard  against  the  intention  of  rendering  evil  for  evil,  because  the  Scrip¬ 
ture  condemns  it?  This  is  what  they  will  tolerate  on  no  account.  Thus  Lessius 
observes,  that  'if  a  man  has  received  a  blow  on  the  face,  he  must  on  no  account 
have  an  intention  to  avenge  himself;  but  he  may  lawfully  have  an  intention  to  avert 
infamy,  and  may,  with  that  view,  repel  the  insult  immediately,  even  at  the  point  of 
the  sword — etiam  cum  gladio /*  So  far  are  we  from  permitting  any  one  to  cherish 
the  design  of  taking  vengeance  on  his  enemies  that  our  fathers  will  not  allow  any 
even  to  wish  their  death — by  a  movement  of  hatred.  'If  your  enemy  is  disposed  to 
injure  you,’  says  Escobar,  ‘you  have  no  right  to  wish  his  death,  by  a  movement  of 
hatred;  though  you  may,  with  a  view  to  save  yourself  from  harm.’  So  legitimate, 
indeed,  is  this  wish,  with  such  an  intention,  that  our  great  Hurtado  de  Mendoza 
says  that  'we  may  pray  God  to  visit  with  speedy  death  those  who  are  bent  on  perse¬ 
cuting  us,  if  there  is  no  other  way  of  escaping  from  it.”’ 

"May  it  please  your  reverence,”  said  I,  "the  Church  has  forgotten  to  insert  a 
petition  to  that  effect  among  her  prayers.” 

"They  have  not  put  in  everything  into  the  prayers  that  one  may  lawfully  ask  of 
God,”  answered  the  monk.  "Besides,  in  the  present  case,  the  thing  was  impossible, 
for  this  same  opinion  is  of  more  recent  standing  than  the  Breviary.  You  are  not  a 
good  chronologist,  friend.  But,  not  to  wander  from  the  point,  let  me  request  your 
attention  to  the  following  passage,  cited  by  Diana  from  Gaspar  Hurtado,  one  of 
Escobar’s  four-and-twenty  fathers:  'An  incumbent  may,  without  any  mortal  sin, 
desire  the  decease  of  a  life-renter  on  his  benefice,  and  a  son  that  of  his  father,  and 
rejoice  when  it  happens;  provided  always  it  is  for  the  sake  of  the  profit  that  is  to 
accrue  from  the  event,  and  not  from  personal  aversion.’  ” 

"Good!”  cried  I.  "That  is  certainly  a  very  happy  hit;  and  I  can  easily  see  that 
the  doctrine  admits  of  a  wide  application.  But  yet  there  are  certain  cases,  the  solu¬ 
tion  of  which,  though  of  great  importance  for  gentlemen,  might  present  still  greater 
difficulties.” 

"Propose  them,  if  you  please,  that  we  may  see, ’’said  the  monk. 

"Show  me,  with  all  your  directing  of  the  intention,”  returned  I,  "that  it  is  al¬ 
lowable  to  fight  a  duel.” 

"Our  great  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,”  said  the  father,  "will  satisfy  you  on  that 
point  in  a  twinkling.  'If  a  gentleman,’  says  he,  in  a  passage  cited  by  Diana,  'who 
is  challenged  to  fight  a  duel,  is  well  known  to  have  no  religion,  and  if  the  vices  to 
which  he  is  openly  and  unscrupulously  addicted  are  such  as  would  lead  people  to 
conclude,  in  the  event  of  his  refusing  to  fight,  that  he  is  actuated,  not  by  the  fear  of 
God,  but  by  cowardice,  and  induce  them  to  say  of  him  that  he  was  a  hen ,  and  not  a 
man,  gallina ,  et  non  vir;  in  that  case  he  may,  to  save  his  honour,  appear  at  the  ap¬ 
pointed  spot — not,  indeed,  with  the  express  intention  of  fighting  a  duel,  but 
merely  with  that  of  defending  himself,  should  the  person  who  challenged  him 


LETTER  VII 


47 

come  there  unjustly  to  attack  him.  His  action  in  this  case,  viewed  by  itself,  will  be 
perfectly  indifferent;  for  what  moral  evil  is  there  in  one  stepping  into  a  field,  tak¬ 
ing  a  stroll  in  expectation  of  meeting  a  person,  and  defending  one’s  self  in  the 
event  of  being  attacked?  And  thus  the  gentleman  is  guilty  of  no  sin  whatever;  for 
in  fact  it  cannot  be  called  accepting  a  challenge  at  all,  his  intention  being  directed  to 
other  circumstances,  and  the  acceptance  of  a  challenge  consisting  in  an  express  in¬ 
tention  to  fight,  which  we  are  supposing  the  gentleman  never  had.”’ 

"You  have  not  kept  your  word  with  me,  sir,”  said  I.  "This  is  not,  properly 
speaking,  to  permit  duelling;  on  the  contrary,  the  casuist  is  so  persuaded  that  this 
practice  is  forbidden  that,  in  licensing  the  action  in  question,  he  carefully  avoids 
calling  it  a  duel.” 

"Ah!”  cried  the  monk,  "you  begin  to  get  knowing  on  my  hand,  I  am  glad  to 
see.  I  might  reply  that  the  author  I  have  quoted  grants  all  that  duellists  are  dis¬ 
posed  to  ask.  But  since  you  must  have  a  categorical  answer,  I  shall  allow  our 
Father  Layman  to  give  it  for  me.  He  permits  duelling  in  so  many  words,  provided 
that,  in  accepting  the  challenge,  the  person  directs  his  intention  solely  to  the 
preservation  of  his  honour  or  his  property:  Tf  a  soldier  or  a  courtier  is  in  such  a 
predicament  that  he  must  lose  either  his  honour  or  his  fortune  unless  he  accepts  a 
challenge,  I  see  nothing  to  hinder  him  from  doing  so  in  self-defence.’  The  same 
thing  is  said  by  Peter  Hurtado,  as  quoted  by  our  famous  Escobar;  his  words  are: 
’One  may  fight  a  duel  even  to  defend  one’s  property,  should  that  be  necessary; 
because  every  man  has  a  right  to  defend  his  property,  though  at  the  expense  of  his 
enemy’s  life!’  ” 

I  was  struck,  on  hearing  these  passages,  with  the  reflection  that,  while  the  piety 
of  the  king  appears  in  his  exerting  all  his  power  to  prohibit  and  abolish  the  practice 
of  duelling  in  the  State,  the  piety  of  the  Jesuits  is  shown  in  their  employing  all 
their  ingenuity  to  tolerate  and  sanction  it  in  the  Church.  But  the  good  father  was 
in  such  an  excellent  key  for  talking  that  it  would  have  been  cruel  to  have  inter¬ 
rupted  him;  so  he  went  on  with  his  discourse. 

"In  short,”  said  he,  "Sanchez  (mark,  now,  what  great  names  I  am  quoting  to 
you!)  Sanchez,  sir,  goes  a  step  further;  for  he  shows  how,  simply  by  managing  the 
intention  rightly,  a  person  may  not  only  receive  a  challenge,  but  give  one.  And 
our  Escobar  follows  him.” 

"Prove  that,  father,”  said  I,  "and  I  shall  give  up  the  point:  but  I  will  not  believe 
that  he  has  written  it,  unless  I  see  it  in  print.” 

"Read  it  yourself,  then,”  he  replied:  and,  to  be  sure,  I  read  the  following  extract 
from  the  Moral  Theology  of  Sanchez:  "It  is  perfectly  reasonable  to  hold  that  a  man 
may  fight  a  duel  to  save  his  life,  his  honour,  or  any  considerable  portion  of  his 
property,  when  it  is  apparent  that  there  is  a  design  to  deprive  him  of  these  un¬ 
justly,  by  law-suits  and  chicanery,  and  when  there  is  no  other  way  of  preserving 
them.  Navarre  justly  observes  that,  in  such  cases,  it  is  lawful  either  to  accept  or  to 
send  a  challenge — licet  acceptare  et  offerre  duellum .  The  same  author  adds  that  there 
is  nothing  to  prevent  one  from  despatching  one’s  adversary  in  a  private  way.  In¬ 
deed,  in  the  circumstances  referred  to,  it  is  advisable  to  avoid  employing  the 
method  of  the  duel,  if  it  is  possible  to  settle  the  affair  by  privately  killing  our  ene¬ 
my;  for,  by  this  means,  we  escape  at  once  from  exposing  our  life  in  the  combat, 
and  from  participating  in  the  sin  which  our  opponent  would  have  committed  by 
fighting  the  duel!” 


48  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"A  most  pious  assassination!"  said  I.  "Still,  however,  pious  though  it  be,  it  is 
assassination,  if  a  man  is  permitted  to  kill  his  enemy  in  a  treacherous  manner." 

"Did  I  say  that  he  might  kill  him  treacherously?"  cried  the  monk.  "God  forbid! 
I  said  he  might  kill  him  privately ,  and  you  conclude  that  he  may  kill  him  treacher¬ 
ously ,  as  if  that  were  the  same  thing!  Attend,  sir,  to  Escobar’s  definition  before  al¬ 
lowing  yourself  to  speak  again  on  this  subject:  *  We  call  it  killing  in  treachery  when 
the  person  who  is  slain  had  no  reason  to  suspect  such  a  fate.  He,  therefore,  that 
slays  his  enemy  cannot  be  said  to  kill  him  in  treachery,  even  although  the  blow 
should  be  given  insidiously  and  behind  his  back — licet  per  insidias  aut  a  tergo  per- 
cutiat.'  And  again:  'He  that  kills  his  enemy,  with  whom  he  was  reconciled  under  a 
promise  of  never  again  attempting  his  life,  cannot  be  absolutely  said  to  kill  in 
treachery,  unless  there  was  between  them  all  the  stricter  friendship — arctior  amici- 
tia.y  You  see  now  you  do  not  even  understand  what  the  terms  signify,  and  yet  you 
pretend  to  talk  like  a  doctor." 

"I  grant  you  this  is  something  quite  new  to  me,"  I  replied;  "and  I  should 
gather  from  that  definition  that  few,  if  any,  were  ever  killed  in  treachery;  for  peo¬ 
ple  seldom  take  it  into  their  heads  to  assassinate  any  but  their  enemies.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  however,  it  seems  that,  according  to  Sanchez,  a  man  may  freely  slay  (I  do 
not  say  treacherously ,  but  only  insidiously  and  behind  his  back)  a  calumniator,  for 
example,  who  prosecutes  us  at  law?" 

"Certainly  he  may,"  returned  the  monk,  "always,  however,  in  the  way  of  giv¬ 
ing  a  right  direction  to  the  intention:  you  constantly  forget  the  main  point.  Mo¬ 
lina  supports  the  same  doctrine;  and  what  is  more,  our  learned  brother  Reginald 
maintains  that  we  may  despatch  the  false  witnesses  whom  he  summons  against  us. 
And,  to  crown  the  whole,  according  to  our  great  and  famous  fathers  Tanner  and 
Emanuel  Sa,  it  is  lawful  to  kill  both  the  false  witnesses  and  the  judge  himself ,  if  he 
has  had  any  collusion  with  them.  Here  are  Tanner’s  very  words:  'Sotus  and  Les- 
sius  think  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  kill  the  false  witnesses  and  the  magistrate  who 
conspire  together  to  put  an  innocent  person  to  death;  but  Emanuel  Sa  and  other 
authors  with  good  reason  impugn  that  sentiment,  at  least  so  far  as  the  conscience 
is  concerned.’  And  he  goes  on  to  show  that  it  is  quite  lawful  to  kill  both  the  wit¬ 
nesses  and  the  judge." 

"Well,  father,"  said  I,  "I  think  I  now  understand  pretty  well  your  principle 
regarding  the  direction  of  the  intention:  but  I  should  like  to  know  something  of 
its  consequences,  and  all  the  cases  in  which  this  method  of  yours  arms  a  man  with 
the  power  of  life  and  death.  Let  us  go  over  them  again,  for  fear  of  mistake,  for 
equivocation  here  might  be  attended  with  dangerous  results.  Killing  is  a  matter 
which  requires  to  be  well-timed,  and  to  be  backed  with  a  good  probable  opinion. 
You  have  assured  me,  then,  that  by  giving  a  proper  turn  to  the  intention,  it  is  law¬ 
ful,  according  to  your  fathers,  for  the  preservation  of  one’s  honour,  or  even  prop¬ 
erty,  to  accept  a  challenge  to  a  duel,  to  give  one  sometimes,  to  kill  in  a  private 
way  a  false  accuser,  and  his  witnesses  along  with  him,  and  even  the  judge  who  has 
been  bribed  to  favour  them;  and  you  have  also  told  me  that  he  who  has  got  a 
blow  may,  without  avenging  himself,  retaliate  with  the  sword.  But  you  have  not 
told  me,  father,  to  what  length  he  may  go." 

"He  can  hardly  mistake  there,"  replied  the  father,  "for  he  may  go  all  the  length 
of  killing  his  man.  This  is  satisfactorily  proved  by  the  learned  Henriquez,  and 
others  of  our  fathers  quoted  by  Escobar,  as  follows:  'It  is  perfectly  right  to  kill  a 


LETTER  VII 


49 

person  who  has  given  us  a  box  on  the  ear,  although  he  should  run  away,  provided 
it  is  not  done  through  hatred  or  revenge,  and  there  is  no  danger  of  giving  occa¬ 
sion  thereby  to  murders  of  a  gross  kind  and  hurtful  to  society.  And  the  reason  is 
that  it  is  as  lawful  to  pursue  the  thief  that  has  stolen  our  honour,  as  him  that  has 
run  away  with  our  property.  For,  although  your  honour  cannot  be  said  to  be  in 
the  hands  of  your  enemy  in  the  same  sense  as  your  goods  and  chattels  are  in  the 
hands  of  the  thief,  still  it  may  be  recovered  in  the  same  way — by  showing  proofs 
of  greatness  and  authority,  and  thus  acquiring  the  esteem  of  men.  And,  in  point  of 
fact,  is  it  not  certain  that  the  man  who  has  received  a  buffet  on  the  ear  is  held  to  be 
under  disgrace,  until  he  has  wiped  off  the  insult  with  the  blood  of  his  enemy?’  ” 

I  was  so  shocked  on  hearing  this  that  it  was  with  great  difficulty  I  could  contain 
myself;  but,  in  my  anxiety  to  hear  the  rest,  I  allowed  him  to  proceed. 

"Nay,”  he  continued,  "it  is  allowable  to  prevent  a  buffet,  by  killing  him  that 
meant  to  give  it,  if  there  be  no  other  way  to  escape  the  insult.  This  opinion  is 
quite  common  with  our  fathers.  For  example,  Azor,  one  of  the  four-and-twenty 
elders,  proposing  the  question,  Ts  it  lawful  for  a  man  of  honour  to  kill  another 
who  threatens  to  give  him  a  slap  on  the  face,  or  strike  him  with  a  stick?’  replies, 
’Some  say  he  may  not;  alleging  that  the  life  of  our  neighbour  is  more  precious 
than  our  honour,  and  that  it  would  be  an  act  of  cruelty  to  kill  a  man  merely  to 
avoid  a  blow.  Others,  however,  think  that  it  is  allowable;  and  I  certainly  consider 
it  probable,  when  there  is  no  other  way  of  warding  off  the  insult;  for,  otherwise, 
the  honour  of  the  innocent  would  be  constantly  exposed  to  the  malice  of  the  inso¬ 
lent.’  The  same  opinion  is  given  by  our  great  Filiutius;  by  Father  Hereau,  in  his 
Treatise  on  Homicide;  by  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  in  his  Disputations;  by  Becan,  in  his 
Summary;  by  our  Fathers  Flahaut  and  Lecourt,  in  those  writings  which  the  Univer¬ 
sity,  in  their  third  petition,  quoted  at  length,  in  order  to  bring  them  into  disgrace 
(though  in  this  they  failed);  and  by  Escobar.  In  short,  this  opinion  is  so  general 
that  Lessius  lays  it  down  as  a  point  which  no  casuist  has  contested;  he  quotes  a 
great  many  that  uphold,  and  none  that  deny  it;  and  particularly  Peter  Navarre, 
who,  speaking  of  affronts  in  general  (and  there  is  none  more  provoking  than  a  box 
on  the  ear),  declares  that  ’by  the  universal  consent  of  the  casuists,  it  is  lawful  to 
kill  the  calumniator,  if  there  be  no  other  way  of  averting  the  affront — ex  sententia 
omnium ,  licet  contumeliosum  occidere,  si  aliter  ea  injuria  arceri  nequit'  Do  you  wish  any 
more  authorities?’’  asked  the  monk. 

I  declared  I  was  much  obliged  to  him;  I  had  heard  rather  more  than  enough  of 
them  already.  But,  just  to  see  how  far  this  damnable  doctrine  would  go,  I  said, 
"But,  father,  may  not  one  be  allowed  to  kill  for  something  still  less?  Might  not  a 
person  so  direct  his  intention  as  lawfully  to  kill  another  for  telling  a  lie,  for  ex¬ 
ample?’’ 

"He  may,’’  returned  the  monk;  "and  according  to  Father  Baldelle,  quoted  by 
Escobar,  ’you  may  lawfully  take  the  life  of  another  for  saying,  "You  have  told  a 
lie’’;  if  there  is  no  other  way  of  shutting  his  mouth.’  The  same  thing  may  be  done 
in  the  case  of  slanders.  Our  Fathers  Lessius  and  Hereau  agree  in  the  following  sen¬ 
timents:  ‘If  you  attempt  to  ruin  my  character  by  telling  stories  against  me  in  the 
presence  of  men  of  honour,  and  I  have  no  other  way  of  preventing  this  than  by 
putting  you  to  death,  may  I  be  permitted  to  do  so?  According  to  the  modern  authors, 
I  may,  and  that  even  though  I  have  been  really  guilty  of  the  crime  which  you 
divulge,  provided  it  is  a  secret  one,  which  you  could  not  establish  by  legal  evi- 


ARCHBISHOP  mitty  high  school  library 

°an  Jose,  California 


50  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

dence.  And  I  prove  it  thus:  If  you  mean  to  rob  me  of  my  honour  by  giving  me  a 
box  on  the  ear,  I  may  prevent  it  by  force  of  arms;  and  the  same  mode  of  defence  is 
lawful  when  you  would  do  me  the  same  injury  with  the  tongue.  Besides,  we  may 
lawfully  obviate  affronts  and,  therefore,  slanders.  In  fine,  honour  is  dearer  than 
life;  and  as  it  is  lawful  to  kill  in  defence  of  life,  it  must  be  so  to  kill  in  defence  of 
honour.’  There,  you  see,  are  arguments  in  due  form;  this  is  demonstration,  sir — 
not  mere  discussion.  And,  to  conclude,  this  great  man  Lessius  shows,  in  the  same 
place,  that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  even  for  a  simple  gesture,  or  a  sign  of  contempt.  'A 
man’s  honour,’  he  remarks,  'may  be  attacked  or  filched  away  in  various  ways — in 
all  of  which  vindication  appears  very  reasonable;  as,  for  instance,  when  one  offers 
to  strike  us  with  a  stick,  or  give  us  a  slap  on  the  face,  or  affront  us  either  by  words 
or  signs — sive per  signa.’” 

"Well,  father,’’  said  I,  "it  must  be  owned  that  you  have  made  every  possible 
provision  to  secure  the  safety  of  reputation;  but  it  strikes  me  that  human  life  is 
greatly  in  danger,  if  any  one  may  be  conscientiously  put  to  death  simply  for  a 
defamatory  speech  ora  saucy  gesture." 

"That  is  true,"  he  replied;  "but,  as  our  fathers  are  very  circumspect,  they  have 
thought  it  proper  to  forbid  putting  this  doctrine  into  practice  on  such  trifling  oc¬ 
casions.  They  say,  at  least,  'that  it  ought  hardly  to  be  reduced  to  practice — practice 
vix prohari potest .’  And  they  have  a  good  reason  for  that,  as  you  shall  see." 

"Oh,  I  know  what  it  will  be,"  interrupted  I;  "because  the  law  of  God  forbids  us 
to  kill,  of  course." 

"They  do  not  exactly  take  that  ground,"  said  the  father;  "as  a  matter  of  con¬ 
science,  and  viewing  the  thing  abstractly,  they  hold  it  allowable." 

"And  why  then,  do  they  forbid  it?" 

"I  shall  tell  you  that,  sir.  It  is  because,  were  we  to  kill  all  the  defamers  among 
us,  we  should  very  shortly  depopulate  the  country.  'Although,’  says  Reginald, 
'the  opinion  that  we  may  kill  a  man  for  calumny  is  not  without  its  probability  in 
theory,  the  contrary  one  ought  to  be  followed  in  practice;  for,  in  our  mode  of 
defending  ourselves,  we  should  always  avoid  doing  injury  to  the  commonwealth; 
and  it  is  evident  that  by  killing  people  in  this  way  there  would  be  too  many  mur¬ 
ders.’  'We  should  be  on  our  guard,’  says  Lessius,  'lest  the  practice  of  this  maxim 
prove  hurtful  to  the  State;  for  in  this  case  it  ought  not  to  be  permitted — tunc  enim 
non  est permittendus* " 

"What,  father!  is  it  forbidden  only  as  a  point  of  policy,  and  not  of  religion? 
Few  people,  I  am  afraid,  will  pay  any  regard  to  such  a  prohibition,  particularly 
when  in  a  passion.  Very  probably  they  might  think  they  were  doing  no  harm  to 
the  State,  by  ridding  it  of  an  unworthy  member." 

"And  accordingly,"  replied  the  monk,  "our  Filiutius  has  fortified  that  argu¬ 
ment  with  another,  which  is  of  no  slender  importance,  namely,  'that  for  killing 
people  after  this  manner,  one  might  be  punished  in  a  court  of  justice.’ " 

"There  now,  father;  I  told  you  before,  that  you  will  never  be  able  to  do  any¬ 
thing  worth  the  while,  unless  you  get  the  magistrates  to  go  along  with  you." 

"The  magistrates,"  said  the  father,  "as  they  do  not  penetrate  into  the  con¬ 
science,  judge  merely  of  the  outside  of  the  action,  while  we  look  principally  to  the 
intention;  and  hence  it  occasionally  happens  that  our  maxims  are  a  little  different 
from  theirs." 

"Be  that  as  it  may,  father;  from  yours,  at  least,  one  thing  may  be  fairly  inferred — 


LETTER  VII 


that,  by  taking  care  not  to  injure  the  commonwealth,  we  may  kill  defamers  with  a 
safe  conscience,  provided  we  can  do  it  with  a  sound  skin.  But,  sir,  after  having  seen 
so  well  to  the  protection  of  honour,  have  you  done  nothing  for  property?  I  am 
aware  it  is  of  inferior  importance,  but  that  does  not  signify;  I  should  think  one 
might  direct  one’s  intention  to  kill  for  its  preservation  also.” 

"Yes,”  replied  the  monk;  "and  I  gave  you  a  hint  to  that  effect  already,  which 
may  have  suggested  the  idea  to  you.  All  our  casuists  agree  in  that  opinion;  and 
they  even  extend  the  permission  to  those  cases  'where  no  further  violence  is  appre¬ 
hended  from  those  that  steal  our  property  ;  as,  for  example,  where  the  thief  runs 
away.’  Azor,  one  of  our  Society,  proves  that  point.” 

"But,  sir,  how  much  must  the  article  be  worth,  to  justify  our  proceeding  to  that 
extremity?” 

"According  to  Reginald  and  Tanner,  ‘the  article  must  be  of  great  value  in  the 
estimation  of  a  judicious  man.’  And  so  think  Layman  and  Filiutius.” 

"But,  father,  that  is  saying  nothing  to  the  purpose;  where  am  I  to  find  'a  judi¬ 
cious  man’  (a  rare  person  to  meet  with  at  any  time),  in  order  to  make  this  estima¬ 
tion?  Why  do  they  not  settle  upon  an  exact  sum  at  once?” 

"Ay,  indeed!”  retorted  the  monk;  "and  was  it  so  easy,  think  you,  to  adjust  the 
comparative  value  between  the  life  of  a  man,  and  a  Christian  man,  too,  and  money? 
It  is  here  I  would  have  you  feel  the  need  of  our  casuists.  Show  me  any  of  your 
ancient  fathers  who  will  tell  for  how  much  money  we  may  be  allowed  to  kill  a 
man.  What  will  they  say,  but  ‘ Non  occides — Thou  shalt  not  kill?’  ” 

"And  who,  then,  has  ventured  to  fix  that  sum?”  I  inquired. 

"Our  great  and  incomparable  Molina,”  he  replied — "the  glory  of  our  Society — 
who  has,  in  his  inimitable  wisdom,  estimated  the  life  of  a  man  ‘at  six  or  seven 
ducats;  for  which  sum  he  assures  us  it  is  warrantable  to  kill  a  thief,  even  though  he 
should  run  off’;  and  he  adds,  ‘that  he  would  not  venture  to  condemn  that  man  as 
guilty  of  any  sin  who  should  kill  another  for  taking  away  an  article  worth  a  crown, 
or  even  less — unius  aurei ,  vel  minoris  adhuc  valoris\  which  has  led  Escobar  to  lay  it 
down,  as  a  general  rule,  ‘that  a  man  may  be  killed  quite  regularly,  according  to 
Molina,  for  the  value  of  a  crownpiece.’  ” 

"O  father,”  cried  I;  "where  can  Molina  have  got  all  this  wisdom  to  enable  him 
to  determine  a  matter  of  such  importance,  without  any  aid  from  Scripture,  the 
councils,  or  the  fathers?  It  is  quite  evident  that  he  has  obtained  an  illumination 
peculiar  to  himself,  and  is  far  beyond  St.  Augustine  in  the  matter  of  homicide,  as 
well  as  of  grace.  Well,  now,  I  suppose  I  may  consider  myself  master  of  this  chap¬ 
ter  of  morals;  and  I  see  perfectly  that,  with  the  exception  of  ecclesiastics,  nobody 
need  refrain  from  killing  those  who  injure  them  in  their  property  or  reputation.” 

"What  say  you?”  exclaimed  the  monk.  "Do  you,  then,  suppose  that  it  would 
be  reasonable  that  those,  who  ought  of  all  men  to  be  most  respected,  should  alone 
be  exposed  to  the  insolence  of  the  wicked?  Our  fathers  have  provided  against 
that  disorder;  for  Tanner  declares  that  ‘Churchmen,  and  even  monks,  are  permit¬ 
ted  to  kill,  for  the  purpose  of  defending  not  only  their  lives,  but  their  property, 
and  that  of  their  community.’  Molina,  Escobar,  Becan,  Reginald,  Layman,  Les- 
sius,  and  others,  hold  the  same  language.  Nay,  according  to  our  celebrated  Father 
Lamy,  priests  and  monks  may  lawfully  prevent  those  who  would  injure  them  by 
calumnies  from  carrying  their  ill  designs  into  effect,  by  putting  them  to  death. 
Care,  however,  must  always  be  taken  to  direct  the  intention  properly.  His  words 


52  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

are:  'An  ecclesiastic  or  a  monk  may  warrantably  kill  a  defamer  who  threatens  to 
publish  the  scandalous  crimes  of  his  community,  or  his  own  crimes,  when  there  is 
no  other  way  of  stopping  him;  if,  for  instance,  he  is  prepared  to  circulate  his  de¬ 
famations  unless  promptly  despatched.  For,  in  these  circumstances,  as  the  monk 
would  be  allowed  to  kill  one  who  threatened  to  take  his  life,  he  is  also  warranted 
to  kill  him  who  would  deprive  him  of  his  reputation  or  his  property,  in  the  same 
way  as  the  men  of  the  world.’  ” 

"I  was  not  aware  of  that,”  said  I;  "in  fact,  I  have  been  accustomed  simply 
enough  to  believe  the  very  reverse,  without  reflecting  on  the  matter,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  having  heard  that  the  Church  had  such  an  abhorrence  of  bloodshed  as 
not  even  to  permit  ecclesiastical  judges  to  attend  in  criminal  cases.” 

"Never  mind  that,”  he  replied;  "our  Father  Lamy  has  completely  proved  the 
doctrine  I  have  laid  down,  although,  with  a  humility  which  sits  uncommonly  well 
on  so  great  a  man,  he  submits  it  to  the  judgement  of  his  judicious  readers.  Cara- 
muel,  too,  our  famous  champion,  quoting  it  in  his  Fundamental  Theology ,  p.  543, 
thinks  it  so  certain,  that  he  declares  the  contrary  opinion  to  be  destitute  of  prob¬ 
ability,  and  draws  some  admirable  conclusions  from  it,  such  as  the  following, 
which  he  calls  'the  conclusion  of  conclusions — conclusionum  conclusio  :  'That  a 
priest  not  only  may  kill  a  slanderer,  but  there  are  certain  circumstances  in  which  it 
may  be  his  duty  to  do  so — etiam  aliquando  debet  occidere .’  He  examines  a  great  many 
new  questions  on  this  principle,  such  as  the  following,  for  instance:  'May  the 
Jesuits  kill  the  Jansenists?’  ” 

"A  curious  point  of  divinity  that,  father!”  cried  I.  "I  hold  the  Jansenists  to  be 
as  good  as  dead  men,  according  to  Father  Lamy’s  doctrine.” 

"There,  now,  you  are  in  the  wrong,”  said  the  monk:  "Caramuel  infers  the  very 
reverse  from  the  same  principles.” 

"And  how  so,  father?” 

"Because,”  he  replied,  "it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  Jansenists  to  injure  our 
reputation.  'The  Jansenists,’  says  he,  'call  the  Jesuits  Pelagians;  may  they  not  be 
killed  for  that?  No;  inasmuch  as  the  Jansenists  can  no  more  obscure  the  glory  of 
the  Society  than  an  owl  can  eclipse  that  of  the  sun;  on  the  contrary,  they  have, 
though  against  their  intention,  enhanced  it — occidi  non  possunt ,  quia  nocere  non 
potuerunt'  ” 

"Ha,  father!  do  the  lives  of  the  Jansenists,  then,  depend  on  the  contingency  of 
their  injuring  your  reputation?  If  so,  I  reckon  them  far  from  being  in  a  safe  posi¬ 
tion;  for  supposing  it  should  be  thought  in  the  slightest  degree  probable  that  they 
might  do  you  some  mischief,  why,  they  are  killable  at  once!  You  have  only  to  draw 
up  a  syllogism  in  due  form,  and,  with  a  direction  of  the  intention,  you  may  des¬ 
patch  your  man  at  once  with  a  safe  conscience.  Thrice  happy  must  those  hot 
spirits  be  who  cannot  bear  with  injuries,  to  be  instructed  in  this  doctrine!  But  woe 
to  the  poor  people  who  have  offended  them!  Indeed,  father,  it  would  be  better  to 
have  to  do  with  persons  who  have  no  religion  at  all  than  with  those  who  have  been 
taught  on  this  system.  For,  after  all,  the  intention  of  the  wounder  conveys  no  com¬ 
fort  to  the  wounded.  The  poor  man  sees  nothing  of  that  secret  direction  of  which 
you  speak;  he  is  only  sensible  of  the  direction  of  the  blow  that  is  dealt  him.  And  I 
am  by  no  means  sure  but  a  person  would  feel  much  less  sorry  to  see  himself  bru¬ 
tally  killed  by  an  infuriated  villain  than  to  find  himself  conscientiously  stilettoed 
by  a  devotee.  To  be  plain  with  you,  father,  I  am  somewhat  staggered  at  all  this; 


LETTER  VIII 


53 


and  these  questions  of  Father  Lamy  and  Caramuel  do  not  please  me  at  all.” 

"How  so?”  cried  the  monk.  "Are  you  a  Jansenist?” 

"I  have  another  reason  for  it,”  I  replied.  "You  must  know  I  am  in  the  habit  of 
writing  from  time  to  time,  to  a  friend  of  mine  in  the  country,  all  that  I  can  learn 
of  the  maxims  of  your  doctors.  Now,  although  I  do  no  more  than  simply  report 
and  faithfully  quote  their  own  words,  yet  I  am  apprehensive  lest  my  letter  should 
fall  into  the  hands  of  some  stray  genius  who  may  take  into  his  head  that  I  have 
done  you  injury,  and  may  draw  some  mischievous  conclusion  from  your  premisses.  ” 

"Away!”  cried  the  monk;  "no  fear  of  danger  from  that  quarter,  I’ll  give  you 
my  word  for  it.  Know  that  what  our  fathers  have  themselves  printed,  with  the 
approbation  of  our  superiors,  it  cannot  be  wrong  to  read  nor  dangerous  to  pub¬ 
lish.” 

I  write  you,  therefore,  on  the  faith  of  this  worthy  father’s  word  of  honour.  But, 
in  the  meantime,  I  must  stop  for  want  of  paper — not  of  passages;  for  I  have  got  as 
many  more  in  reserve,  and  good  ones  too,  as  would  require  volumes  to  contain 
them.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII 


Paris,  May  28,  1656 
Sir, 

You  did  not  suppose  that  anybody  would  have  the  curiosity  to  know  who  we 
were;  but  it  seems  there  are  people  who  are  trying  to  make  it  out,  though  they  are 
not  very  happy  in  their  conjectures.  Some  take  me  for  a  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne; 
others  ascribe  my  letters  to  four  or  five  persons,  who,  like  me,  are  neither  priests 
nor  Churchmen.  All  these  false  surmises  convince  me  that  I  have  succeeded  pretty 
well  in  my  object,  which  was  to  conceal  myself  from  all  but  yourself  and  the 
worthy  monk,  who  still  continues  to  bear  with  my  visits,  while  I  still  contrive, 
though  with  considerable  difficulty,  to  bear  with  his  conversations.  I  am  obliged, 
however,  to  restrain  myself;  for,  were  he  to  discover  how  much  I  am  shocked  at 
his  communications,  he  would  discontinue  them  and  thus  put  it  out  of  my  power 
to  fulfil  the  promise  I  gave  you,  of  making  you  acquainted  with  their  morality. 
You  ought  to  think  a  great  deal  of  the  violence  which  I  thus  do  to  my  own  feel¬ 
ings.  It  is  no  easy  matter,  I  can  assure  you,  to  stand  still  and  see  the  whole  system 
of  Christian  ethics  undermined  by  such  a  set  of  monstrous  principles,  without 
daring  to  put  in  a  word  of  flat  contradiction  against  them.  But,  after  having  borne 
so  much  for  your  satisfaction,  I  am  resolved  I  shall  burst  out  for  my  own  satis¬ 
faction  in  the  end,  when  his  stock  of  information  has  been  exhausted.  Meanwhile, 
I  shall  repress  my  feelings  as  much  as  I  possibly  can  for  I  find  that  the  more  I  hold 
my  tongue,  he  is  the  more  communicative.  The  last  time  I  saw  him,  he  told  me 
so  many  things  that  I  shall  have  some  difficulty  in  repeating  them  all.  On  the 
point  of  restitution  you  will  find  they  have  some  most  convenient  principles.  For, 
however  the  good  monk  palliates  his  maxims,  those  which  I  am  about  to  lay  be¬ 
fore  you  really  go  to  sanction  corrupt  judges,  usurers,  bankrupts,  thieves,  prosti¬ 
tutes  and  sorcerers — all  of  whom  are  most  liberally  absolved  from  the  obligation 
of  restoring  their  ill-gotten  gains.  It  was  thus  the  monk  resumed  the  conversation: 


54  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"At  the  commencement  of  our  interviews,  I  engaged  to  explain  to  you  the 
maxims  of  our  authors  for  all  ranks  and  classes;  and  you  have  already  seen  those 
that  relate  to  beneficiaries,  to  priests,  to  monks,  to  domestics,  and  to  gentlemen. 
Let  us  now  take  a  cursory  glance  at  the  remaining,  and  begin  with  the  judges. 

"Now  I  am  going  to  tell  you  one  of  the  most  important  and  advantageous 
maxims  which  our  fathers  have  laid  down  in  their  favour.  Its  author  is  the  learned 
Castro  Palao,  one  of  our  four-and -twenty  elders.  His  words  are:  ’May  a  judge,  in 
a  question  of  right  and  wrong,  pronounce  according  to  a  probable  opinion,  in 
preference  to  the  more  probable  opinion?  He  may,  even  though  it  should  be  con¬ 
trary  to  his  own  judgement — imo  contra propriam  opinionem.*" 

"Well,  father,"  cried  I,  "that  is  a  very  fair  commencement!  The  judges,  surely, 
are  greatly  obliged  to  you;  and  I  am  surprised  that  they  should  be  so  hostile,  as 
we  have  sometimes  observed,  to  your  probabilities,  seeing  these  are  so  favourable 
to  them.  For  it  would  appear  from  this  that  you  give  them  the  same  power  over 
men’s  fortunes  as  you  have  given  to  yourselves  over  their  consciences." 

"You  perceive  we  are  far  from  being  actuated  by  self-interest,"  returned  he; 
"we  have  had  no  other  end  in  view  than  the  repose  of  their  consciences;  and  to 
the  same  useful  purpose  has  our  great  Molina  devoted  his  attention,  in  regard  to 
the  presents  which  may  be  made  them.  To  remove  any  scruples  which  they  might 
entertain  in  accepting  of  these  on  certain  occasions,  he  has  been  at  the  pains  to 
draw  out  a  list  of  all  those  cases  in  which  bribes  may  be  taken  with  a  good  con¬ 
science,  provided,  at  least,  there  be  no  special  law  forbidding  them.  He  says: 
’Judges  may  receive  presents  from  parties  when  they  are  given  them  either  for 
friendship’s  sake,  or  in  gratitude  for  some  former  act  of  justice,  or  to  induce  them 
to  give  justice  in  future,  or  to  oblige  them  to  pay  particular  attention  to  their 
case,  or  to  engage  them  to  despatch  it  promptly.’  The  learned  Escobar  delivers 
himself  to  the  same  effect:  ’If  there  be  a  number  of  persons,  none  of  whom  have 
more  right  than  another  to  have  their  causes  disposed  of,  will  the  judge  who 
accepts  of  something  from  one  of  them,  on  condition — ex pacto — of  taking  up  his 
cause  first,  be  guilty  of  sin?  Certainly  not,  according  to  Layman;  for,  in  common 
equity,  he  does  no  injury  to  the  rest  by  granting  to  one,  in  consideration  of  his 
present,  what  he  was  at  liberty  to  grant  to  any  of  them  he  pleased;  and  besides, 
being  under  an  equal  obligation  to  them  all  in  respect  of  their  right,  he  becomes 
more  obliged  to  the  individual  who  furnished  the  donation,  who  thereby  acquired 
for  himself  a  preference  above  the  rest — a  preference  which  seems  capable  of  a 
pecuniary  valuation — quae  obligatio  videtur pretio  astimabilis.  ’ " 

"May  it  please  your  reverence,"  said  I,  "after  such  a  permission,  I  am  surprised 
that  the  first  magistrates  of  the  kingdom  should  know  no  better.  For  the  first  presi¬ 
dent  has  actually  carried  an  order  in  Parliament  to  prevent  certain  clerks  of  court 
from  taking  money  for  that  very  sort  of  preference — a  sign  that  he  is  far  from  think¬ 
ing  it  allowable  in  judges;  and  everybody  has  applauded  this  as  a  reform  of  great 
benefit  to  all  parties." 

The  worthy  monk  was  surprised  at  this  piece  of  intelligence,  and  replied:  "Are 
you  sure  of  that?  I  heard  nothing  about  it.  Our  opinion,  recollect,  is  only  prob¬ 
able;  the  contrary  is  probable  also." 

"To  tell  you  the  truth,  father,"  said  I,  "people  think  that  the  first  president  has 
acted  more  than  probably  well,  and  that  he  has  thus  put  a  stop  to  a  course  of 
public  corruption  which  has  been  too  long  winked  at." 


LETTER  VIII  55 

"I  am  not  far  from  being  of  the  same  mind,”  returned  he;  "but  let  us  waive 
that  point,  and  say  no  more  about  the  judges.” 

"You  are  quite  right,  sir,”  said  I;  "indeed,  they  are  not  half  thankful  enough 
for  all  you  have  done  for  them.” 

"That  is  not  my  reason,”  said  the  father;  "but  there  is  so  much  to  be  said  on  all 
the  different  classes  that  we  must  study  brevity  on  each  of  them.  Let  us  now  say  a 
word  or  two  about  men  of  business.  You  are  aware  that  our  great  difficulty  with 
these  gentlemen  is  to  keep  them  from  usury — an  object  to  accomplish  which  our 
fathers  have  been  at  particular  pains;  for  they  hold  this  vice  in  such  abhorrence 
that  Escobar  declares  ’it  is  heresy  to  say  that  usury  is  no  sin';  and  Father  Bauny 
has  filled  several  pages  of  his  Summary  of  Sins  with  the  pains  and  penalties  due  to 
usurers.  He  declares  them  ’infamous  during  their  life,  and  unworthy  of  sepulture 
after  their  death.’  ” 

"O  dear!”  cried  I,  "I  had  no  idea  he  was  so  severe.” 

"He  can  be  severe  enough  when  there  is  occasion  for  it,”  said  the  monk;  "but 
then  this  learned  casuist,  having  observed  that  some  are  allured  into  usury  merely 
from  the  love  of  gain,  remarks  in  the  same  place  that  ’he  would  confer  no  small 
obligation  on  society,  who,  while  he  guarded  it  against  the  evil  effects  of  usury, 
and  of  the  sin  which  gives  birth  to  it,  would  suggest  a  method  by  which  one’s 
money  might  secure  as  large,  if  not  a  larger  profit,  in  some  honest  and  lawful  em¬ 
ployment  than  he  could  derive  from  usurious  dealings.” 

"Undoubtedly,  father,  there  would  be  no  more  usurers  after  that.” 

"Accordingly,”  continued  he,  "our  casuist  has  suggested  ’a  general  method  for 
all  sorts  of  persons — gentlemen,  presidents,  councillors,’  &c.;  and  a  very  simple 
process  it  is,  consisting  only  in  the  use  of  certain  words  which  must  be  pronounced 
by  the  person  in  the  act  of  lending  his  money;  after  which  he  may  take  his  in¬ 
terest  for  it  without  fear  of  being  a  usurer,  which  he  certainly  would  be  on  any 
other  plan.” 

"And  pray  what  may  those  mysterious  words  be,  father?” 

"I  will  give  you  them  exactly  in  his  own  words,”  said  the  father;  "for  he  has 
written  his  Summary  in  French,  you  know,  ’that  it  may  be  understood  by  every¬ 
body,’  as  he  says  in  the  preface:  ’The  person  from  whom  the  loan  is  asked  must 
answer,  then,  in  this  manner:  I  have  got  no  money  to  lend;  I  have  got  a  little,  how¬ 
ever,  to  lay  out  for  an  honest  and  lawful  profit.  If  you  are  anxious  to  have  the  sum 
you  mention  in  order  to  make  something  of  it  by  your  industry,  dividing  the 
profit  and  loss  between  us,  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to  accommodate  you.  But  now 
I  think  of  it,  as  it  may  be  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  agree  about  the  profit,  if  you  will 
secure  me  a  certain  portion  of  it,  and  give  me  so  much  for  my  principal,  so  that  it 
incur  no  risk,  we  may  come  to  terms  much  sooner,  and  you  shall  touch  the  cash 
immediately.’  Is  not  that  an  easy  plan  for  gaining  money  without  sin?  And  has 
not  Father  Bauny  good  reason  for  concluding  with  these  words:  ’Such,  in  my 
opinion,  is  an  excellent  plan  by  which  a  great  many  people,  who  now  provoke  the 
just  indignation  of  God  by  their  usuries,  extortions,  and  illicit  bargains,  might 
save  themselves,  in  the  way  of  making  good,  honest,  and  legitimate  profits’?  ” 

"O  sir!”  I  exclaimed,  "what  potent  words  these  must  be!  Doubtless  they  must 
possess  some  latent  virtue  to  chase  away  the  demon  of  usury  which  I  know  noth¬ 
ing  of,  for,  in  my  poor  judgement,  I  always  thought  that  that  vice  consisted  in  re¬ 
covering  more  money  that  what  was  lent.” 


56  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"You  know  little  about  it  indeed,"  he  replied.  "Usury,  according  to  our  fathers, 
consists  in  little  more  than  the  intention  of  taking  the  interest  as  usurious.  Esco¬ 
bar,  accordingly,  shows  you  how  you  may  avoid  usury  by  a  simple  shift  of  the 
intention.  Tt  would  be  downright  usury/  says  he  'to  take  interest  from  the  bor¬ 
rower,  if  we  should  exact  it  as  due  in  point  of  justice;  but  if  only  exacted  as  due  in 
point  of  gratitude,  it  is  not  usury.  Again,  it  is  not  lawful  to  have  directly  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  profiting  by  the  money  lent;  but  to  claim  it  through  the  medium  of  the 
benevolence  of  the  borrower — media  benevolentia — is  not  usury.’  These  are  subtle 
methods;  but,  to  my  mind,  the  best  of  them  all  (for  we  have  a  great  choice  of 
them)  is  that  of  the  Mohatra  bargain." 

"The  Mohatra,  father!" 

"You  are  not  acquainted  with  it,  I  see,"  returned  he.  "The  name  is  the  only 
strange  thing  about  it.  Escobar  will  explain  it  to  you:  'The  Mohatra  bargain  is  ef¬ 
fected  by  the  needy  person  purchasing  some  goods  at  a  high  price  and  on  credit, 
in  order  to  sell  them  over  again,  at  the  same  time  and  to  the  same  merchant,  for 
ready  money  and  at  a  cheap  rate.’  This  is  what  we  call  the  Mohatra — a  sort  of 
bargain,  you  perceive,  by  which  a  person  receives  a  certain  sum  of  ready  money  by 
becoming  bound  to  pay  more." 

"But,  sir,  I  really  think  nobody  but  Escobar  has  employed  such  a  term  as  that; 
is  it  to  be  found  in  any  other  book?" 

"How  little  you  do  know  of  what  is  going  on,  to  be  sure!"  cried  the  father. 
"Why,  the  last  work  on  theological  morality,  printed  at  Paris  this  very  year,  speaks 
of  the  Mohatra,  and  learnedly,  too.  It  is  called  Epilogus  Summarum ,  and  is  an 
abridgment  of  all  the  summaries  of  divinity — extracted  from  Suarez,  Sanchez, 
Lessius,  Fagundez,  Hurtado,  and  other  celebrated  casuists,  as  the  title  bears.  There 
you  will  find  it  said,  on  p.54,  that  'the  Mohatra  bargain  takes  place  when  a  man 
who  has  occasion  for  twenty  pistoles  purchases  from  a  merchant  goods  to  the 
amount  of  thirty  pistoles,  payable  within  a  year,  and  sells  them  back  to  him  on 
the  spot  for  twenty  pistoles  ready  money.’  This  shows  you  that  the  Mohatra  is 
not  such  an  unheard-of  term  as  you  supposed." 

"But,  father,  is  that  sort  of  bargain  lawful?" 

"Escobar,"  replied  he,  "tells  us  in  the  same  place  that  there  are  laws  which  pro¬ 
hibit  it  under  very  severe  penalties." 

"It  is  useless,  then,  I  suppose?" 

"Not  at  all;  Escobar,  in  the  same  passage,  suggests  expedients  for  making  it 
lawful:  'It  is  so,  even  though  the  principal  intention  both  of  the  buyer  and  seller  is 
to  make  money  by  the  transaction,  provided  the  seller,  in  disposing  of  the  goods, 
does  not  exceed  their  highest  price,  and  in  re-purchasing  them  does  not  go  below 
their  lowest  price,  and  that  no  previous  bargain  has  been  made,  expressly  or  other¬ 
wise/  Lessius,  however,  maintains  that  'even  though  the  merchant  has  sold  his 
goods,  with  the  intention  of  re-purchasing  them  at  the  lowest  price,  he  is  not  bound 
to  make  restitution  of  the  profit  thus  acquired,  unless,  perhaps,  as  an  act  of  charity, 
in  the  case  of  the  person  from  whom  it  had  been  exacted  being  in  poor  circum¬ 
stances,  and  not  even  then,  if  he  cannot  do  it  without  inconvenience — si  commode 
non  potest .’  This  is  the  utmost  length  to  which  they  could  go." 

"Indeed,  sir,"  said  I,  "any  further  indulgence  would,  I  should  think,  be  rather 
too  much." 

"Oh,  our  fathers  know  very  well  when  it  is  time  for  them  to  stop!"  cried  the 


LETTER  VIII 


57 

monk.  "So  much,  then,  for  the  utility  of  the  Mohatra.  I  might  have  mentioned 
several  other  methods,  but  these  may  suffice;  and  I  have  now  to  say  a  little  in  re¬ 
gard  to  those  who  are  in  embarrassed  circumstances.  Our  casuists  have  sought  to 
relieve  them,  according  to  their  condition  of  life.  For,  if  they  have  not  enough  of 
property  for  a  decent  maintenance,  and  at  the  same  time  for  paying  their  debts, 
they  permit  them  to  secure  a  portion  by  making  a  bankruptcy  with  their  creditors. 
This  has  been  decided  by  Lessius,  and  confirmed  by  Escobar,  as  follows:  ’May  a 
person  who  turns  bankrupt,  with  a  good  conscience  keep  back  as  much  of  his 
personal  estate  as  may  be  necessary  to  maintain  his  family  in  a  respectable  way — 
ne  indecore  vivat ?  I  hold,  with  Lessius,  that  he  may,  even  though  he  may  have  ac¬ 
quired  his  wealth  unjustly  and  by  notorious  crimes — ex  injustitia  et  notorio  delicto; 
only,  in  this  case,  he  is  not  at  liberty  to  retain  so  large  an  amount  as  he  otherwise 
might.’  ’’ 

"Indeed,  father!  what  a  strange  sort  of  charity  is  this,  to  allow  property  to  re¬ 
main  in  the  hands  of  the  man  who  has  acquired  it  by  rapine,  to  support  him  in  his 
extravagance  rather  than  go  into  the  hands  of  his  creditors,  to  whom  it  legitimately 
belongs!" 

"It  is  impossible  to  please  everybody,"  replied  the  father;  "and  we  have  made 
it  our  particular  study  to  relieve  these  unfortunate  people.  This  partiality  to  the 
poor  has  induced  our  great  Vasquez,  cited  by  Castro  Palao,  to  say  that  'if  one  saw 
a  thief  going  to  rob  a  poor  man,  it  would  be  lawful  to  divert  him  from  his  purpose 
by  pointing  out  to  him  some  rich  individual,  whom  he  might  rob  in  place  of  the 
other.’  If  you  have  not  access  to  Vasquez  or  Castro  Palao,  you  will  find  the  same 
thing  in  your  copy  of  Escobar;  for,  as  you  are  aware,  his  work  is  little  more  than  a 
compilation  from  twenty-four  of  the  most  celebrated  of  our  fathers.  You  will  find 
it  in  his  treatise,  entitled  The  Practice  of  our  Society ,  in  the  Matter  of  Charity  towards 
our  Neighbours .’’ 

"A  very  singular  kind  of  charity  this,"  I  observed,  "to  save  one  man  from  suf¬ 
fering  loss,  by  inflicting  it  upon  another!  But  I  suppose  that,  to  complete  the  char¬ 
ity,  the  charitable  adviser  would  be  bound  in  conscience  to  restore  to  the  rich  man 
the  sum  which  he  had  made  him  lose?" 

"Not  at  all,  sir,"  returned  the  monk;  "for  he  did  not  rob  the  man — he  only  ad¬ 
vised  the  other  to  do  it.  But  only  attend  to  this  notable  decision  of  Father  Bauny, 
on  a  case  which  will  still  more  astonish  you,  and  in  which  you  would  suppose 
there  was  a  much  stronger  obligation  to  make  restitution.  Here  are  his  identical 
words:  'A  person  asks  a  soldier  to  beat  his  neighbour,  or  to  set  fire  to  the  barn  of  a 
man  that  has  injured  him.  The  question  is  whether,  in  the  essence  of  the  soldier, 
the  person  who  employed  him  to  commit  these  outrages  is  bound  to  make  repara¬ 
tion  out  of  his  own  pocket  for  the  damage  that  has  followed?  My  opinion  is  that 
he  is  not.  For  none  can  be  held  bound  to  restitution,  where  there  has  been  no  vio¬ 
lation  of  justice;  and  is  justice  violated  by  asking  another  to  do  us  a  favour?  As  to 
the  nature  of  the  request  which  he  made,  he  is  at  liberty  either  to  acknowledge  or 
deny  it;  to  whatever  side  he  may  incline,  it  is  a  matter  of  mere  choice;  nothing 
obliges  him  to  it,  unless  it  may  be  the  goodness,  gentleness,  and  easiness  of  his 
disposition.  If  the  soldier,  therefore,  makes  no  reparation  for  the  mischief  he  has 
done,  it  ought  not  to  be  exacted  from  him  at  whose  request  he  injured  the  inno¬ 
cent.”’ 

This  sentence  had  very  nearly  broken  up  the  whole  conversation,  for  I  was  on 


58  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

the  point  of  bursting  into  a  laugh  at  the  idea  of  the  goodness  and  gentleness  of  a  burner 
of  barns,  and  at  these  strange  sophisms  which  would  exempt  from  the  duty  of 
restitution  the  principal  and  real  incendiary,  whom  the  civil  magistrate  would  not 
exempt  from  the  halter.  But,  had  I  not  restrained  myself,  the  worthy  monk,  who 
was  perfectly  serious,  would  have  been  displeased;  he  proceeded,  therefore,  with¬ 
out  any  alteration  of  countenance,  in  his  observations. 

"From  such  a  mass  of  evidence,  you  ought  to  be  satisfied  now  of  the  futility  of 
your  objections;  but  we  are  losing  sight  of  our  subject.  To  revert,  then,  to  the 
succour  which  our  fathers  apply  to  persons  in  straitened  circumstances,  Lessius, 
among  others,  maintains  that  'it  is  lawful  to  steal,  not  only  in  a  case  of  extreme 
necessity,  but  even  where  the  necessity  is  grave ,  though  not  extreme.*  ’* 

"This  is  somewhat  startling,  father,"  said  I.  "There  are  very  few  people  in  this 
world  who  do  not  consider  their  cases  of  necessity  to  be  grave  ones,  and  to  whom, 
accordingly,  you  would  not  give  the  right  of  stealing  with  a  good  conscience. 
And,  though  you  should  restrict  the  permission  to  those  only  who  are  really  and 
truly  in  that  condition,  you  open  the  door  to  an  infinite  number  of  petty  larcenies 
which  the  magistrates  would  punish  in  spite  of  your  grave  necessity ,  and  which  you 
ought  to  repress  on  a  higher  principle — you  who  are  bound  by  your  office  to  be 
the  conservators,  not  of  justice  only,  but  of  charity  between  man  and  man,  a  grace 
which  this  permission  would  destroy.  For  after  all,  now,  is  it  not  a  violation  of  the 
law  of  charity,  and  of  our  duty  to  our  neighbour,  to  deprive  a  man  of  his  property 
in  order  to  turn  it  to  our  own  advantage?  Such,  at  least,  is  the  way  I  have  been 
taught  to  think  hitherto.** 

"That  will  not  always  hold  true,*’  replied  the  monk;  "for  our  great  Molina  has 
taught  us  that  'the  rule  of  charity  does  not  bind  us  to  deprive  ourselves  of  a  profit, 
in  order  thereby  to  save  our  neighbour  from  a  corresponding  loss.*  He  advances 
this  in  corroboration  of  what  he  had  undertaken  to  prove —  'that  one  is  not  bound 
in  conscience  to  restore  the  goods  which  another  had  put  into  his  hands  in  order 
to  cheat  his  creditors.’  Lessius  holds  the  same  opinion,  on  the  same  ground.  Al¬ 
low  me  to  say,  sir,  that  you  have  too  little  compassion  for  people  in  distress.  Our 
fathers  have  had  more  charity  than  that  comes  to:  they  render  ample  justice  to  the 
poor,  as  well  as  the  rich;  and,  I  may  add,  to  sinners  as  well  as  saints.  For,  though 
far  from  having  any  predilection  for  criminals,  they  do  not  scruple  to  teach  that  the 
property  gained  by  crime  may  be  lawfully  retained.  'No  person,*  says  Lessius, 
speaking  generally,  'is  bound,  either  by  the  law  of  nature  or  by  positive  laws  (that 
is,  by  any  law),  to  make  restitution  of  what  has  been  gained  by  committing  a 
criminal  action,  such  as  adultery,  even  though  that  action  is  contrary  to  justice.* 
For,  as  Escobar  comments  on  this  writer,  'though  the  property  which  a  woman  ac¬ 
quires  by  adultery  is  certainly  gained  in  an  illicit  way,  yet  once  acquired,  the  pos¬ 
session  of  it  is  lawful — quamvis  mulier  illicite  acquisat ,  licite  tamen  retinet  acquisita .* 
It  is  on  this  principle  that  the  most  celebrated  of  our  writers  have  formally  decided 
that  the  bribe  received  by  a  judge  from  one  of  the  parties  who  has  a  bad  case,  in 
order  to  procure  an  unjust  decision  in  his  favour,  the  money  got  by  a  soldier  for 
killing  a  man,  or  the  emoluments  gained  by  infamous  crimes,  may  be  legitimately 
retained.  Escobar,  who  has  collected  this  from  a  number  of  our  authors,  lays  down 
this  general  rule  on  the  point  that  'the  means  acquired  by  infamous  courses,  such 
as  murder,  unjust  decisions,  profligacy,  &c.,  are  legitimately  possessed,  and  none 
are  obliged  to  restore  them.*  And,  further,  'they  may  dispose  of  what  they  have 


LETTER  VIII 


59 

received  for  homicide,  profligacy,  &c.,  as  they  please;  for  the  possession  is  just, 
and  they  have  acquired  a  propriety  in  the  fruits  of  their  iniquity.’  ” 

"My  dear  father,"  cried  I,  "this  is  a  mode  of  acquisition  which  I  never  heard  of 
before;  and  I  question  much  if  the  law  will  hold  it  good,  or  if  it  will  consider  as¬ 
sassination,  injustice,  and  adultery,  as  giving  valid  titles  to  property." 

"Ido  not  know  what  your  law-books  may  say  on  the  point,  ’  ’  returned  the  monk ; 
"but  I  know  well  that  our  books,  which  are  the  genuine  rules  for  conscience,  bear 
me  out  in  what  I  say.  It  is  true  they  make  one  exception,  in  which  restitution  is 
positively  enjoined;  that  is,  in  the  case  of  any  receiving  money  from  those  who 
have  no  right  to  dispose  of  their  property  such  as  minors  and  monks.  ’Unless,’  says 
the  great  Molina,  'a  woman  has  received  money  from  one  who  cannot  dispose  of 
it,  such  as  a  monk  or  a  minor — nisi  mulier  accepisset  ab  eo  qui  alienare  non  potest ,  nt  a 
religioso  et  filio  familias.  In  this  case  she  must  give  back  the  money.’  And  so  says 
Escobar." 

"May  it  please  your  reverence,"  said  I,  "the  monks,  I  see,  are  more  highly 
favoured  in  this  way  than  other  people." 

"By  no  means,"  he  replied;  "have  they  not  done  as  much  generally  for  all 
minors,  in  which  class  monks  may  be  viewed  as  continuing  all  their  lives?  It  is 
barely  an  act  of  justice  to  make  them  an  exception;  but  with  regard  to  all  other 
people,  there  is  no  obligation  whatever  to  refund  to  them  the  money  received  from 
them  fora  criminal  action.  For,  as  has  been  amply  shown  by  Lessius,  ‘a  wicked  ac¬ 
tion  may  have  its  price  fixed  in  money,  by  calculating  the  advantage  received  by 
the  person  who  orders  it  to  be  done  and  the  trouble  taken  by  him  who  carries  it  into 
execution;  on  which  account  the  latter  is  not  bound  to  restore  the  money  he  got 
for  the  deed,  whatever  that  may  have  been — homicide,  injustice,  or  a  foul  act’ 
(for  such  are  the  illustrations  which  he  uniformly  employs  in  this  question);  ’un¬ 
less  he  obtained  the  money  from  those  having  no  right  to  dispose  of  their  prop¬ 
erty.  You  may  object,  perhaps,  that  he  who  has  obtained  money  for  a  piece  of 
wickedness  is  sinning  and,  therefore,  ought  neither  to  receive  nor  retain  it.  But  I 
reply  that,  after  the  thing  is  done,  there  can  be  no  sin  either  in  giving  or  in  re¬ 
ceiving  payment  for  it.’  The  great  Filiutius  enters  still  more  minutely  into  details, 
remarking  ’that  a  man  is  bound  in  conscience  to  vary  his  payments  for  actions  of  this 
sort,  according  to  the  different  conditions  of  the  individuals  who  commit  them, 
and  some  may  bring  a  higher  price  than  others.’  This  he  confirms  by  very  solid 
arguments." 

He  then  pointed  out  to  me,  in  his  authors,  some  things  of  this  nature  so  indeli¬ 
cate  that  I  should  be  ashamed  to  repeat  them;  and  indeed  the  monk  himself,  who 
is  a  good  man,  would  have  been  horrified  at  them  himself,  were  it  not  for  the  pro¬ 
found  respect  which  he  entertains  for  his  fathers,  and  which  makes  him  receive 
with  veneration  everything  that  proceeds  from  them.  Meanwhile,  I  held  my  tongue, 
not  so  much  with  the  view  of  allowing  him  to  enlarge  on  this  matter  as  from  pure 
astonishment  at  finding  the  books  of  men  in  holy  orders  stuffed  with  sentiments  at 
once  so  horrible,  so  iniquitous,  and  so  silly.  He  went  on,  therefore,  without  in¬ 
terruption  in  his  discourse,  concluding  as  follows: 

"From  these  premisses,  our  illustrious  Molina  decides  the  following  question 
(and  after  this,  I  think  you  will  have  got  enough:  ’If  one  has  received  money  to 
perpetrate  a  wicked  action,  is  he  obliged  to  restore  it?  We  must  distinguish  here,’ 
says  this  great  man;  ’if  he  has  not  done  the  deed,  he  must  give  back  the  cash;  if  he 


60  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

has,  he  is  under  no  such  obligation!’  Such  are  some  of  our  principles  touching 
restitution.  You  have  got  a  great  deal  of  instruction  to-day;  and  I  should  like, 
now,  to  see  what  proficiency  you  have  made.  Come,  then,  answer  me  this  question: 
Ts  a  judge,  who  has  received  a  sum  of  money  from  one  of  the  parties  before  him, 
in  order  to  pronounce  a  judgement  in  his  favour,  obliged  to  make  restitution?’  ” 

"You  were  just  telling  me  a  little  ago,  father,  that  he  was  not." 

"I  told  you  no  such  thing,"  replied  the  father;  "did  I  express  myself  so  general¬ 
ly?  I  told  you  he  was  not  bound  to  make  restitution,  provided  he  succeeded  in 
gaining  the  cause  for  the  party  who  had  the  wfrong  side  of  the  question.  But  if  a 
man  has  justice  on  his  side,  would  you  have  him  to  purchase  the  success  of  his 
cause,  which  is  his  legitimate  right?  You  are  very  unconscionable.  Justice,  look 
you,  is  a  debt  which  the  judge  owes,  and  therefore  he  cannot  sell  it;  but  he  cannot 
be  said  to  owe  injustice,  and  therefore  he  may  lawfully  receive  money  for  it.  All 
our  leading  authors,  accordingly,  agree  in  teaching  ’that  though  a  judge  is  bound 
to  restore  the  money  he  had  received  for  doing  an  act  of  justice,  unless  it  was 
given  him  out  of  mere  generosity,  he  is  not  obliged  to  restore  what  he  has  re¬ 
ceived  from  a  man  in  whose  favour  he  has  pronounced  an  unjust  decision.’  ” 

This  preposterous  decision  fairly  dumbfounded  me,  and,  while  I  was  musing 
on  its  pernicious  tendencies,  the  monk  had  prepared  another  question  for  me. 
"Answer  me  again,"  said  he,  "with  a  little  more  circumspection.  Tell  me  now,  ’if 
a  man  who  deals  in  divination  is  obliged  to  make  restitution  of  the  money  he  has 
acquired  in  the  exercise  of  his  art?’ " 

"Just  as  you  please,  your  reverence,"  said  I. 

"Eh!  what! —  just  as  I  please!  Indeed,  but  you  are  a  pretty  scholar!  It  would 
seem,  according  to  your  way  of  talking,  that  the  truth  depended  on  our  will  and 
pleasure.  I  see  that,  in  the  present  case,  you  would  never  find  it  out  yourself:  so  I 
must  send  you  to  Sanchez  for  a  solution  of  the  problem — no  less  a  man  than 
Sanchez.  In  the  first  place,  he  makes  a  distinction  between  ’the  case  of  the  diviner 
who  has  recourse  to  astrology  and  other  natural  means,  and  that  of  another 
who  employs  the  diabolical  art.  In  the  one  case,  he  says,  the  diviner  is  bound  to 
make  restitution;  in  the  other  he  is  not.’  Now,  guess  which  of  them  is  the  party 
bound?" 

"It  is  not  difficult  to  find  out  that,"  said  I. 

"I  see  what  you  mean  to  say,"  he  replied.  "You  think  that  he  ought  to  make 
restitution  in  the  case  of  his  having  employed  the  agency  of  demons.  But  you 
know  nothing  about  it;  it  is  just  the  reverse.  ’If,’  says  Sanchez,  ’the  sorcerer  has 
not  taken  care  and  pains  to  discover,  by  means  of  the  devil,  what  he  could  not 
have  known  otherwise,  he  must  make  restitution — si  nullam  operam  apposuit  ut  arte 
diaboli  id  sciret;  but  if  he  has  been  at  that  trouble,  he  is  not  obliged.”’ 

"And  why  so,  father?" 

"Don’t  you  see?"  returned  he.  "It  is  because  men  may  truly  divine  by  the  aid  of 
the  devil,  whereas  astrology  is  a  mere  sham." 

"But,  sir,  should  the  devil  happen  not  to  tell  the  truth  (and  he  is  not  much 
more  to  be  trusted  than  astrology),  the  magician  must,  I  should  think,  for  the 
same  reason,  be  obliged  to  make  restitution?" 

"Not  always,"  replied  the  monk:  ’’ Distinguo ,  as  Sanchez  says,  here.  If  the  magi¬ 
cian  be  ignorant  of  the  diabolic  art — si  sit  artis  diabolic ce  ignarus — he  is  bound  to 
restore:  but  if  he  is  an  expert  sorcerer,  and  has  done  all  in  his  power  to  arrive  at  the 


LETTER  VIII  61 

truth,  the  obligation  ceases;  for  the  industry  of  such  a  magician  may  be  estimated 
at  a  certain  sum  of  money.’  ” 

"There  is  some  sense  in  that,"  I  said;  "for  this  is  an  excellent  plan  to  induce 
sorcerers  to  aim  at  proficiency  in  their  art,  in  the  hope  of  making  an  honest  liveli¬ 
hood,  as  you  would  say,  by  faithfully  serving  the  public." 

"You  are  making  a  jest  of  it,  I  suspect,"  said  the  father:  "that  is  very  wrong.  If 
you  were  to  talk  in  that  way  in  places  where  you  were  not  known,  some  people 
might  take  it  amiss  and  charge  you  with  turning  sacred  subjects  into  ridicule." 

"That,  father,  is  a  charge  from  which  I  could  very  easily  vindicate  myself;  for 
certain  I  am  that  whoever  will  be  at  the  trouble  to  examine  the  true  meaning  of 
my  words  will  find  my  object  to  be  precisely  the  reverse;  and  perhaps,  sir,  before 
our  conversations  are  ended,  I  may  find  an  opportunity  of  making  this  very  amply 
apparent." 

"Ho,  ho,"  cried  the  monk,  "there  is  no  laughing  in  your  head  now." 

"I  confess,"  said  I,  "that  the  suspicion  that  I  intended  to  laugh  at  things  sacred 
would  be  as  painful  for  me  to  incur  as  it  would  be  unjust  in  any  to  entertain  it." 

"I  did  not  say  it  in  earnest,"  returned  the  father;  "but  let  us  speak  more  ser¬ 
iously." 

"Iam  quite  disposed  to  do  so,  if  you  prefer  it;  that  depends  upon  you,  father. 
But  I  must  say,  that  I  have  been  astonished  to  see  your  friends  carrying  their 
attentions  to  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men  so  far  as  even  to  regulate  the  legiti¬ 
mate  gains  of  sorcerers." 

"One  cannot  write  for  too  many  people,"  said  the  monk,  "nor  be  too  minute 
in  particularising  cases,  nor  repeat  the  same  things  too  often  in  different  books. 
You  may  be  convinced  of  this  by  the  following  anecdote,  which  is  related  by  one 
of  the  gravest  of  our  fathers,  as  you  may  well  suppose,  seeing  he  is  our  present 
Provincial — the  reverend  Father  Cellot:  ’We  know  a  person,’  says  he,  ’who  was 
carrying  a  large  sum  of  money  in  his  pocket  to  restore  it,  in  obedience  to  the 
orders  of  his  confessor,  and  who,  stepping  into  a  bookseller’s  shop  by  the  way, 
inquired  if  there  was  anything  new? — numquid  novi? — when  the  bookseller  showed 
him  a  book  on  moral  theology,  recently  published;  and  turning  over  the  leaves 
carelessly,  and  without  reflection,  he  lighted  upon  a  passage  describing  his  own 
case,  and  saw  that  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  make  restitution:  upon  which, 
relieved  from  the  burden  of  his  scruples,  he  returned  home  with  a  purse  no  less 
heavy,  and  a  heart  much  lighter,  than  when  he  left  it — abjecta  scrupuli  sarcina ,  re - 
tento  auri ponder e,  levior  domum  repetiit.' 

"Say,  after  hearing  that,  if  it  is  useful  or  not  to  know  our  maxims?  Will  you 
laugh  at  them  now?  or  rather,  are  you  not  prepared  to  join  with  Father  Cellot  in 
the  pious  reflection  which  he  makes  on  the  blessedness  of  that  incident?  ’Acci¬ 
dents  of  that  kind,’  he  remarks,  ’are,  with  God,  the  effect  of  his  providence;  with 
the  guardian  angel,  the  effect  of  his  good  guidance;  with  the  individuals  to  whom 
they  happen,  the  effect  of  their  predestination.  From  all  eternity,  God  decided 
that  the  golden  chain  of  their  salvation  should  depend  on  such  and  such  an  au¬ 
thor,  and  not  upon  a  hundred  others  who  say  the  same  thing,  because  they  never 
happen  to  meet  with  them.  Had  that  man  not  written,  this  man  would  not  have 
been  saved.  All,  therefore,  who  find  fault  with  the  multitude  of  our  authors,  we 
would  beseech,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  beware  of  envying  others  those 
books  which  the  eternal  election  of  God  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  have  pur- 


62 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

chased  for  them!’  Such  are  the  eloquent  terms  in  which  this  learned  man  proves  so 
successfully  the  proposition  which  he  had  advanced,  namely,  ’How  useful  it  must 
be  to  have  a  great  many  writers  on  moral  theology — quam  utile  sit  de  theologia  morali 
multos  scribe  re!' ” 

’’Father/’  said  I,  ”1  shall  defer  giving  you  my  opinion  of  that  passage  to  another 
opportunity;  in  the  meantime,  I  shall  only  say  that  as  your  maxims  are  so  useful, 
and  as  it  is  so  important  to  publish  them,  you  ought  to  continue  to  give  me  further 
instruction  in  them.  For  I  can  assure  you  that  the  person  to  whom  I  send  them 
shows  my  letters  to  a  great  many  people.  Not  that  we  intend  to  avail  ourselves  of 
them  in  our  own  case;  but,  indeed,  we  think  it  will  be  useful  for  the  world  to  be 
informed  about  them.” 

’’Very  well,”  rejoined  the  monk,  ’’you  see  I  do  not  conceal  them;  and,  in  con¬ 
tinuation,  I  am  ready  to  furnish  you,  at  our  next  interview,  with  an  account  of  the 
comforts  and  indulgences  which  our  fathers  allow,  with  the  view  of  rendering 
salvation  easy,  and  devotion  agreeable;  so  that,  in  addition  to  what  you  have 
hitherto  learned  as  to  particular  conditions  of  men,  you  may  learn  what  applies  in 
general  to  all  classes,  and  thus  you  will  have  gone  through  a  complete  course  of 
instruction.”  So  saying,  the  monk  took  his  leave  of  me.  I  am,  &c. 

P.  S.  I  have  always  forgot  to  tell  you  that  there  are  different  editions  of  Escobar. 
Should  you  think  of  purchasing  him,  I  would  advise  you  to  choose  the  Lyons  edi¬ 
tion,  having  on  the  title  page  the  device  of  a  lamb  lying  on  a  book  sealed  with 
seven  seals;  or  the  Brussels  edition  of  1651.  Both  of  these  are  better  and  larger 
than  the  previous  editions  published  at  Lyons  in  the  years  1644  and  1646. 


LETTER  IX 


Paris,  July  3,  1656 
Sir, 

I  shall  use  as  little  ceremony  with  you  as  the  worthy  monk  did  with  me  when  I 
saw  him  last.  The  moment  he  perceived  me,  he  came  forward,  with  his  eyes  fixed 
on  a  book  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  accosted  me  thus:  ”  ’Would  you  not  be 
infinitely  obliged  to  any  one  who  should  open  to  you  the  gates  of  paradise? 
Would  you  not  give  millions  of  gold  to  have  a  key  by  which  you  might  gain  ad¬ 
mittance  whenever  you  thought  proper?  You  need  not  be  at  such  expense;  here 
is  one — here  are  a  hundred  for  much  less  money.’  ” 

At  first  I  was  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  the  good  father  was  reading,  or  talking 
to  me,  but  he  soon  put  the  matter  beyond  doubt  by  adding: 

’’These,  sir,  are  the  opening  words  of  a  fine  book,  written  by  Father  Barry  of  our 
Society;  for  I  never  give  you  anything  of  my  own.” 

’’What  book  is  it?”  asked  I. 

’’Here  is  its  title,”  he  replied:  "Paradise  opened  to  Philagio ,  in  a  Hundred  Devo¬ 
tions  to  the  Mother  of  God ,  easily  practised .  ” 

’’Indeed,  father!  and  is  each  of  these  easy  devotions  a  sufficient  passport  to 
heaven?” 

”It  is,”  returned  he.  ’’Listen  to  what  follows:  ’The  devotions  to  the  Mother  of 
God,  which  you  will  find  in  this  book,  are  so  many  celestial  keys,  which  will  open 


LETTER  IX 


63 

wide  to  you  the  gates  of  paradise,  provided  you  practise  them’;  and,  accordingly, 
he  says  at  the  conclusion,  ’that  he  is  satisfied  if  you  practise  only  one  of  them.’  ’’ 

"Pray,  then,  father,  do  teach  me  one  of  the  easiest  of  them." 

"They  are  all  easy,"  he  replied,  "for  example — ’Saluting  the  Holy  Virgin  when 
you  happen  to  meet  her  image — saying  the  little  chaplet  of  the  pleasures  of  the 
Virgin — fervently  pronouncing  the  name  of  Mary — commissioning  the  angels  to 
bow  to  her  for  us — wishing  to  build  her  as  many  churches  as  all  the  monarchs  on 
earth  have  done — bidding  her  good  morrow  every  morning,  and  good  night  in 
the  evening — saying  the  Ave  Maria  every  day,  in  honour  of  the  heart  of  Mary’ — 
which  last  devotion,  he  says,  possesses  the  additional  virtue  of  securing  us  the 
heart  of  the  Virgin." 

’’But,  father,"  said  I,  ’’only  provided  we  give  her  our  own  in  return,  I  presume?" 

’’That,"  he  replied,  "is  not  absolutely  necessary,  when  a  person  is  too  much 
attached  to  the  world.  Hear  Father  Barry:  ’Heart  for  heart  would,  no  doubt,  be 
highly  proper;  but  yours  is  rather  too  much  attached  to  the  world,  too  much 
bound  up  in  the  creature,  so  that  I  dare  not  advise  you  to  offer,  at  present,  that 
poor  little  slave  which  you  call  your  heart.’  And  so  he  contents  himself  with  the  Ave 
Maria  which  he  had  prescribed." 

"Why,  this  is  extremely  easy  work,"  said  I,  "and  I  should  really  think  that  no¬ 
body  will  be  damned  after  that." 

"Alas!"  said  the  monk,  "I  see  you  have  no  idea  of  the  hardness  of  some  people’s 
hearts.  There  are  some,  sir,  who  would  never  engage  to  repeat,  every  day,  even 
these  simple  words,  Good  day ,  Good  evening ,  just  because  such  a  practice  would  re¬ 
quire  some  exertion  of  memory.  And,  accordingly,  it  became  necessary  for  Father 
Barry  to  furnish  them  with  expedients  still  easier,  such  as  wearing  a  chaplet  night 
and  day  on  the  arm,  in  the  form  of  a  bracelet,  or  carrying  about  one’s  person  a  ro¬ 
sary,  or  an  image  of  the  Virgin.  ’And,  tell  me  now,’  as  Father  Barry  says,  ’if  I  have 
not  provided  you  with  easy  devotions  to  obtain  the  good  graces  of  Mary?’ " 

"Extremely  easy  indeed,  father,"  I  observed. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "it  is  as  much  as  could  possibly  be  done,  and  I  think  should  be 
quite  satisfactory.  For  he  must  be  a  wretched  creature  indeed,  who  would  not 
spare  a  single  moment  in  all  his  lifetime  to  put  a  chaplet  on  his  arm,  or  a  rosary  in 
his  pocket,  and  thus  secure  his  salvation;  and  that,  too,  with  so  much  certainty 
that  none  who  have  tried  the  experiment  have  ever  found  it  to  fail,  in  whatever 
way  they  may  have  lived;  though,  let  me  add,  we  exhort  people  not  to  omit  holy 
living.  Let  me  refer  you  to  the  example  of  this,  given  at  p.  34;  it  is  that  of  a  female 
who,  while  she  practised  daily  the  devotion  of  saluting  the  images  of  the  Virgin, 
spent  all  her  days  in  mortal  sin,  and  yet  was  saved  after  all,  by  the  merit  of  that 
single  devotion." 

"And  how  so?"  cried  I. 

"Our  Saviour,"  he  replied,  "raised  her  up  again,  for  the  very  purpose  of  show¬ 
ing  it.  So  certain  it  is  that  none  can  perish  who  practise  any  one  of  these  devotions.  ’  ’ 

"My  dear  sir,"  I  observed,  "I  am  fully  aware  that  the  devotions  to  the  Virgin 
are  a  powerful  means  of  salvation,  and  that  the  least  of  them,  if  flowing  from  the 
exercise  of  faith  and  charity,  as  in  the  case  of  the  saints  who  have  practised  them, 
are  of  great  merit;  but  to  make  persons  believe  that,  by  practising  these  without 
reforming  their  wicked  lives,  they  will  be  converted  by  them  at  the  hour  of  death, 
or  that  God  will  raise  them  up  again,  does  appear  calculated  rather  to  keep  sinners 


64  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

going  on  in  their  evil  courses,  by  deluding  them  with  false  peace  and  foolhardy 
confidence,  than  to  draw  them  off  from  sin  by  that  genuine  conversion  which 
grace  alone  can  effect.” 

"What  does  it  matter,”  replied  the  monk,  "by  what  road  we  enter  paradise,  pro¬ 
vided  we  do  enter  it?  as  our  famous  Father  Binet,  formerly  our  Provincial,  re¬ 
marks  on  a  similar  subject,  in  his  excellent  book,  On  the  Mark  of  Predestination.  'Be 
it  by  hook  or  by  crook,’  as  he  says,  'what  need  we  care,  if  we  reach  at  last  the 
celestial  city.’  ” 

"Granted,”  said  I;  "but  the  great  question  is  if  we  will  get  there  at  all.” 

"The  Virgin  will  be  answerable  for  that,”  returned  he;  "so  says  Father  Barry  in 
the  concluding  lines  of  his  book:  'If  at  the  hour  of  death,  the  enemy  should  hap¬ 
pen  to  put  in  some  claim  upon  you,  and  occasion  disturbance  in  the  little  com¬ 
monwealth  of  your  thoughts,  you  have  only  to  say  that  Mary  will  answer  for  you, 
and  that  he  must  make  his  application  to  her.’  ” 

"But,  father,  it  might  be  possible  to  puzzle  you,  were  one  disposed  to  push  the 
question  a  little  further.  Who,  for  example,  has  assured  us  that  the  Virgin  will  be 
answerable  in  this  case?” 

"Father  Barry  will  be  answerable  for  her,”  he  replied.  "  'As  for  the  profit  and 
happiness  to  be  derived  from  these  devotions,’  he  says,  'I  will  be  answerable  for 
that;  I  will  stand  bail  for  the  good  Mother.’  ” 

"But,  father,  who  is  to  be  answerable  for  Father  Barry?” 

"How!”  cried  the  monk;  "for  Father  Barry?  is  he  not  a  member  of  our  Society; 
and  do  you  need  to  be  told  that  our  Society  is  answerable  for  all  the  books  of  its 
members?  It  is  highly  necessary  and  important  for  you  to  know  about  this.  There 
is  an  order  in  our  Society,  by  which  all  booksellers  are  prohibited  from  printing  any 
work  of  our  fathers  without  the  approbation  of  our  divines  and  the  permission  of 
our  superiors.  This  regulation  was  passed  by  Henry  III,  ioth  May  1583,  and  con¬ 
firmed  by  Henry  IV,  20th  December  1603,  and  by  Louis  XIII,  14th  February  1612; 
so  that  the  whole  of  our  body  stands  responsible  for  the  publications  of  each  of 
the  brethren.  This  is  a  feature  quite  peculiar  to  our  community.  And,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  this,  not  a  single  work  emanates  from  us  which  does  not  breathe  the 
spirit  of  the  Society.  That,  sir,  is  a  piece  of  information  quite  apropos." 

"My  good  father,”  said  I,  "you  oblige  me  very  much,  and  I  only  regret  that  I 
did  not  know  this  sooner,  as  it  will  induce  me  to  pay  considerably  more  attention 
to  your  authors.” 

"I  would  have  told  you  sooner,”  he  replied,  "had  an  opportunity  offered;  I 
hope,  however,  you  will  profit  by  the  information  in  future,  and,  in  the  meantime, 
let  us  prosecute  our  subject.  The  methods  of  securing  salvation  which  I  have  men¬ 
tioned  are,  in  my  opinion,  very  easy,  very  sure,  and  sufficiently  numerous;  but  it 
was  the  anxious  wish  of  our  doctors  that  people  should  not  stop  short  at  this  first 
step,  where  they  only  do  wrhat  is  absolutely  necessary  for  salvation  and  nothing 
more.  Aspiring,  as  they  do  without  ceasing,  after  the  greater  glory  of  God,  they 
sought  to  elevate  men  to  a  higher  pitch  of  piety;  and,  as  men  of  the  world  are  gen¬ 
erally  deterred  from  devotion  by  the  strange  ideas  they  have  been  led  to  form  of  it 
by  some  people,  we  have  deemed  it  of  the  highest  importance  to  remove  this  ob¬ 
stacle  which  meets  us  at  the  threshold.  In  this  department  Father  Le  Moine  has  ac¬ 
quired  much  fame,  by  his  work  entitled  Devotion  Made  Easy ,  composed  for  this 
very  purpose.  The  picture  which  he  draws  of  devotion  in  this  work  is  perfectly 


LETTER  IX  65 

charming.  None  ever  understood  the  subject  before  him.  Only  hear  what  he  says 
in  the  beginning  of  his  work:  ’Virtue  has  never  as  yet  been  seen  aright;  no  portrait 
of  her,  hitherto  produced,  has  borne  the  least  verisimilitude.  It  is  by  no  means 
surprising  that  so  few  have  attempted  to  scale  her  rocky  eminence.  She  has  been 
held  up  as  a  cross-tempered  dame,  whose  only  delight  is  in  solitude;  she  has  been 
associated  with  toil  and  sorrow;  and,  in  short,  represented  as  the  foe  of  sports  and 
diversions,  which  are,  in  fact,  the  flowers  of  joy  and  the  seasoning  of  life.’  ” 

"But,  father,  I  am  sure,  I  have  heard,  at  least,  that  there  have  been  great  saints 
who  led  extremely  austere  lives.” 

"No  doubt  of  that,”  he  replied;  "but  still,  to  use  the  language  of  the  doctor, 
’there  have  always  been  a  number  of  genteel  saints,  and  well-bred  devotees’;  and 
this  difference  in  their  manners,  mark  you,  arises  entirely  from  a  difference  of 
humours.  ’I  am  far  from  denying,’  says  my  author,  ’that  there  are  devout  persons 
to  be  met  with,  pale  and  melancholy  in  their  temperament,  fond  of  silence  and 
retirement,  with  phlegm  instead  of  blood  in  their  veins,  and  with  faces  of  clay;  but 
there  are  many  others  of  a  happier  complexion,  and  who  possess  that  sweet  and 
warm  humour,  that  genial  and  rectified  blood,  which  is  the  true  stuff  that  joy  is 
made  of.’ 

"You  see,”  resumed  the  monk,  "that  the  love  of  silence  and  retirement  is  not 
common  to  all  devout  people;  and  that,  as  I  was  saying,  this  is  the  effect  rather  of 
their  complexion  than  their  piety.  Those  austere  manners  to  which  you  refer  are, 
in  fact,  properly  the  character  of  a  savage  and  barbarian,  and,  accordingly,  you  will 
find  them  ranked  by  Father  Le  Moine  among  the  ridiculous  and  brutal  manners  of 
a  moping  idiot.  The  following  is  the  description  he  has  drawn  of  one  of  these  in 
the  seventh  book  of  his  Moral  Pictures:  ’He  has  no  eyes  for  the  beauties  of  art  or 
nature.  Were  he  to  indulge  in  anything  that  gave  him  pleasure,  he  would  con¬ 
sider  himself  oppressed  with  a  grievous  load.  On  festival  days,  he  retires  to  hold 
fellowship  with  the  dead.  He  delights  in  a  grotto  rather  than  a  palace,  and  prefers 
the  stump  of  a  tree  to  a  throne.  As  to  injuries  and  affronts,  he  is  as  insensible  to 
them  as  if  he  had  the  eyes  and  ears  of  a  statue.  Honour  and  glory  are  idols  with 
whom  he  has  no  acquaintance,  and  to  whom  he  has  no  incense  to  offer.  To  him  a 
beautiful  woman  is  no  better  than  a  spectre;  and  those  imperial  and  commanding 
looks — those  charming  tyrants  who  hold  so  many  slaves  in  willing  and  chainless 
servitude — have  no  more  influence  over  his  optics  than  the  sun  over  those  of 
owls,’  &c.” 

"Reverend  sir,”  said  I,  "had  you  not  told  me  that  Father  Le  Moine  was  the 
author  of  that  description,  I  declare  I  would  have  guessed  it  to  be  the  production 
of  some  profane  fellow  who  had  drawn  it  expressly  with  the  view  of  turning  the 
saints  into  ridicule.  For  if  that  is  not  the  picture  of  a  man  entirely  denied  to  those 
feelings  which  the  Gospel  obliges  us  to  renounce,  I  confess  that  I  know  nothing 
of  the  matter.” 

"You  may  now  perceive,  then,  the  extent  of  your  ignorance,”  he  replied;  "for 
these  are  the  features  of  a  feeble,  uncultivated  mind,  ’destitute  of  those  virtuous 
and  natural  affections  which  it  ought  to  possess,’  as  Father  Le  Moine  says  at  the 
close  of  that  description.  Such  is  his  way  of  teaching  ’Christian  virtue  and  philoso¬ 
phy,’  as  he  announces  in  his  advertisement;  and,  in  truth,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
this  method  of  treating  devotion  is  much  more  agreeable  to  the  taste  of  the  world 
than  the  old  way  in  which  they  went  to  work  before  our  times.” 


66 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"There  can  be  no  comparison  between  them,"  was  my  reply,  "and  I  now  begin 
to  hope  that  you  will  be  as  good  as  your  word." 

"You  will  see  that  better  by-and-by,"  returned  the  monk.  "Hitherto  I  have  only 
spoken  of  piety  in  general,  but,  just  to  show  you  more  in  detail  how  our  fathers 
have  disencumbered  it  of  its  toils  and  troubles,  would  it  not  be  most  consoling  to 
the  ambitious  to  learn  that  they  may  maintain  genuine  devotion  along  with  an 
inordinate  love  of  greatness?" 

"What,  father!  even  though  they  should  run  to  the  utmost  excess  of  am¬ 
bition?" 

"Yes,"  he  replied;  "for  this  would  be  only  a  venial  sin,  unless  they  sought  after 
greatness  in  order  to  offend  God  and  injure  the  State  more  effectually.  Now  venial 
sins  do  not  preclude  a  man  from  being  devout,  as  the  greatest  saints  are  not  ex¬ 
empt  from  them.  'Ambition,’  says  Escobar,  'which  consists  in  an  inordinate  ap¬ 
petite  for  place  and  power,  is  of  itself  a  venial  sin;  but  when  such  dignities  are 
coveted  for  the  purpose  of  hurting  the  commonwealth,  or  having  more  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  offend  God,  these  adventitious  circumstances  render  it  mortal.’  ’’ 

"Very  savoury  doctrine,  indeed,  father." 

"And  is  it  not  still  more  savoury,"  continued  the  monk,  "for  misers  to  be  told, 
by  the  same  authority,  'that  the  rich  are  not  guilty  of  mortal  sin  by  refusing  to  give 
alms  out  of  their  superfluity  to  the  poor  in  the  hour  of  their  greatest  need? — scio  in 
gravi pauperum  necessitate  divites  non  dando  superflua ,  non  peccare  mortaliter.'" 

"Why  truly,"  said  I,  "if  that  be  the  case,  I  give  up  all  pretension  to  skill  in  the 
science  of  sins." 

"To  make  you  still  more  sensible  of  this,"  returned  he,  "you  have  been  ac¬ 
customed  to  think,  I  suppose,  that  a  good  opinion  of  one’s  self,  and  a  compla¬ 
cency  in  one’s  own  works,  is  a  most  dangerous  sin?  Now,  will  you  not  be  sur¬ 
prised  if  I  can  show  you  that  such  a  good  opinion,  even  though  there  should  be 
no  foundation  for  it,  is  so  far  from  being  a  sin  that  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  gift 
of  God?" 

"Is  it  possible,  father?’’ 

"That  it  is,"  said  the  monk;  "and  our  good  Father  Garasse  shows  it  in  his 
French  work,  entitled  Summary  of  the  Capital  Truths  of  Religion:  'It  is  a  result  of 
commutative  justice  that  all  honest  labour  should  find  its  recompense  either  in 
praise  or  in  self-satisfaction.  When  men  of  good  talents  publish  some  excellent 
work,  they  are  justly  remunerated  by  public  applause.  But  when  a  man  of  weak 
parts  has  wrought  hard  at  some  worthless  production,  and  fails  to  obtain  the 
praise  of  the  public,  in  order  that  his  labour  may  not  go  without  its  reward,  God 
imparts  to  him  a  personal  satisfaction,  which  it  would  be  worse  than  barbarous  in¬ 
justice  to  envy  him.  It  is  thus  that  God,  who  is  infinitely  just,  has  given  even  to 
frogs  a  certain  complacency  in  their  own  croaking.”’ 

"Very  fine  decisions  in  favour  of  vanity,  ambition,  and  avarice!"  cried  I;  "and 
envy,  father,  will  it  be  more  difficult  to  find  an  excuse  for  it?" 

"That  is  a  delicate  point,"  he  replied.  "We  require  to  make  use  here  of  Father 
Bauny’s  distinction,  which  he  lays  down  in  his  Summary  of  Sins:  'Envy  of  the 
spiritual  good  of  our  neighbour  is  mortal,  but  envy  of  his  temporal  good  is  only 
venial.”’ 

"And  why  so,  father?" 

"You  shall  hear,"  said  he.  "  ‘For  the  good  that  consists  in  temporal  things  is  so 


LETTER  IX  67 

slender,  and  so  insignificant  in  relation  to  heaven,  that  it  is  of  no  consideration  in 
the  eyes  of  God  and  His  saints.’  ’’ 

"But,  father,  if  temporal  good  is  so  slender,  and  of  so  little  consideration,  how  do 
you  come  to  permit  men’s  lives  to  be  taken  away  in  order  to  preserve  it/’’ 

"You  mistake  the  matter  entirely,’’  returned  the  monk;  "you  were  told  that 
temporal  good  was  of  no  consideration  in  the  eyes  of  God,  but  not  in  the  eyes  of 
men.’’ 

"That  idea  never  occurred  to  me,’’  I  replied;  "and  now,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that, 
in  virtue  of  these  same  distinctions,  the  world  will  get  rid  of  mortal  sins  altogether. 

"Do  not  flatter  yourself  with  that,’’  said  the  father;  "there  are  still  such  things  as 
mortal  sins — there  is  sloth,  for  example.’’ 

"Nay,  then,  father  dear!’’  I  exclaimed,  "after  that,  farewell  to  all  ’the  joys  of 
life!”’ 

"Stay,’’  said  the  monk,  "when  you  have  heard  Escobar’s  definition  of  that  vice, 
you  will  perhaps  change  your  tone:  ’Sloth,’  he  observes,  ’lies  in  grieving  that 
spiritual  things  are  spiritual,  as  if  one  should  lament  that  the  sacraments  are  the 
sources  of  grace;  which  would  be  a  mortal  sin.’  ’’ 

"O  my  dear  sir!’’  cried  I,  "I  don’t  think  that  anybody  ever  took  it  into  his  head 
to  be  slothful  in  that  way.’’ 

"And  accordingly,’’  he  replied,  "Escobar  afterwards  remarks:  ’I  must  confess 
that  it  is  very  rarely  that  a  person  falls  into  the  sin  of  sloth.’  You  see  now  how  im¬ 
portant  it  is  to  define  things  properly?’’ 

"Yes,  father,  and  this  brings  to  my  mind  your  other  definitions  about  assassina¬ 
tions,  ambuscades,  and  superfluities.  But  why  have  you  not  extended  your  method 
to  all  cases,  and  given  definitions  of  all  vices  in  your  way,  so  that  people  may  no 
longer  sin  in  gratifying  themselves?’’ 

"It  is  not  always  essential,’’  he  replied,  "to  accomplish  that  purpose  by  chang¬ 
ing  the  definitions  of  things.  I  may  illustrate  this  by  referring  to  the  subject  of 
good  cheer,  which  is  accounted  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  of  life,  and  which  Esco¬ 
bar  thus  sanctions  in  his  Practice  according  to  our  Society:  ’Is  it  allowable  for  a  per¬ 
son  to  eat  and  drink  to  repletion,  unnecessarily,  and  solely  for  pleasure?  Certainly 
he  may,  according  to  Sanchez,  provided  he  does  not  thereby  injure  his  health; 
because  the  natural  appetite  may  be  permitted  to  enjoy  its  proper  functions.”’ 

"Well,  father,  that  is  certainly  the  most  complete  passage,  and  the  most  finished 
maxim  in  the  whole  of  your  moral  system!  What  comfortable  inferences  may  be 
drawn  from  it!  Why,  and  is  gluttony,  then,  not  even  a  venial  sin?’’ 

"Not  in  the  shape  I  have  just  referred  to,’’  he  replied;  "but,  according  to  the 
same  author,  it  would  be  a  venial  sin  ’were  a  person  to  gorge  himself,  unnecessarily, 
with  eating  and  drinking,  to  such  a  degree  as  to  produce  vomiting.’  So  much  for 
that  point.  I  would  now  say  a  little  about  the  facilities  we  have  invented  for  avoid¬ 
ing  sin  in  worldly  conversations  and  intrigues.  One  of  the  most  embarrassing  of 
these  cases  is  how  to  avoid  telling  lies,  particularly  when  one  is  anxious  to  induce 
a  belief  in  what  is  false.  In  such  cases,  our  doctrine  of  equivocations  has  been 
found  of  admirable  service,  according  to  which,  as  Sanchez  has  it,  ’it  is  permitted 
to  use  ambiguous  terms,  leading  people  to  understand  them  in  another  sense  from 
that  in  which  we  understand  them  ourselves.”’ 

"I  know  that  already,  father,’’  said  I. 

"We  have  published  it  so  often,’’  continued  he,  "that  at  length,  it  seems,  every- 


68  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

body  knows  of  it.  But  do  you  know  what  is  to  be  done  when  no  equivocal  words 
can  be  got?" 

"No,  father." 

"I  thought  as  much,"  said  the  Jesuit;  "this  is  something  new,  sir:  I  mean  the 
doctrine  of  mental  reservations.  ’A  man  may  swear/  as  Sanchez  says  in  the  same 
place,  ’that  he  never  did  such  a  thing  (though  he  actually  did  it),  meaning  within 
himself  that  he  did  not  do  so  on  a  certain  day,  or  before  he  was  born,  or  under¬ 
standing  any  other  such  circumstance,  while  the  words  which  he  employs  have  no 
such  sense  as  would  discover  his  meaning.  And  this  is  very  convenient  in  many 
cases,  and  quite  innocent,  when  necessary  or  conducive  to  one’s  health,  honour, 
or  advantage.’  ’’ 

"Indeed,  father!  is  that  not  a  lie,  and  perjury  to  boot?" 

"No,"  said  the  father;  "Sanchez  and  Filiutius  prove  that  it  is  not;  for,  says  the 
latter,  ’it  is  the  intention  that  determines  the  quality  of  the  action.’  And  he  sug¬ 
gests  a  still  surer  method  for  avoiding  falsehood,  which  is  this:  After  saying  aloud, 
’I  swear  that  I  have  not  done  that,’  to  add,  in  a  low  voice,  ’to-day’;  or  after  saying 
aloud,  T  swear,’  to  interpose  in  a  whisper,  ’that  I  say,’  and  then  continue  aloud, 
’that  I  have  done  that.’  This,  you  perceive,  is  telling  the  truth." 

"I  grant  it,"  said  I;  "it  might  possibly,  however,  be  found  to  be  telling  the 
truth  in  a  low  key,  and  falsehood  in  a  loud  one;  besides,  I  should  be  afraid  that 
many  people  might  not  have  sufficient  presence  of  mind  to  avail  themselves  of 
these  methods." 

"Our  doctors,"  replied  the  Jesuit,  "have  taught,  in  the  same  passage,  for  the 
benefit  of  such  as  might  not  be  expert  in  the  use  of  these  reservations,  that  no  more 
is  required  of  them,  to  avoid  lying,  than  simply  to  say  that  ’they  have  not  done’ 
what  they  have  done,  provided  ’they  have,  in  general,  the  intention  of  giving  to 
their  language  the  sense  which  an  able  man  would  give  to  it.’  Be  candid,  now,  and 
confess  if  you  have  not  often  felt  yourself  embarrassed,  in  consequence  of  not 
knowing  this?" 

"Sometimes,"  said  I. 

"And  will  you  not  also  acknowledge,"  continued  he,  "that  it  would  often 
prove  very  convenient  to  be  absolved  in  conscience  from  keeping  certain  en¬ 
gagements  one  may  have  made?" 

"The  most  convenient  thing  in  the  world!"  I  replied. 

"Listen,  then,  to  the  general  rule  laid  down  by  Escobar:  'Promises  are  not  bind¬ 
ing,  when  the  person  in  making  them  had  no  intention  to  bind  himself.  Now,  it 
seldom  happens  that  any  have  such  an  intention,  unless  when  they  confirm  their 
promises  by  an  oath  or  contract;  so  that  when  one  simply  says,  "I  will  do  it,"  he 
means  that  he  will  do  it  if  he  does  not  change  his  mind;  for  he  does  not  wish,  by 
saying  that,  to  deprive  himself  of  his  liberty.’  He  gives  other  rules  in  the  same 
strain,  which  you  may  consult  for  yourself,  and  tells  us,  in  conclusion,  'that  all 
this  is  taken  from  Molina  and  our  other  authors,  and  is  therefore  settled  beyond 
all  doubt.’ " 

"My  dear  father,"  I  observed,  "I  had  no  idea  that  the  direction  of  the  intention 
possessed  the  power  of  rendering  promises  null  and  void." 

"You  must  perceive,"  returned  he,  "what  facility  this  affords  for  prosecuting 
the  business  of  life.  But  what  has  given  us  the  most  trouble  has  been  to  regulate 
the  commerce  between  the  sexes;  our  fathers  being  more  chary  in  the  matter  of 


LETTER  IX 


69 

chastity.  Not  but  that  they  have  discussed  questions  of  a  very  curious  and  very  in¬ 
dulgent  character,  particularly  in  reference  to  married  and  betrothed  persons." 

At  this  stage  of  the  conversation  I  was  made  acquainted  with  the  most  extra¬ 
ordinary  questions  you  can  well  imagine.  He  gave  me  enough  of  them  to  fill 
many  letters;  but,  as  you  show  my  communications  to  all  sorts  of  persons,  and  as 
I  do  not  choose  to  be  the  vehicle  of  such  reading  to  those  who  would  make  it  the 
subject  of  diversion,  I  must  decline  even  giving  the  quotations. 

The  only  thing  to  which  I  can  venture  to  allude,  out  of  all  the  books  which  he 
showed  me,  and  these  in  French,  too,  is  a  passage  which  you  will  find  in  Father 
Bauny’s  Summary ,  p.  165,  relating  to  certain  little  familiarities,  which,  provided 
the  intention  is  well  directed,  he  explains  "  as  passing  for  gallant" ;  and  you  will  be 
surprised  to  find,  on  p.148,  a  principle  of  morals,  as  to  the  power  which  daughters 
have  to  dispose  of  their  persons  without  the  leave  of  their  relatives,  couched  in 
these  terms:  "When  that  is  done  with  the  consent  of  the  daughter,  although  the 
father  may  have  reason  to  complain,  it  does  not  follow  that  she,  or  the  person  to 
whom  she  has  sacrificed  her  honour,  has  done  him  any  wrong,  or  violated  the 
rules  of  justice  in  regard  to  him;  for  the  daughter  has  possession  of  her  honour, 
as  well  as  of  her  body,  and  can  do  what  she  pleases  with  them,  bating  death  or 
mutilation  of  her  members."  Judge,  from  that  specimen,  of  the  rest.  It  brings  to 
my  recollection  a  passage  from  a  heathen  poet,  a  much  better  casuist,  it  would  ap¬ 
pear,  than  these  reverend  doctors;  for  he  says,  "that  the  person  of  a  daughter  does 
not  belong  wholly  to  herself,  but  partly  to  her  father  and  partly  to  her  mother, 
without  whom  she  cannot  dispose  of  it,  even  in  marriage."  And  I  am  much 
mistaken  if  there  is  a  single  judge  in  the  land  who  would  not  lay  down  as  law  the 
very  reverse  of  this  maxim  of  Father  Bauny. 

This  is  all  I  dare  tell  you  of  this  part  of  our  conversation,  which  lasted  so  long 
that  I  was  obliged  to  beseech  the  monk  to  change  the  subject.  He  did  so  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  entertain  me  with  their  regulations  about  female  attire. 

"We  shall  not  speak,"  he  said,  "of  those  who  are  actuated  by  impure  intentions; 
but,  as  to  others,  Escobar  remarks  that  ’if  the  woman  adorn  herself  without  any 
evil  intention,  but  merely  to  gratify  a  natural  inclination  to  vanity — ob  naturalem 
fastus  inclinationem — this  is  only  a  venial  sin,  or  rather  no  sin  at  all.*  And  Father 
Bauny  maintains,  that  ’even  though  the  woman  knows  the  bad  effect  which  her 
care  in  adorning  her  person  may  have  upon  the  virtue  of  those  who  may  behold 
her,  all  decked  out  in  rich  and  precious  attire,  she  would  not  sin  in  so  dressing.’ 
And,  among  others,  he  cites  our  Father  Sanchez  as  being  of  the  same  mind." 

"But,  father,  what  do  your  authors  say  to  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  so 
strongly  denounce  everything  of  that  sort?" 

"Lessius  has  well  met  that  objection,"  said  the  monk,  "by  observing,  ’that  these 
passages  of  Scripture  have  the  force  of  precepts  only  in  regard  to  the  women  of 
that  period,  who  were  expected  to  exhibit,  by  their  modest  demeanour,  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  edification  to  the  Pagans.’ " 

"And  where  did  he  find  that,  father"? 

"It  does  not  matter  where  he  found  it,"  replied  he;  "it  is  enough  to  know  that 
the  sentiments  of  these  great  men  are  always  probable  of  themselves.  It  deserves 
to  be  noticed,  however,  that  Father  Le  Moine  has  qualified  this  general  permission; 
for  he  will  on  no  account  allow  it  to  be  extended  to  the  old  ladies .  ’Youth,’  he  ob¬ 
serves,  'is  naturally  entitled  to  adorn  itself,  nor  can  the  use  of  ornament  be  con- 


70  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

demned  at  an  age  which  is  the  flower  and  verdure  of  life.  But  there  it  should  be 
allowed  to  remain:  it  would  be  strangely  out  of  season  to  seek  for  roses  on  the 
snow.  The  stars  alone  have  a  right  to  be  always  dancing,  for  they  have  the  gift  of 
perpetual  youth.  The  wisest  course  in  this  matter,  therefore,  for  old  women,  would 
be  to  consult  good  sense  and  a  good  mirror,  to  yield  to  decency  and  necessity,  and 
to  retire  at  the  first  approach  of  the  shades  of  night.'  ” 

"A  most  judicious  advice,"  I  observed. 

"But,"  continued  the  monk,  "just  to  show  you  how  careful  our  fathers  are 
about  everything  you  can  think  of,  I  may  mention  that,  after  granting  the  ladies 
permission  to  gamble,  and  foreseeing  that,  in  many  cases,  this  license  would  be  of 
little  avail  unless  they  had  something  to  gamble  with,  they  have  established  an¬ 
other  maxim  in  their  favour,  which  will  be  found  in  Escobar’s  chapter  on  larceny, 
no.  13:  'A  wife,’  says  he,  'may  gamble,  and  for  this  purpose  may  pilfer  money  from 
her  husband.’ " 

"Well,  father,  that  is  capital!" 

"There  are  many  other  good  things  besides  that,"  said  the  father;  "but  we  must 
waive  them  and  say  a  little  about  those  more  important  maxims,  which  facilitate 
the  practice  of  holy  things — the  manner  of  attending  mass,  for  example.  On  this 
subject,  our  great  divines,  Gaspard  Hurtado  and  Coninck,  have  taught  'that  it  is 
quite  sufficient  to  be  present  at  mass  in  body,  though  we  may  be  absent  in  spirit, 
provided  we  maintain  an  outwardly  respectful  deportment.’  Vasquez  goes  a  step 
further,  maintaining  'that  one  fulfils  the  precept  of  hearing  mass,  even  though  one 
should  go  with  no  such  intention  at  all.  ’  All  this  is  repeatedly  laid  down  by  Escobar, 
who,  in  one  passage,  illustrates  the  point  by  the  example  of  those  who  are  dragged 
to  mass  by  force,  and  who  put  on  a  fixed  resolution  not  to  listen  to  it." 

"Truly,  sir,"  said  I,  "had  any  other  person  told  me  that,  I  would  not  have  be¬ 
lieved  it." 

"In  good  sooth,"  he  replied,  "it  requires  all  the  support  which  the  authority  of 
these  great  names  can  lend  it;  and  so  does  the  following  maxim  by  the  same  Esco¬ 
bar,  'that  even  a  wicked  intention,  such  as  that  of  ogling  the  women,  joined  to 
that  of  hearing  mass  rightly,  does  not  hinder  a  man  from  fulfilling  the  service/ 
But  another  very  convenient  device,  suggested  by  our  learned  brother  Turrian,  is 
that  'one  may  hear  the  half  of  a  mass  from  one  priest,  and  the  other  half  from  an¬ 
other;  and  that  it  makes  no  difference  though  he  should  hear  first  the  conclusion 
of  the  one,  and  then  the  commencement  of  the  other.’  I  might  also  mention  that 
it  has  been  decided  by  several  of  our  doctors  to  be  lawful  'to  hear  the  two  halves 
of  a  mass  at  the  same  time,  from  the  lips  of  two  different  priests,  one  of  whom  is 
commencing  the  mass,  while  the  other  is  at  the  elevation;  it  being  quite  possible 
to  attend  to  both  parties  at  once,  and  two  halves  of  a  mass  making  a  whole — duce 
medietates  unam  missam  constituunt'  'From  all  which,’  says  Escobar,  'I  conclude, 
that  you  may  hear  mass  in  a  very  short  period  of  time;  if,  for  example,  you  should 
happen  to  hear  four  masses  going  on  at  the  same  time,  so  arranged  that  when  the 
first  is  at  the  commencement,  the  second  is  at  the  gospel,  the  third  at  the  conse¬ 
cration,  and  the  last  at  the  communion.”’ 

"Certainly,  father,  according  to  that  plan,  one  may  hear  mass  any  day  at  Notre 
Dame  in  a  twinkling." 

"Well,"  replied  he,  "that  just  shows  how  admirably  we  have  succeeded  in 
facilitating  the  hearing  of  mass.  But  I  am  anxious  now  to  show  you  how  we  have 


LETTER  X 


7i 

softened  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  and  particularly  that  of  penance.  It  is  here 
that  the  benignity  of  our  fathers  shines  in  its  truest  splendour;  and  you  will  be 
really  astonished  to  find  that  devotion,  a  thing  which  the  world  is  so  much  afraid 
of,  should  have  been  treated  by  our  doctors  with  such  consummate  skill  that,  to 
use  the  words  of  Father  Le  Moine,  in  his  Devotion  Made  Easy ,  demolishing  the 
bugbear  which  the  devil  had  placed  at  its  threshold,  they  have  rendered  it  easier 
than  vice  and  more  agreeable  than  pleasure;  so  that,  in  fact,  simply  to  live  is 
incomparably  more  irksome  than  to  live  well.  Is  that  not  a  marvellous  change, 
now?” 

"Indeed,  father,  I  cannot  help  telling  you  a  bit  of  my  mind:  I  am  sadly  afraid 
that  you  have  overshot  the  mark,  and  that  this  indulgence  of  yours  will  shock 
more  people  than  it  will  attract.  The  mass,  for  example,  is  a  thing  so  grand  and 
so  holy  that,  in  the  eyes  of  a  great  many,  it  would  be  enough  to  blast  the  credit 
of  your  doctors  forever  to  show  them  how  you  have  spoken  of  it.” 

"With  a  certain  class,”  replied  the  monk,  "I  allow  that  may  be  the  case;  but 
do  you  not  know  that  we  accommodate  ourselves  to  all  sorts  of  persons?  You 
seem  to  have  lost  all  recollection  of  what  I  have  repeatedly  told  you  on  this  point. 
The  first  time  you  are  at  leisure,  therefore,  I  propose  that  we  make  this  the  theme 
of  our  conversation,  deferring  till  then  the  lenitives  we  have  introduced  into  the 
confessional.  I  promise  to  make  you  understand  it  so  well  that  you  will  never 
forget  it.” 

With  these  words  we  parted,  so  that  our  next  conversation,  I  presume,  will  turn 
on  the  policy  of  the  Society.  I  am,  &c. 

P.S.  Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  seen  Paradise  Opened  by  a  Hundred  Devotions 
Easily  Practised ,  by  Father  Barry;  and  also  the  Mark  of  Predestination ,  by  Father 
Binet  ;  both  of  them  pieces  well  worth  the  seeing. 


LETTER  X 


Paris,  August  2,  1656 
Sir, 

I  have  not  come  yet  to  the  policy  of  the  Society,  but  shall  first  introduce  you 
to  one  of  its  leading  principles.  I  refer  to  the  palliatives  which  they  have  applied 
to  confession,  and  which  are  unquestionably  the  best  of  all  the  schemes  they  have 
fallen  upon  to  "attract  all  and  repel  none.”  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  know 
something  of  this  before  going  any  further;  and,  accordingly,  the  monk  judged 
it  expedient  to  give  me  some  instructions  on  the  point,  nearly  as  follows: 

"From  what  I  have  already  stated,”  he  observed,  "you  may  judge  of  the  success 
with  which  our  doctors  have  laboured  to  discover,  in  their  wisdom,  that  a  great 
many  things,  formerly  regarded  as  forbidden,  are  innocent  and  allowable;  but  as 
there  are  some  sins  for  which  one  can  find  no  excuse,  and  for  which  there  is  no 
remedy  but  confession,  it  became  necessary  to  alleviate,  by  the  methods  I  am  now 
going  to  mention,  the  difficulties  attending  that  practice.  Thus,  having  shown 
you,  in  our  previous  conversations,  how  we  relieve  people  from  troublesome 
scruples  of  conscience  by  showing  them  that  what  they  believed  to  be  sinful  was 
indeed  quite  innocent,  I  proceed  now  to  illustrate  our  convenient  plan  for  ex- 


72  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

piating  what  is  really  sinful,  which  is  effected  by  making  confession  as  easy  a 
process  as  it  was  formerly  a  painful  one.” 

"And  how  do  you  manage  that,  father?” 

"Why,”  said  he,  "it  is  by  those  admirable  subtleties  which  are  peculiar  to  our 
Company,  and  have  been  styled  by  our  fathers  in  Flanders,  in  The  Image  of  the 
First  Century ,  'the  pious  finesse,  the  holy  artifice  of  devotion — piam  et  religiosam 
calliditatem ,  et  pietatis  solertiam.'  By  the  aid  of  these  inventions,  as  they  remark  in 
the  same  place,  'crimes  may  be  expiated  nowadays  alacrius — with  more  zeal  and 
alacrity  than  they  were  committed  in  former  days,  and  a  great  many  people  may 
be  washed  from  their  stains  almost  as  cleverly  as  they  contracted  them — plurimi 
vix  citius  maculas  contrahunt  quam  eluunt .’  ” 

"Pray,  then,  father,  do  teach  me  some  of  these  most  salutary  lessons  of  finesse .” 

"We  have  a  good  number  of  them,”  answered  the  monk;  "for  there  are  a  great 
many  irksome  things  about  confession,  and  for  each  of  these  we  have  devised  a 
palliative.  The  chief  difficulties  connected  with  this  ordinance  are  the  shame  of 
confessing  certain  sins,  the  trouble  of  specifying  the  circumstances  of  others,  the 
penance  exacted  for  them,  the  resolution  against  relapsing  into  them,  the  avoid¬ 
ance  of  the  proximate  occasions  of  sins,  and  the  regret  for  having  committed 
them.  I  hope  to  convince  you  to-day  that  it  is  now  possible  to  get  over  all  this 
with  hardly  any  trouble  at  all;  such  is  the  care  we  have  taken  to  allay  the  bitterness 
and  nauseousness  of  this  very  necessary  medicine.  For,  to  begin  with  the  difficulty 
of  confessing  certain  sins,  you  are  aware  it  is  of  importance  often  to  keep  in  the 
good  graces  of  one’s  confessor;  now,  must  it  not  be  extremely  convenient  to  be 
permitted,  as  you  are  by  our  doctors,  particularly  Escobar  and  Suarez,  'to  have 
two  confessors,  one  for  the  mortal  sins  and  another  for  the  venial,  in  order  to 
maintain  a  fair  character  with  your  ordinary  confessor — uti  bonam  famam  apud 
ordinarium  tueatur — provided  you  do  not  take  occasion  from  thence  to  indulge 
in  mortal  sin?’  This  is  followed  by  another  ingenious  contrivance  for  confessing 
a  sin,  even  to  the  ordinary  confessor,  without  his  perceiving  that  it  was  committed 
since  the  last  confession,  which  is,  'to  make  a  general  confession,  and  huddle  this 
last  sin  in  a  lump  among  the  rest  which  we  confess.’  And  I  am  sure  you  will  own 
that  the  following  decision  of  Father  Bauny  goes  far  to  alleviate  the  shame  which 
one  must  feel  in  confessing  his  relapses,  namely,  'that,  except  in  certain  cases, 
which  rarely  occur,  the  confessor  is  not  entitled  to  ask  his  penitent  if  the  sin  of 
which  he  accuses  himself  is  an  habitual  one,  nor  is  the  latter  obliged  to  answer 
such  a  question;  because  the  confessor  has  no  right  to  subject  his  penitent  to  the 
shame  of  disclosing  his  frequent  relapses.’  ” 

"Indeed,  father!  I  might  as  well  say  that  a  physician  has  no  right  to  ask  his 
patient  if  it  is  long  since  he  had  the  fever.  Do  not  sins  assume  quite  a  different 
aspect  according  to  circumstances?  and  should  it  not  be  the  object  of  a  genuine 
penitent  to  discover  the  whole  state  of  his  conscience  to  his  confessor,  with  the 
same  sincerity  and  open-heartedness  as  if  he  were  speaking  to  Jesus  Christ  him¬ 
self,  whose  place  the  priest  occupies?  If  so,  how  far  is  he  from  realizing  such  a 
disposition  who,  by  concealing  the  frequency  of  his  relapses,  conceals  the  aggra¬ 
vations  of  his  offence!” 

I  saw  that  this  puzzled  the  worthy  monk,  for  he  attempted  to  elude  rather  than 
resolve  the  difficulty  by  turning  my  attention  to  another  of  their  rules,  which 
only  goes  to  establish  a  fresh  abuse,  instead  of  justifying  in  the  least  the  decision 


LETTER  X 


73 

of  Father  Bauny;  a  decision  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  one  of  the  most  pernicious 
of  their  maxims,  and  calculated  to  encourage  profligate  men  to  continue  in  their 
evil  habits. 

"I  grant  you,"  replied  the  father,  "that  habit  aggravates  the  malignity  of  a  sin, 
but  it  does  not  alter  its  nature;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  we  do  not  insist  on 
people  confessing  it,  according  to  the  rule  laid  down  by  our  fathers,  and  quoted 
by  Escobar,  'that  one  is  only  obliged  to  confess  the  circumstances  that  alter  the 
species  of  the  sin,  and  not  those  that  aggravate  it/  Proceeding  on  this  rule,  Father 
Granados  says,  'that  if  one  has  eaten  flesh  in  Lent,  all  he  needs  to  do  is  to  confess 
that  he  has  broken  the  fast,  without  specifying  whether  it  was  by  eating  flesh,  or 
by  taking  two  fish  meals/  And,  according  to  Reginald,  'a  sorcerer  who  has  em¬ 
ployed  the  diabolical  art  is  not  obliged  to  reveal  that  circumstance;  it  is  enough  to 
say  that  he  has  dealt  in  magic,  without  expressing  whether  it  was  by  palmistry 
or  by  a  paction  with  the  devil/  Fagundez,  again,  has  decided  that  'rape  is  not  a 
circumstance  which  one  is  bound  to  reveal,  if  the  woman  give  her  consent/  All 
this  is  quoted  by  Escobar,  with  many  other  very  curious  decisions  as  to  these 
circumstances,  which  you  may  consult  at  your  leisure." 

"These  'artifices  of  devotion’  are  vastly  convenient  in  their  way,"  I  observed. 

"And  yet,"  said  the  father,  "notwithstanding  all  that,  they  would  go  for  noth¬ 
ing,  sir,  unless  we  had  proceeded  to  mollify  penance,  which,  more  than  anything 
else,  deters  people  from  confession.  Now,  however,  the  most  squeamish  have 
nothing  to  dread  from  it,  after  what  we  have  advanced  in  our  theses  of  the  College 
of  Clermont,  where  we  hold  that,  if  the  confessor  imposes  a  suitable  penance,  and 
the  penitent  be  unwilling  to  submit  himself  to  it,  the  latter  may  go  home,  'waiv¬ 
ing  both  the  penance  and  the  absolution/  Or,  as  Escobar  says,  in  giving  the  Prac¬ 
tice  of  our  Society,  'if  the  penitent  declare  his  willingness  to  have  his  penance 
remitted  to  the  next  world,  and  to  suffer  in  purgatory  all  the  pains  due  to  him, 
the  confessor  may,  for  the  honour  of  the  sacrament,  impose  a  very  light  penance 
on  him,  particularly  if  he  has  reason  to  believe  that  this  penitent  would  object  to 
a  heavier  one/  " 

"I  really  think,"  said  I,  "that,  if  that  is  the  case,  we  ought  no  longer  to  call 
confession  the  sacrament  of  penance ." 

"You  are  wrong,"  he  replied;  "for  we  always  administer  something  in  the  way 
of  penance,  for  the  form’s  sake." 

"But,  father,  do  you  suppose  that  a  man  is  worthy  of  receiving  absolution 
when  he  will  submit  to  nothing  painful  to  expiate  his  offences?  And,  in  these 
circumstances,  ought  you  not  to  retain  rather  than  remit  their  sins?  Are  you  not 
aware  of  the  extent  of  your  ministry,  and  that  you  have  the  power  of  binding  and 
loosing?  Do  you  imagine  that  you  are  at  liberty  to  give  absolution  indifferently 
to  all  who  ask  it,  and  without  ascertaining  beforehand  if  Jesus  Christ  looses  in 
heaven  those  whom  you  loose  on  earth?" 

"What!"  cried  the  father,  "do  you  suppose  that  we  do  not  know  that  'the 
confessor  (as  one  remarks)  ought  to  sit  in  judgement  on  the  disposition  of  his 
penitent,  both  because  he  is  bound  not  to  dispense  the  sacraments  to  the  un¬ 
worthy,  Jesus  Christ  having  enjoined  him  to  be  a  faithful  steward  and  not  give 
that  which  is  holy  unto  dogs;  and  because  he  is  a  judge,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  a 
judge  to  give  righteous  judgement,  by  loosing  the  worthy  and  binding  the  un¬ 
worthy,  and  he  ought  not  to  absolve  those  whom  Jesus  Christ  condemns.’  " 


74  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

*  'Whose  words  are  these,  father?” 

"They  are  the  words  of  our  father  Filiutius,”  he  replied. 

"You  astonish  me,”  said  I;  "I  took  them  to  be  a  quotation  from  one  of  the 
fathers  of  the  Church.  At  all  events,  sir,  that  passage  ought  to  make  an  impression 
on  the  confessors,  and  render  them  very  circumspect  in  the  dispensation  of  this 
sacrament,  to  ascertain  whether  the  regret  of  their  penitents  is  sufficient,  and 
whether  their  promises  of  future  amendment  are  worthy  of  credit.” 

"That  is  not  such  a  difficult  matter,”  replied  the  father;  "Filiutius  had  more 
sense  than  to  leave  confessors  in  that  dilemma,  and  accordingly  he  suggests  an 
easy  way  of  getting  out  of  it,  in  the  words  immediately  following:  'The  confessor 
may  easily  set  his  mind  at  rest  as  to  the  disposition  of  his  penitent ;  for,  if  he  fail  to 
give  sufficient  evidence  of  sorrow,  the  confessor  has  only  to  ask  him  if  he  does 
not  detest  the  sin  in  his  heart,  and,  if  he  answers  that  he  does,  he  is  bound  to  be¬ 
lieve  it.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  resolutions  as  to  the  future,  unless  the 
case  involves  an  obligation  to  restitution,  or  to  avoid  some  proximate  occasion 
of  sin/  ” 

"As  to  that  passage,  father,  I  can  easily  believe  that  it  is  Filiutius’  own.” 

"You  are  mistaken  though,”  said  the  father,  "for  he  has  extracted  it,  word  for 
word,  from  Suarez.” 

"But,  father,  that  last  passage  from  Filiutius  overturns  what  he  had  laid  down 
in  the  former.  For  confessors  can  no  longer  be  said  to  sit  as  judges  on  the  dis¬ 
position  of  their  penitents,  if  they  are  bound  to  take  it  simply  upon  their  word, 
in  the  absence  of  all  satisfying  signs  of  contrition.  Are  the  professions  made 
on  such  occasions  so  infallible,  that  no  other  sign  is  needed?  I  question  much 
if  experience  has  taught  your  fathers  that  all  who  make  fair  promises  are  re¬ 
markable  for  keeping  them;  I  am  mistaken  if  they  have  not  often  found  the 
reverse.” 

"No  matter,”  replied  the  monk;  "confessors  are  bound  to  believe  them  for  all 
that;  for  Father  Bauny,  who  has  probed  this  question  to  the  bottom,  has  con¬ 
cluded  'that  at  whatever  time  those  who  have  fallen  into  frequent  relapses,  with¬ 
out  giving  evidence  of  amendment,  present  themselves  before  a  confessor,  ex¬ 
pressing  their  regret  for  the  past,  and  a  good  purpose  for  the  future,  he  is  bound 
to  believe  them  on  their  simple  averment,  although  there  may  be  reason  to  pre¬ 
sume  that  such  resolution  only  came  from  the  teeth  outwards.  Nay/  says  he, 
'though  they  should  indulge  subsequently  to  greater  excess  than  ever  in  the  same 
delinquencies,  still,  in  my  opinion,  they  may  receive  absolution/  There  now! 
that,  I  am  sure,  should  silence  you.” 

"But,  father,”  said  I,  "you  impose  a  great  hardship,  I  think,  on  the  confessors, 
by  thus  obliging  them  to  believe  the  very  reverse  of  what  they  see.” 

"You  don’t  understand  it,”  returned  he;  "all  that  is  meant  is  that  they  are 
obliged  to  act  and  absolve  as  if  they  believed  that  their  penitents  would  be  true 
to  their  engagements,  though,  in  point  of  fact,  they  believe  no  such  thing.  This 
is  explained,  immediately  afterwards,  by  Suarez  and  Filiutius.  After  having  said 
that  'the  priest  is  bound  to  believe  the  penitent  on  his  word,’  they  add:  'It  is  not 
necessary  that  the  confessor  should  be  convinced  that  the  good  resolution  of  his 
penitent  will  be  carried  into  effect,  nor  even  that  he  should  judge  it  probable;  it 
is  enough  that  he  thinks  the  person  has  at  the  time  the  design  in  general,  though 
he  may  very  shortly  after  relapse.  Such  is  the  doctrine  of  all  our  authors — ita 


LETTER  X 


75 

our 


docent  omnes  autores .’  Will  you  presume  to  doubt  what  has  been  taught  by 
authors?” 

’'But,  sir,  what  then  becomes  of  what  Father  Petau  himself  is  obliged  to  own, 
in  the  preface  to  his  Public  Penance,  ’that  the  holy  fathers,  doctors,  and  councils  of 
the  Church  agree  in  holding  it  as  a  settled  point  that  the  penance  preparatory  to 
the  eucharist  must  be  genuine,  constant,  resolute,  and  not  languid  and  sluggish, 
or  subject  to  after-thoughts  and  relapses?’  ” 

’’Don’t  you  observe,”  replied  the  monk,  "that  Father  Petau  is  speaking  of  the 
ancient  Church?  But  all  that  is  now  so  little  in  season ,  to  use  a  common  saying  of  our 
doctors,  that,  according  to  Father  Bauny,  the  reverse  is  the  only  true  view  of  the 
matter.  'There  are  some,’  says  he,  'who  maintain  that  absolution  ought  to  be  re¬ 
fused  to  those  who  fall  frequently  into  the  same  sin,  more  especially  if,  after  being 
often  absolved,  they  evince  no  signs  of  amendment;  and  others  hold  the  opposite 
view.  But  the  only  true  opinion  is  that  they  ought  not  to  be  refused  absolution; 
and,  though  they  should  be  nothing  the  better  of  all  the  advice  given  them, 
though  they  should  have  broken  all  their  promises  to  lead  new  lives,  and  been  at 
no  trouble  to  purify  themselves,  still  it  is  of  no  consequence;  whatever  may  be 
said  to  the  contrary,  the  true  opinion  which  ought  to  be  followed  is  that  even  in 
all  these  cases,  they  ought  to  be  absolved.’  And  again:  'Absolution  ought  neither 
to  be  denied  nor  delayed  in  the  case  of  those  who  live  in  habitual  sins  against  the 
law  of  God,  of  nature,  and  of  the  Church,  although  there  should  be  no  apparent 
prospect  of  future  amendment — etsi  emendationis  futurce  nulla  spes  appareat.'  ” 
"But,  father,  this  certainty  of  always  getting  absolution  may  induce  sinners — ” 
"I  know  what  you  mean,”  interrupted  the  Jesuit;  "but  listen  to  Father  Bauny, 
Q.  15:  'Absolution  may  be  given  even  to  him  who  candidly  avows  that  the  hope 
of  being  absolved  induced  him  to  sin  with  more  freedom  than  he  would  other¬ 
wise  have  done.’  And  Father  Caussin,  defending  this  proposition,  says  'that,  were 
this  not  true,  confession  would  be  interdicted  to  the  greater  part  of  mankind;  and 
the  only  resource  left  poor  sinners  would  be  a  branch  and  a  rope.’ 

"O  father,  how  these  maxims  of  yours  will  draw  people  to  your  confessionals!” 
"Yes,”  he  replied,  "you  would  hardly  believe  what  numbers  are  in  the  habit  of 
frequenting  them;  'we  are  absolutely  oppressed  and  overwhelmed,  so  to  speak, 
under  the  crowd  of  our  penitents — penitentium  numero  obruimur — as  is  said  in  The 
Image  of  the  First  Century .” 

"I  could  suggest  a  very  simple  method,”  said  I,  "to  escape  from  this  incon¬ 
venient  pressure.  You  have  only  to  oblige  sinners  to  avoid  the  proximate  occa¬ 
sions  of  sin;  that  single  expedient  would  afford  you  relief  at  once.” 

"We  have  no  wish  for  such  a  relief,”  rejoined  the  monk;  "quite  the  reverse; 
for,  as  is  observed  in  the  same  book,  'the  great  end  of  our  Society  is  to  labor  to 
establish  the  virtues,  to  wage  war  on  the  vices,  and  to  save  a  great  number  of 
souls.’  Now,  as  there  are  very  few  souls  inclined  to  quit  the  proximate  occasions 
of  sin,  we  have  been  obliged  to  define  what  a  proximate  occasion  is.  'That  cannot 
be  called  a  proximate  occasion,’  says  Escobar,  'where  one  sins  but  rarely,  or  on  a 
sudden  transport — say  three  or  four  times  a  year’;  or,  as  Father  Bauny  has  it, 
'once  or  twice  in  a  month.’  Again,  asks  this  author,  'what  is  to  be  done  in  the  case 
of  masters  and  servants,  or  cousins,  who,  living  under  the  same  roof,  are  by  this 
occasion  tempted  to  sin?’  ” 

"They  ought  to  be  separated,”  said  I. 


7 6  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"That  is  what  he  says,  too,  ’if  their  relapses  be  very  frequent:  but  if  the  parties 
offend  rarely,  and  cannot  be  separated  without  trouble  and  loss,  they  may,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Suarez  and  other  authors,  be  absolved,  provided  they  promise  to  sin  no 
more,  and  are  truly  sorry  for  what  is  past.’  ’’ 

This  required  no  explanation,  for  he  had  already  informed  me  with  what  sort 
of  evidence  of  contrition  the  confessor  was  bound  to  rest  satisfied. 

"And  Father  Bauny,"  continued  the  monk,  "permits  those  who  are  involved 
in  the  proximate  occasions  of  sin,  ’to  remain  as  they  are,  when  they  cannot  avoid 
them  without  becoming  the  common  talk  of  the  world,  or  subjecting  themselves 
to  inconvenience.’  ’A  priest,’  he  remarks  in  another  work,  ’may  and  ought  to 
absolve  a  woman  who  is  guilty  of  living  with  a  paramour,  if  she  cannot  put  him 
away  honourably,  or  has  some  reason  for  keeping  him — si  non  potest  honeste  ejicere , 
aut  habeat  aliquam  causam  retinendi — provided  she  promises  to  act  more  virtu¬ 
ously  for  the  future.’  ’’ 

"Well,  father,’’  cried  I,  "you  have  certainly  succeeded  in  relaxing  the  obliga¬ 
tion  of  avoiding  the  occasions  of  sin  to  a  very  comfortable  extent,  by  dispensing 
with  the  duty  as  soon  as  it  becomes  inconvenient;  but  I  should  think  your  fathers 
will  at  least  allow  it  be  binding  when  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  way  of  its 
performance?’’ 

"Yes,"  said  the  father,  "though  even  then  the  rule  is  not  without  exceptions. 
For  Father  Bauny  says,  in  the  same  place,  ’that  any  one  may  frequent  profligate 
houses,  with  the  view  of  converting  their  unfortunate  inmates,  though  the  prob¬ 
ability  should  be  that  he  fall  into  sin,  having  often  experienced  before  that  he  has 
yielded  to  their  fascinations.  Some  doctors  do  not  approve  of  this  opinion,  and 
hold  that  no  man  may  voluntarily  put  his  salvation  in  peril  to  succour  his  neigh¬ 
bor;  yet  I  decidedly  embrace  the  opinion  which  they  controvert.’  ’’ 

"A  novel  sort  of  preachers  these,  father!  But  where  does  Father  Bauny  find  any 
ground  for  investing  them  with  such  a  mission?" 

"It  is  upon  one  of  his  own  principles,"  he  replied,  "which  he  announces  in  the 
same  place  after  Basil  Ponce.  I  mentioned  it  to  you  before,  and  I  presume  you 
have  not  forgotten  it.  It  is,  ’that  one  may  seek  an  occasion  of  sin,  directly  and 
expressly — primo  et  per  se — to  promote  the  temporal  or  spiritual  good  of  himself 
or  his  neighbour.’  ’’ 

On  hearing  these  passages,  I  felt  so  horrified  that  I  was  on  the  point  of  breaking 
out;  but,  being  resolved  to  hear  him  to  an  end,  I  restrained  myself,  and  merely 
inquired:  "How,  father,  does  this  doctrine  comport  with  that  of  the  Gospel, 
which  binds  us  to  ’pluck  out  the  right  eye,’  and  ’cut  off  the  right  hand,’  when 
they  ’offend,’  or  prove  prejudicial  to  salvation?  And  how  can  you  suppose  that  the 
man  who  wilfully  indulges  in  the  occasions  of  sins,  sincerely  hates  sin?  Is  it  not 
evident,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  has  never  been  properly  touched  with  a  sense  of 
it,  and  that  he  has  not  yet  experienced  that  genuine  conversion  of  heart,  which 
makes  a  man  love  God  as  much  as  he  formerly  loved  the  creature?" 

"Indeed!"  cried  he,  "do  you  call  that  genuine  contrition?  It  seems  you  do  not 
know  that,  as  Father  Pintereau  says,  ’all  our  fathers  teach,  with  one  accord,  that 
it  is  an  error,  and  almost  a  heresy,  to  hold  that  contrition  is  necessary;  or  that 
attrition  alone,  induced  by  the  sole  motive,  the  fear  of  the  pains  of  hell,  which 
excludes  a  disposition  to  offend,  is  not  sufficient  with  the  sacrament?’  ’’ 


LETTER  X 


77 

"What,  father!  do  you  mean  to  say  that  it  is  almost  an  article  of  faith  that 
attrition,  induced  merely  by  fear  of  punishment,  is  sufficient  with  the  sacrament? 
That  idea,  I  think,  is  peculiar  to  your  fathers;  for  those  other  doctors  who  hold 
that  attrition  is  sufficient  along  with  the  sacrament,  always  take  care  to  show  that 
it  must  be  accompanied  with  some  love  to  God  at  least.  It  appears  to  me,  more¬ 
over,  that  even  your  own  authors  did  not  always  consider  this  doctrine  of  yours 
so  certain.  Your  Father  Suarez,  for  instance,  speaks  of  it  thus:  ’Although  it  is  a 
probable  opinion  that  attrition  is  sufficient  with  the  sacrament,  yet  it  is  not  certain, 
and  it  may  be  false — non  est  certa ,  et  potest  esse  falsa .  And,  if  it  is  false,  attrition  is  not 
sufficient  to  save  a  man;  and  he  that  dies  knowingly  in  this  state,  wilfully  exposes 
himself  to  the  grave  peril  of  eternal  damnation.  For  this  opinion  is  neither  very 
ancient  nor  very  common — nec  valde  antiqua ,  nec  multum  communis  .’  Sanchez  was 
not  more  prepared  to  hold  it  as  infallible  when  he  said  in  his  Summary  that  ’the 
sick  man  and  his  confessor,  who  content  themselves  at  the  hour  of  death  with 
attrition  and  the  sacrament,  are  both  chargeable  with  mortal  sin,  on  account  of 
the  great  risk  of  damnation  to  which  the  penitent  would  be  exposed,  if  the  opin¬ 
ion  that  attrition  is  sufficient  with  the  sacrament  should  not  turn  out  to  be  true.’ 
Comitolus,  too,  says  that  ’we  should  not  be  too  sure  that  attrition  suffices  with 
the  sacrament.’" 

Here  the  worthy  father  interrupted  me.  "What!"  he  cried,  "you  read  our  au¬ 
thors  then,  it  seems?  That  is  all  very  well;  but  it  would  be  still  better  were  you 
never  to  read  them  without  the  precaution  of  having  one  of  us  beside  you.  Do 
you  not  see,  now,  that,  from  having  read  them  alone,  you  have  concluded,  in 
your  simplicity,  that  these  passages  bear  hard  on  those  who  have  more  lately 
supported  our  doctrine  of  attrition?  Whereas  it  might  be  shown  that  nothing 
could  set  them  off  to  greater  advantage.  Only  think  what  a  triumph  it  is  for  our 
fathers  of  the  present  day  to  have  succeeded  in  disseminating  their  opinion  in 
such  short  time,  and  to  such  an  extent  that,  with  the  exception  of  theologians, 
nobody  almost  would  ever  suppose  but  that  our  modern  views  on  this  subject 
had  been  the  uniform  belief  of  the  faithful  in  all  ages!  So  that,  in  fact,  when  you 
have  shown,  from  our  fathers  themselves,  that,  a  few  years  ago,  ’this  opinion  was 
not  certain,’  you  have  only  succeeded  in  giving  our  modern  authors  the  whole 
merit  of  its  establishment! 

"Accordingly,"  he  continued,  "our  cordial  friend  Diana,  to  gratify  us,  no  doubt, 
has  recounted  the  various  steps  by  which  the  opinion  reached  its  present  position. 
’In  former  days,  the  ancient  schoolmen  maintained  that  contrition  was  necessary 
as  soon  as  one  had  committed  a  mortal  sin;  since  then,  however,  it  has  been 
thought  that  it  is  not  binding  except  on  festival  days;  afterwards,  only  when 
some  great  calamity  threatened  the  people;  others,  again,  that  it  ought  not  to  be 
long  delayed  at  the  approach  of  death.  But  our  fathers,  Hurtado  and  Vasquez, 
have  ably  refuted  all  these  opinions  and  established  that  one  is  not  bound  to 
contrition  unless  he  cannot  be  absolved  in  any  other  way,  or  at  the  point  of 
death!’  But,  to  continue  the  wonderful  progress  of  this  doctrine,  I  might  add, 
what  our  fathers,  Fagundez,  Granados,  and  Escobar,  have  decided,  ’that  contri¬ 
tion  is  not  necessary  even  at  death;  because,’  say  they,  ’if  attrition  with  the  sacra¬ 
ment  did  not  suffice  at  death,  it  would  follow  that  attrition  would  not  be  suffi¬ 
cient  with  the  sacrament.  And  the  learned  Hurtado,  cited  by  Diana  and  Escobar, 


78  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

goes  still  further;  for  he  asks:  Ts  that  sorrow  for  sin  which  flows  solely  from 
apprehension  of  its  temporal  consequences,  such  as  having  lost  health  or  money, 
sufficient?  We  must  distinguish.  If  the  evil  is  not  regarded  as  sent  by  the  hand  of 
God,  such  a  sorrow  does  not  suffice;  but  if  the  evil  is  viewed  as  sent  by  God,  as, 
in  fact,  all  evil,  says  Diana,  except  sin,  comes  from  him,  that  kind  of  sorrow  is 
sufficient/  Our  Father  Lamy  holds  the  same  doctrine/’ 

"You  surprise  me,  father;  for  I  see  nothing  in  all  that  attrition  of  which  you 
speak  but  what  is  natural;  and  in  this  way  a  sinner  may  render  himself  worthy  of 
absolution  without  supernatural  grace  at  all.  Now  everybody  knows  that  this  is 
a  heresy  condemned  by  the  Council." 

"I  should  have  thought  with  you,"  he  replied;  "and  yet  it  seems  this  must  not 
be  the  case,  for  the  fathers  of  our  College  of  Clermont  have  maintained  (in  their 
Theses  of  the  23rd  May  and  6th  June  1644)  'that  attrition  may  be  holy  and  suffi¬ 
cient  for  the  sacrament,  although  it  may  not  be  supernatural’;  and  (in  that  of 
August  1643)  th3*  attrition,  though  merely  natural,  is  sufficient  for  the  sacra¬ 
ment,  provided  it  is  honest.’  I  do  not  see  what  more  could  be  said  on  the  subject, 
unless  we  choose  to  subjoin  an  inference,  which  may  be  easily  drawn  from  these 
principles,  namely,  that  contrition,  so  far  from  being  necessary  to  the  sacrament, 
is  rather  prejudicial  to  it,  inasmuch  as,  by  washing  away  sins  of  itself,  it  would 
leave  nothing  for  the  sacrament  to  do  at  all.  That  is,  indeed,  exactly  what  the 
celebrated  Jesuit  Father  Valencia  remarks.  (Book  iv,  disp.  7,  q.  8,  p.  4.)  ’Con¬ 
trition,’  says  he,  ’is  by  no  means  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  the  principal  benefit 
of  the  sacrament;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  rather  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  it — into 
obstat  potius  quominus  effectus  sequatur.'  Nobody  could  well  desire  more  to  be  said 
in  commendation  of  attrition." 

"I  believe  that,  father,"  said  I;  "but  you  must  allow  me  to  tell  you  my  opinion, 
and  to  show  you  to  what  a  dreadful  length  this  doctrine  leads.  When  you  say  that 
’attrition,  induced  by  the  mere  dread  of  punishment,’  is  sufficient,  with  the  sacra¬ 
ment,  to  justify  sinners,  does  it  not  follow  that  a  person  may  always  expiate  his 
sins  in  this  way,  and  thus  be  saved  without  ever  having  loved  God  all  his  lifetime? 
Would  your  fathers  venture  to  hold  that?" 

"I  perceive,"  replied  the  monk,  "from  the  strain  of  your  remarks,  that  you 
need  some  information  on  the  doctrine  of  our  fathers  regarding  the  love  of  God. 
This  is  the  last  feature  of  their  morality,  and  the  most  important  of  all.  You  must 
have  learned  something  of  it  from  the  passages  about  contrition  which  I  have 
quoted  to  you.  But  here  are  others  still  more  definite  on  the  point  of  love  to 
God — Don’t  interrupt  me,  now;  for  it  is  of  importance  to  notice  the  connection. 
Attend  to  Escobar,  who  reports  the  different  opinions  of  our  authors,  in  his 
Practice  of  the  Love  of  God  according  to  our  Society.  The  question  is:  ’When  is  one 
obliged  to  have  an  actual  affection  for  God?’  Suarez  says  it  is  enough  if  one  loves 
Him  before  being  articulo  mortis — at  the  point  of  death — without  determining  the 
exact  time.  Vasquez,  that  it  is  sufficient  even  at  the  very  point  of  death.  Others, 
when  one  has  received  baptism.  Others,  again,  when  one  is  bound  to  exercise 
contrition.  And  others,  on  festival  days.  But  our  father,  Castro  Palao,  combats 
all  these  opinions,  and  with  good  reason — merito.  Hurtado  de  Mendoza  insists 
that  we  are  obliged  to  love  God  once  a  year;  and  that  we  ought  to  regard  it  as  a 
great  favour  that  we  are  not  bound  to  do  it  oftener.  But  our  Father  Coninck 


LETTER  X 


79 

thinks  that  we  are  bound  to  it  only  once  in  three  or  four  years;  Henriquez,  once 
in  five  years;  and  Filiutius  says  that  it  is  probable  that  we  are  not  strictly  bound  to 
it  even  once  in  five  years.  How  often,  then,  do  you  ask?  Why,  he  refers  it  to  the 
judgement  of  the  judicious/’ 

I  took  no  notice  of  all  this  badinage,  in  which  the  ingenuity  of  man  seems  to 
be  sporting,  in  the  height  of  insolence,  with  the  love  of  God. 

"But,”  pursued  the  monk,  "our  Father  Antony  Sirmond  surpasses  all  on  this 
point,  in  his  admirable  book,  The  Defence  of  Virtue ,  where,  as  he  tells  the  reader, 
‘he  speaks  French  in  France,’  as  follows:  ‘St.  Thomas  says  that  we  are  obliged  to 
love  God  as  soon  as  we  come  to  the  use  of  reason:  that  is  rather  too  soon! 
Scotus  says  every  Sunday;  pray,  for  what  reason?  Others  say  when  we  are  sorely 
tempted:  yes,  if  there  be  no  other  way  of  escaping  the  temptation.  Scotus  says 
when  we  have  received  a  benefit  from  God:  good,  in  the  way  of  thanking  Him  for 
it.  Others  say  at  death:  rather  late!  As  little  do  I  think  it  binding  at  the  reception 
of  any  sacrament:  attrition  in  such  cases  is  quite  enough,  along  with  confession, 
if  convenient.  Suarez  says  that  it  is  binding  at  some  time  or  another;  but  at  what 
time? — he  leaves  you  to  judge  of  that  for  yourself — he  does  not  know;  and  what 
that  doctor  did  not  know  I  know  not  who  should  know.’  In  short,  he  concludes 
that  we  are  not  strictly  bound  to  more  than  to  keep  the  other  commandments, 
without  any  affection  for  God,  and  without  giving  Him  our  hearts,  provided  that 
we  do  not  hate  Him.  To  prove  this  is  the  sole  object  of  his  second  treatise.  You 
will  find  it  in  every  page;  more  especially  where  he  says:  'God,  in  commanding 
us  to  love  Him,  is  satisfied  with  our  obeying  Him  in  his  other  commandments. 
If  God  had  said:  "Whatever  obedience  thou  yieldest  me,  if  thy  heart  is  not  given 
to  me,  I  will  destroy  thee!”  would  such  a  motive,  think  you,  be  well  fitted  to 
promote  the  end  which  God  must,  and  only  can,  have  in  view?  Hence  it  is  said 
that  we  shall  love  God  by  doing  His  will,  as  if  we  loved  Him  with  affection,  as  if 
the  motive  in  this  case  was  real  charity.  If  that  is  really  our  motive,  so  much  the 
better;  if  not,  still  we  are  strictly  fulfilling  the  commandment  of  love,  by  having 
its  works,  so  that  (such  is  the  goodness  of  God!)  we  are  commanded,  not  so 
much  to  love  Him,  as  not  to  hate  Him.’ 

"Such  is  the  way  in  which  our  doctors  have  discharged  men  from  the  painful 
obligation  of  actually  loving  God.  And  this  doctrine  is  so  advantageous  that  our 
Fathers  Annat,  Pintereau,  Le  Moine,  and  Antony  Sirmond  himself,  have  strenu¬ 
ously  defended  it  when  it  has  been  attacked.  You  have  only  to  consult  their 
answers  to  the  Moral  Theology .  That  of  Father  Pintereau,  in  particular,  will  enable 
you  to  form  some  idea  of  the  value  of  this  dispensation,  from  the  price  which  he 
tells  us  that  it  cost,  which  is  no  less  than  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  crowns  the 
whole.  It  appears,  that  this  dispensation  from  the  painful  obligation  to  love  God, 
is  the  privilege  of  the  Evangelical  law,  in  opposition  to  the  Judaical.  ‘It  was  reason¬ 
able,’  he  says,  ‘that,  under  the  law  of  grace  in  the  New  Testament,  God  should  re¬ 
lieve  us  from  that  troublesome  and  arduous  obligation  which  existed  under  the  law 
of  bondage,  to  exercise  an  act  of  perfect  contrition,  in  order  to  be  justified  ;  and 
that  the  place  of  this  should  be  supplied  by  the  sacraments,  instituted  in  aid  of 
an  easier  disposition.  Otherwise,  indeed,  Christians,  who  are  the  children,  would 
have  no  greater  facility  in  gaining  the  good  graces  of  their  Father  than  the  Jews, 
who  were  the  slaves,  had  in  obtaining  the  mercy  of  their  Lord  and  Master.’  ” 


So 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"O  father !’’  cried  I;  "no  patience  can  stand  this  any  longer.  It  is  impossible  to 
listen  without  horror  to  the  sentiments  I  have  just  heard." 

"They  are  not  my  sentiments,"  said  the  monk. 

"I  grant  it,  sir,"  said  I;  "but  you  feel  no  aversion  to  them;  and,  so  far  from 
detesting  the  authors  of  these  maxims,  you  hold  them  in  esteem.  Are  you  not 
afraid  that  your  consent  may  involve  you  in  a  participation  of  their  guilt?  and  are 
you  not  aware  that  St.  Paul  judges  worthy  of  death,  not  only  the  authors  of  evil 
things,  but  also  'those  who  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them?'  Was  it  not 
enough  to  have  permitted  men  to  indulge  in  so  many  forbidden  things  under  the 
covert  of  your  palliations?  Was  it  necessary  to  go  still  further  and  hold  out  a 
bribe  to  them  to  commit  even  those  crimes  which  you  found  it  impossible  to 
excuse,  by  offering  them  an  easy  and  certain  absolution;  and  for  this  purpose 
nullifying  the  power  of  the  priests,  and  obliging  them,  more  as  slaves  than  as 
judges,  to  absolve  the  most  inveterate  sinners — without  any  amendment  of 
life,  without  any  sign  of  contrition  except  promises  a  hundred  times  broken, 
without  penance  'unless  they  choose  to  accept  of  it’,  and  without  abandoning 
the  occasions  of  their  vices,  'if  they  should  thereby  be  put  to  any  incon¬ 
venience?’ 

"But  your  doctors  have  gone  even  beyond  this;  and  the  license  which  they 
have  assumed  to  tamper  with  the  most  holy  rules  of  Christian  conduct  amounts 
to  a  total  subversion  of  the  law  of  God.  They  violate  'the  great  commandment  on 
which  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets’;  they  strike  at  the  very  heart  of  piety; 
they  rob  it  of  the  spirit  that  giveth  life;  they  hold  that  to  love  God  is  not  necessary 
to  salvation;  and  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  'this  dispensation  from  loving  God 
is  the  privilege  which  Jesus  Christ  has  introduced  into  the  world!’  This,  sir,  is  the 
very  climax  of  impiety.  The  price  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  paid  to  obtain  us  a 
dispensation  from  loving  Him!  Before  the  incarnation,  it  seems  men  were  obliged 
to  love  God;  but  since  'God  has  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give  His  only  begotten 
Son,’  the  world,  redeemed  by  him,  is  released  from  loving  Him!  Strange  divinity 
of  our  days — to  dare  to  take  off  the  'anathema’  which  St.  Paul  denounces  on  those 
'that  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus!’  To  cancel  the  sentence  of  St.  John:  'He  that  loveth 
not,  abideth  in  death!’  and  that  of  Jesus  Christ  himself:  'He  that  loveth  me  not 
keepeth  not  my  precepts!’  and  thus  to  render  those  worthy  of  enjoying  God 
through  eternity  who  never  loved  God  all  their  life!  Behold  the  Mystery  of 
Iniquity  fulfilled!  Open  your  eyes  at  length,  my  dear  father,  and  if  the  other 
aberrations  of  your  casuists  have  made  no  impression  on  you,  let  these  last,  by 
their  very  extravagance,  compel  you  to  abandon  them.  This  is  what  I  desire  from 
the  bottom  of  my  heart,  for  your  own  sake  and  for  the  sake  of  your  doctors;  and 
my  prayer  to  God  is  that  He  would  vouchsafe  to  convince  them  how  false  the  light 
must  be  that  has  guided  them  to  such  precipices;  and  that  He  would  fill  their 
hearts  with  that  love  of  Himself  from  which  they  have  dared  to  give  man  a 
dispensation!" 

After  some  remarks  of  this  nature,  I  took  my  leave  of  the  monk,  and  I  see  no 
great  likelihood  of  my  repeating  my  visits  to  him.  This,  however,  need  not  oc¬ 
casion  you  any  regret;  for,  should  it  be  necessary  to  continue  these  communica¬ 
tions  on  their  maxims,  I  have  studied  their  books  sufficiently  to  tell  you  as  much 
of  their  morality,  and  more,  perhaps,  of  their  policy,  than  he  could  have  done 
himself.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  XI 


81 


LETTER  XI 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS,  THE  JESUITS 


August  1 8,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

I  have  seen  the  letters  which  you  are  circulating  in  opposition  to  those  which 
I  wrote  to  one  of  my  friends  on  your  morality;  and  I  perceive  that  one  of  the 
principal  points  of  your  defence  is  that  I  have  not  spoken  of  your  maxims  with 
sufficient  seriousness.  This  charge  you  repeat  in  all  your  productions,  and  carry  it 
so  far  as  to  allege,  that  I  have  been  "guilty  of  turning  sacred  things  into  ridicule/’ 

Such  a  charge,  fathers,  is  no  less  surprising  than  it  is  unfounded.  Where  do 
you  find  that  I  have  turned  sacred  things  into  ridicule?  You  specify  "  the  Mohatra 
contract,  and  the  story  of  John  d’Alba."  But  are  these  what  you  call  * ’sacred 
things?"  Does  it  really  appear  to  you  that  the  Mohatra  is  something  so  venerable 
that  it  would  be  blasphemy  not  to  speak  of  it  with  respect?  And  the  lessons  of 
Father  Bauny  on  larceny,  which  led  John  d’Alba  to  practise  it  at  your  expense, 
are  they  so  sacred  as  to  entitle  you  to  stigmatize  all  who  laugh  at  them  as  profane 
people? 

What,  fathers!  must  the  vagaries  of  your  doctors  pass  for  the  verities  of  the 
Christian  faith,  and  no  man  be  allowed  to  ridicule  Escobar,  or  the  fantastical  and 
unchristian  dogmas  of  your  authors,  without  being  stigmatized  as  jesting  at 
religion?  Is  it  possible  you  can  have  ventured  to  reiterate  so  often  an  idea  so 
utterly  unreasonable?  Have  you  no  fears  that,  in  blaming  me  for  laughing  at  your 
absurdities,  you  may  only  afford  me  fresh  subject  of  merriment;  that  you  may 
make  the  charge  recoil  on  yourselves,  by  showing  that  I  have  really  selected 
nothing  from  your  writings  as  the  matter  of  raillery  but  what  was  truly  ridiculous; 
and  that  thus,  in  making  a  jest  of  your  morality,  I  have  been  as  far  from  jeering  at 
holy  things,  as  the  doctrine  of  your  casuists  is  far  from  being  the  holy  doctrine  of 
the  Gospel? 

Indeed,  reverend  sirs,  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  laughing  at  religion  and 
laughing  at  those  who  profane  it  by  their  extravagant  opinions.  It  were  impiety 
to  be  wanting  in  respect  for  the  verities  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  revealed;  but 
it  were  no  less  impiety  of  another  sort  to  be  wanting  in  contempt  for  the  falsities 
which  the  spirit  of  man  opposes  to  them. 

For,  fathers  (since  you  will  force  me  into  this  argument),  I  beseech  you  to 
consider  that,  just  in  proportion  as  Christian  truths  are  worthy  of  love  and  re¬ 
spect,  the  contrary  errors  must  deserve  hatred  and  contempt;  there  being  two 
things  in  the  truths  of  our  religion:  a  divine  beauty  that  renders  them  lovely,  and 
a  sacred  majesty  that  renders  them  venerable;  and  two  things  also  about  errors: 
an  impiety,  that  makes  them  horrible,  and  an  impertinence  that  renders  them 
ridiculous.  For  these  reasons,  while  the  saints  have  ever  cherished  towards  the 
truth  the  twofold  sentiment  of  love  and  fear — the  whole  of  their  wisdom  being 
comprised  between  fear,  which  is  its  beginning,  and  love,  which  is  its  end — they 
have,  at  the  same  time,  entertained  towards  error  the  twofold  feeling  of  hatred 
and  contempt,  and  their  zeal  has  been  at  once  employed  to  repel,  by  force  of 


82  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

reasoning,  the  malice  of  the  wicked,  and  to  chastise,  by  the  aid  of  ridicule,  their 
extravagance  and  folly. 

Do  not  then  expea,  fathers,  to  make  people  believe  that  it  is  un worthy  of  a 
Christian  to  treat  error  with  derision.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  convince  all  who 
were  not  aware  of  it  before  that  this  praaice  is  perfealy  just — that  it  is  common 
with  the  fathers  of  the  Church,  and  that  it  is  sanaioned  by  Scripture,  by  the 
example  of  the  best  of  saints,  and  even  by  that  of  God  himself. 

Do  we  not  find  God  at  once  hates  and  despises  sinners;  so  that  even  at  the 
hour  of  death,  when  their  condition  is  most  sad  and  deplorable.  Divine  Wisdom 
adds  mocker)7  to  the  vengeance  which  consigns  them  to  eternal  punishment?  "In 
interitu  vestro  ridebo  et  subsannabo — I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity.”  The  saints,  too, 
influenced  by  the  same  feeling,  will  join  in  the  derision;  for,  according  to  David, 
when  they  witness  the  punishment  of  the  wicked,  'They  shall  fear,  and  yet  laugh 
at  it — videbunt  justi  et  timebunt ,  et  super  eum  ridebunt .”  And  Job  says:  "Innocens 
subsannabit  eos — The  innocent  shall  laugh  at  them.” 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  here  that  the  very  first  words  which  God  addressed  to 
man  after  his  fall  contain,  in  the  opinion  of  the  fathers,  "bitter  irony”  and  mock¬ 
ery.  After  Adam  had  disobeyed  his  Maker,  in  the  hope,  suggested  by  the  devil, 
of  being  like  God,  it  appears  from  Scripture  that  God,  as  a  punishment,  subjeaed 
him  to  death;  and  after  having  reduced  him  to  this  miserable  condition,  which 
was  due  to  his  sin,  He  taunted  him  in  that  state  with  the  following  terms  of 
derision:  "Behold,  the  man  has  become  as  one  of  us! — Ecce  Adam  quasi  unus  ex 
nobis!" — wLich,  according  to  St.  Jerome  and  the  interpreters,  is  "a  grievous  and 
cutting  piece  of  irony,”  with  winch  God  "stung  him  to  the  quick.”  "Adam,” 
says  Rupert,  "deserved  to  be  taunted  in  this  manner,  and  he  would  be  naturally 
made  to  feel  his  folly  more  acutely  by  this  ironical  expression  than  by  a  more 
serious  one.”  St.  Viaor,  after  making  the  same  remark,  adds,  "that  this  irony  w'as 
due  to  his  sottish  credulity,  and  that  this  species  of  raillery  is  an  aa  of  justice, 
merited  by  him  against  whom  it  w7as  direaed.” 

Thus  you  see,  fathers,  that  ridicule  is,  in  some  cases,  a  very  appropriate  means 
of  reclaiming  men  from  their  errors,  and  that  it  is  accordingly  an  aa  of  justice, 
because,  as  Jeremiah  says,  "the  aaions  of  those  that  err  are  worthy  of  derision, 
because  of  their  vanity — t  ana  sunt  et  risu  digna "  And  so  far  from  its  being  im¬ 
pious  to  laugh  at  them,  St.  Augustine  holds  it  to  be  the  effea  of  divine  wisdom: 
"The  wise  laugh  at  the  foolish,  because  they  are  wise,  not  after  their  own  wisdom, 
but  after  that  divine  wisdom  which  shall  laugh  at  the  death  of  the  wicked.” 

The  prophets,  accordingly,  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  have  availed  them¬ 
selves  of  ridicule,  as  we  find  from  the  examples  of  Daniel  and  Elias.  In  short, 
examples  of  it  are  not  wanting  in  the  discourses  of  Jesus  Christ  himself.  St. 
Augustine  remarks  that,  when  he  would  humble  Nicodemus,  wLo  deemed  him¬ 
self  so  expert  in  his  knowledge  of  the  law7,  "perceiving  him  to  be  puffed  up  with 
pride,  from  his  rank  as  doaor  of  the  Jew’s,  he  first  beats  down  his  presumption 
by  the  magnitude  of  his  demands,  and,  having  reduced  him  so  low  that  he  was 
unable  to  answer,  What!  says  he,  you  a  master  in  Israel,  and  not  know  these 
things! — as  if  he  had  said,  Proud  ruler,  confess  that  thou  know’est  nothing.”  St. 
Chrysostom  and  St,  Cyril  likewise  observe  upon  this  that  "he  deserved  to  be 
ridiculed  in  this  manner.” 

You  may  learn  from  this,  fathers,  that  should  it  so  happen,  in  our  day  that 


LETTER  XI 


83 

persons  who  enact  the  part  of  ' ’masters”  among  Christians,  as  Nicodemus  and 
the  Pharisees  did  among  the  Jews,  show  themselves  so  ignorant  of  the  first  prin¬ 
ciples  of  religion  as  to  maintain,  for  example,  that  "a  man  may  be  saved  who 
never  loved  God  all  his  life,”  we  only  follow  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ  when 
we  laugh  at  such  a  combination  of  ignorance  and  conceit. 

I  am  sure,  fathers,  these  sacred  examples  are  sufficient  to  convince  you  that  to 
deride  the  errors  and  extravagances  of  man  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  practice 
of  the  saints;  otherwise  we  must  blame  that  of  the  greatest  doctors  of  the  Church, 
who  have  been  guilty  of  it — such  as  St.  Jerome,  in  his  letters  and  writings  against 
Jovinian,  Vigilantius,  and  the  Pelagians;  Tertullian,  in  his  Apology  against  the 
follies  of  idolaters;  St.  Augustine  against  the  monks  of  Africa,  whom  he  styles 
"the  hairy  men”;  St.  Irenseus  the  Gnostics;  St.  Bernard  and  the  other  fathers  of 
the  Church,  who,  having  been  the  imitators  of  the  apostles,  ought  to  be  imitated 
by  the  faithful  in  all  time  coming;  for,  say  what  we  will,  they  are  the  true  models 
for  Christians,  even  of  the  present  day. 

In  following  such  examples,  I  conceived  that  I  could  not  go  far  wrong;  and,  as 
I  think  I  have  sufficiently  established  this  position,  I  shall  only  add,  in  the  ad¬ 
mirable  words  of  Tertullian,  which  give  the  true  explanation  of  the  whole  of  my 
proceeding  in  this  matter:  "What  I  have  now  done  is  only  a  little  sport  before  the 
real  combat.  I  have  rather  indicated  the  wounds  that  might  be  given  you  than 
inflicted  any.  If  the  reader  has  met  with  passages  which  have  excited  his  risibility, 
he  must  ascribe  this  to  the  subjects  themselves.  There  are  many  things  which 
deserve  to  be  held  up  in  this  way  to  ridicule  and  mockery,  lest,  by  a  serious 
refutation,  we  should  attach  a  weight  to  them  which  they  do  not  deserve.  Noth¬ 
ing  is  more  due  to  vanity  than  laughter;  and  it  is  the  Truth  properly  that  has  a 
right  to  laugh,  because  she  is  cheerful,  and  to  make  sport  of  her  enemies,  because 
she  is  sure  of  the  victory.  Care  must  be  taken,  indeed,  that  the  raillery  is  not  too 
low,  and  unworthy  of  the  truth;  but,  keeping  this  in  view,  when  ridicule  may  be 
employed  with  effect,  it  is  a  duty  to  avail  ourselves  of  it.”  Do  you  not  think 
fathers,  that  this  passage  is  singularly  applicable  to  our  subject?  The  letters  which 
I  have  hitherto  written  are  "merely  a  little  sport  before  a  real  combat.”  As  yet,  I 
have  been  only  playing  with  the  foils  and  "rather  indicating  the  wounds  that 
might  be  given  you  than  inflicting  any.”  I  have  merely  exposed  your  passages  to 
the  light,  without  making  scarcely  a  reflection  on  them.  "If  the  reader  has  met 
with  any  that  have  excited  his  risibility,  he  must  ascribe  this  to  the  subjects  them¬ 
selves.”  And,  indeed,  what  is  more  fitted  to  raise  a  laugh  than  to  see  a  matter  so 
grave  as  that  of  Christian  morality  decked  out  with  fancies  so  grotesque  as  those 
in  which  you  have  exhibited  it?  One  is  apt  to  form  such  high  anticipations  of 
these  maxims,  from  being  told  that  "Jesus  Christ  himself  has  revealed  them  to 
the  fathers  of  the  Society,”  that  when  one  discovers  among  them  such  absurdities 
as  "that  a  priest,  receiving  money  to  say  a  mass,  may  take  additional  sums  from 
other  persons  by  giving  up  to  them  his  own  share  in  the  sacrifice”;  "that  a  monk 
is  not  to  be  excommunicated  for  putting  off  his  habit,  provided  it  is  to  dance, 
swindle,  or  go  incognito  into  infamous  houses”;  and  "that  the  duty  of  hearing 
mass  may  be  fulfilled  by  listening  to  four  quarters  of  a  mass  at  once  from  different 
priests” — when,  I  say,  one  listens  to  such  decisions  as  these,  the  surprise  is  such 
that  it  is  impossible  to  refrain  from  laughing;  for  nothing  is  more  calculated  to 
produce  that  emotion  than  a  startling  contrast  between  the  thing  looked  for  and 


84  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

the  thing  looked  at.  And  why  should  the  greater  part  of  these  maxims  be  treated 
in  any  other  way?  As  Tertullian  says,  "To  treat  them  seriously  would  be  to  sanc¬ 
tion  them." 

What!  is  it  necessary  to  bring  up  all  the  forces  of  Scripture  and  tradition,  in 
order  to  prove  that  running  a  sword  through  a  man’s  body,  covertly  and  behind 
his  back,  is  to  murder  him  in  treachery?  or,  that  to  give  one  money  as  a  motive  to 
resign  a  benefice,  is  to  purchase  the  benefice?  Yes,  there  are  things  which  it  is 
duty  to  despise,  and  which  "deserve  only  to  be  laughed  at."  In  short,  the  remark 
of  that  ancient  author,  "that  nothing  is  more  due  to  vanity  than  derision,"  with 
what  follows,  applies  to  the  case  before  us  so  justly  and  so  convincingly,  as  to 
put  it  beyond  all  question  that  we  may  laugh  at  errors  without  violating  propriety. 

And  let  me  add,  fathers,  that  this  may  be  done  without  any  breach  of  charity 
either,  though  this  is  another  of  the  charges  you  bring  against  me  in  your  pub¬ 
lications.  For,  according  to  St.  Augustine,  "charity  may  sometimes  oblige  us  to 
ridicule  the  errors  of  men,  that  they  may  be  induced  to  laugh  at  them  in  their 
turn,  and  renounce  them — Hac  tu  misericorditer  irride ,  lit  eis  ridenda  ac  fugienda 
commendes ."  And  the  same  charity  may  also,  at  other  times,  bind  us  to  repel  them 
with  indignation,  according  to  that  other  saying  of  St.  Gregory  of  Nazianzen: 
"The  spirit  of  meekness  and  charity  hath  its  emotions  and  its  heats."  Indeed,  as 
St.  Augustine  observes,  "who  would  venture  to  say  that  truth  ought  to  stand 
disarmed  against  falsehood,  or  that  the  enemies  of  the  faith  shall  be  at  liberty  to 
frighten  the  faithful  with  hard  words,  and  jeer  at  them  with  lively  sallies  of  wit; 
while  the  Catholics  ought  never  to  write  except  with  a  coldness  of  style  enough 
to  set  the  reader  asleep?" 

Is  it  not  obvious  that,  by  following  such  a  course,  a  wide  door  would  be 
opened  for  the  introduction  of  the  most  extravagant  and  pernicious  dogmas  into 
the  Church;  while  none  would  be  allowed  to  treat  them  with  contempt,  through 
fear  of  being  charged  with  violating  propriety,  or  to  confute  them  with  indigna¬ 
tion,  from  the  dread  of  being  taxed  with  want  of  charity? 

Indeed,  fathers!  shall  you  be  allowed  to  maintain,  "that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  a 
man  to  avoid  a  box  on  the  ear  or  an  affront,"  and  must  nobody  be  permitted 
publicly  to  expose  a  public  error  of  such  consequence?  Shall  you  be  at  liberty  to 
say,  "that  a  judge  may  in  conscience  retain  a  fee  received  for  an  act  of  injustice," 
and  shall  no  one  be  at  liberty  to  contradict  you?  Shall  you  print,  with  the  privilege 
and  approbation  of  your  doctors,  "that  a  man  may  be  saved  without  ever  having 
loved  God";  and  will  you  shut  the  mouth  of  those  who  defend  the  true  faith,  by 
telling  them  that  they  would  violate  brotherly  love  by  attacking  you,  and  Chris¬ 
tian  modesty  by  laughing  at  your  maxims?  I  doubt,  fathers,  if  there  be  any  per¬ 
sons  whom  you  could  make  believe  this;  if  however,  there  be  any  such,  who  are 
really  persuaded  that,  by  denouncing  your  morality,  I  have  been  deficient  in  the 
charity  which  I  owe  to  you,  I  would  have  them  examine,  with  great  jealousy, 
whence  this  feeling  takes  its  rise  within  them.  They  may  imagine  that  it  proceeds 
from  a  holy  zeal,  which  will  not  allow  them  to  see  their  neighbour  impeached 
without  being  scandalized  at  it;  but  I  would  entreat  them  to  consider  that  it  is 
not  impossible  that  it  may  flow  from  another  source,  and  that  it  is  even  extremely 
likely  that  it  may  spring  from  that  secret,  and  often  self-concealed  dissatisfaction, 
which  the  unhappy  corruption  within  us  seldom  fails  to  stir  up  against  those  who 
oppose  the  relaxation  of  morals.  And,  to  furnish  them  with  a  rule  which  may 


LETTER  XI 


85 

enable  them  to  ascertain  the  real  principle  from  which  it  proceeds,  I  will  ask  them 
if,  while  they  lament  the  way  in  which  the  religious  have  been  treated,  they 
lament  still  more  the  manner  in  which  these  religious  have  treated  the  truth;  if 
they  are  incensed,  not  only  against  the  letters,  but  still  more  against  the  maxims 
quoted  in  them.  I  shall  grant  it  to  be  barely  possible  that  their  resentment  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  some  zeal,  though  not  of  the  most  enlightened  kind;  and,  in  this  case, 
the  passages  I  have  just  cited  from  the  fathers  will  serve  to  enlighten  them.  But 
if  they  are  merely  angry  at  the  reprehension,  and  not  at  the  things  reprehended, 
truly,  fathers,  I  shall  never  scruple  to  tell  them  that  they  are  grossly  mistaken,  and 
that  their  zeal  is  miserably  blind. 

Strange  zeal,  indeed!  which  gets  angry  at  those  that  censure  public  faults, 
and  not  at  those  that  commit  them!  Novel  charity  this,  which  groans  at  seeing 
error  confuted,  but  feels  no  grief  at  seeing  morality  subverted  by  that  error.  If 
these  persons  were  in  danger  of  being  assassinated,  pray,  would  they  be  offended 
at  one  advertising  them  of  the  stratagem  that  had  been  laid  for  them;  and  instead 
of  turning  out  of  their  way  to  avoid  it,  would  they  trifle  away  their  time  in  whin¬ 
ing  about  the  little  charity  manifested  in  discovering  to  them  the  criminal  design 
of  the  assassins?  Do  they  get  waspish  when  one  tells  them  not  to  eat  such  an 
article  of  food,  because  it  is  poisoned?  or  not  to  enter  such  a  city,  because  it  has 
the  plague? 

Whence  comes  it,  then,  that  the  same  persons  who  set  down  a  man  as  wanting 
in  charity,  for  exposing  maxims  hurtful  to  religion,  would,  on  the  contrary,  think 
him  equally  deficient  in  that  grace  were  he  not  to  disclose  matters  hurtful  to 
health  and  life,  unless  it  be  from  this,  that  their  fondness  for  life  induces  them  to 
take  in  good  part  every  hint  that  contributes  to  its  preservation,  while  their  in¬ 
difference  to  truth  leads  them,  not  only  to  take  no  share  in  its  defence,  but  even 
to  view  with  pain  the  efforts  made  for  the  extirpation  of  falsehood? 

Let  them  seriously  ponder,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  how  shameful,  and  how 
prejudicial  to  the  Church,  is  the  morality  which  your  casuists  are  in  the  habit  of 
propagating;  the  scandalous  and  unmeasured  license  which  they  are  introducing 
into  public  manners;  the  obstinate  and  violent  hardihood  with  which  you  support 
them.  And  if  they  do  not  think  it  full  time  to  rise  against  such  disorders,  their 
blindness  is  as  much  to  be  pitied  as  yours,  fathers;  and  you  and  they  have  equal 
reason  to  dread  that  saying  of  St.  Augustine,  founded  on  the  words  of  Jesus 
Christ,  in  the  Gospel:  "Woe  to  the  blind  leaders!  woe  to  the  blind  followers! — 
Vce  ccecis  ducentibus!  vce  ccecis  sequentibus!" 

But,  to  leave  you  no  room  in  future,  either  to  create  such  impressions  on  the 
minds  of  others,  or  to  harbour  them  in  your  own,  I  shall  tell  you,  fathers  (and  I 
am  ashamed  I  should  have  to  teach  you  what  I  should  have  rather  learnt  from 
you),  the  marks  which  the  fathers  of  the  Church  have  given  for  judging  when  our 
animadversions  flow  from  a  principle  of  piety  and  charity,  and  when  from  a  spirit 
of  malice  and  impiety. 

The  first  of  these  rules  is  that  the  spirit  of  piety  always  prompts  us  to  speak 
with  sincerity  and  truthfulness;  whereas  malice  and  envy  make  use  of  falsehood 
and  calumny.  " Splendentia  et  vehementia ,  sed  rebus  verts — Splendid  and  vehement  in 
words,  but  true  in  things,"  as  St.  Augustine  says.  The  dealer  in  falsehood  is  an 
agent  of  the  devil.  No  direction  of  the  intention  can  sanctify  slander;  and  though 
the  conversion  of  the  whole  earth  should  depend  on  it,  no  man  may  warrantably 


86  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

calumniate  the  innocent:  because  none  may  do  the  least  evil,  in  order  to  accom¬ 
plish  the  greatest  good;  and,  as  the  Scripture  says,  "the  truth  of  God  stands  in  no 
need  of  our  lie."  St.  Hilary  observes  that  "it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  the  advocates 
of  truth,  to  advance  nothing  in  its  support  but  true  things."  Now,  fathers,  I  can 
declare  before  God  that  there  is  nothing  that  I  detest  more  than  the  slightest 
possible  deviation  from  the  truth,  and  that  I  have  ever  taken  the  greatest  care, 
not  only  not  to  falsify  (which  would  be  horrible),  but  not  to  alter  or  wrest,  in  the 
slightest  possible  degree,  the  sense  of  a  single  passage.  So  closely  have  I  adhered 
to  this  rule  that,  if  I  may  presume  to  apply  them  to  the  present  case,  I  may  safely 
say,  in  the  words  of  the  same  St.  Hilary:  "If  we  advance  things  that  are  false,  let 
our  statements  be  branded  with  infamy;  but  if  we  can  show  that  they  are  public 
and  notorious,  it  is  no  breach  of  apostolic  modesty  or  liberty  to  expose  them." 

It  is  not  enough,  however,  to  tell  nothing  but  the  truth;  we  must  not  always 
tell  everything  that  is  true;  we  should  publish  only  those  things  which  it  is  useful 
to  disclose,  and  not  those  which  can  only  hurt,  without  doing  any  good.  And, 
therefore,  as  the  first  rule  is  to  speak  with  truth,  the  second  is  to  speak  with 
discretion.  "The  wicked,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "in  persecuting  the  good,  blindly 
follow  the  dictates  of  their  passion;  but  the  good,  in  their  prosecution  of  the 
wicked,  are  guided  by  a  wise  discretion,  even  as  the  surgeon  warily  considers 
where  he  is  cutting,  while  the  murderer  cares  not  where  he  strikes."  You  must  be 
sensible,  fathers,  that  in  selecting  from  the  maxims  of  your  authors,  I  have  re¬ 
frained  from  quoting  those  which  would  have  galled  you  most,  though  I  might 
have  done  it,  and  that  without  sinning  against  discretion,  as  others  who  were 
both  learned  and  Catholic  writers,  have  done  before  me.  All  who  have  read  your 
authors  know  how  far  I  have  spared  you  in  this  respect.  Besides,  I  have  taken  no 
notice  whatever  of  what  might  be  brought  against  individual  characters  among 
you;  and  I  would  have  been  extremely  sorry  to  have  said  a  word  about  secret  and 
personal  failings,  whatever  evidence  I  might  have  of  them,  being  persuaded  that 
this  is  the  distinguishing  property  of  malice,  and  a  practice  which  ought  never  to 
be  resorted  to,  unless  where  it  is  urgently  demanded  for  the  good  of  the  Church. 
It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that,  in  what  I  have  been  compelled  to  advance  against 
your  moral  maxims,  I  have  been  by  no  means  wanting  in  due  consideration:  and 
that  you  have  more  reason  to  congratulate  yourself  on  my  moderation  than  to 
complain  of  my  indiscretion. 

The  third  rule,  fathers,  is:  That  when  there  is  need  to  employ  a  little  raillery, 
the  spirit  of  piety  will  take  care  to  employ  it  against  error  only,  and  not  against 
things  holy;  whereas  the  spirit  of  buffoonery,  impiety,  and  heresy,  mocks  at  all 
that  is  most  sacred.  I  have  already  vindicated  myself  on  that  score;  and  indeed 
there  is  no  great  danger  of  falling  into  that  vice  so  long  as  I  confine  my  remarks 
to  the  opinions  which  I  have  quoted  from  your  authors. 

In  short,  fathers,  to  abridge  these  rules,  I  shall  only  mention  another,  which  is 
the  essence  and  the  end  of  all  the  rest:  That  the  spirit  of  charity  prompts  us  to 
cherish  in  the  heart  a  desire  for  the  salvation  of  those  against  whom  we  dispute, 
and  to  address  our  prayers  to  God  while  we  direct  our  accusations  to  men.  "We 
ought  ever,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "to  preserve  charity  in  the  heart,  even  while  we 
are  obliged  to  pursue  a  line  of  external  conduct  which  to  man  has  the  appearance 
of  harshness;  we  ought  to  smite  them  with  a  sharpness,  severe  but  kindly,  re¬ 
membering  that  their  advantage  is  more  to  be  studied  than  their  gratification."  I 


LETTER  XI 


*7 

am  sure,  fathers,  that  there  is  nothing  in  my  letters  from  which  it  can  be  inferred 
that  I  have  not  cherished  such  a  desire  towards  you;  and  as  you  can  find  nothing 
to  the  contrary  in  them,  charity  obliges  you  to  believe  that  I  have  been  really 
actuated  by  it.  It  appears,  then,  that  you  cannot  prove  that  I  have  offended  against 
this  rule,  or  against  any  of  the  other  rules  which  charity  inculcates;  and  you  have 
no  right  to  say,  therefore,  that  I  have  violated  it. 

But,  fathers,  if  you  should  now  like  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing,  within  a 
short  compass,  a  course  of  conduct  directly  at  variance  with  each  of  these  rules, 
and  bearing  the  genuine  stamp  of  the  spirit  of  buffoonery,  envy,  and  hatred,  I 
shall  give  you  a  few  examples  of  it;  and,  that  they  may  be  of  the  sort  best  known 
and  most  familiar  to  you,  I  shall  extract  them  from  your  own  writings. 

To  begin,  then,  with  the  unworthy  manner  in  which  your  authors  speak  of  holy 
things,  whether  in  their  sportive  and  gallant  effusions,  or  in  their  more  serious 
pieces,  do  you  think  that  the  parcel  of  ridiculous  stories,  which  your  father  Binet 
has  introduced  into  his  Consolation  to  the  Sick ,  are  exactly  suitable  to  his  professed 
object,  which  is  that  of  imparting  Christian  consolation  to  those  whom  God  has 
chastened  with  affliction?  Will  you  pretend  to  say  that  the  profane,  foppish  style 
in  which  your  Father  Le  Moine  has  talked  of  piety  in  his  Devotion  made  Easy  is 
more  fitted  to  inspire  respect  than  contempt  for  the  picture  that  he  draws  of 
Christian  virtues?  What  else  does  his  whole  book  of  Moral  Pictures  breathe,  both 
in  its  prose  and  poetry,  but  a  spirit  full  of  vanity,  and  the  follies  of  this  world? 
Take,  for  example,  that  ode  in  his  seventh  book,  entitled,  “Eulogy  on  Bashful¬ 
ness,  showing  that  all  beautiful  things  are  red,  or  inclined  to  redden."  Call  you 
that  a  production  worthy  of  a  priest?  The  ode  is  intended  to  comfort  a  lady, 
called  Delphina,  who  was  sadly  addicted  to  blushing.  Each  stanza  is  devoted  to 
show  that  certain  red  things  are  the  best  of  things,  such  as  roses,  pomegranates, 
the  mouth,  the  tongue;  and  it  is  in  the  midst  of  this  badinage,  so  disgraceful  in  a 
clergyman,  that  he  has  the  effrontery  to  introduce  those  blessed  spirits  that  min¬ 
ister  before  God,  and  of  whom  no  Christian  should  speak  without  reverence: 

The  cherubim — those  glorious  choirs — 

Composed  of  head  and  plumes , 

Whom  God  with  His  own  Spirit  inspires , 

And  with  His  eyes  illumes. 

These  splendid  faces ,  as  they  fly , 

A  re  ever  red  and  burning  high , 

With  fire  angelic  or  divine: 

And  while  their  mutual  flames  combine , 

The  waving  of  their  wings  supplies 
A  fan  to  cool  their  ecstasies ! 

But  redness  shines  with  better  grace , 

Delphina ,  on  thy  beauteous  face , 

Where  modesty  sits  revelling — 

Arrayed  in  purple ,  like  a  king,"  &c. 

What  think  you  of  this,  fathers?  Does  this  preference  of  the  blushes  of  Del¬ 
phina  to  the  ardour  of  those  spirits,  which  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  ardour 
of  divine  love,  and  this  simile  of  the  fan  applied  to  their  mysterious  wings,  strike 
you  as  being  very  Christian-like  in  the  lips  which  consecrate  the  adorable  body  of 


88 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Jesus  Christ?  I  am  quite  aware  that  he  speaks  only  in  the  character  of  a  gallant 
and  to  raise  a  smile;  but  this  is  precisely  what  is  called  laughing  at  things  holy.  And 
is  it  not  certain,  that,  were  he  to  get  full  justice,  he  could  not  save  himself  from 
incurring  a  censure?  although,  to  shield  himself  from  this,  he  pleads  an  excuse 
which  is  hardly  less  censurable  than  the  offence,  “that  the  Sorbonne  has  no  juris¬ 
diction  over  Parnassus,  and  that  the  errors  of  that  land  are  subject  neither  to 
censure  nor  the  Inquisition’1;  as  if  one  could  act  the  blasphemer  and  profane 
fellow  only  in  prose!  There  is  another  passage,  however,  in  the  preface,  where 
even  this  excuse  fails  him,  when  he  says,  “that  the  water  of  the  river,  on  whose 
banks  he  composes  his  verses,  is  so  apt  to  make  poets,  that,  though  it  were 
converted  into  holy  water ,  it  would  not  chase  away  the  demon  of  poesy.”  To 
match  this,  I  may  add  the  following  flight  of  your  Father  Garasse,  in  his  Summary 
of  the  Capital  Truths  in  Religion ,  where,  speaking  of  the  sacred  mystery  of  the  in¬ 
carnation,  he  mixes  up  blasphemy  and  heresy  in  this  fashion:  “The  human  per¬ 
sonality  was  grafted,  as  it  were,  or  set  on  horseback ,  upon  the  personality  of  the 
Word!”  And  omitting  many  others,  I  might  mention  another  passage  from  the 
same  author,  who,  speaking  on  the  subject  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  ordinarily  writ¬ 
ten  thus,  i.  h.  S.  observes  that  “some  have  taken  away  the  cross  from  the  top  of  it, 
leaving  the  characters  barely  thus,  I.  H.  S. — which,”  says  he,  "is  a  stripped  Jesus!” 

Such  is  the  indecency  with  which  you  treat  the  truths  of  religion,  in  the  face  of 
the  inviolable  law  which  binds  us  always  to  speak  of  them  with  reverence.  But 
you  have  sinned  no  less  flagrantly  against  the  rule  which  obliges  us  to  speak  of 
them  with  truth  and  discretion.  What  is  more  common  in  your  writings  than 
calumny?  Can  those  of  Father  Brisacier  be  called  sincere?  Does  he  speak  with 
truth  when  he  says  that  “the  nuns  of  Port-Royal  do  not  pray  to  the  saints,  and 
have  no  images  in  their  church?”  Are  not  these  most  outrageous  falsehoods, 
when  the  contrary  appears  before  the  eyes  of  all  Paris?  And  can  he  be  said  to  speak 
with  discretion  when  he  stabs  the  fair  reputation  of  these  virgins,  who  lead  a  life 
so  pure  and  austere,  representing  them  as  “impenitent,  unsacramentalists,  un¬ 
communicants,  foolish  virgins,  visionaries,  Calagans,  desperate  creatures,  and 
anything  you  please,”  loading  them  with  many  other  slanders,  which  have  justly 
incurred  the  censure  of  the  late  Archbishop  of  Paris?  Or  when  he  calumniates 
priests  of  the  most  irreproachable  morals,  by  asserting  “that  they  practise  novel¬ 
ties  in  confession,  to  entrap  handsome  innocent  females,  and  that  he  would  be 
horrified  to  tell  the  abominable  crimes  which  they  commit.”  Is  it  not  a  piece  of 
intolerable  assurance  to  advance  slanders  so  black  and  base,  not  merely  without 
proof,  but  without  the  slightest  shadow,  or  the  most  distant  semblance  of  truth? 
I  shall  not  enlarge  on  this  topic,  but  defer  it  to  a  future  occasion,  for  I  have 
something  more  to  say  to  you  about  it;  but  what  I  have  now  produced  is  enough 
to  show  that  you  have  sinned  at  once  against  truth  and  discretion. 

But  it  may  be  said,  perhaps,  that  you  have  not  offended  against  the  last  rule  at 
least,  which  binds  you  to  desire  the  salvation  of  those  whom  you  denounce,  and 
that  none  can  charge  you  with  this,  except  by  unlocking  the  secrets  of  your 
breasts,  which  are  only  known  to  God.  It  is  strange,  fathers,  but  true,  neverthe¬ 
less,  that  we  can  convict  you  even  of  this  offence;  that  while  your  hatred  to  your 
opponents  has  carried  you  so  far  as  to  wish  their  eternal  perdition,  your  infatua¬ 
tion  has  driven  you  to  discover  the  abominable  wish  that,  so  far  from  cherishing 
in  secret  desires  for  their  salvation,  you  have  offered  up  prayers  in  public  for  their 


LETTER  XI 


89 

damnation;  and  that,  after  having  given  utterance  to  that  hideous  vow  in  the  city 
of  Caen,  to  the  scandal  of  the  whole  Church,  you  have  since  then  ventured,  in 
Paris,  to  vindicate,  in  your  printed  books,  the  diabolical  transaction.  After  such 
gross  offences  against  piety,  first  ridiculing  and  speaking  lightly  of  things  the 
most  sacred;  next  falsely  and  scandalously  calumniating  priests  and  virgins; 
and  lastly,  forming  desires  and  prayers  for  their  damnation,  it  would  be  diffi¬ 
cult  to  add  anything  worse.  I  cannot  conceive,  fathers,  how  you  can  fail  to  be 
ashamed  of  yourselves,  or  how  you  could  have  thought  for  an  instant  of  charg¬ 
ing  me  with  a  want  of  charity,  who  have  acted  all  along  with  so  much  truth  and 
moderation,  without  reflecting  on  your  own  horrid  violations  of  charity,  mani¬ 
fested  in  those  deplorable  exhibitions,  which  make  the  charge  recoil  against 
yourselves. 

In  fine,  fathers,  to  conclude  with  another  charge  which  you  bring  against  me, 

I  see  you  complain  that  among  the  vast  number  of  your  maxims  which  I  quote, 
there  are  some  which  have  been  objected  to  already,  and  that  I  "say  over  again, 
what  others  have  said  before  me."  To  this  I  reply  that  it  is  just  because  you  have 
not  profited  by  what  has  been  said  before  that  I  say  it  over  again.  Tell  me  now 
what  fruit  has  appeared  from  all  the  castigations  you  have  received  in  all  the 
books  written  by  learned  doctors  and  even  the  whole  University?  What  more 
have  your  fathers  Annat,  Caussin,  Pintereau,  and  Le  Moine  done,  in  the  replies 
they  have  put  forth,  except  loading  with  reproaches  those  who  had  given  them 
salutary  admonitions?  Have  you  suppressed  the  books  in  which  these  nefarious 
maxims  are  taught?  Have  you  restrained  the  authors  of  these  maxims?  Have  you 
become  more  circumspect  in  regard  to  them?  On  the  contrary,  is  it  not  the  fact 
that  since  that  time  Escobar  has  been  repeatedly  reprinted  in  France  and  in  the 
Low  Countries,  and  that  your  fathers  Cellot,  Bagot,  Bauny,  Lamy,  Le  Moine,  and 
others,  persist  in  publishing  daily  the  same  maxims  over  again,  or  new  ones  as 
licentious  as  ever?  Let  us  hear  no  more  complaints,  then,  fathers,  either  because 
I  have  charged  you  with  maxims  which  you  have  not  disavowed,  or  because  I 
have  objected  to  some  new  ones  against  you,  or  because  I  have  laughed  equally 
at  them  all.  You  have  only  to  sit  down  and  look  at  them,  to  see  at  once  your  own 
confusion  and  my  defence.  Who  can  look  without  laughing  at  the  decision  of 
Bauny,  respecting  the  person  who  employs  another  to  set  fire  to  his  neighbour’s 
barn;  that  of  Cellot  on  restitution;  the  rule  of  Sanchez  in  favour  of  sorcerers;  the 
plan  of  Hurtado  for  avoiding  the  sin  of  duelling  by  taking  a  walk  through  a  field 
and  waiting  for  a  man;  the  compliments  of  Bauny  for  escaping  usury;  the  way  of 
avoiding  simony  by  a  detour  of  the  intention,  and  keeping  clear  of  falsehood  by 
speaking  high  and  low;  and  such  other  opinions  of  your  most  grave  and  reverend 
doctors?  Is  there  anything  more  necessary,  fathers,  for  my  vindication?  And,  as 
Tertullian  says,  "can  anything  be  more  justly  due  to  the  vanity  and  weakness  of 
these  opinions  than  laughter?"  But,  fathers,  the  corruption  of  manners,  to  which 
your  maxims  lead,  deserves  another  sort  of  consideration;  and  it  becomes  us  to 
ask,  with  the  same  ancient  writer:  "Whether  ought  we  to  laugh  at  their  folly,  or 
deplore  their  blindness? — Rideam  vanitatem ,  an  exprobrem  cacitatem?"  My  humble 
opinion  is  that  one  may  either  laugh  at  them  or  weep  over  them,  as  one  is  in  the 
humour.  "Hac  tolerabilius  vel  ridentur ,  vel flentur ,"  as  St.  Augustine  says.  The  Scrip¬ 
ture  tells  us  that  "there  is  a  time  to  laugh,  and  a  time  to  weep";  and  my  hope  is, 
fathers,  that  I  may  not  find  verified,  in  your  case,  these  words  in  the  Proverbs: 


90  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"If  a  wise  man  contendeth  with  a  foolish  man,  whether  he  rage  or  laugh,  there  is 
no  rest." 

P.S. — On  finishing  this  letter,  there  was  put  in  my  hands  one  of  your  publica¬ 
tions,  in  which  you  accuse  me  of  falsification,  in  the  case  of  six  of  your  maxims 
quoted  by  me,  and  also  with  being  in  correspondence  with  heretics.  You  will 
shortly  receive,  I  trust,  a  suitable  reply;  after  which,  fathers,  I  rather  think  you 
will  not  feel  very  anxious  to  continue  this  species  of  warfare. 


LETTER  XII 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS,  THE  JESUITS 

September  9,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

I  was  prepared  to  write  you  on  the  subject  of  the  abuse  with  which  you  have 
for  some  time  past  been  assailing  me  in  your  publications,  in  which  you  salute 
me  with  such  epithets  as  "reprobate,"  "buffoon,"  "blockhead,"  "merry- Andrew," 
"impostor,"  "slanderer,"  "cheat,"  "heretic,"  "Calvinist  in  disguise,"  "disciple 
of  Du  Moulin,"  "possessed  with  a  legion  of  devils,"  and  everything  else  you  can 
think  of.  As  I  should  be  sorry  to  have  all  this  believed  of  me,  I  was  anxious  to 
show  the  public  why  you  treated  me  in  this  manner;  and  I  had  resolved  to  com¬ 
plain  of  your  calumnies  and  falsifications,  when  I  met  with  your  Answers ,  in 
which  you  bring  these  same  charges  against  myself.  This  will  compel  me  to  alter 
my  plan;  though  it  will  not  prevent  me  from  prosecuting  it  in  some  sort,  for  I 
hope,  while  defending  myself,  to  convict  you  of  impostures  more  genuine  than 
the  imaginary  ones  which  you  have  ascribed  to  me.  Indeed,  fathers,  the  suspicion 
of  foul  play  is  much  more  sure  to  rest  on  you  than  on  me.  It  is  not  very  likely, 
standing  as  I  do,  alone,  without  power  or  any  human  defence  against  such  a  large 
body,  and  having  no  support  but  truth  and  integrity,  that  I  would  expose  myself 
to  lose  everything  by  laying  myself  open  to  be  convicted  of  imposture.  It  is  too 
easy  to  discover  falsifications  in  matters  of  fact  such  as  the  present.  In  such  a  case 
there  would  have  been  no  want  of  persons  to  accuse  me,  nor  would  justice  have 
been  denied  them.  With  you,  fathers,  the  case  is  very  different;  you  may  say  as 
much  as  you  please  against  me,  while  I  may  look  in  vain  for  any  to  complain  to. 
With  such  a  wide  difference  between  our  positions,  though  there  had  been  no 
other  consideration  to  restrain  me,  it  became  me  to  study  no  little  caution.  By 
treating  me,  however,  as  a  common  slanderer,  you  compel  me  to  assume  the  de¬ 
fensive,  and  you  must  be  aware  that  this  cannot  be  done  without  entering  into 
a  fresh  exposition  and  even  into  a  fuller  disclosure  of  the  points  of  your  mor¬ 
ality.  In  provoking  this  discussion,  I  fear  you  are  not  acting  as  good  politicians. 
The  war  must  be  waged  within  your  own  camp  and  at  your  own  expense;  and,  al¬ 
though  you  imagine  that,  by  embroiling  the  questions  with  scholastic  terms,  the 
answers  will  be  so  tedious,  thorny,  and  obscure,  that  people  will  lose  all  relish  for 
the  controversy,  this  may  not,  perhaps,  turn  out  to  be  exactly  the  case;  I  shall 
use  my  best  endeavours  to  tax  your  patience  as  little  as  possible  with  that  sort  of 
writing.  Your  maxims  have  something  diverting  about  them,  which  keeps  up  the 


LETTER  XII 


91 

good  humour  of  people  to  the  last.  At  all  events,  remember  that  it  is  you  that 
oblige  me  to  enter  upon  this  eclaircissement ,  and  let  us  see  which  of  us  comes  off 
best  in  self-defence. 

The  first  of  your  Impostures ,  as  you  call  them,  is  on  the  opinion  of  Vasquez  upon 
alms-giving.  To  avoid  all  ambiguity,  then,  allow  me  to  give  a  simple  explanation 
of  the  matter  in  dispute.  It  is  well  known,  fathers,  that,  according  to  the  mind  of 
the  Church,  there  are  two  precepts  touching  alms:  ist,  "To  give  out  of  our  super¬ 
fluity  in  the  case  of  the  ordinary  necessities  of  the  poor”;  and  2nd ,  "To  give  even 
out  of  our  necessaries,  according  to  our  circumstances,  in  cases  of  extreme  ne¬ 
cessity.”  Thus  says  Cajetan,  after  St.  Thomas;  so  that,  to  get  at  the  mind  of 
Vasquez  on  this  subject,  we  must  consider  the  rules  he  lays  down,  both  in  regard 
to  necessaries  and  superfluities. 

With  regard  to  superfluity,  which  is  the  most  common  source  of  relief  to  the 
poor,  it  is  entirely  set  aside  by  that  single  maxim  which  I  have  quoted  in  my 
Letters:  "That  what  the  men  of  the  world  keep  with  the  view  of  improving  their 
own  condition,  and  that  of  their  relatives,  is  not  properly  superfluity;  so  that  such 
a  thing  as  superfluity  is  rarely  to  be  met  with  among  men  of  the  world,  not  even 
excepting  kings.”  It  is  very  easy  to  see,  fathers,  that,  according  to  this  definition, 
none  can  have  superfluity,  provided  they  have  ambition;  and  thus,  so  far  as  the 
greater  part  of  the  world  is  concerned,  alms-giving  is  annihilated.  But  even  though 
a  man  should  happen  to  have  superfluity,  he  would  be  under  no  obligation,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Vasquez,  to  give  it  away  in  the  case  of  ordinary  necessity;  for  he 
protests  against  those  who  would  thus  bind  the  rich.  Here  are  his  own  words: 
"Corduba,”  says  he,  "teaches  that  when  we  have  a  superfluity  we  are  bound  to 
give  out  of  it  in  cases  of  ordinary  necessity;  but  this  does  not  please  me — sed  hoc  non 
placet — for  we  have  demonstrated  the  contrary  against  Cajetan  and  Navarre.”  So, 
fathers,  the  obligation  to  this  kind  of  alms  is  wholly  set  aside,  according  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  Vasquez. 

With  regard  to  necessaries,  out  of  which  we  are  bound  to  give  in  cases  of 
extreme  and  urgent  necessity,  it  must  be  obvious,  from  the  conditions  by  which 
he  has  limited  the  obligation,  the  richest  man  in  all  Paris  may  not  come  within  its 
reach  one  in  a  lifetime.  I  shall  only  refer  to  two  of  these.  The  first  is:  That  "we 
must  know  that  the  poor  man  cannot  be  relieved  from  any  other  quarter — hcec 
intelligo  et  ccetera  omnia ,  quando  scio  nullum  ahum  opem  laturum .”  What  say  you  to 
this,  fathers?  Is  it  likely  to  happen  frequently  in  Paris,  where  there  are  so  many 
charitable  people,  that  I  must  know  that  there  is  not  another  soul  but  myself  to 
relieve  the  poor  wretch  who  begs  an  alms  from  me?  And  yet,  according  to  Vas¬ 
quez,  if  I  have  not  ascertained  that  fact,  I  may  send  him  away  with  nothing.  The 
second  condition  is:  That  the  poor  man  be  reduced  to  such  straits  "that  he  is 
menaced  with  some  fatal  accident,  or  the  ruin  of  his  character” — none  of  them 
very  common  occurrences.  But  what  marks  still  more  the  rarity  of  the  cases  in 
which  one  is  bound  to  give  charity,  is  his  remark,  in  another  passage,  that  the 
poor  man  must  be  so  ill  off,  "that  he  may  conscientiously  rob  the  rich  man!” 
This  must  surely  be  a  very  extraordinary  case,  unless  he  will  insist  that  a  man  may 
be  ordinarily  allowed  to  commit  robbery.  And  so,  after  having  cancelled  the 
obligation  to  give  alms  out  of  our  superfluities,  he  obliges  the  rich  to  relieve  the 
poor  only  in  those  cases  when  he  would  allow  the  poor  to  rifle  the  rich!  Such  is 
the  doctrine  of  Vasquez,  to  whom  you  refer  your  readers  for  their  edification! 


92  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

I  now  come  to  your  pretended  Impostures.  You  begin  by  enlarging  on  the 
obligation  to  alms-giving  which  Vasquez  imposes  on  ecclesiastics.  But  on  this 
point  I  have  said  nothing;  and  I  am  prepared  to  take  it  up  whenever  you  choose. 
This,  then,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  present  question.  As  for  laymen,  who  are 
the  only  persons  with  whom  we  have  now  to  do,  you  are  apparently  anxious  to 
have  it  understood  that,  in  the  passage  which  I  quoted,  Vasquez  is  giving  not  his 
own  judgement,  but  that  of  Cajetan.  But  as  nothing  could  be  more  false  than 
this,  and  as  you  have  not  said  it  in  so  many  terms,  I  am  willing  to  believe,  for  the 
sake  of  your  character,  that  you  did  not  intend  to  say  it. 

You  next  loudly  complain  that,  after  quoting  that  maxim  of  Vasquez,  "Such  a 
thing  as  superfluity  is  rarely  if  ever  to  be  met  with  among  men  of  the  world,  not 
excepting  kings,"  I  have  inferred  from  it,  "that  the  rich  are  rarely,  if  ever,  bound 
to  give  alms  out  of  their  superfluity."  But  what  do  you  mean  to  say,  fathers?  If  it 
be  true  that  the  rich  have  almost  never  superfluity,  is  it  not  obvious  that  they  will 
almost  never  be  bound  to  give  alms  out  of  their  superfluity?  I  might  have  put  it 
into  the  form  of  a  syllogism  for  you,  if  Diana,  who  has  such  an  esteem  for  Vas¬ 
quez  that  he  calls  him  "the  phoenix  of  genius,"  had  not  drawn  the  same  conclu¬ 
sion  from  the  same  premisses;  for,  after  quoting  the  maxim  of  Vasquez,  he  con¬ 
cludes,  "that,  with  regard  to  the  question,  whether  the  rich  are  obliged  to  give 
alms  out  of  their  superfluity,  though  the  affirmation  were  true,  it  would  seldom, 
or  almost  never,  happen  to  be  obligatory  in  practice."  I  have  followed  this  lan¬ 
guage  word  for  word.  What,  then,  are  we  to  make  of  this,  fathers?  When  Diana 
quotes  with  approbation  the  sentiments  of  Vasquez,  when  he  finds  them  prob¬ 
able,  and  "very  convenient  for  rich  people,"  as  he  says  in  the  same  place,  he  is  no 
slanderer,  no  falsifier,  and  we  hear  no  complaints  of  misrepresenting  his  author; 
whereas,  when  I  cite  the  same  sentiments  of  Vasquez,  though  without  holding 
him  up  as  a  phoenix,  I  am  a  slanderer,  a  fabricator,  a  corrupter  of  his  maxims. 
Truly,  fathers,  you  have  some  reason  to  be  apprehensive,  lest  your  very  different 
treatment  of  those  who  agree  in  their  representation,  and  differ  only  in  their 
estimate  of  your  doctrine,  discover  the  real  secret  of  your  hearts  and  provoke  the 
conclusion  that  the  main  object  you  have  in  view  is  to  maintain  the  credit  and 
glory  of  your  Company.  It  appears  that,  provided  your  accommodating  theology 
is  treated  as  judicious  complaisance,  you  never  disavow  those  that  publish  it,  but 
laud  them  as  contributing  to  your  design;  but  let  it  be  held  forth  as  pernicious 
laxity,  and  the  same  interest  of  your  Society  prompts  you  to  disclaim  the  maxims 
which  would  injure  you  in  public  estimation.  And  thus  you  recognize  or  re¬ 
nounce  them,  not  according  to  the  truth,  which  never  changes,  but  according  to 
the  shifting  exigencies  of  the  times,  acting  on  that  motto  of  one  of  the  ancients, 
"Omnia  pro  tempore ,  nihil  pro  veritate — Anything  for  the  times,  nothing  for  the 
truth."  Beware  of  this,  fathers;  and  that  you  may  never  have  it  in  your  power 
again  to  say  that  I  drew  from  the  principle  of  Vasquez  a  conclusion  which  he  had 
disavowed,  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  he  has  drawn  it  himself:  "According  to  the 
opinion  of  Cajetan,  and  according  to  my  own — et  secundum  nostram — (he  says, 
chap,  i.,  no.  27),  one  is  hardly  obliged  to  give  alms  at  all  when  one  is  only  obliged 
to  give  them  out  of  one’s  superfluity."  Confess  then,  fathers,  on  the  testimony  of 
Vasquez  himself,  that  I  have  exactly  copied  his  sentiment;  and  think  how  you 
could  have  the  conscience  to  say  that  "the  reader,  on  consulting  the  original, 
would  see  to  his  astonishment  that  he  there  teaches  the  very  reverse!" 


LETTER  XII 


93 

In  fine,  you  insist,  above  all,  that  if  Vasquez  does  not  bind  the  rich  to  give  alms 
out  of  their  superfluity,  he  obliges  them  to  atone  for  this  by  giving  out  of  the 
necessaries  of  life.  But  you  have  forgotten  to  mention  the  list  of  conditions  which 
he  declares  to  be  essential  to  constitute  that  obligation,  which  I  have  quoted,  and 
which  restrict  it  in  such  a  way  as  almost  entirely  to  annihilate  it.  In  place  of  giving 
this  honest  statement  of  his  doctrine,  you  tell  us,  in  general  terms,  that  he  obliges 
the  rich  to  give  even  what  is  necessary  to  their  condition.  This  is  proving  too 
much,  fathers;  the  rule  of  the  Gospel  does  not  go  so  far;  and  it  would  be  an  error, 
into  which  Vasquez  is  very  far,  indeed,  from  having  fallen.  To  cover  his  laxity, 
you  attribute  to  him  an  excess  of  severity  which  would  be  reprehensible;  and  thus 
you  lose  all  credit  as  faithful  reporters  of  his  sentiments.  But  the  truth  is,  Vasquez 
is  quite  free  from  any  such  suspicion;  for  he  has  maintained,  as  I  have  shown, 
that  the  rich  are  not  bound,  either  in  justice  or  in  charity,  to  give  of  their  super¬ 
fluities,  and  still  less  of  their  necessaries,  to  relieve  the  ordinary  wants  of  the  poor; 
and  that  they  are  not  obliged  to  give  of  the  necessaries,  except  in  cases  so  rare 
that  they  almost  never  happen. 

Having  disposed  of  your  objections  against  me  on  this  head,  it  only  remains 
to  show  the  falsehood  of  your  assertion  that  Vasquez  is  more  severe  than  Cajetan. 
This  will  by  very  easily  done.  That  cardinal  teaches  "that  we  are  bound  in  justice 
to  give  alms  out  of  our  superfluity,  even  in  the  ordinary  wants  of  the  poor; 
because,  according  to  the  holy  fathers,  the  rich  are  merely  the  dispensers  of  their 
superfluity,  which  they  are  to  give  to  whom  they  please,  among  those  who  have 
need  of  it."  And  accordingly,  unlike  Diana,  who  says  of  the  maxims  of  Vasquez 
that  they  will  be  "very  convenient  and  agreeable  to  the  rich  and  their  confessors," 
the  cardinal,  who  has  no  such  consolation  to  afford  them,  declares  that  he  has 
nothing  to  say  to  the  rich  but  these  words  of  Jesus  Christ:  "It  is  easier  for  a 
camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  heaven"; 
and  to  their  confessors:  "If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch." 
So  indispensable  did  he  deem  this  obligation!  This,  too,  is  what  the  fathers  and 
all  the  saints  have  laid  down  as  a  certain  truth.  "There  are  two  cases,"  says  St. 
Thomas,  "in  which  we  are  bound  to  give  alms  as  a  matter  of  justice — ex  debito 
legali:  one,  when  the  poor  are  in  danger;  the  other,  when  we  possess  superfluous 
property."  And  again:  "The  three-tenths  which  the  Jews  were  bound  to  eat  with 
the  poor,  have  been  augmented  under  the  new  law;  for  Jesus  Christ  wills  that  we 
give  to  the  poor,  not  the  tenth  only,  but  the  whole  of  our  superfluity."  And  yet 
it  does  not  seem  good  to  Vasquez  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  give  even  a  frag¬ 
ment  of  our  superfluity;  such  is  his  complaisance  to  the  rich,  such  his  hardness  to 
the  poor,  such  his  opposition  to  those  feelings  of  charity  which  teach  us  to  relish 
the  truth  contained  in  the  following  words  of  St.  Gregory,  harsh  as  it  may  sound 
to  the  rich  of  this  world:  "When  we  give  the  poor  what  is  necessary  to  them,  we 
are  not  so  much  bestowing  on  them  what  is  our  property  as  rendering  to  them 
what  is  their  own;  and  it  may  be  said  to  be  an  act  of  justice  rather  than  a  work  of 
mercy." 

It  is  thus  that  the  saints  recommend  the  rich  to  share  with  the  poor  the  good 
things  of  this  earth,  if  they  would  expect  to  possess  with  them  the  good  things  of 
heaven.  While  you  make  it  your  business  to  foster  in  the  breasts  of  men  that 
ambition  which  leaves  no  superfluity  to  dispose  of,  and  that  avarice  which  refuses 
to  part  with  it,  the  saints  have  laboured  to  induce  the  rich  to  give  up  their  super- 


94  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

fluity,  and  to  convince  them  that  they  would  have  abundance  of  it,  provided  they 
measured  it,  not  by  the  standard  of  covetousness,  which  knows  no  bounds  to  its 
cravings,  but  by  that  of  piety,  which  is  ingenious  in  retrenchments,  so  as  to  have 
wherewith  to  diffuse  itself  in  the  exercise  of  charity.  "We  will  have  a  great  deal  of 
superfluity,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "if  we  keep  only  what  is  necessary:  but  if  we 
seek  after  vanities,  we  will  never  have  enough.  Seek,  brethren,  what  is  sufficient 
for  the  work  of  God" — that  is,  for  nature — "and  not  for  what  is  sufficient  for 
your  covetousness,"  which  is  the  work  of  the  devil:  "and  remember  that  the 
superfluities  of  the  rich  are  the  necessaries  of  the  poor." 

I  would  fondly  trust,  fathers,  that  what  I  have  now  said  to  you  may  serve,  not 
only  for  my  vindication — that  were  a  small  matter — but  also  to  make  you  feel  and 
detest  what  is  corrupt  in  the  maxims  of  your  casuists,  and  thus  unite  us  sincerely 
under  the  sacred  rules  of  the  Gospel,  according  to  which  we  must  all  be  judged. 

As  to  the  second  point,  which  regards  simony,  before  proceeding  to  answer  the 
charges  you  have  advanced  against  me,  I  shall  begin  by  illustrating  your  doctrine 
on  this  subject.  Finding  yourselves  placed  in  an  awkward  dilemma,  between  the 
canons  of  the  Church,  which  impose  dreadful  penalties  upon  simoniacs,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  avarice  of  many  who  pursue  this  infamous  traffic  on  the  other, 
you  have  recourse  to  your  ordinary  method,  which  is  to  yield  to  men  what  they 
desire,  and  give  the  Almighty  only  words  and  shows.  For  what  else  does  the 
simoniac  want  but  money  in  return  for  his  benefice?  And  yet  this  is  what  you 
exempt  from  the  charge  of  simony.  And  as  the  name  of  simony  must  still  remain 
standing,  and  a  subject  to  which  it  may  be  ascribed,  you  have  substituted,  in  the 
place  of  this,  an  imaginary  idea,  which  never  yet  crossed  the  brain  of  a  simoniac, 
and  would  not  serve  him  much  though  it  did — the  idea,  namely,  that  simony  lies 
in  estimating  the  money  considered  in  itself  as  highly  as  the  spiritual  gift  or  office 
considered  in  itself.  Who  would  ever  take  it  into  his  head  to  compare  things  so 
utterly  disproportionate  and  heterogeneous?  And  yet,  provided  this  metaphysical 
comparison  be  not  drawn,  any  one  may,  according  to  your  authors,  give  away  a 
benefice,  and  receive  money  in  return  for  it,  without  being  guilty  of  simony. 

Such  is  the  way  in  which  you  sport  with  religion,  in  order  to  gratify  the  worst 
passions  of  men;  and  yet  only  see  with  what  gravity  your  Father  Valentia  delivers 
his  rhapsodies  in  the  passage  cited  in  my  letters.  He  says:  "One  may  give  a 
spiritual  for  a  temporal  good  in  two  ways — first,  in  the  way  of  prizing  the  tem¬ 
poral  more  than  the  spiritual,  and  that  would  be  simony;  secondly,  in  the  way  of 
taking  the  temporal  as  the  motive  and  end  inducing  one  to  give  away  the  spirit¬ 
ual,  but  without  prizing  the  temporal  more  than  the  spiritual,  and  then  it  is  not 
simony.  And  the  reason  is  that  simony  consists  in  receiving  something  temporal 
as  the  just  price  of  what  is  spiritual.  If,  therefore,  the  temporal  is  sought — si 
petatur  temporale — not  as  the  price ,  but  only  as  the  motive  determining  us  to  part 
with  the  spiritual,  it  is  by  no  means  simony,  even  although  the  possession  of  the 
temporal  may  be  principally  intended  and  expected — minime  erit  simonia ,  etiamsi 
temporale  principaliter  intendatur  et  expectetur ."  Your  redoubtable  Sanchez  has  been 
favoured  with  a  similar  revelation ;  Escobar  quotes  him  thus :  "If  one  give  a  spiritual 
for  a  temporal  good,  not  as  the  price ,  but  as  a  motive  to  induce  the  collator  to  give 
it,  or  as  an  acknowledgement  if  the  benefice  has  been  actually  received,  is  that 
simony?  Sanchez  assures  us  that  it  is  not."  In  your  Caen  Theses  of  1644,  you  say: 
"It  is  a  probable  opinion,  taught  by  many  Catholics,  that  it  is  not  simony  to 


LETTER  XII 


95 

exchange  a  temporal  for  a  spiritual  good,  when  the  former  is  not  given  as  a  price/' 
And  as  to  Tanner,  here  is  his  doctrine,  exactly  the  same  with  that  of  Valentia;  and 
I  quote  it  again  to  show  you  how  far  wrong  it  is  in  you  to  complain  of  me  for 
saying  that  it  does  not  agree  with  that  of  St.  Thomas,  for  he  avows  it  himself  in 
the  very  passage  which  I  quoted  in  my  letter:  "There  is  properly  and  truly  no 
simony,"  says  he,  "unless  when  a  temporal  good  is  taken  as  the  price  of  a  spirit¬ 
ual;  but  when  taken  merely  as  the  motive  for  giving  the  spiritual,  or  as  an  ac¬ 
knowledgement  for  having  received  it,  this  is  not  simony,  at  least  in  point  of 
conscience."  And  again:  "The  same  thing  may  be  said,  although  the  temporal 
should  be  regarded  as  the  principal  end,  and  even  preferred  to  the  spiritual; 
although  St.  Thomas  and  others  appear  to  hold  the  reverse,  inasmuch  as  they 
maintain  it  to  be  downright  simony  to  exchange  a  spiritual  for  a  temporal  good, 
when  the  temporal  is  the  end  of  the  transaction." 

Such,  then,  being  your  doctrine  on  simony,  as  taught  by  your  best  authors, 
who  follow  each  other  very  closely  in  this  point,  it  only  remains  now  to  reply  to 
your  charges  of  misrepresentation.  You  have  taken  no  notice  of  Valentia’s  opin¬ 
ion,  so  that  his  doctrine  stands  as  it  was  before.  But  you  fix  on  that  of  Tanner, 
maintaining  that  he  has  merely  decided  it  to  be  no  simony  by  divine  right;  and 
you  would  have  it  to  be  believed  that,  in  quoting  the  passage,  I  have  suppressed 
these  words,  divine  right.  This,  fathers,  is  a  most  unconscionable  trick;  for  these 
words,  divine  right ,  never  existed  in  that  passage.  You  add  that  Tanner  declares 
it  to  be  simony  according  to  positive  right.  But  you  are  mistaken;  he  does  not  say 
that  generally,  but  only  of  particular  cases,  or,  as  he  expresses  it,  in  casibus  a  jure 
expressis ,  by  which  he  makes  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  he  had  laid  down  in 
that  passage,  "that  it  is  not  simony  in  point  of  conscience,"  which  must  imply 
that  it  is  not  so  in  point  of  positive  right,  unless  you  would  have  Tanner  made  so 
impious  as  to  maintain  that  simony,  in  point  of  positive  right,  is  not  simony  in 
point  of  conscience.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  your  drift  in  mustering  up  such  terms  as 
"divine  right,  positive  right,  natural  right,  internal  and  external  tribunal,  ex¬ 
pressed  cases,  outward  presumption,"  and  others  equally  little  known;  you  mean 
to  escape  under  this  obscurity  of  language,  and  make  us  lose  sight  of  your  aber¬ 
rations.  But,  fathers,  you  shall  not  escape  by  these  vain  artifices;  for  I  shall  put 
some  questions  to  you  so  simple,  that  they  will  not  admit  of  coming  under  your 
distinguo. 

I  ask  you,  then,  without  speaking  of  "positive  rights,"  of  "outward  presump¬ 
tions,"  or  "external  tribunals" — I  ask  if,  according  to  your  authors,  a  beneficiary 
would  be  simoniacal,  were  he  to  give  a  benefice  worth  four  thousand  livres  of 
yearly  rent,  and  to  receive  ten  thousand  francs  ready  money,  not  as  the  price  of 
the  benefice,  but  merely  as  a  motive  inducing  him  to  give  it?  Answer  me  plainly, 
fathers:  What  must  we  make  of  such  a  case  as  this  according  to  your  authors? 
Will  not  Tanner  tell  us  decidedly  that  "this  is  not  simony  in  point  of  conscience, 
seeing  that  the  temporal  good  is  not  the  price  of  the  benefice,  but  only  the  motive 
inducing  to  dispose  of  it?"  Will  not  Valentia,  will  not  your  own  Theses  of  Caen, 
will  not  Sanchez  and  Escobar,  agree  in  the  same  decision  and  give  the  same  reason 
for  it?  Is  anything  more  necessary  to  exculpate  that  beneficiary  from  simony? 
And,  whatever  might  be  your  private  opinion  of  the  case,  durst  you  deal  with 
that  man  as  a  simonist  in  your  confessionals,  when  he  would  be  entitled  to  stop 
your  mouth  by  telling  you  that  he  acted  according  to  the  advice  of  so  many  grave 


9 6  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

doctors?  Confess  candidly,  then,  that,  according  to  your  views,  that  man  would 
be  no  simonist;  and,  having  done  so,  defend  the  doctrine  as  you  best  can. 

Such,  fathers,  is  the  true  mode  of  treating  questions,  in  order  to  unravel,  instead 
of  perplexing  them,  either  by  scholastic  terms,  or,  as  you  have  done  in  your  last 
charge  against  me  here,  by  altering  the  state  of  the  question.  Tanner,  you  say,  has, 
at  any  rate,  declared  that  such  an  exchange  is  a  great  sin;  and  you  blame  me  for 
having  maliciously  suppressed  this  circumstance,  which,  you  maintain,  " completely 
justifies  him .”  But  you  are  wrong  again,  and  that  in  more  ways  than  one.  For,  first, 
though  what  you  say  had  been  true,  it  would  be  nothing  to  the  point,  the  ques¬ 
tion  in  the  passage  to  which  I  referred  being,  not  if  it  was  sin,  but  if  it  was  simony. 
Now,  these  are  two  very  different  questions.  Sin,  according  to  your  maxims, 
obliges  only  to  confession — simony  obliges  to  restitution;  and  there  are  people 
to  whom  these  may  appear  two  very  different  things.  You  have  found  expedients 
for  making  confession  a  very  easy  affair;  but  you  have  not  fallen  upon  ways  and 
means  to  make  restitution  an  agreeable  one.  Allow  me  to  add  that  the  case  which 
Tanner  charges  with  sin  is  not  simply  that  in  which  a  spiritual  good  is  exchanged 
for  a  temporal,  the  latter  being  the  principal  end  in  view,  but  that  in  which  the 
party  "prizes  the  temporal  above  the  spiritual,”  which  is  the  imaginary  case  al¬ 
ready  spoken  of.  And  it  must  be  allowed  he  could  not  go  far  wrong  in  charging 
such  a  case  as  that  with  sin,  since  that  man  must  be  either  very  wicked  or  very 
stupid  who,  when  permitted  to  exchange  the  one  thing  for  the  other,  would  not 
avoid  the  sin  of  the  transaction  by  such  a  simple  process  as  that  of  abstaining 
from  comparing  the  two  things  together.  Besides,  Valentia,  in  the  place  quoted, 
when  treating  the  question — if  it  be  sinful  to  give  a  spiritual  good  for  a  temporal, 
the  latter  being  the  main  consideration — and  after  producing  the  reasons  given 
for  the  affirmative,  adds,  "Sed  hoc  non  videtur  mihi  satis  certum — But  this  does  not 
appear  to  my  mind  sufficiently  certain.” 

Since  that  time,  however,  your  father,  Erade  Bille,  professor  of  cases  of  con¬ 
science  at  Caen,  has  decided  that  there  is  no  sin  at  all  in  the  case  supposed;  for 
probable  opinions,  you  know,  are  always  in  the  way  of  advancing  to  maturity. 
This  opinion  he  maintains  in  his  writings  of  1644,  against  which  M.  Dupre, 
doctor  and  professor  at  Caen,  delivered  that  excellent  oration,  since  printed  and 
well  known.  For  though  this  Erade  Bille  confesses  that  Valentia’s  doctrine,  adopt¬ 
ed  by  Father  Milhard  and  condemned  by  the  Sorbonne,  "is  contrary  to  the  com¬ 
mon  opinion,  suspected  of  simony,  and  punishable  at  law  when  discovered  in 
practice,”  he  does  not  scruple  to  say  that  it  is  a  probable  opinion,  and  conse¬ 
quently  sure  in  point  of  conscience,  and  that  there  is  neither  simony  nor  sin  in  it. 
"It  is  a  probable  opinion,”  he  says,  "taught  by  many  Catholic  doctors,  that  there 
is  neither  any  simony  nor  any  sin  in  giving  money,  or  any  other  temporal  thing, 
for  a  benefice,  either  in  the  way  of  acknowledgement,  or  as  a  motive,  without 
which  it  would  not  be  given,  provided  it  is  not  given  as  a  price  equal  to  the 
benefice.”  This  is  all  that  could  possibly  be  desired.  In  fact,  according  to  these 
maxims  of  yours,  simony  would  be  so  exceedingly  rare  that  we  might  exempt 
from  this  sin  even  Simon  Magus  himself,  who  desired  to  purchase  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  is  the  emblem  of  those  simonists  that  buy  spiritual  things;  and  Gehazi, 
who  took  money  for  a  miracle  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  prototype  of  the 
simonists  that  sell  them.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  when  Simon,  as  we  read  in 
the  Acts,  "offered  the  apostles  money,  saying,  Give  me  also  this  power”;  he  said 


LETTER  XII 


97 

nothing  about  buying  or  selling,  or  fixing  the  price;  he  did  no  more  than  offer 
the  money  as  a  motive  to  induce  them  to  give  him  that  spiritual  gift;  which  being, 
according  to  you,  no  simony  at  all,  he  might,  had  be  but  been  instructed  in  your 
maxims,  have  escaped  the  anathema  of  St.  Peter.  The  same  unhappy  ignorance 
was  a  great  loss  to  Gehazi,  when  he  was  struck  with  leprosy  by  Elisha;  for,  as  he 
accepted  the  money  from  the  prince  who  had  been  miraculously  cured,  simply  as 
an  acknowledgement,  and  not  as  a  price  equivalent  to  the  divine  virtue  which 
had  effected  the  miracle,  he  might  have  insisted  on  the  prophet  healing  him 
again  on  pain  of  mortal  sin;  seeing,  on  this  supposition,  he  would  have  acted 
according  to  the  advice  of  your  grave  doctors,  who,  in  such  cases,  oblige  con¬ 
fessors  to  absolve  their  penitents  and  to  wash  them  from  that  spiritual  leprosy  of 
which  the  bodily  disease  is  the  type. 

Seriously,  fathers,  it  would  be  extremely  easy  to  hold  you  up  to  ridicule  in  this 
matter,  and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  why  you  expose  yourselves  to  such  treatment. 
To  produce  this  effect,  I  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  simply  to  quote  Escobar, 
in  his  Practice  of  Simony  according  to  the  Society  of  Jesus;  “Is  it  simony  when  two 
Churchmen  become  mutually  pledged  thus:  Give  me  your  vote  for  my  election 
as  Provincial,  and  I  shall  give  you  mine  for  your  election  as  prior?  By  no  means.” 
Or  take  another:  “It  is  not  simony  to  get  possession  of  a  benefice  by  promising 
a  sum  of  money,  when  one  has  no  intention  of  actually  paying  the  money;  for 
this  is  merely  making  a  show  of  simony,  and  is  as  far  from  being  real  simony  as 
counterfeit  gold  is  from  the  genuine.”  By  this  quirk  of  conscience,  he  has  con¬ 
trived  means,  in  the  way  of  adding  swindling  to  simony,  for  obtaining  benefices 
without  simony  and  without  money. 

But  I  have  no  time  to  dwell  longer  on  the  subject,  for  I  must  say  a  word  or  two 
in  reply  to  your  third  accusation,  which  refers  to  the  subject  of  bankrupts.  Noth¬ 
ing  can  be  more  gross  than  the  manner  in  which  you  have  managed  this  charge. 
You  rail  at  me  as  a  libeller  in  reference  to  a  sentiment  of  Lessius,  which  I  did  not 
quote  myself,  but  took  from  a  passage  in  Escobar;  and,  therefore,  though  it  were 
true  that  Lessius  does  not  hold  the  opinion  ascribed  to  him  by  Escobar,  what  can 
be  more  unfair  than  to  charge  me  with  the  misrepresentation?  When  I  quote 
Lessius  or  others  of  your  authors  myself,  I  am  quite  prepared  to  answer  for  it; 
but,  as  Escobar  has  collected  the  opinions  of  twenty-four  of  your  writers,  I  beg 
to  ask  if  I  am  bound  to  guarantee  anything  beyond  the  correctness  of  my  citations 
from  his  book?  Or  if  I  must,  in  addition,  answer  for  the  fidelity  of  all  his  quota¬ 
tions  of  which  I  may  avail  myself?  This  would  be  hardly  reasonable;  and  yet  this 
is  precisely  the  case  in  the  question  before  us.  I  produced  in  my  letter  the  follow¬ 
ing  passage  from  Escobar,  and  you  do  not  object  to  the  fidelity  of  my  translation: 
“May  the  bankrupt,  with  a  good  conscience,  retain  as  much  of  his  property  as  is 
necessary  to  afford  him  an  honourable  maintenance — ne  indecore  vivat?  I  answer, 
with  Lessius,  that  he  may — cum  Lessio  assero posse."  You  tell  me  that  Lessius  does 
not  hold  that  opinion.  But  just  consider  for  a  moment  the  predicament  in  which 
you  involve  yourselves.  If  it  turns  out  that  he  does  hold  that  opinion,  you  will  be 
set  down  as  impostors  for  having  asserted  the  contrary;  and  if  it  is  proved  that  he 
does  not  hold  it,  Escobar  will  be  the  impostor;  so  it  must  now  of  necessity  follow 
that  one  or  other  of  the  Society  will  be  convicted  of  imposture.  Only  think  what 
a  scandal!  You  cannot,  it  would  appear,  foresee  the  consequences  of  things.  You 
seem  to  imagine  that  you  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  cast  aspersions  upon 


98  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

people,  without  considering  on  whom  they  may  recoil.  Why  did  you  not  ac¬ 
quaint  Escobar  with  your  objection  before  venturing  to  publish  it?  He  might 
have  given  you  satisfaction.  It  is  not  so  very  troublesome  to  get  word  from 
Valladolid,  where  he  is  living  in  perfect  health,  and  completing  his  grand  work  on 
Moral  Theology ,  in  six  volumes,  on  the  first  of  which  I  mean  to  say  a  few  words 
by-and-by.  They  have  sent  him  the  first  ten  letters;  you  might  as  easily  have  sent 
him  your  objection,  and  I  am  sure  he  would  have  soon  returned  you  an  answer, 
for  he  has  doubtless  seen  in  Lessius  the  passage  from  which  he  took  the  ne  indecore 
vivat.  Read  him  yourselves,  fathers,  and  you  will  find  it  word  for  word,  as  I  have 
done.  Here  it  is:  "The  same  thing  is  apparent  from  the  authorities  cited,  par¬ 
ticularly  in  regard  to  that  property  which  he  acquires  after  his  failure,  out  of 
which  even  the  delinquent  debtor  may  retain  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  his 
honourable  maintenance,  according  to  his  station  of  life — ut  non  indecore  vivat. 
Do  you  ask  if  this  rule  applies  to  goods  which  he  possessed  at  the  time  of  his 
failure?  Such  seems  to  be  the  judgement  of  the  doctors." 

I  shall  not  stop  here  to  show  how  Lessius,  to  sanction  his  maxim,  perverts  the 
law  that  allows  bankrupts  nothing  more  than  a  mere  livelihood,  and  that  makes 
no  provision  for  "honourable  maintenance."  It  is  enough  to  have  vindicated 
Escobar  from  such  an  accusation — it  is  more,  indeed,  than  what  I  was  in  duty 
bound  to  do.  But  you,  fathers,  have  not  done  your  duty.  It  still  remains  for  you 
to  answer  the  passage  of  Escobar,  whose  decisions,  by  the  way,  have  this  advan¬ 
tage,  that,  being  entirely  independent  of  the  context  and  condensed  in  little 
articles,  they  are  not  liable  to  your  distinctions.  I  quoted  the  whole  of  the  passage, 
in  which  "bankrupts  are  permitted  to  keep  their  goods,  though  unjustly  acquired, 
to  provide  an  honourable  maintenance  for  their  families" — commenting  on  which 
in  my  letters,  I  exclaim:  "Indeed,  father!  by  what  strange  kind  of  charity  would 
you  have  the  ill-gotten  property  of  a  bankrupt  appropriated  to  his  own  use, 
instead  of  that  of  his  lawful  creditors?"  This  is  the  question  which  must  be 
answered;  but  it  is  one  that  involves  you  in  a  sad  dilemma,  and  from  which  you 
in  vain  seek  to  escape  by  altering  the  state  of  the  question,  and  quoting  other 
passages  from  Lessius,  which  have  no  connection  with  the  subject.  I  ask  you, 
then:  May  this  maxim  of  Escobar  be  followed  by  bankrupts  with  a  safe  con¬ 
science,  or  no?  And  take  care  what  you  say.  If  you  answer,  "No,"  what  becomes 
of  your  doctor,  and  your  doctrine  of  probability?  If  you  say,  "Yes,"  I  delate 
you  to  the  Parliament. 

In  this  predicament  I  must  now  leave  you,  fathers;  for  my  limits  will  not  per¬ 
mit  me  to  overtake  your  next  accusation,  which  respects  homicide.  This  will 
serve  for  my  next  letter,  and  the  rest  will  follow. 

In  the  meanwhile,  I  shall  make  no  remarks  on  the  advertisements  which  you 
have  tagged  to  the  end  of  each  of  your  charges,  filled  as  they  are  with  scandalous 
falsehoods.  I  mean  to  answer  all  these  in  a  separate  letter,  in  which  I  hope  to  show 
the  weight  due  to  your  calumnies.  I  am  sorry,  fathers,  that  you  should  have 
recourse  to  such  desperate  resources.  The  abusive  terms  which  you  heap  on  me 
will  not  clear  up  our  disputes,  nor  will  your  manifold  threats  hinder  me  from 
defending  myself.  You  think  you  have  power  and  impunity  on  your  side;  and  I 
think  I  have  truth  and  innocence  on  mine.  It  is  a  strange  and  tedious  war  when 
violence  attempts  to  vanquish  truth.  All  the  efforts  of  violence  cannot  weaken 
truth,  and  only  serve  to  give  it  fresh  vigour.  All  the  lights  of  truth  cannot  arrest 


LETTER  XIII 


99 

violence,  and  only  serve  to  exasperate  it.  When  force  meets  force,  the  weaker 
must  succumb  to  the  stronger;  when  argument  is  opposed  to  argument,  the  solid 
and  the  convincing  triumphs  over  the  empty  and  the  false;  but  violence  and  verity 
can  make  no  impression  on  each  other.  Let  none  suppose,  however,  that  the  two 
are,  therefore,  equal  to  each  other;  for  there  is  this  vast  difference  between  them, 
that  violence  has  only  a  certain  course  to  run,  limited  by  the  appointment  of 
Heaven,  which  overrules  its  effects  to  the  glory  of  the  truth  which  it  assails; 
whereas  verity  endures  forever  and  eventually  triumphs  over  its  enemies,  being 
eternal  and  almighty  as  God  himself. 


LETTER  XIII 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  OF  JESUS 

September  30,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

I  have  just  seen  your  last  production,  in  which  you  have  continued  your  list  of 
Impostures  up  to  the  twentieth  and  intimate  that  you  mean  to  conclude  with  this 
the  first  part  of  your  accusations  against  me,  and  to  proceed  to  the  second,  in 
which  you  are  to  adopt  a  new  mode  of  defence,  by  showing  that  there  are  other 
casuists  besides  those  of  your  Society  who  are  as  lax  as  yourselves.  I  now  see  the 
precise  number  of  charges  to  which  I  have  to  reply;  and  as  the  fourth,  to  which 
we  have  now  come,  relates  to  homicide,  it  may  be  proper,  in  answering  it,  to 
include  the  nth,  13th,  14th,  15th,  16th,  17th,  and  18th,  which  refer  to  the  same 
subject. 

In  the  present  letter,  therefore,  my  object  shall  be  to  vindicate  the  correctness 
of  my  quotations  from  the  charges  of  falsity  which  you  bring  against  me.  But  as 
you  have  ventured,  in  your  pamphlets,  to  assert  that  "the  sentiments  of  your 
authors  on  murder  are  agreeable  to  the  decisions  of  popes  and  ecclesiastical  laws," 
you  will  compel  me,  in  my  next  letter,  to  confute  a  statement  at  once  so  un¬ 
founded  and  so  injurious  to  the  Church.  It  is  of  some  importance  to  show  that 
she  is  innocent  of  your  corruptions,  in  order  that  heretics  may  be  prevented  from 
taking  advantage  of  your  aberrations,  to  draw  conclusions  tending  to  her  dis¬ 
honour.  And  thus,  viewing  on  the  one  hand  your  pernicious  maxims,  and  on  the 
other  the  canons  of  the  Church  which  have  uniformly  condemned  them,  people 
will  see,  at  one  glance,  what  they  should  shun  and  what  they  should  follow. 

Your  fourth  charge  turns  on  a  maxim  relating  to  murder,  which  you  say  I  have 
falsely  ascribed  to  Lessius.  It  is  as  follows:  "That  if  a  man  has  received  a  buffet, 
he  may  immediately  pursue  his  enemy,  and  even  return  the  blow  with  the  sword, 
not  to  avenge  himself,  but  to  retrieve  his  honour."  This,  you  say,  is  the  opinion 
of  the  casuist  Victoria.  But  this  is  nothing  to  the  point.  There  is  no  inconsistency 
in  saying  that  it  is  at  once  the  opinion  of  Victoria  and  of  Lessius;  for  Lessius 
himself  says  that  it  is  also  held  by  Navarre  and  Henriquez,  who  teach  identically 
the  same  doctrine.  The  only  question,  then,  is  if  Lessius  holds  this  view  as  w'ell  as 
his  brother  casuists.  You  maintain  "that  Lessius  quotes  this  opinion  solely  for 


IOO 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

the  purpose  of  refuting  it,  and  that  I,  therefore,  attribute  to  him  a  sentiment 
which  he  produces  only  to  overthrow — the  basest  and  most  disgraceful  act  of 
which  a  writer  can  be  guilty/’  Now  I  maintain,  fathers,  that  he  quotes  the  opinion 
solely  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  it.  Here  is  a  question  of  fact,  which  it  will  be 
very  easy  to  settle.  Let  us  see,  then,  how  you  prove  your  allegation,  and  you  will 
see  afterwards  how  I  prove  mine. 

To  show  that  Lessius  is  not  of  that  opinion,  you  tell  us  that  he  condemns  the 
practice  of  it  ;  and  in  proof  of  this,  you  quote  one  passage  of  his  (1.  2,  c.  9,  n.  92), 
in  which  he  says,  in  so  many  words,  "I  condemn  the  practice  of  it.”  I  grant  that, 
on  looking  for  these  words,  at  number  92,  to  which  you  refer,  they  will  be  found 
there.  But  what  will  people  say,  fathers,  when  they  discover,  at  the  same  time, 
that  he  is  treating  in  that  place  of  a  question  totally  different  from  that  of  which 
we  are  speaking,  and  that  the  opinion  of  which  he  there  says  that  he  condemns 
the  practice  has  no  connection  with  that  now  in  dispute,  but  is  quite  distinct? 
And  yet  to  be  convinced  that  this  is  the  fact,  we  have  only  to  open  the  book  to 
which  you  refer,  and  there  we  find  the  whole  subject  in  its  connection  as  follows: 
At  number  79  he  treats  the  question,  "If  it  is  lawful  to  kill  for  a  buffet?”  and  at 
number  80  he  finishes  this  matter  without  a  single  word  of  condemnation.  Hav¬ 
ing  disposed  of  this  question,  he  opens  a  new  one  at  81,  namely,  "If  it  is  lawful 
to  kill  for  slanders?”  and  it  is  when  speaking  of  this  question  that  he  employs  the 
words  you  have  quoted:  "I  condemn  the  practice  of  it.” 

Is  it  not  shameful,  fathers,  that  you  should  venture  to  produce  these  words  to 
make  it  be  believed  that  Lessius  condemns  the  opinion  that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  for 
a  buffet?  and  that,  on  the  ground  of  this  single  proof,  you  should  chuckle  over  it, 
as  you  have  done,  by  saying:  "Many  persons  of  honour  in  Paris  have  already 
discovered  this  notorious  falsehood  by  consulting  Lessius,  and  have  thus  ascer¬ 
tained  the  degree  of  credit  due  to  that  slanderer?”  Indeed!  and  is  it  thus  that  you 
abuse  the  confidence  which  those  persons  of  honour  repose  in  you?  To  show 
them  that  Lessius  does  not  hold  a  certain  opinion,  you  open  the  book  to  them  at 
a  place  where  he  is  condemning  another  opinion;  and  these  persons,  not  having 
begun  to  mistrust  your  good  faith  and  never  thinking  of  examining  whether  the 
author  speaks  in  that  place  of  the  subject  in  dispute,  you  impose  on  their  credu¬ 
lity.  I  make  no  doubt,  fathers,  that,  to  shelter  yourselves  from  the  guilt  of  such  a 
scandalous  lie,  you  had  recourse  to  your  doctrine  of  equivocations;  and  that, 
having  read  the  passage  in  a  loud  voice ,  you  would  say,  in  a  lower  key ,  that  the 
author  was  speaking  there  of  something  else.  But  I  am  not  so  sure  whether  this 
saving  clause,  which  is  quite  enough  to  satisfy  your  consciences,  will  be  a  very 
satisfactory  answer  to  the  just  complaint  of  those  "honourable  persons,”  when 
they  shall  discover  that  you  have  hoodwinked  them  in  this  style. 

Take  care,  then,  fathers,  to  prevent  them  by  all  means  from  seeing  my  letters; 
for  this  is  the  only  method  now  left  to  you  to  preserve  your  credit  for  a  short 
time  longer.  This  is  not  the  way  in  which  I  deal  with  your  writings:  I  send  them 
to  all  my  friends;  I  wish  everybody  to  see  them.  And  I  verily  believe  that  both  of 
us  are  in  the  right  for  our  own  interests;  for,  after  having  published  with  such 
parade  this  fourth  Imposture ,  were  it  once  discovered  that  you  have  made  it  up  by 
foisting  in  one  passage  for  another,  you  would  be  instantly  denounced.  It  will 
be  easily  seen  that  if  you  could  have  found  what  you  wanted  in  the  passage  where 
Lessius  treated  of  this  matter,  you  would  not  have  searched  for  it  elsewhere,  and 


LETTER  XIII 


IOI 


that  you  had  recourse  to  such  a  trick  only  because  you  could  find  nothing  in  that 
passage  favourable  to  your  purpose. 

You  would  have  us  believe  that  we  may  find  in  Lessius  what  you  assert,  "that  he 
does  not  allow  that  this  opinion  (that  a  man  may  be  lawfully  killed  for  a  buffet)  is 
probable  in  theory";  whereas  Lessius  distinctly  declares,  at  number  80:  "This 
opinion,  that  a  man  may  kill  for  a  buffet,  is  probable  in  theory."  Is  not  this,  word 
for  word,  the  reverse  of  your  assertion?  And  can  we  sufficiently  admire  the  hardi¬ 
hood  with  which  you  have  advanced,  in  set  phrase,  the  very  reverse  of  a  matter  of 
fact!  To  your  conclusion,  from  a  fabricated  passage,  that  Lessius  was  not  of  that 
opinion,  we  have  only  to  place  Lessius  himself,  who,  in  the  genuine  passage,  de¬ 
clares  that  he  is  of  that  opinion. 

Again,  you  would  have  Lessius  to  say  "that  he  condemns  the  practice  of  it"; 
and,  as  I  have  just  observed,  there  is  not  in  the  original  a  single  word  of  condem¬ 
nation;  all  that  he  says  is:  "It  appears  that  it  ought  not  to  be  easily  permitted  in 
practice — In  praxi  non  videtur  facile  permittenda ."  Is  that,  fathers,  the  language  of 
a  man  who  condemns  a  maxim?  Would  you  say  that  adultery  and  incest  ought  not 
to  be  easily  permitted  in  practice?  Must  we  not,  on  the  contrary,  conclude  that  as 
Lessius  says  no  more  than  that  the  practice  ought  not  to  be  easily  permitted,  his 
opinion  is  that  it  may  be  permitted  sometimes,  though  rarely?  And,  as  if  he  had 
been  anxious  to  apprise  everybody  when  it  might  be  permitted,  and  to  relieve 
those  who  have  received  affronts  from  being  troubled  with  unreasonable  scruples 
from  not  knowing  on  what  occasions  they  might  lawfully  kill  in  practice,  he  has 
been  at  pains  to  inform  them  what  they  ought  to  avoid  in  order  to  practise  the 
doctrine  with  a  safe  conscience.  Mark  his  words:  "It  seems,"  says  he,  "that  it 
ought  not  to  be  easily  permitted,  because  of  the  danger  that  persons  may  act  in  this 
matter  out  of  hatred  or  revenge,  or  with  excess,  or  that  this  may  occasion  too 
many  murders."  From  this  it  appears  that  murder  is  freely  permitted  by  Lessius, 
if  one  avoids  the  inconveniences  referred  to — in  other  words,  if  one  can  act  with¬ 
out  hatred  or  revenge  and  in  circumstances  that  may  not  open  the  door  to  a  great 
many  murders.  To  illustrate  the  matter,  I  may  give  you  an  example  of  recent 
occurrence — the  case  of  the  buffet  of  Compiegne.  You  will  grant  that  the  person 
who  received  the  blow  on  that  occasion  has  shown,  by  the  way  in  which  he  has 
acted,  that  he  was  sufficiently  master  of  the  passions  of  hatred  and  revenge.  It 
only  remained  for  him,  therefore,  to  see  that  he  did  not  give  occasion  to  too 
many  murders;  and  you  need  hardly  be  told,  fathers,  it  is  such  a  rare  spectacle  to 
find  Jesuits  bestowing  buffets  on  the  officers  of  the  royal  household  that  he  had 
no  great  reason  to  fear  that  a  murder  committed  on  this  occasion  would  be  likely 
to  draw  many  others  in  its  train.  You  cannot,  accordingly,  deny  that  the  Jesuit 
who  figured  on  that  occasion  was  killable  with  a  safe  conscience,  and  that  the 
offended  party  might  have  converted  him  into  a  practical  illustration  of  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  Lessius.  And  very  likely,  fathers,  this  might  have  been  the  result  had  he 
been  educated  in  your  school,  and  learnt  from  Escobar  that  the  man  who  has 
received  a  buffet  is  held  to  be  disgraced  until  he  has  taken  the  life  of  him  who 
insulted  him.  But  there  is  ground  to  believe  that  the  very  different  instructions 
which  he  received  from  a  curate,  who  is  no  great  favourite  of  yours,  have  con¬ 
tributed  not  a  little  in  this  case  to  save  the  life  of  a  Jesuit. 

Tell  us  no  more,  then,  of  inconveniences  which  may,  in  many  instances,  be  so 
easily  got  over,  and  in  the  absence  of  which,  according  to  Lessius,  murder  is 


102 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

permissible  even  in  practice.  This  is  frankly  avowed  by  your  authors,  as  quoted  by 
Escobar,  in  his  Practice  of  Homicide,  according  to  your  Society.  "Is  it  allowable,"  asks 
this  casuist,  "to  kill  him  who  has  given  me  a  buffet?  Lessius  says  it  is  permissible 
in  speculation,  though  not  to  be  followed  in  practice — non  consulendum  in  praxi — 
on  account  of  the  risk  of  hatred,  or  of  murders  prejudicial  to  the  State.  Others, 
however,  have  judged  that,  by  avoiding  these  inconveniences ,  this  is  permissible  and  safe 
in  practice — in  praxi  probabilem  et  tutam  judicarunt  Henriquez,  & c.  See  how  your 
opinions  mount  up,  by  little  and  little,  to  the  climax  of  probabilism!  The  present 
one  you  have  at  last  elevated  to  this  position,  by  permitting  murder  without  any 
distinction  between  speculation  and  practice,  in  the  following  terms:  "It  is  lawful, 
when  one  has  received  a  buffet,  to  return  the  blow  immediately  with  the  sword,  not 
to  avenge  one’s  self,  but  to  preserve  one’s  honour."  Such  is  the  decision  of  your 
fathers  of  Caen  in  1644,  embodied  in  their  publications  produced  by  the  univer¬ 
sity  before  parliament,  when  they  presented  their  third  remonstrance  against  your 
doctrine  of  homicide,  as  shown  in  the  book  then  emitted  by  them,  on  page  339. 

Mark,  then,  fathers,  that  your  own  authors  have  themselves  demolished  this 
absurd  distinction  between  speculative  and  practical  murder — a  distinction  which 
the  university  treated  with  ridicule,  and  the  invention  of  which  is  a  secret  of  your 
policy,  which  it  may  now  be  worth  while  to  explain.  The  knowledge  of  it,  besides 
being  necessary  to  the  right  understanding  of  your  15th,  16th,  17th,  and  18th 
charges,  is  well  calculated,  in  general,  to  open  up,  by  little  and  little,  the  principles 
of  that  mysterious  policy. 

In  attempting,  as  you  have  done,  to  decide  cases  of  conscience  in  the  most 
agreeable  and  accommodating  manner,  while  you  met  with  some  questions  in 
which  religion  alone  was  concerned — such  as  those  of  contrition,  penance,  love 
to  God,  and  others  only  affecting  the  inner  court  of  conscience — you  encoun¬ 
tered  another  class  of  cases  in  which  civil  society  was  interested  as  well  as  religion 
— such  as  those  relating  to  usury,  bankruptcy,  homicide,  and  the  like.  And  it  is 
truly  distressing  to  all  that  love  the  Church  to  observe  that,  in  a  vast  number  of 
instances,  in  which  you  had  only  Religion  to  contend  with,  you  have  violated  her 
laws  without  reservation,  without  distinction,  and  without  compunction;  because 
you  knew  that  it  is  not  here  that  God  visibly  administers  his  justice.  But  in  those 
cases  in  which  the  State  is  interested  as  well  as  Religion,  your  apprehension  of 
man’s  justice  has  induced  you  to  divide  your  decisions  into  two  shares.  To  the 
first  of  these  you  give  the  name  of  speculation;  under  which  category  crimes,  con¬ 
sidered  in  themselves,  without  regard  to  society,  but  merely  to  the  law  of  God, 
you  have  permitted,  without  the  least  scruple,  and  in  the  way  of  trampling  on  the 
divine  law  which  condemns  them.  The  second  you  rank  under  the  denomination 
of  practice;  and  here,  considering  the  injury  which  may  be  done  to  society,  and 
the  presence  of  magistrates  who  look  after  the  public  peace,  you  take  care,  in 
order  to  keep  yourselves  on  the  safe  side  of  the  law,  not  to  approve  always  in 
practice  the  murders  and  other  crimes  which  you  have  sanctioned  in  speculation. 
Thus,  for  example,  on  the  question,  "If  it  be  lawful  to  kill  for  slanders?"  your 
authors,  Filiutius,  Reginald,  and  others,  reply:  "This  is  permitted  in  speculation 
— ex  probabile  opinione  licet;  but  is  not  to  be  approved  in  practice ,  on  account  of  the 
great  number  of  murders  which  might  ensue,  and  which  might  injure  the  State,  if 
all  slanderers  were  to  be  killed,  and  also  because  one  might  be  punished  in  a  court  of 
justice  for  having  killed  another  for  that  matter."  Such  is  the  style  in  which  your 


LETTER  XIII 


103 

opinions  begin  to  develop  themselves,  under  the  shelter  of  this  distinction,  in 
virtue  of  which,  without  doing  any  sensible  injury  to  society,  you  only  ruin 
religion.  In  acting  thus,  you  consider  yourselves  quite  safe.  You  suppose  that,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  influence  you  have  in  the  Church  will  effectually  shield  from 
punishment  your  assaults  on  truth;  and  that,  on  the  other,  the  precautions  you 
have  taken  against  too  easily  reducing  your  permissions  to  practice  will  save  you 
on  the  part  of  the  civil  powers,  who,  not  being  judges  in  cases  of  conscience,  are 
properly  concerned  only  with  the  outward  practice.  Thus  an  opinion  which  would 
be  condemned  under  the  name  of  practice ,  comes  out  quite  safe  under  the  name 
of  speculation.  But  this  basis  once  established,  it  is  not  difficult  to  erect  on  it  the 
rest  of  your  maxims.  There  is  an  infinite  distance  between  God’s  prohibition  of 
murder  and  your  speculative  permission  of  the  crime;  but  between  that  permis¬ 
sion  and  the  practice  the  distance  is  very  small  indeed.  It  only  remains  to  show 
that  what  is  allowable  in  speculation  is  also  so  in  practice;  and  there  can  be  no 
want  of  reasons  for  this.  You  have  contrived  to  find  them  in  far  more  difficult 
cases.  Would  you  like  to  see,  fathers,  how  this  may  be  managed?  I  refer  you  to  the 
reasoning  of  Escobar,  who  has  distinctly  decided  the  point  in  the  first  six  vol¬ 
umes  of  his  grand  Moral  Theology ,  of  which  I  have  already  spoken — a  work  in 
which  he  shows  quite  another  spirit  from  that  which  appears  in  his  former  com¬ 
pilation  from  your  four-and-twenty  elders.  At  that  time  he  thought  that  there 
might  be  opinions  probable  in  speculation,  which  might  not  be  safe  in  practice; 
but  he  has  now  come  to  form  an  opposite  judgment,  and  has,  in  this,  his  latest 
work,  confirmed  it.  Such  is  the  wonderful  growth  attained  by  the  doctrine  of 
probability  in  general,  as  well  as  by  every  probable  opinion  in  particular,  in  the 
course  of  time.  Attend,  then,  to  what  he  says:  "I  cannot  see  how  it  can  be  that  an 
action  which  seems  allowable  in  speculation  should  not  be  so  likewise  in  practice; 
because  what  may  be  done  in  practice  depends  on  what  is  found  to  be  lawful  in 
speculation,  and  the  things  differ  from  each  other  only  as  cause  and  effect.  Specu¬ 
lation  is  that  which  determines  to  action.  Whence  it  follows  that  opinions  probable  in 
speculation  may  be  followed  with  a  safe  conscience  in  practice ,  and  that  even  with  more 
safety  than  those  which  have  not  been  so  well  examined  as  matters  of  speculation. " 

Verily,  fathers,  your  friend  Escobar  reasons  uncommonly  well  sometimes;  and, 
in  point  of  fact,  there  is  such  a  close  connection  between  speculation  and  practice, 
that  when  the  former  has  once  taken  root,  you  have  no  difficulty  in  permitting 
the  latter,  without  any  disguise.  A  good  illustration  of  this  we  have  in  the  per¬ 
mission  "to  kill  for  a  buffet, "  which,  from  being  a  point  of  simple  speculation, 
was  boldly  raised  by  Lessius  into  a  practice  "which  ought  not  easily  to  be  al¬ 
lowed";  from  that  promoted  by  Escobar  to  the  character  of  "an  easy  practice"; 
and  from  thence  elevated  by  your  fathers  of  Caen,  as  we  have  seen,  without  any 
distinction  between  theory  and  practice,  into  a  full  permission.  Thus  you  bring 
your  opinions  to  their  full  growth  very  gradually.  Were  they  presented  all  at  once 
in  their  finished  extravagance,  they  would  beget  horror;  but  this  slow  imper¬ 
ceptible  progress  gradually  habituates  men  to  the  sight  of  them  and  hides  their 
offensiveness.  And  in  this  way  the  permission  to  murder,  in  itself  so  odious  both 
to  Church  and  State,  creeps  first  into  the  Church,  and  then  from  the  Church  into 
the  State. 

A  similar  success  has  attended  the  opinion  of  "killing  for  slander,"  which  has 
now  reached  the  climax  of  a  permission  without  any  distinction.  I  should  not 


104  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

have  stopped  to  quote  my  authorities  on  this  point  from  your  writings,  had  it  not 
been  necessary  in  order  to  put  down  the  effrontery  with  which  you  have  asserted, 
twice  over,  in  your  fifteenth  Imposture ,  "that  there  never  was  a  Jesuit  who  per¬ 
mitted  killing  for  slander."  Before  making  this  statement,  fathers,  you  should 
have  taken  care  to  prevent  it  from  coming  under  my  notice,  seeing  that  it  is  so 
easy  for  me  to  answer  it.  For,  not  to  mention  that  your  fathers  Reginald,  Filiutius, 
and  others,  have  permitted  it  in  speculation,  as  I  have  already  shown,  and  that  the 
principle  laid  down  by  Escobar  leads  us  safely  on  to  the  practice,  I  have  to  tell  you 
that  you  have  authors  who  have  permitted  it  in  so  many  words,  and  among  others 
Father  Hereau  in  his  public  lectures,  on  the  conclusion  of  which  the  king  put  him 
under  arrest  in  your  house,  for  having  taught,  among  other  errors,  that  when  a 
person  who  has  slandered  us  in  the  presence  of  men  of  honour,  continues  to  do 
so  after  being  warned  to  desist,  it  is  allowable  to  kill  him,  not  publicly,  indeed, 
for  fear  of  scandal,  but  in  a  private  way — sed  clam. 

I  have  had  occasion  already  to  mention  Father  Lamy,  and  you  do  not  need  to 
be  informed  that  his  doctrine  on  this  subject  was  censured  in  1649  by  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Louvain.  And  yet  two  months  have  not  elapsed  since  your  Father  Des 
Bois  maintained  this  very  censured  doctrine  of  Father  Lamy  and  taught  that  "it 
was  allowable  for  a  monk  to  defend  the  honour  which  he  acquired  by  his  virtue, 
even  by  killing  the  person  who  assails  his  reputation — etiam  cum  morte  invasoris" ; 
which  has  raised  such  a  scandal  in  that  town  that  the  whole  of  the  cures  united  to 
impose  silence  on  him,  and  to  oblige  him,  by  a  canonical  process,  to  retract  his 
doctrine.  The  case  is  now  pending  in  the  Episcopal  court. 

What  say  you  now,  fathers?  Why  attempt,  after  that,  to  maintain  that  "no 
Jesuit  ever  held  that  it  was  lawful  to  kill  for  slander?"  Is  anything  more  nec¬ 
essary  to  convince  you  of  this  than  the  very  opinions  of  your  fathers  which  you 
quote,  since  they  do  not  condemn  murder  in  speculation,  but  only  in  practice, 
and  that,  too,  "on  account  of  the  injury  that  might  thereby  accrue  to  the  State"? 
And  here  I  would  just  beg  to  ask  whether  the  whole  matter  in  dispute  between  us 
is  not  simply  and  solely  to  ascertain  if  you  have  or  have  not  subverted  the  law  of 
God  which  condemns  murder?  The  point  in  question  is,  not  whether  you  have 
injured  the  commonwealth,  but  whether  you  have  injured  religion.  What  pur¬ 
pose,  then,  can  it  serve,  in  a  dispute  of  this  kind,  to  show  that  you  have  spared 
the  State,  when  you  make  it  apparent,  at  the  same  time,  that  you  have  destroyed 
the  faith?  Is  this  not  evident  from  your  saying  that  the  meaning  of  Reginald,  on 
the  question  of  killing  for  slanders,  is,  "that  a  private  individual  has  a  right  to 
employ  that  mode  of  defence,  viewing  it  simply  in  itself y ?  I  desire  nothing  beyond 
this  concession  to  confute  you.  "A  private  individual,"  you  say,  "has  a  right  to 
employ  that  mode  of  defence"  (that  is,  killing  for  slanders),  "viewing  the  thing 
in  itself";  and,  consequently,  fathers,  the  law  of  God,  which  forbids  us  to  kill,  is 
nullified  by  that  decision. 

It  serves  no  purpose  to  add,  as  you  have  done,  "that  such  a  mode  is  unlawful 
and  criminal,  even  according  to  the  law  of  God,  on  account  of  the  murders  and 
disorders  which  would  follow  in  society,  because  the  law  of  God  obliges  us  to 
have  regard  to  the  good  of  society."  This  is  to  evade  the  question:  for  there  are 
two  laws  to  be  observed — one  forbidding  us  to  kill,  and  another  forbidding  us  to 
harm  society.  Reginald  has  not,  perhaps,  broken  the  law  which  forbids  us  to  do 
harm  to  society;  but  he  has  most  certainly  violated  that  which  forbids  us  to  kill. 


LETTER  XIII 


105 

Now  this  is  the  only  point  with  which  we  have  to  do.  I  might  have  shown,  besides, 
that  your  other  writers,  who  have  permitted  these  murders  in  practice,  have  sub¬ 
verted  the  one  law  as  well  as  the  other.  But,  to  proceed,  we  have  seen  that  you 
sometimes  forbid  doing  harm  to  the  State;  and  you  allege  that  your  design  in  that 
is  to  fulfil  the  law  of  God,  which  obliges  us  to  consult  the  interests  of  society. 
That  may  be  true,  though  it  is  far  from  being  certain,  as  you  might  do  the  same 
thing  purely  from  fear  of  the  civil  magistrate.  With  your  permission,  then,  we 
shall  scrutinize  the  real  secret  of  this  movement. 

Is  it  not  certain,  fathers,  that  if  you  had  really  any  regard  to  God,  and  if  the 
observance  of  his  law  had  been  the  prime  and  principal  object  in  your  thoughts, 
this  respect  would  have  invariably  predominated  in  all  your  leading  decisions  and 
would  have  engaged  you  at  all  times  on  the  side  of  religion?  But,  if  it  turns  out, 
on  the  contrary,  that  you  violate,  in  innumerable  instances,  the  most  sacred  com¬ 
mands  that  God  has  laid  upon  men,  and  that,  as  in  the  instances  before  us,  you 
annihilate  the  law  of  God,  which  forbids  these  actions  as  criminal  in  themselves, 
and  that  you  only  scruple  to  approve  of  them  in  practice,  from  bodily  fear  of  the 
civil  magistrate,  do  you  not  afford  us  ground  to  conclude  that  you  have  no  respect 
to  God  in  your  apprehensions,  and  that  if  you  yield  an  apparent  obedience  to  his 
law,  in  so  far  as  regards  the  obligation  to  do  no  harm  to  the  State,  this  is  not 
done  out  of  any  regard  to  the  law  itself,  but  to  compass  your  own  ends,  as  has 
ever  been  the  way  with  politicians  of  no  religion? 

What,  fathers!  will  you  tell  us  that,  looking  simply  to  the  law  of  God,  which 
says,  "Thou  shalt  not  kill,”  we  have  a  right  to  kill  for  slanders?  And  after  having 
thus  trampled  on  the  eternal  law  of  God,  do  you  imagine  that  you  atone  for  the 
scandal  you  have  caused,  and  can  persuade  us  of  your  reverence  for  Him,  by  add¬ 
ing  that  you  prohibit  the  practice  for  State  reasons  and  from  dread  of  the  civil 
arm?  Is  not  this,  on  the  contrary,  to  raise  a  fresh  scandal?  I  mean  not  by  the  respect 
which  you  testify  for  the  magistrate;  that  is  not  my  charge  against  you,  and  it  is 
ridiculous  in  you  to  banter,  as  you  have  done,  on  this  matter.  I  blame  you,  not 
for  fearing  the  magistrate,  but  for  fearing  none  but  the  magistrate.  And  I  blame 
you  for  this,  because  it  is  making  God  less  the  enemy  of  vice  than  man.  Had  you 
said  that  to  kill  for  slander  was  allowable  according  to  men,  but  not  according  to 
God,  that  might  have  been  something  more  endurable;  but  when  you  maintain 
that  what  is  too  criminal  to  be  tolerated  among  men  may  yet  be  innocent  and 
right  in  the  eyes  of  that  Being  who  is  righteousness  itself,  what  is  this  but  to 
declare  before  the  whole  world,  by  a  subversion  of  principle  as  shocking  in  itself 
as  it  is  alien  to  the  spirit  of  the  saints,  that  while  you  can  be  braggarts  before  God, 
you  are  cowards  before  men? 

Had  you  really  been  anxious  to  condemn  these  homicides,  you  would  have 
allowed  the  commandment  of  God  which  forbids  them  to  remain  intact;  and  had 
you  dared  at  once  to  permit  them,  you  would  have  permitted  them  openly,  in 
spite  of  the  laws  of  God  and  men.  But,  your  object  being  to  permit  them  im¬ 
perceptibly,  and  to  cheat  the  magistrate,  who  watches  over  the  public  safety,  you 
have  gone  craftily  to  work.  You  separate  your  maxims  into  two  portions.  On  the 
one  side,  you  hold  out  "that  it  is  lawful  in  speculation  to  kill  a  man  for  slander"; 
and  nobody  thinks  of  hindering  you  from  taking  a  speculative  view  of  matters. 
On  the  other  side,  you  come  out  with  this  detached  axiom,  "that  what  is  per¬ 
mitted  in  speculation  is  also  permissible  in  practice";  and  what  concern  does 


10 6  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

society  seem  to  have  in  this  general  and  metaphysical-looking  proposition?  And 
thus  these  two  principles,  so  little  suspected,  being  embraced  in  their  separate 
form,  the  vigilance  of  the  magistrate  is  eluded  ;  while  it  is  only  necessary  to  com¬ 
bine  the  two  together  to  draw  from  them  the  conclusion  which  you  aim  at — 
namely,  that  it  is  lawful  in  practice  to  put  a  man  to  death  for  a  simple  slander. 

It  is,  indeed,  fathers,  one  of  the  most  subtle  tricks  of  your  policy  to  scatter 
through  your  publications  the  maxims  which  you  club  together  in  your  decisions. 
It  is  partly  in  this  way  that  you  establish  your  doctrine  of  probabilities,  which  I 
have  frequently  had  occasion  to  explain.  That  general  principle  once  established, 
you  advance  propositions  harmless  enough  when  viewed  apart,  but  which,  when 
taken  in  connection  with  that  pernicious  dogma,  become  positively  horrible.  An 
example  of  this,  which  demands  an  answer,  may  be  found  in  the  nth  page  of 
your  Impostures ,  where  you  allege  that  " several  famous  theologians  have  decided 
that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  a  man  for  a  box  on  the  ear.”  Now,  it  is  certain  that,  if  that 
had  been  said  by  a  person  who  did  not  hold  probabilism,  there  would  be  nothing 
to  find  fault  with  in  it;  it  would  in  this  case  amount  to  no  more  than  a  harmless 
statement,  and  nothing  could  be  elicited  from  it.  But  you,  fathers,  and  all  who 
hold  that  dangerous  tenet,  "that  whatever  has  been  approved  by  celebrated  au¬ 
thors  is  probable  and  safe  in  conscience,”  when  you  add  to  this  "that  several 
celebrated  authors  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  a  man  for  a  box  on  the 
ear,”  what  is  this  but  to  put  a  dagger  into  the  hand  of  all  Christians,  for  the 
purpose  of  plunging  it  into  the  heart  of  the  first  person  that  insults  them,  and  to 
assure  them  that,  having  the  judgement  of  so  many  grave  authors  on  their  side, 
they  may  do  so  with  a  perfectly  safe  conscience? 

What  monstrous  species  of  language  is  this,  which,  in  announcing  that  certain 
authors  hold  a  detestable  opinion,  is  at  the  same  time  giving  a  decision  in  favour 
of  that  opinion — which  solemnly  teaches  whatever  it  simply  tells!  We  have  learnt, 
fathers,  to  understand  this  peculiar  dialect  of  the  Jesuitical  school;  and  it  is 
astonishing  that  you  have  the  hardihood  to  speak  it  out  so  freely,  for  it  betrays 
your  sentiments  somewhat  too  broadly.  It  convicts  you  of  permitting  murder  for 
a  buffet,  as  often  as  you  repeat  that  many  celebrated  authors  have  maintained 
that  opinion. 

This  charge,  fathers,  you  will  never  be  able  to  repel;  nor  will  you  be  much 
helped  out  by  those  passages  from  Vasquez  and  Suarez  that  you  adduce  against 
me,  in  which  they  condemn  the  murders  which  their  associates  have  approved. 
These  testimonies,  disjoined  from  the  rest  of  your  doctrine,  may  hoodwink  those 
who  know  little  about  it;  but  we,  who  know  better,  put  your  principles  and 
maxims  together.  You  say,  then,  that  Vasquez  condemns  murders;  but  what  say 
you  on  the  other  side  of  the  question,  my  reverend  fathers?  Why,  "that  the  prob¬ 
ability  of  one  sentiment  does  not  hinder  the  probability  of  the  opposite  senti¬ 
ment;  and  that  it  is  warrantable  to  follow  the  less  probable  and  less  safe  opinion, 
giving  up  the  more  probable  and  more  safe  one.”  What  follows  from  all  this 
taken  in  connection,  but  that  we  have  perfect  freedom  of  conscience  to  adopt  any 
one  of  these  conflicting  judgements  which  pleases  us  best?  And  what  becomes  of 
all  the  effect  which  you  fondly  anticipate  from  your  quotations?  It  evaporates  in 
smoke,  for  we  have  no  more  to  do  than  to  conjoin  for  your  condemnation  the 
maxims  which  you  have  disjoined  for  your  exculpation.  Why,  then,  produce  those 
passages  of  your  authors  which  I  have  not  quoted,  to  qualify  those  which  I  have 


LETTER  XIII 


107 

quoted,  as  if  the  one  could  excuse  the  other?  What  right  does  that  give  you  to 
call  me  an  "impostor”?  Have  I  said  that  all  your  fathers  are  implicated  in  the  same 
corruptions?  Have  I  not,  on  the  contrary,  been  at  pains  to  show  that  your  interest 
lay  in  having  them  of  all  different  minds,  in  order  to  suit  all  your  purposes?  Do 
you  wish  to  kill  your  man? — here  is  Lessius  for  you.  Are  you  inclined  to  spare 
him? — here  is  Vasquez.  Nobody  need  go  away  in  ill  humour — nobody  without 
the  authority  of  a  grave  doctor.  Lessius  will  talk  to  you  like  a  Heathen  on  homi¬ 
cide,  and  like  a  Christian,  it  may  be,  on  charity.  Vasquez,  again,  will  descant  like 
a  Heathen  on  charity,  and  like  a  Christian  on  homicide.  But  by  means  of  prob- 
abilism,  which  is  held  both  by  Vasquez  and  Lessius,  and  which  renders  all  your 
opinions  common  property,  they  will  lend  their  opinions  to  one  another,  and 
each  will  be  held  bound  to  absolve  those  who  have  acted  according  to  opinions 
which  each  of  them  has  condemned.  It  is  this  very  variety,  then,  that  confounds 
you.  Uniformity,  even  in  evil,  would  be  better  than  this.  Nothing  is  more  contrary 
to  the  orders  of  St.  Ignatius  and  the  first  generals  of  your  Society  than  this  con¬ 
fused  medley  of  all  sorts  of  opinions,  good  and  bad.  I  may,  perhaps,  enter  on  this 
topic  at  some  future  period;  and  it  will  astonish  many  to  see  how  far  you  have 
degenerated  from  the  original  spirit  of  your  institution,  and  that  your  own  gen¬ 
erals  have  foreseen  that  the  corruption  of  your  doctrine  on  morals  might  prove 
fatal,  not  only  to  your  Society,  but  to  the  Church  universal. 

Meanwhile,  I  repeat  that  you  can  derive  no  advantage  from  the  doctrine  of 
Vasquez.  It  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if,  out  of  all  the  Jesuits  that  have  written  on 
morals,  one  or  two  could  not  be  found  who  may  have  hit  upon  a  truth  which  has 
been  confessed  by  all  Christians.  There  is  no  glory  in  maintaining  the  truth, 
according  to  the  Gospel,  that  it  is  unlawful  to  kill  a  man  for  smiting  us  on  the 
face;  but  it  is  foul  shame  to  deny  it.  So  far,  indeed,  from  justifying  you,  nothing 
tells  more  fatally  against  you  than  the  fact  that,  having  doctors  among  you  who 
have  told  you  the  truth,  you  abide  not  in  the  truth,  but  love  the  darkness  rather 
than  the  light.  You  have  been  taught  by  Vasquez  that  it  is  a  Heathen,  and  not  a 
Christian,  opinion  to  hold  that  we  may  knock  down  a  man  for  a  blow  on  the 
cheek;  and  that  it  is  subversive  both  of  the  Gospel  and  of  the  Decalogue  to  say 
that  we  may  kill  for  such  a  matter.  The  most  profligate  of  men  will  acknowledge 
as  much.  And  yet  you  have  allowed  Lessius,  Escobar,  and  others,  to  decide,  in 
the  face  of  these  well-known  truths,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  laws  of  God  against 
manslaughter,  that  it  is  quite  allowable  to  kill  a  man  for  a  buffet! 

What  purpose,  then,  can  it  serve  to  set  this  passage  of  Vasquez  over  against  the 
sentiment  of  Lessius,  unless  you  mean  to  show  that,  in  the  opinion  of  Vasquez, 
Lessius  is  a  "Heathen”  and  a  "profligate”?  and  that,  fathers,  is  more  than  I  durst 
have  said  myself.  What  else  can  be  deduced  from  it  than  that  Lessius  "subverts 
both  the  Gospel  and  the  Decalogue”;  that,  at  the  last  day,  Vasquez  will  condemn 
Lessius  on  this  point,  as  Lessius  will  condemn  Vasquez  on  another;  and  that  all 
your  fathers  will  rise  up  in  judgement  one  against  another,  mutually  condemning 
each  other  for  their  sad  outrages  on  the  law  of  Jesus  Christ? 

To  this  conclusion,  then,  reverend  fathers,  must  we  come  at  length,  that,  as 
your  probabilism  renders  the  good  opinions  of  some  of  your  authors  useless  to 
the  Church,  and  useful  only  to  your  policy,  they  merely  serve  to  betray,  by  their 
contrariety,  the  duplicity  of  your  hearts.  This  you  have  completely  unfolded,  by 
telling  us,  on  the  one  hand,  that  Vasquez  and  Suarez  are  against  homicide,  and 


108  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

on  the  other  hand,  that  many  celebrated  authors  are  for  homicide;  thus  presenting 
two  roads  to  our  choice  and  destroying  the  simplicity  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who 
denounces  his  anathema  on  the  deceitful  and  the  double-hearted:  "Vos  duplici 
corde ,  et  ingredienti  duabus  viis! — Woe  be  to  the  double  hearts,  and  the  sinner  that 
goeth  two  ways!” 


LETTER  XIV 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS,  THE  JESUITS 


October  23,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

If  I  had  merely  to  reply  to  the  three  remaining  charges  on  the  subject  of  homi¬ 
cide,  there  would  be  no  need  for  a  long  discourse,  and  you  will  see  them  refuted 
presently  in  a  few  words;  but  as  I  think  it  of  much  more  importance  to  inspire  the 
public  with  a  horror  at  your  opinions  on  this  subject  than  to  justify  the  fidelity  of 
my  quotations,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  devote  the  greater  part  of  this  letter  to  the 
refutation  of  your  maxims,  to  show  you  how  far  you  have  departed  from  the 
sentiments  of  the  Church  and  even  of  nature  itself.  The  permissions  of  murder, 
which  you  have  granted  in  such  a  variety  of  cases,  render  it  very  apparent,  that  you 
have  so  far  forgotten  the  law  of  God,  and  quenched  the  light  of  nature,  as  to  re¬ 
quire  to  be  remanded  to  the  simplest  principles  of  religion  and  of  common  sense. 

What  can  be  a  plainer  dictate  of  nature  than  that  "no  private  individual  has  a 
right  to  take  away  the  life  of  another”?  "So  well  are  we  taught  this  of  ourselves,” 
says  St.  Chrysostom,  "that  God,  in  giving  the  commandment  not  to  kill,  did  not 
add  as  a  reason  that  homicide  was  an  evil;  because,”  says  that  father,  "the  law 
supposes  that  nature  has  taught  us  that  truth  already.”  Accordingly,  this  com¬ 
mandment  has  been  binding  on  men  in  all  ages.  The  Gospel  has  confirmed  the 
requirement  of  the  law;  and  the  Decalogue  only  renewed  the  command  which 
man  had  received  from  God  before  the  law,  in  the  person  of  Noah,  from  whom 
all  men  are  descended.  On  that  renovation  of  the  world,  God  said  to  the  patriarch: 
"At  the  hand  of  man,  and  at  the  hand  of  every  man’s  brother,  will  I  require  the 
life  of  man.  Whoso  sheddeth  man’s  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed;  for 
man  is  made  in  the  image  of  God.”  (Gen.  ix.  5,  6.)  This  general  prohibition  de¬ 
prives  man  of  all  power  over  the  life  of  man.  And  so  exclusively  has  the  Almighty 
reserved  this  prerogative  in  His  own  hand  that,  in  accordance  with  Christianity, 
which  is  at  utter  variance  with  the  false  maxims  of  Paganism,  man  has  no  power 
even  over  his  own  life.  But,  as  it  has  seemed  good  to  His  providence  to  take  human 
society  under  His  protection,  and  to  punish  the  evil-doers  that  give  it  disturbance, 
He  has  Himself  established  laws  for  depriving  criminals  of  life;  and  thus  those  ex¬ 
ecutions  which,  without  His  sanction,  would  be  punishable  outrages,  become,  by 
virtue  of  His  authority,  which  is  the  rule  of  justice,  praiseworthy  penalties.  St. 
Augustine  takes  an  admirable  view  of  this  subject.  "God,”  he  says,  "has  himself 
qualified  this  general  prohibition  against  manslaughter,  both  by  the  laws  which 
He  has  instituted  for  the  capital  punishment  of  malefactors,  and  by  the  special 
orders  which  He  has  sometimes  issued  to  put  to  death  certain  individuals.  And 


LETTER  XIV  109 

when  death  is  inflicted  in  such  cases,  it  is  not  man  that  kills,  but  God,  of  whom 
man  may  be  considered  as  only  the  instrument,  in  the  same  way  as  a  sword  in  the 
hand  of  him  that  wields  it.  But,  these  instances  excepted,  whosoever  kills  incurs 
the  guilt  of  murder." 

It  appears,  then,  fathers,  that  the  right  of  taking  away  the  life  of  man  is  the  sole 
prerogative  of  God,  and  that,  having  ordained  laws  for  executing  death  on  crimi¬ 
nals,  He  has  deputed  kings  or  commonwealths  as  the  depositaries  of  that  power — 
a  truth  which  St.  Paul  teaches  us,  when,  speaking  of  the  right  which  sovereigns 
possess  over  the  lives  of  their  subjects,  he  deduces  it  from  Heaven  in  these  words: 
"He  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain;  for  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  execute  wrath 
upon  him  that  doeth  evil."  (Rom.  13.  4.)  But  as  it  is  God  who  has  put  this 
power  into  their  hands,  so  He  requires  them  to  exercise  it  in  the  same  manner  as 
He  does  himself;  in  other  words,  with  perfect  justice;  according  to  what  St.  Paul 
observes  in  the  same  passage:  "Rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the 
evil.  Wilt  thou,  then,  not  be  afraid  of  the  power?  Do  that  which  is  good:  for  he  is 
the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good."  And  this  restriction,  so  far  from  lowering 
their  prerogative,  exalts  it,  on  the  contrary,  more  than  ever;  for  it  is  thus  assimi¬ 
lated  to  that  of  God  who  has  no  power  to  do  evil,  but  is  all-powerful  to  do  good; 
and  it  is  thus  distinguished  from  that  of  devils,  who  are  impotent  in  that  which  is 
good,  and  powerful  only  for  evil.  There  is  this  difference  only  to  be  observed 
betwixt  the  King  of  Heaven  and  earthly  sovereigns,  that  God,  being  justice  and 
wisdom  itself,  may  inflict  death  instantaneously  on  whomsoever  and  in  whatso¬ 
ever  manner  He  pleases;  for,  besides  His  being  the  sovereign  Lord  of  human  life, 
it  is  certain  that  He  never  takes  it  away  either  without  cause  or  without  judgement, 
because  He  is  as  incapable  of  injustice  as  He  is  of  error.  Earthly  potentates,  how¬ 
ever,  are  not  at  liberty  to  act  in  this  manner;  for,  though  the  ministers  of  God,  still 
they  are  but  men,  and  not  gods.  They  may  be  misguided  by  evil  counsels,  irritated 
by  false  suspicions,  transported  by  passion,  and  hence  they  find  themselves 
obliged  to  have  recourse,  in  their  turn  also,  to  human  agency,  and  appoint  magis¬ 
trates  in  their  dominions,  to  whom  they  delegate  their  power,  that  the  authority 
which  God  has  bestowed  on  them  may  be  employed  solely  for  the  purpose  for 
which  they  received  it. 

I  hope  you  understand,  then,  fathers,  that,  to  avoid  the  crime  of  murder,  we 
must  act  at  once  by  the  authority  of  God,  and  according  to  the  justice  of  God; 
and  that,  when  these  two  conditions  are  not  united,  sin  is  contracted;  whether  it 
be  by  taking  away  life  with  his  authority,  but  without  his  justice;  or  by  taking  it 
away  with  justice,  but  without  his  authority.  From  this  indispensable  connection 
it  follows,  according  to  St.  Augustine,  "that  he  who,  without  proper  authority, 
kills  a  criminal,  becomes  a  criminal  himself,  chiefly  for  this  reason,  that  he  usurps 
an  authority  which  God  has  not  given  him";  and  on  the  other  hand,  magistrates, 
though  they  possess  this  authority,  are  nevertheless  chargeable  with  murder,  if, 
contrary  to  the  laws  which  they  are  bound  to  follow,  they  inflict  death  on  an  inno¬ 
cent  man. 

Such  are  the  principles  of  public  safety  and  tranquillity  which  have  been  ad¬ 
mitted  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  and  on  the  basis  of  which  all  legislators,  sacred 
and  profane,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  have  founded  their  laws.  Even 
Heathens  have  never  ventured  to  make  an  exception  to  this  rule,  unless  in  cases 
where  there  was  no  other  way  of  escaping  the  loss  of  chastity  or  life,  when  they 


no 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

conceived,  as  Cicero  tells  us,  "that  the  law  itself  seemed  to  put  its  weapons  into 
the  hands  of  those  who  were  placed  in  such  an  emergency.” 

But  with  this  single  exception,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  my  present  pur¬ 
pose,  that  such  a  law  was  ever  enacted,  authorizing  or  tolerating,  as  you  have  done, 
the  practice  of  putting  a  man  to  death,  to  atone  for  an  insult,  or  to  avoid  the  loss 
of  honour  or  property,  where  life  is  not  in  danger  at  the  same  time;  that,  fathers,  is 
what  I  deny  was  ever  done,  even  by  infidels.  They  have,  on  the  contrary,  most  ex¬ 
pressly  forbidden  the  practice.  The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  of  Rome  bore,  "that 
it  is  unlawful  to  kill  a  robber  in  the  daytime,  when  he  does  not  defend  himself 
with  arms”;  which,  indeed,  had  been  prohibited  long  before  in  the  22d  chapter  of 
Exodus.  And  the  law  Furem ,  in  the  Lex  Cornelia ,  which  is  borrowed  from  Ulpian, 
forbids  the  killing  of  robbers  even  by  night,  if  they  do  not  put  us  in  danger  of  our 
lives. 

Tell  us  now,  fathers,  what  authority  you  have  to  permit  what  all  laws,  human 
as  well  as  divine,  have  forbidden;  and  who  gave  Lessius  a  right  to  use  the  following 
language?  "The  book  of  Exodus  forbids  the  killing  of  thieves  by  day,  when  they 
do  not  employ  arms  in  their  defence;  and  in  a  court  of  justice,  punishment  is  in¬ 
flicted  on  those  who  kill  under  these  circumstances.  In  conscience ,  however,  no 
blame  can  be  attached  to  this  practice,  when  a  person  is  not  sure  of  being  able 
otherwise  to  recover  his  stolen  goods,  or  entertains  a  doubt  on  the  subject,  as 
Sotus  expresses  it;  for  he  is  not  obliged  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  any  part  of  his 
property  merely  to  save  the  life  of  a  robber.  The  same  privilege  extends  even  to 
clergymen.”  Such  extraordinary  assurance!  The  law  of  Moses  punishes  those  who 
kill  a  thief  when  he  does  not  threaten  our  lives,  and  the  law  of  the  Gospel,  accord¬ 
ing  to  you,  will  absolve  them!  What,  fathers!  has  Jesus  Christ  come  to  destroy  the 
law,  and  not  to  fulfil  it?  "The  civil  judge,”  says  Lessius,  "would  inflict  punish¬ 
ment  on  those  who  should  kill  under  such  circumstances;  but  no  blame  can  be 
attached  to  the  deed  in  conscience.”  Must  we  conclude,  then,  that  the  morality  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  more  sanguinary,  and  less  the  enemy  of  murder,  than  that  of  Pagans, 
from  whom  our  judges  have  borrowed  their  civil  laws  which  condemn  that  crime? 
Do  Christians  make  more  account  of  the  good  things  of  this  earth,  and  less  ac¬ 
count  of  human  life,  than  infidels  and  idolaters?  On  what  principle  do  you  pro¬ 
ceed,  fathers?  Assuredly  not  upon  any  law  that  ever  was  enacted  either  by  God  or 
man — on  nothing,  indeed,  but  this  extraordinary  reasoning:  "The  laws,”  say  you, 
"permit  us  to  defend  ourselves  against  robbers,  and  to  repel  force  by  force;  self- 
defence,  therefore,  being  permitted,  it  follows  that  murder,  without  which  self- 
defence  is  often  impracticable,  may  be  considered  as  permitted  also.” 

It  is  false,  fathers,  that,  because  self-defence  is  allowed,  murder  may  be  allowed 
also.  This  barbarous  method  of  self- vindication  lies  at  the  root  of  all  your  errors, 
and  has  been  justly  stigmatized  by  the  Faculty  of  Louvain,  in  their  censure  of  the 
doctrine  of  your  friend  Father  Lamy,  as  "a  murderous  defence — defensio  occisiva .”  I 
maintain  that  the  laws  recognize  such  a  wide  difference  between  murder  and  self- 
defence  that,  in  those  very  cases  in  which  the  latter  is  sanctioned,  they  have  made 
a  provision  against  murder,  when  the  person  is  in  no  danger  of  his  life.  Read  the 
words,  fathers,  as  they  run  in  the  same  passage  of  Cujas:  "It  is  lawful  to  repulse 
the  person  who  comes  to  invade  our  property;  but  we  are  not  permitted  to  kill  him .” 
And  again:  "If  any  should  threaten  to  strike  us,  and  not  to  deprive  us  of  life,  it  is 
quite  allowable  to  repulse  him;  but  it  is  against  all  law  to  put  him  to  death." 


Ill 


LETTER  XIV 

Who,  then,  has  given  you  a  right  to  say,  as  Molina,  Reginald,  Filiutius,  Escobar, 
Lessius,  and  others  among  you,  have  said,  "that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  the  man  who 
offers  to  strike  us  a  blow"?  or,  "that  it  is  lawful  to  take  the  life  of  one  who  means 
to  insult  us,  by  the  common  consent  of  all  the  casuists,"  as  Lessius  says.  By  what 
authority  do  you,  who  are  mere  private  individuals,  confer  upon  other  private 
individuals,  not  excepting  clergymen,  this  right  of  killing  and  slaying?  And  how 
dare  you  usurp  the  power  of  life  and  death,  which  belongs  essentially  to  none  but 
God,  and  which  is  the  most  glorious  mark  of  sovereign  authority?  These  are  the 
points  that  demand  explanation;  and  yet  you  conceive  that  you  have  furnished  a 
triumphant  reply  to  the  whole,  by  simply  remarking,  in  your  thirteenth  Imposture , 
"that  the  value  for  which  Molina  permits  us  to  kill  a  thief,  who  flies  without  hav¬ 
ing  done  us  any  violence,  is  not  so  small  as  I  have  said,  and  that  it  must  be  a  much 
larger  sum  than  six  ducats!"  How  extremely  silly!  Pray,  fathers,  where  would  you 
have  the  price  to  be  fixed?  At  fifteen  or  sixteen  ducats?  Do  not  suppose  that  this 
will  produce  any  abatement  in  my  accusations.  At  all  events,  you  cannot  make  it 
exceed  the  value  of  a  horse;  for  Lessius  is  clearly  of  opinion,  "that  we  may  law¬ 
fully  kill  the  thief  that  runs  off  with  our  horse."  But  I  must  tell  you,  moreover, 
that  I  was  perfectly  correct  when  I  said  that  Molina  estimates  the  value  of  the 
thief  s  life  at  six  ducats;  and,  if  you  will  not  take  it  upon  my  word,  we  shall  refer  it 
to  an  umpire  to  whom  you  cannot  object.  The  person  whom  I  fix  upon  for  this 
office  is  your  own  Father  Reginald,  who,  in  his  explanation  of  the  same  passage  of 
Molina  (I.28,  n.  68),  declares  that  "Molina  there  determines  the  sum  for  which  it  is 
not  allowable  to  kill  at  three,  or  four,  or  five  ducats."  And  thus,  fathers,  I  shall 
have  Reginald,  in  addition  to  Molina,  to  bear  me  out. 

It  will  be  equally  easy  for  me  to  refute  your  fourteenth  Imposture ,  touching 
Molina’s  permission  to  "kill  a  thief  who  offers  to  rob  us  of  a  crown."  This  pal¬ 
pable  fact  is  attested  by  Escobar,  who  tells  us  "that  Molina  has  regularly  deter¬ 
mined  the  sum  for  which  it  is  lawful  to  take  away  life,  at  one  crown."  And  all  you 
have  to  lay  to  my  charge  in  the  fourteenth  Imposture  is,  that  I  have  suppressed  the 
last  words  of  this  passage,  namely,  "that  in  this  matter  every  one  ought  to  study 
the  moderation  of  a  just  self-defence."  Why  do  you  not  complain  that  Escobar 
has  also  omitted  to  mention  these  words?  But  how  little  tact  you  have  about  you! 
You  imagine  that  nobody  understands  what  you  mean  by  self-defence.  Don’t  we 
know  that  it  is  to  employ  "a  murderous  defence"?  You  would  persuade  us  that 
Molina  meant  to  say  that  if  a  person,  in  defending  his  crown,  finds  himself  in 
danger  of  his  life,  he  is  then  at  liberty  to  kill  his  assailant,  in  self-preservation.  If 
that  were  true,  fathers,  why  should  Molina  say  in  the  same  place  that  "in  this  mat¬ 
ter  he  was  of  a  contrary  judgement  from  Carrer  and  Bald,"  who  give  permission 
to  kill  in  self-preservation?  I  repeat,  therefore,  that  his  plain  meaning  is  that,  pro¬ 
vided  the  person  can  save  his  crown  without  killing  the  thief,  he  ought  not  to  kill 
him;  but  that,  if  he  cannot  secure  his  object  without  shedding  blood,  even  though 
he  should  run  no  risk  of  his  own  life,  as  in  the  case  of  the  robber  being  unarmed, 
he  is  permitted  to  take  up  arms  and  kill  the  man,  in  order  to  save  his  crown;  and  in 
so  doing,  according  to  him,  the  person  does  not  transgress  "the  moderation  of  a 
just  defence."  To  show  you  that  I  am  in  the  right,  just  allow  him  to  explain  him¬ 
self:  "One  does  not  exceed  the  moderation  of  a  just  defence,"  says  he,  "when  he 
takes  up  arms  against  a  thief  who  has  none,  or  employs  weapons  which  give  him 
the  advantage  over  his  assailant.  I  know  there  are  some  who  are  of  a  contrary 


1 1 2 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

judgement;  but  I  do  not  approve  of  their  opinion,  even  in  the  external  tribunal.” 

Thus,  fathers,  it  is  unquestionable  that  your  authors  have  given  permission  to 
kill  in  defence  of  property  and  honour,  though  life  should  be  perfectly  free  from 
danger.  And  it  is  upon  the  same  principle  that  they  authorize  duelling,  as  I  have 
shown  by  a  great  variety  of  passages  from  their  writings,  to  which  you  have  made 
no  reply.  You  have  animadverted  in  your  writings  only  on  a  single  passage  taken 
from  Father  Layman,  who  sanctions  the  above  practice,  “when  otherwise  a  person 
would  be  in  danger  of  sacrificing  his  fortune  or  his  honour”;  and  here  you  ac¬ 
cuse  me  with  having  suppressed  what  he  adds,  “that  such  a  case  happens  very 
rarely.”  You  astonish  me,  fathers:  these  are  really  curious  impostures  you  charge 
me  withal.  You  talk  as  if  the  question  were  whether  that  is  a  rare  case?  when  the 
real  question  is  if,  in  such  a  case,  duelling  is  lawful?  These  are  two  very  different 
questions.  Layman,  in  the  quality  of  a  casuist,  ought  to  judge  whether  duelling  is 
lawful  in  the  case  supposed;  and  he  declares  that  it  is.  We  can  judge  without  his 
assistance  whether  the  case  be  a  rare  one;  and  we  can  tell  him  that  it  is  a  very 
ordinary  one.  Or,  if  you  prefer  the  testimony  of  your  good  friend  Diana,  he  will 
tell  you  that  “the  case  is  exceedingly  common.”  But,  be  it  rare  or  not,  and  let  it  be 
granted  that  Layman  follows  in  this  the  example  of  Navarre,  a  circumstance  on 
which  you  lay  so  much  stress,  is  it  not  shameful  that  he  should  consent  to  such  an 
opinion  as  that,  to  preserve  a  false  honour,  it  is  lawful  in  conscience  to  accept  of  a 
challenge,  in  the  face  of  the  edicts  of  all  Christian  states,  and  of  all  the  canons  of 
the  Church,  while  in  support  of  these  diabolical  maxims  you  can  produce  neither 
laws,  nor  canons,  nor  authorities  from  Scripture,  or  from  the  fathers,  nor  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  a  single  saint,  nor,  in  short,  anything  but  the  following  impious  syllo¬ 
gism:  “Honour  is  more  than  life;  it  is  allowable  to  kill  in  defence  of  life;  therefore 
it  is  allowable  to  kill  in  defence  of  honour!”  What,  fathers!  because  the  depravity 
of  men  disposes  them  to  prefer  that  factitious  honour  before  the  life  which  God 
hath  given  them  to  be  devoted  to  his  service,  must  they  be  permitted  to  murder 
one  another  for  its  preservation?  To  love  that  honour  more  than  life  is  in  itself  a 
heinous  evil;  and  yet  this  vicious  passion,  which,  when  proposed  as  the  end  of  our 
conduct,  is  enough  to  tarnish  the  holiest  of  actions,  is  considered  by  you  capable 
of  sanctifying  the  most  criminal  of  them! 

What  a  subversion  of  all  principle  is  here,  fathers!  And  who  does  not  see  to 
what  atrocious  excesses  it  may  lead?  It  is  obvious,  indeed,  that  it  will  ultimately 
lead  to  the  commission  of  murder  for  the  most  trifling  things  imaginable,  when 
one’s  honour  is  considered  to  be  staked  for  their  preservation — murder,  I  venture 
to  say,  even  for  an  apple!  You  might  complain  of  me,  fathers,  for  drawing  san¬ 
guinary  inferences  from  your  doctrine  with  a  malicious  intent,  were  I  not  fortu¬ 
nately  supported  by  the  authority  of  the  grave  Lessius,  who  makes  the  following 
observation,  in  number  68:  “It  is  not  allowable  to  take  life  for  an  article  of  small 
value,  such  as  for  a  crown  or  for  an  apple — aut  pro  pomo — unless  it  would  be  deemed 
dishonourable  to  lose  it.  In  this  case,  one  may  recover  the  article,  and  even,  if 
necessary,  kill  the  aggressor ,  for  this  is  not  so  much  defending  one’s  property  as 
retrieving  one’s  honour.”  This  is  plain  speaking,  fathers;  and,  just  to  crown  your 
doctrine  with  a  maxim  which  includes  all  the  rest,  allow  me  to  quote  the  follow¬ 
ing  from  Father  Hereau,  who  has  taken  it  from  Lessius:  “The  right  of  self-defence 
extends  to  whatever  is  necessary  to  protect  ourselves  from  all  injury.” 

What  strange  consequences  does  this  inhuman  principle  involve!  and  how  im- 


LETTER  XIV 


1  *3 

perative  is  the  obligation  laid  upon  all,  and  especially  upon  those  in  public  stations, 
to  set  their  face  against  it!  Not  the  general  good  alone,  but  their  own  personal 
interest  should  engage  them  to  see  well  to  it;  for  the  casuists  of  your  school  whom 
I  have  cited  in  my  letters  extend  their  permissions  to  kill  far  enough  to  reach  even 
them.  Factious  men,  who  dread  the  punishment  of  their  outrages,  which  never 
appear  to  them  in  a  criminal  light,  easily  persuade  themselves  that  they  are  the 
victims  of  violent  oppression,  and  will  be  led  to  believe  at  the  same  time,  "that  the 
right  of  self-defence  extends  to  whatever  is  necessary  to  protect  themselves  from 
all  injury."  And  thus,  relieved  from  contending  against  the  checks  of  conscience, 
which  stifle  the  greater  number  of  crimes  at  their  birth,  their  only  anxiety  will  be 
to  surmount  external  obstacles. 

I  shall  say  no  more  on  this  subject,  fathers;  nor  shall  I  dwell  on  the  other 
murders,  still  more  odious  and  important  to  governments,  which  you  sanction, 
and  of  which  Lessius,  in  common  with  many  others  of  your  authors,  treats  in  the 
most  unreserved  manner.  It  was  to  be  wished  that  these  horrible  maxims  had 
never  found  their  way  out  of  hell;  and  that  the  devil,  who  is  their  original  author, 
had  never  discovered  men  sufficiently  devoted  to  his  will  to  publish  them  among 
Christians. 

From  all  that  I  have  hitherto  said,  it  is  easy  to  judge  what  a  contrariety  there  is 
betwixt  the  licentiousness  of  your  opinions  and  the  severity  of  civil  laws,  not  even 
excepting  those  of  Heathens.  How  much  more  apparent  must  the  contrast  be  with 
ecclesiastical  laws,  which  must  be  incomparably  more  holy  than  any  other,  since  it 
is  the  Church  alone  that  knows  and  possesses  the  true  holiness!  Accordingly,  this 
chaste  spouse  of  the  Son  of  God,  who,  in  imitation  of  her  heavenly  husband,  can 
shed  her  own  blood  for  others,  but  never  the  blood  of  others  for  herself,  entertains 
a  horror  at  the  crime  of  murder  altogether  singular,  and  proportioned  to  the  pe¬ 
culiar  illumination  which  God  has  vouchsafed  to  bestow  upon  her.  She  views  man, 
not  simply  as  man,  but  as  the  image  of  the  God  whom  she  adores.  She  feels  for 
every  one  of  the  race  a  holy  respect,  which  imparts  to  him,  in  her  eyes,  a  venerable 
character,  as  redeemed  by  an  infinite  price,  to  be  made  the  temple  of  the  living 
God.  And  therefore  she  considers  the  death  of  a  man,  slain  without  the  authority 
of  his  Maker,  not  as  murder  only,  but  as  sacrilege,  by  which  she  is  deprived  of  one 
of  her  members;  for,  whether  he  be  a  believer  or  an  unbeliever,  she  uniformly 
looks  upon  him,  if  not  as  one,  at  least  as  capable  of  becoming  one,  of  her  own 
children. 

Such,  fathers,  are  the  holy  reasons  which,  ever  since  the  time  that  God  became 
man  for  the  redemption  of  men,  have  rendered  their  condition  an  object  of  such 
consequence  to  the  Church  that  she  uniformly  punishes  the  crime  of  homicide, 
not  only  as  destructive  to  them,  but  as  one  of  the  grossest  outrages  that  can  pos¬ 
sibly  be  perpetrated  against  God.  In  proof  of  this  I  shall  quote  some  examples, 
not  from  the  idea  that  all  the  severities  to  which  I  refer  ought  to  be  kept  up  (for  I 
am  aware  that  the  Church  may  alter  the  arrangement  of  such  exterior  discipline), 
but  to  demonstrate  her  immutable  spirit  upon  this  subject.  The  penances  which 
she  ordains  for  murder  may  differ  according  to  the  diversity  of  the  times,  but  no 
change  of  time  can  ever  effect  an  alteration  of  the  horror  with  which  she  regards 
the  crime  itself. 

For  a  long  time  the  Church  refused  to  be  reconciled,  till  the  very  hour  of  death, 
to  those  who  had  been  guilty  of  wilful  murder,  as  those  are  to  whom  you  give 


1 14  the  provincial  letters 

your  sanction.  The  celebrated  Council  of  Ancyra  adjudged  them  to  penance  dur¬ 
ing  their  whole  lifetime;  and,  subsequently,  the  Church  deemed  it  an  act  of  suffi¬ 
cient  indulgence  to  reduce  that  term  to  a  great  many  years.  But,  still  more  effec¬ 
tually  to  deter  Christians  from  wilful  murder,  she  has  visited  with  most  severe 
punishment  even  those  acts  which  have  been  committed  through  inadvertence, 
as  may  be  seen  in  St.  Basil,  in  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssen,  and  in  the  decretals  of  Popes 
Zachary  and  Alexander  II.  The  canons  quoted  by  Isaac,  bishop  of  Langres  (tr.  2. 
13),  "ordain  seven  years  of  penance  for  having  killed  another  in  self-defence." 
And  we  find  St.  Hildebert,  bishop  of  Mans,  replying  to  Yves  de  Chartres,  "that  he 
was  right  in  interdicting  for  life  a  priest  who  had,  in  self-defence,  killed  a  robber 
with  a  stone." 

After  this,  you  cannot  have  the  assurance  to  persist  in  saying  that  your  decisions 
are  agreeable  to  the  spirit  or  the  canons  of  the  Church.  I  defy  you  to  show  one  of 
them  that  permits  us  to  kill  solely  in  defence  of  our  property  (for  I  speak  not  of 
cases  in  which  one  may  be  called  upon  to  defend  his  life — se  suaquae  ltberando)\ 
your  own  authors,  and,  among  the  rest,  Father  Lamy,  confess  that  no  such  canon 
can  be  found.  "There  is  no  authority,"  he  says,  "human  or  divine,  which  gives  an 
express  permission  to  kill  a  robber  who  makes  no  resistance."  And  yet  this  is  what 
you  permit  most  expressly.  I  defy  you  to  show  one  of  them  that  permits  us  to  kill 
in  vindication  of  honour,  for  a  buffet,  for  an  affront,  or  for  a  slander.  I  defy  you  to 
show  one  of  them  that  permits  the  killing  of  witnesses,  judges,  or  magistrates, 
whatever  injustice  we  may  apprehend  from  them.  The  spirit  of  the  church  is 
diametrically  opposite  to  these  seditious  maxims,  opening  the  door  to  insurrec¬ 
tions  to  which  the  mob  is  naturally  prone  enough  already.  She  has  invariably 
taught  her  children  that  they  ought  not  to  render  evil  for  evil;  that  they  ought  to 
give  place  unto  wrath;  to  make  no  resistance  to  violence;  to  give  unto  every  one 
his  due — honour,  tribute,  submission;  to  obey  magistrates  and  superiors,  even 
though  they  should  be  unjust,  because  we  ought  always  to  respect  in  them  the 
power  of  that  God  who  has  placed  them  over  us.  She  forbids  them,  still  more 
strongly  than  is  done  by  the  civil  law,  to  take  justice  into  their  own  hands;  and  it 
is  in  her  spirit  that  Christian  kings  decline  doing  so  in  cases  of  high  treason,  and 
remit  the  criminals  charged  with  this  grave  offence  into  the  hands  of  the  judges, 
that  they  may  be  punished  according  to  the  laws  and  the  forms  of  justice,  which  in 
this  matter  exhibit  a  contrast  to  your  mode  of  management  so  striking  and  com¬ 
plete  that  it  may  well  make  you  blush  for  shame. 

As  my  discourse  has  taken  this  turn,  I  beg  you  to  follow  the  comparison  which 
I  shall  now  draw  between  the  style  in  which  you  would  dispose  of  your  enemies, 
and  that  in  which  the  judges  of  the  land  dispose  of  criminals.  Everybody  knows, 
fathers,  that  no  private  individual  has  a  right  to  demand  the  death  of  another 
individual;  and  that  though  a  man  should  have  ruined  us,  maimed  our  body, 
burnt  our  house,  murdered  our  father,  and  was  prepared,  moreover,  to  assassinate 
ourselves,  or  ruin  our  character,  our  private  demand  for  the  death  of  that  person 
would  not  be  listened  to  in  a  court  of  justice.  Public  officers  have  been  appointed 
for  that  purpose,  who  make  the  demand  in  the  name  of  the  king,  or  rather,  I 
would  say,  in  the  name  of  God.  Now,  do  you  conceive,  fathers,  that  Christian 
legislators  have  established  this  regulation  out  of  mere  show  and  grimace?  Is  it 
not  evident  that  their  object  was  to  harmonize  the  laws  of  the  state  with  those  of 
the  Church,  and  thus  prevent  the  external  practice  of  justice  from  clashing  with 


LETTER  XIV 


115 

the  sentiments  which  all  Christians  are  bound  to  cherish  in  their  hearts?  It  is  easy  to 
see  how  this,  which  forms  the  commencement  of  a  civil  process,  must  stagger  you; 
its  subsequent  procedure  absolutely  overwhelms  you. 

Suppose  then,  fathers,  that  these  official  persons  have  demanded  the  death  of 
the  man  who  has  committed  all  the  above-mentioned  crimes,  what  is  to  be  done 
next?  Will  they  instantly  plunge  a  dagger  in  his  breast?  No,  fathers;  the  life  of  man 
is  too  important  to  be  thus  disposed  of;  they  go  to  work  with  more  decency;  the 
laws  have  committed  it,  not  to  all  sorts  of  persons,  but  exclusively  to  the  judges, 
whose  probity  and  competency  have  been  duly  tried.  And  is  one  judge  sufficient 
to  condemn  a  man  to  death?  No;  it  requires  seven  at  the  very  least;  and  of  these 
seven  there  must  not  be  one  who  has  been  injured  by  the  criminal,  lest  his  judge¬ 
ment  should  be  warped  or  corrupted  by  passion.  You  are  aware  also,  fathers,  that, 
the  more  effectually  to  secure  the  purity  of  their  minds,  they  devote  the  hours  of 
the  morning  to  these  functions.  Such  is  the  care  taken  to  prepare  them  for  the 
solemn  action  of  devoting  a  fellow-creature  to  death;  in  performing  which  they 
occupy  the  place  of  God,  whose  ministers  they  are,  appointed  to  condemn  such 
only  as  have  incurred  his  condemnation. 

For  the  same  reason,  to  act  as  faithful  administrators  of  the  divine  power  of 
taking  away  human  life,  they  are  bound  to  form  their  judgement  solely  according 
to  the  depositions  of  the  witnesses,  and  according  to  all  the  other  forms  pre¬ 
scribed  to  them;  after  which  they  can  pronounce  conscientiously  only  according 
to  law,  and  can  judge  worthy  of  death  those  only  whom  the  law  condemns  to  that 
penalty.  And  then,  fathers,  if  the  command  of  God  obliges  them  to  deliver  over  to 
punishment  the  bodies  of  the  unhappy  culprits,  the  same  divine  statute  binds 
them  to  look  after  the  interests  of  their  guilty  souls,  and  binds  them  the  more  to 
this  just  because  they  are  guilty;  so  that  they  are  not  delivered  up  to  execution  till 
after  they  have  been  afforded  the  means  of  providing  for  their  consciences.  All 
this  is  quite  fair  and  innocent;  and  yet,  such  is  the  abhorrence  of  the  Church  to 
blood  that  she  judges  those  to  be  incapable  of  ministering  at  her  altars  who  have 
borne  any  share  in  passing  or  executing  a  sentence  of  death,  accompanied  though 
it  be  with  these  religious  circumstances;  from  which  we  may  easily  conceive  what 
idea  the  Church  entertains  of  murder. 

Such,  then,  being  the  manner  in  which  human  life  is  disposed  of  by  the  legal 
forms  of  justice,  let  us  now  see  how  you  dispose  of  it.  According  to  your  modern 
system  of  legislation,  there  is  but  one  judge,  and  that  judge  is  no  other  than  the 
offended  party.  He  is  at  once  the  judge,  the  party,  and  the  executioner.  He  him¬ 
self  demands  from  himself  the  death  of  his  enemy;  he  condemns  him,  he  executes 
him  on  the  spot;  and,  without  the  least  respect  either  for  the  soul  or  the  body  of 
his  brother,  he  murders  and  damns  him  for  whom  Jesus  Christ  died;  and  all  this 
for  the  sake  of  avoiding  a  blow  on  the  cheek,  or  a  slander,  or  an  offensive  word,  or 
some  other  offence  of  a  similar  nature,  for  which,  if  a  magistrate,  in  the  exercise  of 
legitimate  authority,  were  condemning  any  to  die,  he  would  himself  be  impeached; 
for,  in  such  cases,  the  laws  are  very  far  indeed  from  condemning  any  to  death.  In 
one  word,  to  crown  the  whole  of  this  extravagance,  the  person  who  kills  his  neigh¬ 
bour  in  this  style,  without  authority  and  in  the  face  of  all  law,  contracts  no  sin  and 
commits  no  disorder,  though  he  should  be  religious  and  even  a  priest!  Where  are 
we,  fathers?  Are  these  really  religious,  and  priests,  who  talk  in  this  manner?  Are 
they  Christians?  are  they  Turks?  are  they  men?  or  are  they  demons?  And  are  these 


ii 6  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"the  mysteries  revealed  by  the  Lamb  to  his  Society"?  or  are  they  not  rather  abom¬ 
inations  suggested  by  the  Dragon  to  those  who  take  part  with  him? 

To  come  to  the  point,  with  you,  fathers,  whom  do  you  wish  to  be  taken  for? — 
for  the  children  of  the  Gospel,  or  for  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel?  You  must  be 
ranged  either  on  the  one  side  or  on  the  other;  for  there  is  no  medium  here.  "He 
that  is  not  with  Jesus  Christ  is  against  him."  Into  these  two  classes  all  mankind 
are  divided.  There  are,  according  to  St.  Augustine,  two  peoples  and  two  worlds, 
scattered  abroad  over  the  earth.  There  is  the  world  of  the  children  of  God,  who 
form  one  body,  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  king  and  the  head;  and  there  is  the 
world  at  enmity  with  God,  of  which  the  devil  is  the  king  and  the  head.  Hence 
Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  King  and  God  of  the  world,  because  he  has  everywhere 
his  subjects  and  worshippers;  and  hence  the  devil  is  also  termed  in  Scripture  the 
prince  of  this  world,  and  the  god  of  this  world,  because  he  has  everywhere  his 
agents  and  his  slaves.  Jesus  Christ  has  imposed  upon  the  Church,  which  is  his 
empire,  such  laws  as  he,  in  his  eternal  wisdom,  was  pleased  to  ordain;  and  the 
devil  has  imposed  on  the  world,  which  is  his  kingdom,  such  laws  as  he  chose  to 
establish.  Jesus  Christ  has  associated  honour  with  suffering;  the  devil  with  not- 
suffering.  Jesus  Christ  has  told  those  who  are  smitten  on  the  one  cheek  to  turn  the 
other  also;  and  the  devil  has  told  those  who  are  threatened  with  a  buffet  to  kill  the 
man  that  would  do  them  such  an  injury.  Jesus  Christ  pronounces  those  happy 
who  share  in  his  reproach;  and  the  devil  declares  those  to  be  unhappy  who  lie 
under  ignominy.  Jesus  Christ  says:  Woe  unto  you  when  men  shall  speak  well  of 
you!  and  the  devil  says:  Woe  unto  those  of  whom  the  world  does  not  speak  with 
esteem! 

Judge,  then,  fathers,  to  which  of  these  kingdoms  you  belong.  You  have  heard 
the  language  of  the  city  of  peace,  the  mystical  Jerusalem;  and  you  have  heard  the 
language  of  the  city  of  confusion,  which  Scripture  terms  "the  spiritual  Sodom." 
Which  of  these  two  languages  do  you  understand?  which  of  them  do  you  speak? 
Those  who  are  on  the  side  of  Jesus  Christ  have,  as  St.  Paul  teaches  us,  the  same 
mind  which  was  also  in  him ;  and  those  who  are  the  children  of  the  devil — ex patre 
diabolo — who  has  been  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,  according  to  the  saying  of 
Jesus  Christ,  follow  the  maxims  of  the  devil.  Let  us  hear,  therefore,  the  language  of 
your  school.  I  put  this  question  to  your  doctors:  When  a  person  has  given  me  a 
blow  on  the  cheek,  ought  I  rather  to  submit  to  the  injury  than  kill  the  offender? 
or  may  I  not  kill  the  man  in  order  to  escape  the  affront?  Kill  him  by  all  means — it 
is  quite  lawful!  exclaim,  in  one  breath,  Lessius,  Molina,  Escobar,  Reginald,  Filiu- 
tius,  Baldelle,  and  other  Jesuits.  Is  that  the  language  of  Jesus  Christ?  One  question 
more:  Would  I  lose  my  honour  by  tolerating  a  box  on  the  ear,  without  killing  the 
person  that  gave  it?  "Can  there  be  a  doubt,"  cries  Escobar,  "that  so  long  as  a  man 
suffers  another  to  live  who  has  given  him  a  buffet,  that  man  remains  without 
honour?"  Yes,  fathers,  without  that  honour  which  the  devil  transfuses,  from  his 
own  proud  spirit  into  that  of  his  proud  children.  This  is  the  honour  which  has  ever 
been  the  idol  of  worldly-minded  men.  For  the  preservation  of  this  false  glory,  of 
which  the  god  of  this  world  is  the  appropriate  dispenser,  they  sacrifice  their  lives 
by  yielding  to  the  madness  of  duelling;  their  honour,  by  exposing  themselves  to 
ignominious  punishments;  and  their  salvation,  by  involving  themselves  in  the 
peril  of  damnation — a  peril  which,  according  to  the  canons  of  the  Church,  de¬ 
prives  them  even  of  Christian  burial.  We  have  reason  to  thank  God,  however,  for 


LETTER  XV 


117 

having  enlightened  the  mind  of  our  monarch  with  ideas  much  purer  than  those  of 
your  theology.  His  edicts  bearing  so  severely  on  this  subject,  have  not  made  duel¬ 
ling  a  crime — they  only  punish  the  crime  which  is  inseparable  from  duelling.  He 
has  checked,  by  the  dread  of  his  rigid  justice,  those  who  were  not  restrained  by 
the  fear  of  the  justice  of  God;  and  his  piety  has  taught  him  that  the  honour  of 
Christians  consists  in  their  observance  of  the  mandates  of  Heaven  and  the  rules  of 
Christianity,  and  not  in  the  pursuit  of  that  phantom  which,  airy  and  unsubstantial 
as  it  is,  you  hold  to  be  a  legitimate  apology  for  murder.  Your  murderous  decisions 
being  thus  universally  detested,  it  is  highly  advisable  that  you  should  now  change 
your  sentiments,  if  not  from  religious  principle,  at  least  from  motives  of  policy. 
Prevent,  fathers,  by  a  spontaneous  condemnation  of  these  inhuman  dogmas,  the 
melancholy  consequences  which  may  result  from  them,  and  for  which  you  will  be 
responsible.  And  to  impress  your  minds  with  a  deeper  horror  at  homicide,  remem¬ 
ber  that  the  first  crime  of  fallen  man  was  a  murder,  committed  on  the  person  of  the 
first  holy  man;  that  the  greatest  crime  was  a  murder,  perpetrated  on  the  person  of 
the  King  of  saints;  and  that,  of  all  crimes,  murder  is  the  only  one  which  involves 
in  a  common  destruction  the  Church  and  the  state,  nature  and  religion. 

I  have  just  seen  the  answer  of  your  apologist  to  my  Thirteenth  Letter;  but  if  he 
has  nothing  better  to  produce  in  the  shape  of  a  reply  to  that  letter,  which  obviates 
the  greater  part  of  his  objections,  he  will  not  deserve  a  rejoinder.  I  am  sorry  to  see 
him  perpetually  digressing  from  his  subject,  to  indulge  in  rancorous  abuse  both 
of  the  living  and  the  dead.  But,  in  order  to  gain  some  credit  to  the  stories  with 
which  you  have  furnished  him,  you  should  not  have  made  him  publicly  disavow  a 
fact  so  notorious  as  that  of  the  buffet  of  Compiegne.  Certain  it  is,  fathers,  from 
the  deposition  of  the  injured  party,  that  he  received  upon  his  cheek  a  blow  from 
the  hand  of  a  Jesuit;  and  all  that  your  friends  have  been  able  to  do  for  you  has 
been  to  raise  a  doubt  whether  he  received  the  blow  with  the  back  or  the  palm  of 
the  hand,  and  to  discuss  the  question  whether  a  stroke  on  the  cheek  with  the  back 
of  the  hand  can  be  properly  denominated  a  buffet.  I  know  not  to  what  tribunal  it 
belongs  to  decide  this  point;  but  shall  content  myself,  in  the  meantime,  with  be¬ 
lieving  that  it  was,  to  say  the  very  least,  a  probable  buffet.  This  gets  me  off  with  a 
safe  conscience. 


LETTER  XV 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS,  THE  JESUITS 

November  25,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

As  your  scurrilities  are  daily  increasing,  and  as  you  are  employing  them  in  the 
merciless  abuse  of  all  pious  persons  opposed  to  your  errors,  I  feel  myself  obliged, 
for  their  sake  and  that  of  the  Church,  to  bring  out  that  grand  secret  of  your  policy, 
which  I  promised  to  disclose  some  time  ago,  in  order  that  all  may  know,  through 
means  of  your  own  maxims,  what  degree  of  credit  is  due  to  your  calumnious 
accusations. 

I  am  aware  that  those  who  are  not  very  well  acquainted  with  you  are  at  a  great 


n8  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

loss  what  to  think  on  this  subject,  as  they  find  themselves  under  the  painful 
necessity,  either  of  believing  the  incredible  crimes  with  which  you  charge  your 
opponents,  or  (what  is  equally  incredible)  of  setting  you  down  as  slanderers. 
"Indeed!”  they  exclaim,  "were  these  things  not  true,  would  clergymen  publish 
them  to  the  world — would  they  debauch  their  consciences  and  damn  themselves 
by  venting  such  libels?”  Such  is  their  way  of  reasoning,  and  thus  it  is  that  the 
palpable  proof  of  your  falsifications  coming  into  collision  with  their  opinion  of 
your  honesty,  their  minds  hang  in  a  state  of  suspense  between  the  evidence  of 
truth,  which  they  cannot  gainsay,  and  the  demands  of  charity,  which  they  would 
not  violate.  It  follows  that  since  their  high  esteem  for  you  is  the  only  thing  that 
prevents  them  from  discrediting  your  calumnies,  if  we  can  succeed  in  convincing 
them  that  you  have  quite  a  different  idea  of  calumny  from  that  which  they  suppose 
you  to  have,  and  that  you  actually  believe  that  in  blackening  and  defaming  your 
adversaries  you  are  working  out  your  own  salvation,  there  can  be  little  question 
that  the  weight  of  truth  will  determine  them  immediately  to  pay  no  regard  to 
your  accusations.  This,  fathers,  will  be  the  subject  of  the  present  letter. 

My  design  is  not  simply  to  show  that  your  writings  are  full  of  calumnies;  I 
mean  to  go  a  step  beyond  this.  It  is  quite  possible  for  a  person  to  say  a  number  of 
false  things  believing  them  to  be  true;  but  the  character  of  a  liar  implies  the  inten¬ 
tion  to  tell  lies.  Now  I  undertake  to  prove,  fathers,  that  it  is  your  deliberate  inten¬ 
tion  to  tell  lies,  and  that  it  is  both  knowingly  and  purposely  that  you  load  your 
opponents  with  crimes  of  which  you  know  them  to  be  innocent,  because  you 
believe  that  you  may  do  so  without  falling  from  a  state  of  grace.  Though  you 
doubtless  know  this  point  of  your  morality  as  well  as  I  do,  this  need  not  prevent 
me  from  telling  you  about  it;  which  I  shall  do,  were  it  for  no  other  purpose  than 
to  convince  all  men  of  its  existence,  by  showing  them  that  I  can  maintain  it  to 
your  face,  while  you  cannot  have  the  assurance  to  disavow  it,  without  confirming, 
by  that  very  disavowment,  the  charge  which  I  bring  against  you. 

The  doctrine  to  which  I  allude  is  so  common  in  your  schools  that  you  have 
maintained  it  not  only  in  your  books,  but,  such  is  your  assurance,  even  in  your 
public  theses;  as,  for  example,  in  those  delivered  at  Louvain  in  the  year  1645, 
where  it  occurs  in  the  following  terms:  "What  is  it  but  a  venial  sin  to  culminate 
and  forge  false  accusations  to  ruin  the  credit  of  those  who  speak  evil  of  us?”  So 
settled  is  this  point  among  you  that,  if  any  one  dare  to  oppose  it,  you  treat  him  as 
a  blockhead  and  a  hare-brained  idiot.  Such  was  the  way  in  which  you  treated 
Father  Quiroga,  the  German  Capuchin,  when  he  was  so  unfortunate  as  to  impugn 
the  doctrine.  The  poor  man  was  instantly  attacked  by  Dicastille,  one  of  your 
fraternity;  and  the  following  is  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  he  manages 
the  dispute:  "A  certain  rueful-visaged,  bare-footed,  cowled  friar — cucullatus  gym- 
nopoda — whom  I  do  not  choose  to  name,  had  the  boldness  to  denounce  this 
opinion,  among  some  women  and  ignorant  people,  and  to  allege  that  it  was 
scandalous  and  pernicious  against  all  good  manners,  hostile  to  the  peace  of  states 
and  societies,  and,  in  short,  contrary  to  the  judgement  not  only  of  all  Catholic 
doctors,  but  of  all  true  Catholics.  But  in  opposition  to  him  I  maintained,  as  I  do 
still,  that  calumny,  when  employed  against  a  calumniator,  though  it  should  be  a 
falsehood,  is  not  a  mortal  sin,  either  against  justice  or  charity:  and,  to  prove  the 
point,  I  referred  him  to  the  whole  body  of  our  fathers,  and  to  whole  universities, 
exclusively  composed  of  them  whom  I  had  consulted  on  the  subject;  and  among 


LETTER  XV 


"9 

others  the  reverend  Father  John  Gans,  confessor  to  the  Emperor;  the  reverend 
Father  Daniel  Bastele,  confessor  to  the  Archduke  Leopold;  Father  Henri,  who 
was  preceptor  to  these  two  princes;  all  the  public  and  ordinary  professors  of  the 
university  of  Vienna”  (wholly  composed  of  Jesuits);  "all  the  professors  of  the 
university  of  Gratz"  (all  Jesuits);  "all  the  professors  of  the  university  of  Prague" 
(where  Jesuits  are  the  masters); — "from  all  of  whom  I  have  in  my  possession 
approbations  of  my  opinions,  written  and  signed  with  their  own  hands;  besides 
having  on  my  side  the  reverend  Father  Panalossa,  a  Jesuit,  preacher  to  the  Em¬ 
peror  and  the  King  of  Spain;  Father  Pilliceroli,  a  Jesuit,  and  many  others,  who 
had  all  judged  this  opinion  to  be  probable,  before  our  dispute  began."  You 
perceive,  fathers,  that  there  are  few  of  your  opinions  which  you  have  been  at  more 
pains  to  establish  than  the  present,  as  indeed  there  were  few  of  them  of  which  you 
stood  more  in  need.  For  this  reason,  doubtless,  you  have  authenticated  it  so  well 
that  the  casuists  appeal  to  it  as  an  indubitable  principle.  "There  can  be  no  doubt," 
says  Caramuel,  "that  it  is  a  probable  opinion  that  we  contract  no  mortal  sin  by 
calumniating  another,  in  order  to  preserve  our  own  reputation.  For  it  is  main¬ 
tained  by  more  than  twenty  grave  doctors,  by  Gaspard  Hurtado,  and  Dicastille, 
Jesuits,  &c.;  so  that,  were  this  doctrine  not  probable,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find 
any  one  such  in  the  whole  compass  of  theology." 

Wretched  indeed  must  that  theology  be,  and  rotten  to  the  very  core,  which, 
unless  it  has  been  decided  to  be  safe  in  conscience  to  defame  our  neighbor’s 
character  to  preserve  our  own,  can  hardly  boast  of  a  safe  decision  on  any  other 
point!  How  natural  is  it,  fathers,  that  those  who  hold  this  principle  should  oc¬ 
casionally  put  it  in  practice!  The  corrupt  propensity  of  mankind  leans  so  strongly 
in  that  direction  of  itself  that,  the  obstacle  of  conscience  once  being  removed,  it 
would  be  folly  to  suppose  that  it  will  not  burst  forth  with  all  its  native  impetu¬ 
osity.  If  you  desire  an  example  of  this,  Caramuel  will  furnish  you  with  one  that 
occurs  in  the  same  passage:  "This  maxim  of  Father  Dicastille,"  he  says,  "having 
been  communicated  by  a  German  countess  to  the  daughters  of  the  Empress,  the 
belief  thus  impressed  on  their  minds  that  calumny  was  only  a  venial  sin,  gave  rise 
in  the  course  of  a  few  days  to  such  an  immense  number  of  false  and  scandalous 
tales  that  the  whole  court  was  thrown  into  a  flame  and  filled  with  alarm.  It  is  easy, 
indeed,  to  conceive  what  a  fine  use  these  ladies  would  make  of  the  new  light  they 
had  acquired.  Matters  proceeded  to  such  a  length,  that  it  was  found  necessary  to 
call  in  the  assistance  of  a  worthy  Capuchin  friar,  a  man  of  exemplary  life,  called 
Father  Quiroga"  (the  very  man  whom  Dicastille  rails  at  so  bitterly),  "who  assured 
them  that  the  maxim  was  most  pernicious,  especially  among  women,  and  was  at 
the  greatest  pains  to  prevail  upon  the  Empress  to  abolish  the  practice  of  it  en¬ 
tirely."  We  have  no  reason,  therefore,  to  be  surprised  at  the  bad  effects  of  this 
doctrine;  on  the  contrary,  the  wonder  would  be  if  it  had  failed  to  produce  them. 
Self-love  is  always  ready  enough  to  whisper  in  our  ear,  when  we  are  attacked,  that 
we  suffer  wrongfully;  and  more  particularly  in  your  case,  fathers,  whom  vanity 
has  blinded  so  egregiously  as  to  make  you  believe  that  to  wound  the  honour  of 
your  Society  is  to  wound  that  of  the  Church.  There  would  have  been  good 
ground  to  look  on  it  as  something  miraculous,  if  you  had  /zo/ reduced  this  maxim 
to  practice.  Those  who  do  not  know  you  are  ready  to  say:  How  could  these  good 
fathers  slander  their  enemies,  when  they  cannot  do  so  but  at  the  expense  of  their 
own  salvation?  But,  if  they  knew  you  better,  the  question  would  be:  How  could 


120 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

these  good  fathers  forego  the  advantage  of  decrying  their  enemies,  when  they  have 
it  in  their  power  to  do  so  without  hazarding  their  salvation?  Let  none,  therefore, 
henceforth  be  surprised  to  find  the  Jesuits  calumniators;  they  can  exercise  this 
vocation  with  a  safe  conscience;  there  is  no  obstacle  in  heaven  or  on  earth  to 
prevent  them.  In  virtue  of  the  credit  they  have  acquired  in  the  world,  they  can 
practise  defamation  without  dreading  the  justice  of  mortals;  and,  on  the  strength 
of  their  self-assumed  authority  in  matters  of  conscience,  they  have  invented  max¬ 
ims  for  enabling  them  to  do  it  without  any  fear  of  the  justice  of  God. 

This,  fathers,  is  the  fertile  source  of  your  base  slanders.  On  this  principle  was 
Father  Brisacier  led  to  scatter  his  calumnies  about  him,  with  such  zeal  as  to  draw 
down  on  his  head  the  censure  of  the  late  Archbishop  of  Paris.  Actuated  by  the 
same  motives,  Father  D’Anjou  launched  his  invectives  from  the  pulpit  of  the 
Church  of  St.  Benedict  in  Paris  on  the  8th  of  March,  1655,  against  those  honour¬ 
able  gentlemen  who  were  intrusted  with  the  charitable  funds  raised  for  the  poor 
of  Picardy  and  Champagne,  to  which  they  themselves  had  largely  contributed; 
and,  uttering  a  base  falsehood,  calculated  (if  your  slanders  had  been  considered 
worthy  of  any  credit)  to  dry  up  the  stream  of  that  charity,  he  had  the  assurance  to 
say,  "that  he  knew,  from  good  authority,  that  certain  persons  had  diverted  that 
money  from  its  proper  use,  to  employ  it  against  the  Church  and  the  State";  a 
calumny  which  obliged  the  curate  of  the  parish,  who  is  a  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne, 
to  mount  the  pulpit  the  very  next  day,  in  order  to  give  it  the  lie  direct.  To  the 
same  source  must  be  traced  the  conduct  of  your  Father  Crasset,  who  preached 
calumny  at  such  a  furious  rate  in  Orleans  that  the  Archbishop  of  that  place  was 
under  the  necessity  of  interdicting  him  as  a  public  slanderer.  In  this  mandate, 
dated  the  9th  of  September  last,  his  lordship  declares:  "That  whereas  he  had  been 
informed  that  Brother  Jean  Crasset,  priest  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  had  delivered 
from  the  pulpit  a  discourse  filled  with  falsehoods  and  calumnies  against  the  ec¬ 
clesiastics  of  this  city,  falsely  and  maliciously  charging  them  with  maintaining 
impious  and  heretical  propositions,  such  as:  That  the  commandments  of  God  are 
impracticable;  that  internal  grace  is  irresistible;  that  Jesus  Christ  did  not  die  for 
all  men;  and  others  of  a  similar  kind,  condemned  by  Innocent  X:  he  therefore 
hereby  interdicts  the  aforesaid  Crasset  from  preaching  in  his  diocese,  and  forbids 
all  his  people  to  hear  him,  on  pain  of  mortal  disobedience."  The  above,  fathers, 
is  your  ordinary  accusation,  and  generally  among  the  first  that  you  bring  against 
all  whom  it  is  your  interest  to  denounce.  And,  although  you  should  find  it  as 
impossible  to  substantiate  the  charge  against  any  of  them,  as  Father  Crasset  did  in 
the  case  of  the  clergy  of  Orleans,  your  peace  of  conscience  will  not  be  in  the  least 
disturbed  on  that  account;  for  you  believe  that  this  mode  of  calumniating  your 
adversaries  is  permitted  you  with  such  certainty  that  you  have  no  scruple  to  avow 
it  in  the  most  public  manner,  and  in  the  face  of  a  whole  city. 

A  remarkable  proof  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  dispute  you  had  with  M.  Puys, 
curate  of  St.  Nisier  at  Lyons;  and  the  story  exhibits  so  complete  an  illustration  of 
your  spirit  that  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  relating  some  of  its  leading  circum¬ 
stances.  You  know,  fathers,  that,  in  the  year  1649,  M.  Puys  translated  into  French 
an  excellent  book,  written  by  another  Capuchin  friar,  On  the  duty  which  Christians 
oive  to  their  own  parishes ,  against  those  that  would  lead  them  away  from  them ,  without 
using  a  single  invective,  or  pointing  to  any  monk  or  any  order  of  monks  in  par¬ 
ticular.  Your  fathers,  however,  were  pleased  to  put  the  cap  on  their  own  heads; 


LETTER  XV 


1 2  I 


and  without  any  respect  to  an  aged  pastor,  a  judge  in  the  Primacy  of  France,  and 
a  man  who  was  held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  the  whole  city,  Father  Alby  wrote  a 
furious  tract  against  him,  which  you  sold  in  your  own  church  upon  Assumption 
Day;  in  which  book,  among  other  various  charges,  he  accused  him  of  having 
"made  himself  scandalous  by  his  gallantries,"  described  him  as  suspected  of  hav¬ 
ing  no  religion,  as  a  heretic,  excommunicated,  and,  in  short,  worthy  of  the  stake. 
To  this  M.  Puys  made  a  reply;  and  Father  Alby,  in  a  second  publication,  sup¬ 
ported  his  former  allegations.  Now,  fathers,  is  it  not  a  clear  point  either  that  you 
were  calumniators,  or  that  you  believed  all  that  you  alleged  against  that  worthy 
priest  to  be  true;  and  that,  on  this  latter  assumption,  it  became  you  to  see  him 
purified  from  all  these  abominations  before  judging  him  worthy  of  your  friend¬ 
ship?  Let  us  see,  then,  what  happened  at  the  accommodation  of  the  dispute, 
which  took  place  in  the  presence  of  a  great  number  of  the  principal  inhabitants 
of  the  town  on  the  25th  of  September,  1650.  Before  all  these  witnesses  M.  Puys 
made  a  declaration,  which  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  this:  "That  what  he  had 
written  was  not  directed  against  the  fathers  of  the  Society  of  Jesus;  that  he  had 
spoken  in  general  of  those  who  alienated  the  faithful  from  their  parishes,  without 
meaning  by  that  to  attack  the  Society;  and  that,  so  far  from  having  such  an  inten¬ 
tion,  the  Society  was  the  object  of  his  esteem  and  affection."  By  virtue  of  these 
words  alone,  without  either  retraction  or  absolution,  M.  Puys  recovered,  all  at 
once,  from  his  apostasy,  his  scandals,  and  his  excommunication;  and  Father  Alby 
immediately  thereafter  addressed  him  in  the  following  express  terms:  "Sir,  it  was 
in  consequence  of  my  believing  that  you  meant  to  attack  the  Society  to  which  I 
have  the  honour  to  belong  that  I  was  induced  to  take  up  the  pen  in  its  defence; 
and  I  considered  that  the  mode  of  reply  which  I  adopted  was  such  as  I  was  permitted 
to  employ.  But,  on  a  better  understanding  of  your  intention,  I  am  now  free  to 
declare  that  there  is  nothing  in  your  work  to  prevent  me  from  regarding  you  as  a 
man  of  genius,  enlightened  in  judgement,  profound  and  orthodox  in  doctrine,  and 
irreproachable  in  manners;  in  one  word,  as  a  pastor  worthy  of  your  Church.  It  is 
with  much  pleasure  that  I  make  this  declaration,  and  I  beg  these  gentlemen  to 
remember  what  I  have  now  said." 

They  do  remember  it,  fathers;  and,  allow  me  to  add,  they  were  more  scandal¬ 
ized  by  the  reconciliation  than  by  the  quarrel.  For  who  can  fail  to  admire  this 
speech  of  Father  Alby?  He  does  not  say  that  he  retracts,  in  consequence  of  having 
learnt  that  a  change  had  taken  place  in  the  faith  and  manners  of  M.  Puys,  but 
solely  because,  having  understood  that  he  had  no  intention  of  attacking  your  Society , 
there  was  nothing  further  to  prevent  him  from  regarding  the  author  as  a  good 
Catholic.  He  did  not  then  believe  him  to  be  actually  a  heretic!  And  yet,  after 
having,  contrary  to  his  conviction,  accused  him  of  this  crime,  he  will  not  acknowl¬ 
edge  he  was  in  the  wrong,  but  has  the  hardihood  to  say  that  he  considered  the 
method  he  adopted  to  be  "such  as  he  was  permitted  to  employ!" 

What  can  you  possibly  mean,  fathers,  by  so  publicly  avowing  the  fact  that  you 
measure  the  faith  and  the  virtue  of  men  only  by  the  sentiments  they  entertain 
towards  your  Society?  Had  you  no  apprehension  of  making  yourselves  pass,  by 
your  own  acknowledgement,  as  a  band  of  swindlers  and  slanderers?  What,  fathers! 
must  the  same  individual  without  undergoing  any  personal  transformation,  but 
simply  according  as  you  judge  him  to  have  honoured  or  assailed  your  commun¬ 
ity,  be  "pious"  or  "impious,"  "irreproachable"  or  "excommunicated,"  "a  pastor 


122 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

worthy  of  the  Church,”  or  "worthy  of  the  stake”;  in  short,  "a  Catholic”  or  "a 
heretic”?  To  attack  your  Society  and  to  be  a  heretic  are,  therefore,  in  your  lan¬ 
guage,  convertible  terms!  An  odd  sort  of  heresy  this,  fathers!  And  so  it  would 
appear  that,  when  we  see  many  good  Catholics  branded,  in  your  writings,  by  the 
name  of  heretics ,  it  means  nothing  more  than  that  you  think  they  attack  you!  It  is 
well,  fathers,  that  we  understand  this  strange  dialect,  according  to  which  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  I  must  be  a  great  heretic.  It  is  in  this  sense,  then,  that  you  so 
often  favour  me  with  this  appellation!  Your  sole  reason  for  cutting  me  off  from 
the  Church  is  because  you  conceive  that  my  letters  have  done  you  harm;  and, 
accordingly,  all  that  I  have  to  do,  in  order  to  become  a  good  Catholic,  is  either  to 
approve  of  your  extravagant  morality,  or  to  convince  you  that  my  sole  aim  in 
exposing  it  has  been  your  advantage.  The  former  I  could  not  do  without  re¬ 
nouncing  every  sentiment  of  piety  that  I  ever  possessed;  and  the  latter  you  will 
be  slow  to  acknowledge  till  you  are  well  cured  of  your  errors.  Thus  am  I  involved 
in  heresy,  after  a  very  singular  fashion;  for,  the  purity  of  my  faith  being  of  no 
avail  for  my  exculpation,  I  have  no  means  of  escaping  from  the  charge,  except 
either  by  turning  traitor  to  my  own  conscience,  or  by  reforming  yours.  Till  one 
or  other  of  these  events  happen,  I  must  remain  a  reprobate  and  a  slanderer;  and, 
let  me  be  ever  so  faithful  in  my  citations  from  your  writings,  you  will  go  about 
crying  everywhere:  "What  an  instrument  of  the  devil  must  that  man  be,  to  impute 
to  us  things  of  which  there  is  not  the  least  mark  or  vestige  to  be  found  in  our 
books!”  And,  by  doing  so,  you  will  only  be  acting  in  conformity  with  your  fixed 
maxim  and  your  ordinary  practice:  to  such  latitude  does  your  privilege  of  telling 
lies  extend!  Allow  me  to  give  you  an  example  of  this,  which  I  select  on  purpose; 
it  will  give  me  an  opportunity  of  replying,  at  the  same  time,  to  your  ninth  Im¬ 
posture:  for,  in  truth,  they  only  deserve  to  be  refuted  in  passing. 

About  ten  or  twelve  years  ago,  you  were  accused  of  holding  that  maxim  of 
Father  Bauny,  "that  it  is  permissible  to  seek  directly  ( primo  et  per  se)  a  proximate 
occasion  of  sin,  for  the  spiritual  or  temporal  good  of  ourselves  or  our  neighbour” 
(tr.  4,  q.  14);  as  an  example  of  which,  he  observes:  "It  is  allowable  to  visit  in¬ 
famous  places,  for  the  purpose  of  converting  abandoned  females,  even  although 
the  practice  should  be  very  likely  to  lead  into  sin,  as  in  the  case  of  one  who  has 
found  from  experience  that  he  has  frequently  yielded  to  their  temptations.”  What 
answer  did  your  Father  Caussin  give  to  this  charge  in  the  year  1644?  "Just  let  any 
one  look  at  the  passage  in  Father  Bauny,”  said  he,  "let  him  peruse  the  page,  the 
margins,  the  preface,  the  appendix,  in  short,  the  whole  book  from  beginning  to 
end,  and  he  will  not  discover  the  slightest  vestige  of  such  a  sentence,  which  could 
only  enter  into  the  mind  of  a  man  totally  devoid  of  conscience,  and  could  hardly 
have  been  forged  by  any  other  but  an  instrument  of  Satan.”  Father  Pintereau  talks 
in  the  same  style:  "That  man  must  be  lost  to  all  conscience  who  would  teach  so 
detestable  a  doctrine;  but  he  must  be  worse  than  a  devil  who  attributes  it  to 
Father  Bauny.  Reader,  there  is  not  a  single  trace  or  vestige  of  it  in  the  whole  of 
his  book.”  Who  would  not  believe  that  persons  talking  in  this  tone  have  good 
reason  to  complain,  and  that  Father  Bauny  has,  in  very  deed,  been  misrepresented? 
Have  you  ever  asserted  anything  against  me  in  stronger  terms?  And,  after  such  a 
solemn  asseveration,  that  "there  was  not  a  single  trace  or  vestige  of  it  in  the  whole 
book,”  who  would  imagine  that  the  passage  is  to  be  found,  word  for  word,  in  the 
place  referred  to? 


LETTER  XV 


I23 

Truly,  fathers,  if  this  be  the  means  of  securing  your  reputation,  so  long  as  you 
remain  unanswered,  it  is  also,  unfortunately,  the  means  of  destroying  it  forever, 
so  soon  as  an  answer  makes  its  appearance.  For  so  certain  is  it  that  you  told  a  lie 
at  the  period  before  mentioned,  that  you  make  no  scruple  of  acknowledging,  in 
your  apologies  of  the  present  day,  that  the  maxim  in  question  is  to  be  found  in 
the  very  place  which  had  been  quoted;  and,  what  is  most  extraordinary,  the  same 
maxim  which,  twelve  years  ago,  was  "detestable,”  has  now  become  so  innocent 
that  in  your  ninth  Imposture  (p.  io)  you  accuse  me  of  "ignorance  and  malice,  in 
quarrelling  with  Father  Bauny  for  an  opinion  which  has  not  been  rejected  in  the 
School.”  What  an  advantage  it  is,  fathers,  to  have  to  do  with  people  that  deal  in 
contradictions!  I  need  not  the  aid  of  any  but  yourselves  to  confute  you;  for  I 
have  only  two  things  to  show:  first,  That  the  maxim  in  dispute  is  a  worthless  one; 
and,  secondly,  That  it  belongs  to  Father  Bauny;  and  I  can  prove  both  by  your 
own  confession.  In  1644,  you  confessed  that  it  was  "detestable”;  and,  in  1656, 
you  avow  that  it  is  Father  Bauny’s.  This  double  acknowledgement  completely 
justifies  me,  fathers;  but  it  does  more,  it  discovers  the  spirit  of  your  policy.  For, 
tell  me,  pray,  what  is  the  end  you  propose  to  yourselves  in  your  writings?  Is  it  to 
speak  with  honesty?  No,  fathers;  that  cannot  be,  since  your  defences  destroy  each 
other.  Is  it  to  follow  the  truth  of  the  faith?  As  little  can  this  be  your  end;  since, 
according  to  your  own  showing,  you  authorize  a  "detestable”  maxim.  But,  be  it 
observed  that  while  you  said  the  maxim  was  "detestable,”  you  denied,  at  the 
same  time,  that  it  was  the  property  of  Father  Bauny,  and  so  he  was  innocent;  and 
when  you  now  acknowledge  it  to  be  his,  you  maintain,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  is 
a  good  maxim,  and  so  he  is  innocent  still.  The  innocence  of  this  monk,  therefore, 
being  the  only  thing  common  to  your  two  answers,  it  is  obvious  that  this  was  the 
sole  end  which  you  aimed  at  in  putting  them  forth;  and  that,  when  you  say  of  one 
and  the  same  maxim,  that  it  is  in  a  certain  book,  and  that  it  is  not;  that  it  is  a  good 
maxim,  and  that  it  is  a  bad  one;  your  sole  object  is  to  whitewash  some  one  or 
other  of  your  fraternity;  judging  in  the  matter,  not  according  to  the  truth,  which 
never  changes,  but  according  to  your  own  interest,  which  is  varying  every  hour. 
Can  I  say  more  than  this?  You  perceive  that  it  amounts  to  a  demonstration;  but  it 
is  far  from  being  a  singular  instance,  and,  to  omit  a  multitude  of  examples  of  the 
same  thing,  I  believe  you  will  be  contented  with  my  quoting  only  one  more. 

You  have  been  charged,  at  different  times,  with  another  proposition  of  the 
same  Father  Bauny,  namely:  "That  absolution  ought  to  be  neither  denied  nor 
deferred  in  the  case  of  those  who  live  in  the  habits  of  sin  against  the  law  of  God, 
of  nature,  and  of  the  Church,  although  there  should  be  no  apparent  prospect  of 
future  amendment — etsi  emendationis  futurce  spes  nulla  appareat."  Now,  with  regard 
to  this  maxim,  I  beg  you  to  tell  me,  fathers,  which  of  the  apologies  that  have  been 
made  for  it  is  most  to  your  liking;  whether  that  of  Father  Pintereau,  or  that  of 
Father  Brisacier,  both  of  your  Society,  who  have  defended  Father  Bauny,  in  your 
two  different  modes — the  one  by  condemning  the  proposition,  but  disavowing  it 
to  be  Father  Bauny’s;  the  other  by  allowing  it  to  be  Father  Bauny’s,  but  vindicat¬ 
ing  the  proposition?  Listen,  then,  to  their  respective  deliverances.  Here  comes 
that  of  Father  Pintereau  (p.  8):  "I  know  not  what  can  be  called  a  transgression  of 
all  the  bounds  of  modesty,  a  step  beyond  all  ordinary  impudence,  if  the  imputa¬ 
tion  to  Father  Bauny  of  so  damnable  a  doctrine  is  not  worthy  of  that  designation. 
Judge,  reader,  of  the  baseness  of  that  calumny;  see  what  sort  of  creatures  the 


I24  the  provincial  letters 

Jesuits  have  to  deal  with;  and  say  if  the  author  of  so  foul  a  slander  does  not 
deserve  to  be  regarded  from  henceforth  as  the  interpreter  of  the  father  of  lies.” 
Now  for  Father  Brisacier:  "It  is  true,  Father  Bauny  says  what  you  allege.”  (That 
gives  the  lie  direct  to  Father  Pintereau,  plain  enough.)  "But,”  adds  he,  in  defence 
of  Father  Bauny,  "if  you  who  find  so  much  fault  with  this  sentiment  wait,  when 
a  penitent  lies  at  your  feet,  till  his  guardian  angel  find  security  for  his  rights  in  the 
inheritance  of  heaven;  if  you  wait  till  God  the  Father  swear  by  himself  that  David 
told  a  lie,  when  he  said  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  'all  men  are  liars,’  fallible  and 
perfidious;  if  you  wait  till  the  penitent  be  no  longer  a  liar,  no  longer  frail  and 
changeable,  no  longer  a  sinner,  like  other  men;  if  you  wait,  I  say,  till  then,  you 
will  never  apply  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  a  single  soul.” 

What  do  you  really  think  now,  fathers,  of  these  impious  and  extravagant  ex¬ 
pressions?  According  to  them,  if  we  would  wait  "till  there  be  some  hope  of 
amendment”  in  sinners  before  granting  their  absolution,  we  must  wait  "till  God 
the  Father  swear  by  himself,”  that  they  will  never  fall  into  sin  any  more!  What, 
fathers!  is  no  distinction  to  be  made  between  hope  and  certainty?  How  injurious  is 
it  to  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ  to  maintain  that  it  is  so  impossible  for  Christians 
ever  to  escape  from  crimes  against  the  laws  of  God,  nature,  and  the  Church,  that 
such  a  thing  cannot  be  looked  for,  without  supposing  "that  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
told  a  lie” ;  and,  if  absolution  is  not  granted  to  those  who  give  no  hope  of  amend¬ 
ment,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  useless,  forsooth,  and  "would  never  be 
applied  to  a  single  soul!”  To  what  a  sad  pass  have  you  come,  fathers  by  this 
extravagant  desire  of  upholding  the  glory  of  your  authors,  when  you  can  find 
only  two  ways  of  justifying  them — by  imposture  or  by  impiety;  and  when  the 
most  innocent  mode  by  which  you  can  extricate  yourselves  is  by  the  barefaced 
denial  of  facts  as  patent  as  the  light  of  day! 

This  may  perhaps  account  for  your  having  recourse  so  frequently  to  that  very 
convenient  practice.  But  this  does  not  complete  the  sum  of  your  accomplish¬ 
ments  in  the  art  of  self-defence.  To  render  your  opponents  odious,  you  have  had 
recourse  to  the  forging  of  documents,  such  as  that  Letter  of  a  Minister  to  M. 
Arnauld ,  which  you  circulated  through  all  Paris,  to  induce  the  belief  that  the  work 
on  Frequent  Communion ,  which  had  been  approved  by  so  many  bishops  and  doctors, 
but  which,  to  say  the  truth,  was  rather  against  you,  had  been  concocted  through 
secret  intelligence  with  the  ministers  of  Charenton.  At  other  times,  you  attribute 
to  your  adversaries  writings  full  of  impiety,  such  as  the  Circular  Letter  of  the 
Jansenistsy  the  absurd  style  of  which  renders  the  fraud  too  gross  to  be  swallowed, 
and  palpably  betrays  the  malice  of  your  Father  Meynier,  who  has  the  impudence 
to  make  use  of  it  for  supporting  his  foulest  slanders.  Sometimes,  again,  you  will 
quote  books  which  were  never  in  existence,  such  as  The  Constitution  of  the  Holy 
Sacramenty  from  which  you  extract  passages,  fabricated  at  pleasure  and  calculated 
to  make  the  hair  on  the  heads  of  certain  good  simple  people,  who  have  no  idea  of 
the  effrontery  with  which  you  can  invent  and  propagate  falsehoods,  actually  to 
bristle  with  horror.  There  is  not,  indeed,  a  single  species  of  calumny  which  you 
have  not  put  into  requisition;  nor  is  it  possible  that  the  maxim  which  excuses  the 
vice  could  have  been  lodged  in  better  hands. 

But  those  sorts  of  slander  to  which  we  have  adverted  are  rather  too  easily  dis¬ 
credited;  and,  accordingly,  you  have  others  of  a  more  subtle  character,  in  which 
you  abstain  from  specifying  particulars,  in  order  to  preclude  your  opponents  from 


LETTER  XV 


125 

getting  any  hold,  or  finding  any  means  of  reply;  as,  for  example,  when  Father 
Brisacier  says  that  "his  enemies  are  guilty  of  abominable  crimes,  which  he  does  not 
choose  to  mention .’’  Would  you  not  think  it  were  impossible  to  prove  a  charge  so 
vague  as  this  to  be  a  calumny?  An  able  man,  however,  has  found  out  the  secret 
of  it;  and  it  is  a  Capuchin  again,  fathers.  You  are  unlucky  in  Capuchins,  as  times 
now  go;  and  I  foresee  that  you  may  be  equally  so  some  other  time  in  Benedictines. 
The  name  of  this  Capuchin  is  Father  Valerien,  of  the  house  of  the  Counts  of 
Magnis.  You  shall  hear,  by  this  brief  narrative,  how  he  answered  your  calumnies. 
He  had  happily  succeeded  in  converting  Prince  Ernest,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse- 
Rheinsfelt.  Your  fathers,  however,  seized,  as  it  would  appear,  with  some  chagrin 
at  seeing  a  sovereign  prince  converted  without  their  having  had  any  hand  in  it, 
immediately  wrote  a  book  against  the  friar  (for  good  men  are  everywhere  the 
objects  of  your  persecution),  in  which,  by  falsifying  one  of  his  passages,  they 
ascribed  to  him  an  heretical  doctrine.  They  also  circulated  a  letter  against  him,  in 
which  they  said:  "Ah,  we  have  such  things  to  disclose"  (without  mentioning 
what)  "as  will  gall  you  to  the  quick!  If  you  don’t  take  care,  we  shall  be  forced  to 
inform  the  pope  and  the  cardinals  about  it."  This  manoeuvre  was  pretty  well 
executed;  and  I  doubt  not,  fathers,  but  you  may  speak  in  the  same  style  of  me; 
but  take  warning  from  the  manner  in  which  the  friar  answered  in  his  book,  which 
was  printed  last  year  at  Prague  (p.  112,  &c.):  "What  shall  I  do,"  he  says,  "to 
counteract  these  vague  and  indefinite  insinuations?  How  shall  I  refute  charges 
which  have  never  been  specified?  Here,  however,  is  my  plan.  I  declare,  loudly  and 
publicly,  to  those  who  have  threatened  me,  that  they  are  notorious  slanderers  and 
most  impudent  liars,  if  they  do  not  discover  these  crimes  before  the  whole  world. 
Come  forth,  then,  mine  accusers!  and  publish  your  lies  upon  the  house-tops,  in 
place  of  telling  them  in  the  ear,  and  keeping  yourselves  out  of  harm’s  way  by 
telling  them  in  the  ear.  Some  may  think  this  a  scandalous  way  of  managing  the 
dispute.  It  was  scandalous,  I  grant,  to  impute  to  me  such  a  crime  as  heresy,  and  to 
fix  upon  me  the  suspicion  of  many  others  besides;  but,  by  asserting  my  innocence, 

I  am  merely  applying  the  proper  remedy  to  the  scandal  already  in  existence." 

Truly,  fathers,  never  were  your  reverences  more  roughly  handled,  and  never 
was  a  poor  man  more  completely  vindicated.  Since  you  have  made  no  reply  to 
such  a  peremptory  challenge,  it  must  be  concluded  that  you  are  unable  to  dis¬ 
cover  the  slightest  shadow  of  criminality  against  him.  You  have  had  very  awk¬ 
ward  scrapes  to  get  through  occasionally;  but  experience  has  made  you  nothing 
the  wiser.  For,  some  time  after  this  happened,  you  attacked  the  same  individual 
in  a  similar  strain,  upon  another  subject;  and  he  defended  himself  after  the  same 
spirited  manner,  as  follows:  "This  class  of  men,  who  have  become  an  intolerable 
nuisance  to  the  whole  of  Christendom,  aspire,  under  the  pretext  of  good  works, 
to  dignities  and  domination,  by  perverting  to  their  own  ends  almost  all  laws, 
human  and  divine,  natural  and  revealed.  They  gain  over  to  their  side,  by  their 
doctrine,  by  the  force  of  fear,  or  of  persuasion,  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  whose 
authority  they  abuse  for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  their  detestable  intrigues. 
Meanwhile  their  enterprises,  criminal  as  they  are,  are  neither  punished  nor  sup¬ 
pressed;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  rewarded;  and  the  villains  go  about  them  with 
as  little  fear  or  remorse  as  if  they  were  doing  God  service.  Everybody  is  aware  of 
the  fact  I  have  now  stated;  everybody  speaks  of  it  with  execration;  but  few  are 
found  capable  of  opposing  a  despotism  so  powerful.  This,  however,  is  wFhat  I 


126  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

have  done.  I  have  already  curbed  their  insolence;  and,  by  the  same  means,  I  shall 
curb  it  again.  I  declare,  then,  that  they  are  most  impudent  liars — mentiris  impudentis- 
sime.  If  the  charges  they  have  brought  against  me  be  true,  let  them  prove  it; 
otherwise  they  stand  convicted  of  falsehood,  aggravated  by  the  grossest  effron¬ 
tery.  Their  procedure  in  this  case  will  show  who  has  the  right  upon  his  side.  I 
desire  all  men  to  take  a  particular  observation  of  it;  and  beg  to  remark,  in  the 
meantime,  that  this  precious  cabal,  who  will  not  suffer  the  most  trifling  charge 
which  they  can  possibly  repel  to  lie  upon  them,  made  a  show  of  enduring,  with 
great  patience,  those  from  which  they  cannot  vindicate  themselves,  and  conceal, 
under  a  counterfeit  virtue,  their  real  impotency.  My  object,  therefore,  in  provok¬ 
ing  their  modesty  by  this  sharp  retort,  is  to  let  the  plainest  people  understand 
that,  if  my  enemies  hold  their  peace,  their  forbearance  must  be  ascribed,  not  to 
the  meekness  of  their  natures,  but  to  the  power  of  a  guilty  conscience.”  He  con¬ 
cludes  with  the  following  sentence:  "These  gentry,  whose  history  is  well  known 
throughout  the  whole  world,  are  so  glaringly  iniquitous  in  their  measures,  and 
have  become  so  insolent  in  their  impunity,  that  if  I  did  not  detest  their  conduct, 
and  publicly  express  my  detestation  too,  not  merely  for  my  own  vindication,  but 
to  guard  the  simple  against  its  seducing  influence,  I  must  have  renounced  my 
allegiance  to  Jesus  Christ  and  his  Church.” 

Reverend  fathers,  there  is  no  room  for  tergiversation.  You  must  pass  for  con¬ 
victed  slanderers,  and  take  comfort  in  your  old  maxim  that  calumny  is  no  crime. 
This  honest  friar  has  discovered  the  secret  of  shutting  your  mouths;  and  it  must 
be  employed  on  all  occasions  when  you  accuse  people  without  proof.  We  have 
only  to  reply  to  each  slander  as  it  appears,  in  the  words  of  the  Capuchin:  "Mentiris 
impudentissime — You  are  most  impudent  liars.”  For  instance,  what  better  answer 
does  Father  Brisacier  deserve  when  he  says  of  his  opponents  that  they  are  "the 
gates  of  hell;  the  devil’s  bishops;  persons  devoid  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity;  the 
builders  of  Antichrist’s  exchequer”;  adding,  "I  say  this  of  him,  not  by  way  of 
insult,  but  from  deep  conviction  of  its  truth”?  Who  would  be  at  the  pains  to 
demonstrate  that  he  is  not  "a  gate  of  hell,”  and  that  he  has  no  concern  with  "the 
building  up  of  Antichrist’s  exchequer”? 

In  like  manner,  what  reply  is  due  to  all  the  vague  speeches  of  this  sort  which 
are  to  be  found  in  your  books  and  advertisements  on  my  letters;  such  as  the 
following,  for  example:  "That  restitutions  have  been  converted  to  private  uses, 
and  thereby  creditors  have  been  reduced  to  beggary;  that  bags  of  money  have 
been  offered  to  learned  monks,  who  declined  the  bribe;  that  benefices  are  con¬ 
ferred  for  the  purpose  of  disseminating  heresies  against  the  faith;  that  pensioners 
are  kept  in  the  houses  of  the  most  eminent  churchmen,  and  in  the  courts  of 
sovereigns;  that  I  also  am  a  pensioner  of  Port-Royal;  and  that,  before  writing  my 
letters,  I  had  composed  romances ” — I,  who  never  read  one  in  my  life,  and  who  do 
not  know  so  much  as  the  names  of  those  which  your  apologist  has  published? 
What  can  be  said  in  reply  to  all  this,  fathers,  if  you  do  not  mention  the  names  of 
all  these  persons  you  refer  to,  their  words,  the  time,  and  the  place,  except — Men¬ 
tiris  impudentissime?  You  should  either  be  silent  altogether,  or  relate  and  prove  all 
the  circumstances,  as  I  did  when  I  told  you  the  anecdotes  of  Father  Alby  and  John 
d’Alba.  Otherwise,  you  will  hurt  none  but  yourselves.  Your  numerous  fables 
might,  perhaps,  have  done  you  some  service,  before  your  principles  were  known; 
but  now  that  the  whole  has  been  brought  to  light,  when  you  begin  to  whisper  as 


LETTER  XVI 


127 

usual,  "A  man  of  honor,  who  desired  us  to  conceal  his  name,  has  told  us  some 
horrible  stories  of  these  same  people" — you  will  be  cut  short  at  once,  and  re¬ 
minded  of  the  Capuchin’s  "Mentiris  impudentissime ."  Too  long  by  far  have  you 
been  permitted  to  deceive  the  world,  and  to  abuse  the  confidence  which  men 
were  ready  to  place  in  your  calumnious  accusations.  It  is  high  time  to  redeem  the 
reputation  of  the  multitudes  whom  you  have  defamed.  For  what  innocence  can 
be  so  generally  known,  as  not  to  suffer  some  injury  from  the  daring  aspersions  of 
a  body  of  men  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  who,  under  religious 
habits,  conceal  minds  so  utterly  irreligious  that  they  perpetrate  crimes  like  cal¬ 
umny,  not  in  opposition  to,  but  in  strict  accordance  with,  their  moral  maxims?  I 
cannot,  therefore,  be  blamed  for  destroying  the  credit  which  might  have  been 
awarded  you,  seeing  it  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  much  greater  act  of  justice  to 
restore  to  the  victims  of  your  obloquy  the  character  which  they  did  not  deserve 
to  lose,  than  to  leave  you  in  the  possession  of  a  reputation  for  sincerity  which  you 
do  not  deserve  to  enjoy.  And,  as  the  one  could  not  be  done  without  the  other, 
how  important  was  it  to  show  you  up  to  the  world  as  you  really  are!  In  this  letter 
I  have  commenced  the  exhibition;  but  it  will  require  some  time  to  complete  it. 
Published  it  shall  be,  fathers,  and  all  your  policy  will  be  inadequate  to  save  you 
from  the  disgrace;  for  the  efforts  which  you  may  make  to  avert  the  blow  will  only 
serve  to  convince  the  most  obtuse  observers  that  you  were  terrified  out  of  your 
wits,  and  that,  your  consciences  anticipating  the  charges  I  had  to  bring  against 
you,  you  have  put  every  oar  in  the  water  to  prevent  the  discovery. 


LETTER  XVI 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHERS,  THE  JESUITS 


December  4,  1656 

Reverend  Fathers, 

I  now  come  to  consider  the  rest  of  your  calumnies,  and  shall  begin  with  those 
contained  in  your  advertisements,  which  remain  to  be  noticed.  As  all  your  other 
writings,  however,  are  equally  well  stocked  with  slander,  they  will  furnish  me 
with  abundant  materials  for  entertaining  you  on  this  topic  as  long  as  I  may  judge 
expedient.  In  the  first  place,  then,  with  regard  to  the  fable  which  you  have  propa¬ 
gated  in  all  your  writings  against  the  Bishop  of  Ypres,  I  beg  leave  to  say,  in  one 
word,  that  you  have  maliciously  wrested  the  meaning  of  some  ambiguous  ex¬ 
pressions  in  one  of  his  letters  which,  being  capable  of  a  good  sense,  ought,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  to  have  been  taken  in  good  part,  and  could 
only  be  taken  otherwise  according  to  the  spirit  of  your  Society.  For  example, 
when  he  says  to  a  friend,  "Give  yourself  no  concern  about  your  nephew;  I  will 
furnish  him  with  what  he  requires  from  the  money  that  lies  in  my  hands,"  what 
reason  have  you  to  interpret  this  to  mean  that  he  would  take  that  money  without 
restoring  it,  and  not  that  he  merely  advanced  it  with  the  purpose  of  replacing  it? 
And  how  extremely  imprudent  was  it  for  you  to  furnish  a  refutation  of  your  own 
lie,  by  printing  the  other  letters  of  the  Bishop  of  Ypres,  which  clearly  show  that, 
in  point  of  fact,  it  was  merely  advanced  money,  which  he  was  bound  to  refund. 


128 


THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

This  appears,  to  your  confusion,  from  the  following  terms  in  the  letter,  to  which 
you  give  the  date  of  July  30, 1619:  "Be  not  uneasy  about  the  money  advanced;  he 
shall  want  for  nothing  so  long  as  he  is  here”;  and  likewise  from  another,  dated 
January  6,  1620,  where  he  says:  "You  are  in  too  great  haste;  when  the  account 
shall  become  due,  I  have  no  fear  but  that  the  little  credit  which  I  have  in  this  place 
will  bring  me  as  much  money  as  I  require.” 

If  you  are  convicted  slanderers  on  this  subject,  you  are  no  less  so  in  regard  to 
the  ridiculous  story  about  the  charity-box  of  St.  Merri.  What  advantage,  pray,  can 
you  hope  to  derive  from  the  accusation  which  one  of  your  worthy  friends  has 
trumped  up  against  that  ecclesiastic?  Are  we  to  conclude  that  a  man  is  guilty, 
because  he  is  accused?  No,  fathers.  Men  of  piety,  like  him,  may  expect  to  be 
perpetually  accused,  so  long  as  the  world  contains  calumniators  like  you.  We 
must  judge  of  him,  therefore,  not  from  the  accusation,  but  from  the  sentence; 
and  the  sentence  pronounced  on  the  case  (February  23,  1656)  justifies  him  com¬ 
pletely.  Moreover,  the  person  who  had  the  temerity  to  involve  himself  in  that 
iniquitous  process,  was  disavowed  by  his  colleagues,  and  himself  compelled  to 
retract  his  charge.  And  as  to  what  you  allege,  in  the  same  place,  about  "that 
famous  director,  who  pocketed  at  once  nine  hundred  thousand  livres,”  I  need  only 
refer  you  to  Messieurs  the  cures  of  St.  Roch  and  St.  Paul,  who  will  bear  witness, 
before  the  whole  city  of  Paris,  to  his  perfect  disinterestedness  in  the  affair,  and  to 
your  inexcusable  malice  in  that  piece  of  imposition. 

Enough,  however,  for  such  paltry  falsities.  These  are  but  the  first  raw  attempts 
of  your  novices,  and  not  the  master-strokes  of  your  "grand  professed.”  To  these 
do  I  now  come,  fathers;  I  come  to  a  calumny  which  is  certainly  one  of  the  basest 
that  ever  issued  from  the  spirit  of  your  Society.  I  refer  to  the  insufferable  audacity 
with  which  you  have  imputed  to  holy  nuns,  and  to  their  directors,  the  charge  of 
"disbelieving  the  mystery  of  transubstantiation  and  the  real  presence  of  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  eucharist.”  Here,  fathers,  is  a  slander  worthy  of  yourselves.  Here  is  a 
crime  which  God  alone  is  capable  of  punishing,  as  you  alone  were  capable  of 
committing  it.  To  endure  it  with  patience  would  require  an  humility  as  great  as 
that  of  these  calumniated  ladies;  to  give  it  credit  would  demand  a  degree  of 
wickedness  equal  to  that  of  their  wretched  defamers.  I  propose  not,  therefore,  to 
vindicate  them;  they  are  beyond  suspicion.  Had  they  stood  in  need  of  defence, 
they  might  have  commanded  abler  advocates  than  me.  My  object  in  what  I  say 
here  is  to  show,  not  their  innocence,  but  your  malignity.  I  merely  intend  to  make 
you  ashamed  of  yourselves,  and  to  let  the  whole  world  understand  that,  after  this, 
there  is  nothing  of  which  you  are  not  capable. 

You  will  not  fail,  I  am  certain,  notwithstanding  all  this,  to  say  that  I  belong  to 
Port-Royal;  for  this  is  the  first  thing  you  say  to  every  one  who  combats  your 
errors:  as  if  it  were  only  at  Port-Royal  that  persons  could  be  found  possessed  of 
sufficient  zeal  to  defend,  against  your  attacks,  the  purity  of  Christian  morality.  I 
know,  fathers,  the  work  of  the  pious  recluses  who  have  retired  to  that  monastery, 
and  how  much  the  Church  is  indebted  to  their  truly  solid  and  edifying  labours.  I 
know  the  excellence  of  their  piety  and  their  learning.  For,  though  I  have  never 
had  the  honour  to  belong  to  their  establishment,  as  you,  without  knowing  who 
or  what  I  am,  would  fain  have  it  believed,  nevertheless,  I  do  know  some  of  them, 
and  honour  the  virtue  of  them  all.  But  God  has  not  confined  within  the  precincts 
of  that  society  all  whom  he  means  to  raise  up  in  opposition  to  your  corruptions. 


LETTER  XVI 


129 

I  hope,  with  his  assistance,  fathers,  to  make  you  feel  this;  and  if  he  vouchsafe  to 
sustain  me  in  the  design  he  has  led  me  to  form,  of  employing  in  his  service  all  the 
resources  I  have  received  from  him,  I  shall  speak  to  you  in  such  a  strain  as  will, 
perhaps,  give  you  reason  to  regret  that  you  have  not  had  to  do  with  a  man  of 
Port-Royal.  And  to  convince  you  of  this,  fathers,  I  must  tell  you  that,  while  those 
whom  you  have  abused  with  this  notorious  slander  content  themselves  with  lift¬ 
ing  up  their  groans  to  Heaven  to  obtain  your  forgiveness  for  the  outrage,  I  feel 
myself  obliged,  not  being  in  the  least  affected  by  your  slander,  to  make  you  blush 
in  the  face  of  the  whole  Church,  and  so  bring  you  to  that  wholesome  shame  of 
which  the  Scripture  speaks,  and  which  is  almost  the  only  remedy  for  a  hardness  of 
heart  like  yours:  "Imple  facies  eorum  ignominia ,  et  qucerent  nomen  tuum,  Domine — 
Fill  their  faces  with  shame,  that  they  may  seek  thy  name,  O  Lord.” 

A  stop  must  be  put  to  this  insolence,  which  does  not  spare  the  most  sacred 
retreats.  For  who  can  be  safe  after  a  calumny  of  this  nature?  For  shame,  fathers! 
to  publish  in  Paris  such  a  scandalous  book,  with  the  name  of  your  Father  Meynier 
on  its  front,  and  under  this  infamous  title,  Port-Royal  and  Geneva  in  concert  against 
the  most  holy  Sacrament  of  the  Altar ,  in  which  you  accuse  of  this  apostasy,  not  only 
Monsieur  the  abbe  of  St.  Cyran,  and  M.  Arnauld,  but  also  Mother  Agnes,  his 
sister,  and  all  the  nuns  of  that  monastery,  alleging  that  "their  faith,  in  regard  to 
the  eucharist,  is  as  suspicious  as  that  of  M.  Arnauld,”  whom  you  maintain  to  be 
"a  down-right  Calvinist.”  I  here  ask  the  whole  world  if  there  be  any  class  of 
persons  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  on  whom  you  could  have  advanced  such 
an  abominable  charge  with  less  semblance  of  truth.  For  tell  me,  fathers,  if  these 
nuns  and  their  directors  had  been  "in  concert  with  Geneva  against  the  most  holy 
sacrament  of  the  altar”  (the  very  thought  of  which  is  shocking),  how  they  should 
have  come  to  select  as  the  principal  object  of  their  piety  that  very  sacrament  which 
they  held  in  abomination?  How  should  they  have  assumed  the  habit  of  the  holy 
sacrament?  taken  the  name  of  the  Daughters  of  the  Holy  Sacrament?  called  their 
church  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sacrament?  How  should  they  have  requested  and 
obtained  from  Rome  the  confirmation  of  that  institution,  and  the  right  of  saying 
every  Thursday  the  office  of  the  holy  sacrament,  in  which  the  faith  of  the  Church 
is  so  perfectly  expressed,  if  they  had  conspired  with  Geneva  to  banish  that  faith 
from  the  Church?  Why  would  they  havebound  themselves,  by  a  particular  devotion,  ‘ 
also  sanctioned  by  the  Pope,  to  have  some  of  their  sisterhood,  night  and  day 
without  intermission,  in  presence  of  the  sacred  host,  to  compensate,  by  their  per¬ 
petual  adorations  towards  that  perpetual  sacrifice,  for  the  impiety  of  the  heresy  that 
aims  at  its  annihilation?  Tell  me,  fathers,  if  you  can,  why,  of  all  the  mysteries  of 
our  religion,  they  should  have  passed  by  those  in  which  they  believed,  to  fix  upon 
that  in  which  they  believed  not?  and  how  they  should  have  devoted  themselves, 
so  fully  and  entirely,  to  that  mystery  of  our  faith,  if  they  took  it,  as  the  heretics 
do,  for  the  mystery  of  iniquity?  And  what  answer  do  you  give  to  these  clear  evi¬ 
dences,  embodied  not  in  words  only,  but  in  actions;  and  not  in  some  particular 
actions,  but  in  the  whole  tenor  of  a  life  expressly  dedicated  to  the  adoration  of 
Jesus  Christ,  dwelling  on  our  altars?  What  answer,  again,  do  you  give  to  the  books 
which  you  ascribe  to  Port-Royal,  all  of  which  are  full  of  the  most  precise  terms 
employed  by  the  fathers  and  the  councils  to  mark  the  essence  of  that  mystery?  It 
is  at  once  ridiculous  and  disgusting  to  hear  you  replying  to  these  as  you  have 
done  throughout  your  libel.  M.  Arnauld,  say  you,  talks  very  well  about  transub- 


130  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

stantiation;  but  he  understands,  perhaps,  only  "a  significative  transubstantiation." 
True,  he  professes  to  believe  in  "the  real  presence"  ;  who  can  tell,  however,  but  he 
means  nothing  more  than  "a  true  and  real  figure"?  How  now,  fathers!  whom,  pray, 
will  you  not  make  pass  for  a  Calvinist  whenever  you  please,  if  you  are  to  be  allowed 
the  liberty  of  perverting  the  most  canonical  and  sacred  expressions  by  the  wicked 
subtleties  of  your  modern  equivocations?  Who  ever  thought  of  using  any  other 
terms  than  those  in  question,  especially  in  simple  discourses  of  devotion,  where 
no  controversies  are  handled?  And  yet  the  love  and  the  reverence  in  which  they 
hold  this  sacred  mystery  have  induced  them  to  give  it  such  a  prominence  in  all 
their  writings  that  I  defy  you,  fathers,  with  all  your  cunning,  to  detect  in  them 
either  the  least  appearance  of  ambiguity,  or  the  slightest  correspondence  with 
the  sentiments  of  Geneva. 

Everybody  knows,  fathers,  that  the  essence  of  the  Genevan  heresy  consists,  as 
it  does  according  to  your  own  showing,  in  their  believing  that  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
contained  in  this  sacrament;  that  it  is  impossible  he  can  be  in  many  places  at  once; 
that  he  is,  properly  speaking,  only  in  heaven,  and  that  it  is  as  there  alone  that  he 
ought  to  be  adored,  and  not  on  the  altar;  that  the  substance  of  the  bread  remains; 
that  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  does  not  enter  into  the  mouth  or  the  stomach;  that 
he  can  only  be  eaten  by  faith,  and  accordingly  wicked  men  do  not  eat  him  at  all; 
and  that  the  mass  is  not  a  sacrifice,  but  an  abomination.  Let  us  now  hear,  then,  in 
what  way  "Port-Royal  is  in  concert  with  Geneva."  In  the  writings  of  the  former 
we  read,  to  your  confusion,  the  following  statement:  That  "the  flesh  and  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  are  contained  under  the  species  of  bread  and  wine";  that  "the 
Holy  of  Holies  is  present  in  the  sanctuary,  and  that  there  he  ought  to  be  adored"; 
that  "Jesus  Christ  dwells  in  the  sinners  who  communicate,  by  the  real  and  veri¬ 
table  presence  of  his  body  in  their  stomach,  although  not  by  the  presence  of  his 
Spirit  in  their  hearts"  ;  that  "the  dead  ashes  of  the  bodies  of  the  saints  derive  their 
principal  dignity  from  that  seed  of  life  which  they  retain  from  the  touch  of  the 
immortal  and  vivifying  flesh  of  Jesus  Christ";  that  "it  is  not  owing  to  any  natural 
power,  but  to  the  almighty  power  of  God,  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible,  that 
the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  comprehended  under  the  host,  and  under  the  smallest 
portion  of  every  host";  that  "the  divine  virtue  is  present  to  produce  the  effect 
which  the  words  of  consecration  signify"  ;  that  "Jesus  Christ,  while  he  is  lowered 
and  hidden  upon  the  altar,  is,  at  the  same  time,  elevated  in  his  glory;  that  he 
subsists,  of  himself  and  by  his  own  ordinary  power,  in  divers  places  at  the  same 
time — in  the  midst  of  the  Church  triumphant,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Church 
militant  and  travelling";  that  "the  sacramental  species  remain  suspended,  and 
subsist  extraordinarily,  without  being  upheld  by  any  subject;  and  that  the  body 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  also  suspended  under  the  species,  and  that  it  does  not  depend 
upon  these,  as  substances  depend  upon  accidents";  that  "the  substance  of  the 
bread  is  changed,  the  immutable  accidents  remaining  the  same";  that  "Jesus 
Christ  reposes  in  the  eucharist  with  the  same  glory  that  he  has  in  heaven";  that 
"his  glorious  humanity  resides  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  Church,  under  the  species 
of  bread,  which  forms  its  visible  covering;  and  that,  knowing  the  grossness  of  our 
natures,  he  conducts  us  to  the  adoration  of  his  divinity,  which  is  present  in  all 
places,  by  the  adoring  of  his  humanity,  which  is  present  in  a  particular  place"; 
that  "we  receive  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  the  tongue,  which  is  sanctified  by 
its  divine  touch";  "that  it  enters  into  the  mouth  of  the  priest";  that  "although 


LETTER  XVI 


*3* 

Jesus  Christ  has  made  himself  accessible  in  the  holy  sacrament,  by  an  act  of  his 
love  and  graciousness,  he  preserves,  nevertheless,  in  that  ordinance,  his  inacces¬ 
sibility,  as  an  inseparable  condition  of  his  divine  nature;  because,  although  the 
body  alone  and  the  blood  alone  are  there,  by  virtue  of  the  words — vi  verborum ,  as 
the  schoolmen  say — his  whole  divinity  may,  notwithstanding,  be  there  also,  as 
well  as  his  whole  humanity,  by  a  necessary  conjunction.”  In  fine,  that  ”the  eu- 
charist  is  at  the  same  time  sacrament  and  sacrifice”;  and  that  "although  this  sacri¬ 
fice  is  a  commemoration  of  that  of  the  cross,  yet  there  is  this  difference  between 

them,  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  is  offered  for  the  Church  only,  and  for  the 
faithful  in  her  communion;  whereas  that  of  the  cross  has  been  offered  for  all  the 
world,  as  the  Scripture  testifies.” 

I  have  quoted  enough,  fathers,  to  make  it  evident  that  there  was  never,  perhaps, 
a  more  imprudent  thing  attempted  than  what  you  have  done.  But  I  will  go  a  step 
farther,  and  make  you  pronounce  this  sentence  against  yourselves.  For  what  do 
you  require  from  a  man,  in  order  to  remove  all  suspicion  of  his  being  in  concert 
and  correspondence  with  Geneva?  "If  M.  Arnauld,”  says  your  Father  Meynier, 
p.  93,  "had  said  that,  in  this  adorable  mystery,  there  is  no  substance  of  the  bread 
under  the  species,  but  only  the  flesh  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  should  have 
confessed  that  he  had  declared  himself  absolutely  against  Geneva.”  Confess  it, 

then,  ye  revilers!  and  make  him  a  public  apology.  How  often  have  you  seen  this 
declaration  made  in  the  passages  I  have  just  cited?  Besides  this,  however,  the 
Familiar  Theology  of  M.  de  St.  Cyran  having  been  approved  by  M.  Arnauld,  it 
contains  the  sentiments  of  both.  Read,  then,  the  whole  of  lesson  15th,  and  par¬ 
ticularly  article  2d,  and  you  will  there  find  the  words  you  desiderate,  even  more 
formally  stated  than  you  have  done  yourselves.  "Is  there  any  bread  in  the  host,  or 
any  wine  in  the  chalice?  No:  for  all  the  substance  of  the  bread  and  the  wine  is 
taken  away,  to  give  place  to  that  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  which 
substance  alone  remains  therein,  covered  by  the  qualities  and  species  of  bread  and 
wine.” 

How  now,  fathers!  will  you  still  say  that  Port-Royal  teaches  "nothing  that 
Geneva  does  not  receive,”  and  that  M.  Arnauld  has  said  nothing  in  his  second 
letter  "which  might  not  have  been  said  by  a  minister  of  Charenton”?  See  if  you 
can  persuade  Mestrezat  to  speak  as  M.  Arnauld  does  in  that  letter,  on  page  237. 
Make  him  say  that  it  is  an  infamous  calumny  to  accuse  him  of  denying  transub- 
stantiation;  that  he  takes  for  the  fundamental  principle  of  his  writings  the  truth  of 
the  real  presence  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  opposition  to  the  heresy  of  the  Calvinists; 
and  that  he  accounts  himself  happy  for  living  in  a  place  where  the  Holy  of  Holies 
is  continually  adored  in  the  sanctuary” — a  sentiment  which  is  still  more  opposed 
to  the  belief  of  the  Calvinists  than  the  real  presence  itself;  for,  as  Cardinal  Richelieu 
observes  in  his  Controversies  (p.  536):  "The  new  ministers  of  France  having  agreed 
with  the  Lutherans,  who  believe  the  real  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  eucharist; 
they  have  declared  that  they  remain  in  a  state  of  separation  from  the  Church  on 
the  point  of  this  mystery,  only  on  account  of  the  adoration  which  Catholics 
render  to  the  eucharist.”  Get  all  the  passages  which  I  have  extracted  from  the 
books  of  Port-Royal  subscribed  at  Geneva,  and  not  the  isolated  passages  merely, 
but  the  entire  treatises  regarding  this  mystery,  such  as  the  Book  of  Frequent  Com¬ 
munion,  the  Explication  of  the  Ceremonies  of  the  Mass ,  the  Exercise  during  Mass ,  the 
Reasons  of  the  Suspension  of  the  Holy  Sacrament ,  the  Translation  of  the  Hymns  in  the 


132  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Hours  of  Port-Royal,  &  c.;  in  one  word,  prevail  upon  them  to  establish  at  Charenton 
that  holy  institution  of  adoring,  without  intermission,  Jesus  Christ  contained  in 
the  eucharist,  as  is  done  at  Port-Royal,  and  it  will  be  the  most  signal  service  which 
you  could  render  to  the  Church;  for  in  this  case  it  will  turn  out,  not  that  Port- 
Royal  is  in  concert  with  Geneva,  but  that  Geneva  is  in  concert  with  Port-Royal 
and  with  the  whole  Church. 

Certainly,  fathers,  you  could  not  have  been  more  unfortunate  than  in  selecting 
Port-Royal  as  the  object  of  attack  for  not  believing  in  the  eucharist;  but  I  will 
show  what  led  you  to  fix  upon  it.  You  know  I  have  picked  up  some  small  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  your  policy;  in  this  instance  you  have  acted  upon  its  maxims  to 
admiration.  If  Monsieur  the  abbe  of  St.  Cyran,  and  M.  Arnauld,  had  only  spoken 
of  what  ought  to  be  believed  with  great  respect  to  this  mystery,  and  said  nothing 
about  what  ought  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  preparation  for  its  reception,  they 
might  have  been  the  best  Catholics  alive;  and  no  equivocations  would  have  been 
discovered  in  their  use  of  the  terms  real  presence  and  transubstantiation.  But,  since 
all  who  combat  your  licentious  principles  must  needs  be  heretics,  and  heretics, 
too,  in  the  very  point  in  which  they  condemn  your  laxity,  how  could  M.  Arnauld 
escape  falling  under  this  charge  on  the  subject  of  the  eucharist,  after  having  pub¬ 
lished  a  book  expressly  against  your  profanations  of  that  sacrament?  What!  must 
he  be  allowed  to  say,  with  impunity,  that  "the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  ought  not  to 
be  given  to  those  who  habitually  lapse  into  the  same  crimes,  and  who  have  no 
prospect  of  amendment;  and  that  such  persons  ought  to  be  excluded,  for  some 
time,  from  the  altar,  to  purify  themselves  by  sincere  penitence,  that  they  may 
approach  it  afterwards  with  benefit"?  Suffer  no  one  to  talk  in  this  strain,  fathers, 
or  you  will  find  that  fewer  people  will  come  to  your  confessionals.  Father  Brisacier 
says  that  "were  you  to  adopt  this  course,  you  would  never  apply  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  a  single  individual."  It  would  be  infinitely  more  for  your  interest 
were  every  one  to  adopt  the  views  of  your  Society,  as  set  forth  by  your  Father 
Mascarenhas,  in  a  book  approved  by  your  doctors,  and  even  by  your  reverend 
Father-General,  namely:  "That  persons  of  every  description,  and  even  priests, 
may  receive  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  very  day  they  have  polluted  themselves 
with  odious  crimes;  that,  so  far  from  such  communions  implying  irreverence, 
persons  who  partake  of  them  in  this  manner  act  a  commendable  part;  that  con¬ 
fessors  ought  not  to  keep  them  back  from  the  ordinance,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
ought  to  advise  those  who  have  recently  committed  such  crimes  to  communicate 
immediately;  because,  although  the  Church  has  forbidden  it,  this  prohibition  is 
annulled  by  the  universal  practice  in  all  places  of  the  earth." 

See  what  it  is,  fathers,  to  have  Jesuits  in  all  places  of  the  earth!  Behold  the 
universal  practice  which  you  have  introduced,  and  which  you  are  anxious  every¬ 
where  to  maintain!  It  matters  nothing  that  the  tables  of  Jesus  Christ  are  filled  with 
abominations,  provided  that  your  churches  are  crowded  with  people.  Be  sure, 
therefore,  cost  what  it  may,  to  set  down  all  that  dare  to  say  a  word  against  your 
practice  as  heretics  on  the  holy  sacrament.  But  how  can  you  do  this,  after  the 
irrefragable  testimonies  which  they  have  given  of  their  faith?  Are  you  not  afraid 
of  my  coming  out  with  the  four  grand  proofs  of  their  heresy  which  you  have 
adduced?  You  ought,  at  least,  to  be  so,  fathers,  and  I  ought  not  to  spare  your 
blushing.  Let  us,  then,  proceed  to  examine  proof  the  first. 

"M.  de  St.  Cyran,"  says  Father  Meynier,  "consoling  one  of  his  friends  upon  the 


LETTER  XVI 


*33 

death  of  his  mother  (tom.  i.,  let.  14),  says  that  the  most  acceptable  sacrifice  that 
can  be  offered  up  to  God,  on  such  occasions,  is  that  of  patience;  therefore  he  is 
a  Calvinist. ”  This  is  marvellously  shrewd  reasoning,  fathers;  and  I  doubt  if  any¬ 
body  will  be  able  to  discover  the  precise  point  of  it.  Let  us  learn  it,  then,  from  his 
own  mouth.  "Because,”  says  this  mighty  controversialist,  "it  is  obvious  that  he 
does  not  believe  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass;  for  this  is,  of  all  other  sacrifices,  the 
most  acceptable  unto  God.”  Who  will  venture  to  say  now  that  the  Jesuits  do  not 
know  how  to  reason?  Why,  they  know  the  art  to  such  perfection  that  they  will 
extract  heresy  out  of  anything  you  choose  to  mention,  not  even  excepting  the 
Holy  Scripture  itself!  For  example,  might  it  not  be  heretical  to  say,  with  the  wise 
man  in  Ecclesiasticus,  "There  is  nothing  worse  than  to  love  money”;  as  if  adul¬ 
tery,  murder,  or  idolatry,  were  not  far  greater  crimes?  Where  is  the  man  who  is  not 
in  the  habit  of  using  similar  expressions  every  day?  May  we  not  say,  for  instance, 
that  the  most  acceptable  of  all  sacrifices  in  the  eyes  of  God  is  that  of  a  contrite 
and  humbled  heart;  just  because,  in  discourses  of  this  nature,  we  simply  mean  to 
compare  certain  internal  virtues  with  one  another,  and  not  with  the  sacrifice  of 
the  mass,  which  is  of  a  totally  different  order,  and  infinitely  more  exalted?  Is  this 
not  enough  to  make  you  ridiculous,  fathers?  And  is  it  necessary,  to  complete 
your  discomfiture,  that  I  should  quote  the  passages  of  that  letter  in  which  M.  de 
St.  Cyran  speaks  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  as  "the  most  excellent”  of  all  others, 
in  the  following  terms?  "Let  there  be  presented  to  God,  daily  and  in  all  places, 
the  sacrifice  of  the  body  of  his  Son,  who  could  not  find  a  more  excellent  way  than 
that  by  which  he  might  honour  his  Father.”  And  afterwards:  "Jesus  Christ  has 
enjoined  us  to  take,  when  we  are  dying,  his  sacrificed  body,  to  render  more  ac¬ 
ceptable  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  our  own,  and  to  join  himself  with  us  at  the  hour 
of  dissolution;  to  the  end  that  he  may  strengthen  us  for  the  struggle,  sanctifying, 
by  his  presence,  the  last  sacrifice  which  we  make  to  God  of  our  life  and  our  body”? 
Pretend  to  take  no  notice  of  all  this,  fathers,  and  persist  in  maintaining,  as  you 
do  in  page  39,  that  he  refused  to  take  the  communion  on  his  death-bed,  and  that 
he  did  not  believe  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass.  Nothing  can  be  too  gross  for 
calumniators  by  profession. 

Your  second  proof  furnishes  an  excellent  illustration  of  this.  To  make  a  Calvin¬ 
ist  of  M.  de  St.  Cyran,  to  whom  you  ascribe  the  book  of  Petrus  Aurelius ,  you  take 
advantage  of  a  passage  (page  80)  in  which  Aurelius  explains  in  what  manner  the 
Church  acts  towards  priests,  and  even  bishops,  whom  she  wishes  to  degrade  or 
depose.  "The  Church,”  he  says,  "being  incapable  of  depriving  them  of  the  power 
of  the  order,  the  character  of  which  is  indelible,  she  does  all  that  she  can  do:  she 
banishes  from  her  memory  the  character  which  she  cannot  banish  from  the  souls 
of  the  individuals  who  have  been  once  invested  with  it;  she  regards  them  in  the 
same  light  as  if  they  were  not  bishops  or  priests;  so  that,  according  to  the  ordinary 
language  of  the  Church,  it  may  be  said  they  are  no  longer  such,  although  they 
always  remain  such,  in  as  far  as  the  character  is  concerned — ob  indelebilitatem 
characterise  You  perceive,  fathers,  that  this  author,  who  has  been  approved  by 
three  general  assemblies  of  the  clergy  of  France,  plainly  declares  that  the  character 
of  the  priesthood  is  indelible;  and  yet  you  make  him  say,  on  the  contrary,  in  the 
very  same  passage,  that  "the  character  of  the  priesthood  is  not  indelible.”  This  is 
what  I  would  call  a  notorious  slander;  in  other  words,  according  to  your  nomen¬ 
clature,  a  small  venial  sin.  And  the  reason  is,  this  book  has  done  you  some  harm 


134  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

by  refuting  the  heresies  of  your  brethren  in  England  touching  the  Episcopal 
authority.  But  the  folly  of  the  charge  is  equally  remarkable;  for,  after  having 
taken  it  for  granted,  without  any  foundation,  that  M.  de  St.  Cyran  holds  the 
priestly  character  to  be  not  indelible,  you  conclude  from  this  that  he  does  not 
believe  in  the  real  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  eucharist. 

Do  not  expect  me  to  answer  this,  fathers.  If  you  have  got  no  common  sense,  I 
am  not  able  to  furnish  you  with  it.  All  who  possess  any  share  of  it  will  enjoy  a 
hearty  laugh  at  your  expense.  Nor  will  they  treat  with  greater  respect  your  third 
proof,  which  rests  upon  the  following  words,  taken  from  the  Book  of  Frequent 
Communion:  “In  the  eucharist  God  vouchsafes  us  the  same  food  that  He  bestows  on 
the  saints  in  heaven,  with  this  difference  only,  that  here  He  withholds  from  us  its 
sensible  sight  and  taste,  reserving  both  of  these  for  the  heavenly  world.”  These 
words  express  the  sense  of  the  Church  so  distinctly  that  I  am  constantly  forgetting 
what  reason  you  have  for  picking  a  quarrel  with  them,  in  order  to  turn  them  to  a 
bad  use;  for  I  can  see  nothing  more  in  them  than  what  the  Council  of  Trent 
teaches  (sess.  xiii,  c.  8),  namely,  that  there  is  no  difference  between  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  eucharist  and  Jesus  Christ  in  heaven,  except  that  here  he  is  veiled,  and  there 
he  is  not.  M.  Arnauld  does  not  say  that  there  is  no  difference  in  the  manner  of 
receiving  Jesus  Christ,  but  only  that  there  is  no  difference  in  Jesus  Christ  who  is 
received.  And  yet  you  would,  in  the  face  of  all  reason,  interpret  his  language  in 
this  passage  to  mean  that  Jesus  Christ  is  no  more  eaten  with  the  mouth  in  this 
world  than  he  is  in  heaven;  upon  which  you  ground  the  charge  of  heresy  against 
him. 

You  really  make  me  sorry  for  you,  fathers.  Must  we  explain  this  further  to  you? 
Why  do  you  confound  that  divine  nourishment  with  the  manner  of  receiving  it? 
There  is  but  one  point  of  difference,  as  I  have  just  observed,  betwixt  that  nourish¬ 
ment  upon  earth  and  in  heaven,  which  is  that  here  it  is  hidden  under  veils  which 
deprive  us  of  its  sensible  sight  and  taste;  but  there  are  various  points  of  dissimilar¬ 
ity  in  the  manner  of  receiving  it  here  and  there,  the  principal  of  which  is,  as  M. 
Arnauld  expresses  it  (p.  3,  ch.  16),  "that  here  it  enters  into  the  mouth  and  the 
breast  both  of  the  good  and  of  the  wicked,”  which  is  not  the  case  in  heaven. 

And,  if  you  require  to  be  told  the  reason  of  this  diversity,  I  may  inform  you, 
fathers,  that  the  cause  of  God’s  ordaining  these  different  modes  of  receiving  the 
same  food  is  the  difference  that  exists  betwixt  the  state  of  Christians  in  this  life 
and  that  of  the  blessed  in  heaven.  The  state  of  the  Christian,  as  Cardinal  Perron 
observes  after  the  fathers,  holds  a  middle  place  between  the  state  of  the  blessed 
and  the  state  of  the  Jews.  The  spirits  in  bliss  possess  Jesus  Christ  really,  without 
veil  or  figure.  The  Jews  possessed  Jesus  Christ  only  in  figures  and  veils,  such  as 
the  manna  and  the  paschal  lamb.  And  Christians  possess  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
eucharist  really  and  truly,  although  still  concealed  under  veils.  "God,”  says  St. 
Eucher,  "has  made  three  tabernacles:  the  synagogue,  which  had  the  shadows 
only,  without  the  truth;  the  Church,  which  has  the  truth  and  shadows  together; 
and  heaven,  where  there  is  no  shadow,  but  the  truth  alone.”  It  would  be  a  de¬ 
parture  from  our  present  state,  which  is  the  state  of  faith,  opposed  by  St.  Paul 
alike  to  the  law  and  to  open  vision,  did  we  possess  the  figures  only,  without  Jesus 
Christ;  for  it  is  the  property  of  the  law  to  have  the  mere  figure,  and  not  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  things.  And  it  would  be  equally  a  departure  from  our  present  state  if  we 
possessed  him  visibly;  because  faith,  according  to  the  same  apostle,  deals  not 


LETTER  XVI 


T35 

with  things  that  are  seen.  And  thus  the  eucharist,  from  its  including  Jesus  Christ 
truly,  though  under  a  veil,  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  our  state  of  faith.  It 
follows  that  this  state  would  be  destroyed,  if,  as  the  heretics  maintain,  Jesus 
Christ  were  not  really  under  the  species  of  bread  and  wine;  and  it  would  be  equally 
destroyed  if  we  received  him  openly,  as  they  do  in  heaven:  since,  on  these  sup¬ 
positions,  our  state  would  be  confounded,  either  with  the  state  of  Judaism  or  with 
that  of  glory. 

Such,  fathers,  is  the  mysterious  and  divine  reason  of  this  most  divine  mystery. 
This  it  is  that  fills  us  with  abhorrence  at  the  Calvinists,  who  would  reduce  us  to 
the  condition  of  the  Jews;  and  this  it  is  that  makes  us  aspire  to  the  glory  of  the 
beatified,  where  we  shall  be  introduced  to  the  full  and  eternal  enjoyment  of  Jesus 
Christ.  From  hence  you  must  see  that  there  are  several  points  of  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  manner  in  which  he  communicates  himself  to  Christians  and  to  the 
blessed;  and  that,  amongst  others,  he  is  in  this  world  received  by  the  mouth,  and 
not  so  in  heaven;  but  that  they  all  depend  solely  on  the  distinction  between  our 
state  of  faith  and  their  state  of  immediate  vision.  And  this  is  precisely,  fathers, 
what  M.  Arnauld  has  expressed,  with  great  plainness,  in  the  following  terms: 
"There  can  be  no  other  difference  between  the  purity  of  those  who  receive  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  eucharist  and  that  of  the  blessed,  than  what  exists  between  faith  and 
the  open  vision  of  God,  upon  which  alone  depends  the  different  manner  in  which 
he  is  eaten  upon  earth  and  in  heaven."  You  were  bound  in  duty,  fathers,  to  have 
revered  in  these  words  the  sacred  truths  they  express,  instead  of  wresting  them 
for  the  purpose  of  detecting  an  heretical  meaning  which  they  never  contained, 
nor  could  possibly  contain,  namely,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  eaten  by  faith  only,  and 
not  by  the  mouth;  the  malicious  perversion  of  your  Fathers  Annat  and  Meynier, 
which  forms  the  capital  count  of  their  indictment. 

Conscious,  however,  of  the  wretched  deficiency  of  your  proofs,  you  have  had 
recourse  to  a  new  artifice,  which  is  nothing  less  than  to  falsify  the  Council  of 
Trent,  in  order  to  convict  M.  Arnauld  of  nonconformity  with  it;  so  vast  is  your 
store  of  methods  for  making  people  heretics.  This  feat  has  been  achieved  by 
Father  Meynier,  in  fifty  different  places  of  his  book,  and  about  eight  or  ten  times 
in  the  space  of  a  single  page  (the  54th),  wherein  he  insists  that  to  speak  like  a  true 
Catholic  it  is  not  enough  to  say,  "I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  really  present  in  the 
eucharist,"  but  we  must  say,  "I  believe,  with  the  council ,  that  he  is  present  by  a 
true  local  presence ,  or  locally."  And,  in  proof  of  this,  he  cites  the  council,  session 
xiii,  canon  3d,  canon  4th,  and  canon  6th.  Who  would  not  suppose,  upon  seeing 
the  term  local  presence  quoted  from  three  canons  of  a  universal  council,  that  the 
phrase  was  actually  to  be  found  in  them?  This  might  have  served  your  turn  very 
well,  before  the  appearance  of  my  Fifteenth  Letter;  but,  as  matters  now  stand, 
fathers,  the  trick  has  become  too  stale  for  us.  We  go  our  way  and  consult  the 
council,  and  discover  only  that  you  are  falsifiers.  Such  terms  as  local  presence , 
locally ,  and  locality ,  never  existed  in  the  passages  to  which  you  refer;  and  let  me 
tell  you  further,  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  any  other  canon  of  that  council,  nor 
in  any  other  previous  council,  not  in  any  father  of  the  Church.  Allow  me,  then,  to 
ask  you,  fathers,  if  you  mean  to  cast  the  suspicion  of  Calvinism  upon  all  that  have 
not  made  use  of  that  peculiar  phrase?  If  this  be  the  case,  the  Council  of  Trent 
must  be  suspected  of  heresy,  and  all  the  holy  fathers  without  exception.  Have  you 
no  other  way  of  making  M.  Arnauld  heretical,  without  abusing  so  many  other 


1 36  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

people  who  never  did  you  any  harm,  and,  among  the  rest,  St.  Thomas,  who  is  one 
of  the  greatest  champions  of  the  eucharist,  and  who,  so  far  from  employing  that 
term,  has  expressly  rejected  it — "Nullo  modo  corpus  Christi  est  in  hoc  Sacramento 
localiter. — By  no  means  is  the  body  of  Christ  in  this  sacrament  locally  ’?  Who  are 
you,  then,  fathers,  to  pretend,  on  your  authority,  to  impose  new  terms,  and  or¬ 
dain  them  to  be  used  by  all  for  rightly  expressing  their  faith;  as  if  the  profession 
of  the  faith,  drawn  up  by  the  popes  according  to  the  plan  of  the  council,  in  which 
this  term  has  no  place,  were  defective,  and  left  an  ambiguity  in  the  creed  of  the 
faithful  which  you  had  the  sole  merit  of  discovering?  Such  a  piece  of  arrogance,  to 
prescribe  these  terms,  even  to  learned  doctors!  such  a  piece  of  forgery,  to  attribute 
them  to  general  councils!  and  such  ignorance,  not  to  know  the  objections  which 
the  most  enlightened  saints  have  made  to  their  reception!  "Be  ashamed  of  the 
error  of  your  ignorance,"  as  the  Scripture  says  of  ignorant  impostors  like  you, 
"De  mendacto  ineruditionis  tuce  confundere." 

Give  up  all  further  attempts,  then,  to  act  the  masters;  you  have  neither  char¬ 
acter  nor  capacity  for  the  part.  If,  however,  you  would  bring  forward  your  prop¬ 
ositions  with  a  little  more  modesty,  they  might  obtain  a  hearing.  For,  although 
this  phrase,  local  presence ,  has  been  rejected,  as  you  have  seen,  by  St.  Thomas,  on 
the  ground  that  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  in  the  eucharist,  in  the  ordinary 
extension  of  bodies  in  their  places,  the  expression  has,  nevertheless,  been  adopted 
by  some  modern  controversial  writers,  who  understand  it  simply  to  mean  that  the 
body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  truly  under  the  species,  which  being  in  a  particular  place, 
the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  there  also.  And  in  this  sense  M.  Arnauld  will  make  no 
scruple  to  admit  the  term,  as  M.  de  St.  Cyran  and  he  have  repeatedly  declared  that 
Jesus  Christ  in  the  eucharist  is  truly  in  a  particular  place,  and  miraculously  in 
many  places  at  the  same  time.  Thus  all  your  subtleties  fall  to  the  ground;  and  you 
have  failed  to  give  the  slightest  semblance  of  plausibility  to  an  accusation  which 
ought  not  to  have  been  allowed  to  show  its  face  without  being  supported  by  the 
most  unanswerable  proofs. 

But  what  avails  it,  fathers,  to  oppose  their  innocence  to  your  calumnies?  You 
impute  these  errors  to  them,  not  in  the  belief  that  they  maintain  heresy,  but  from 
the  idea  that  they  have  done  you  injury.  That  is  enough,  according  to  your 
theology,  to  warrant  you  to  calumniate  them  without  criminality;  and  you  can, 
without  either  penance  or  confession,  say  mass,  at  the  very  time  that  you  charge 
priests,  who  say  it  every  day,  with  holding  it  to  be  pure  idolatry;  which,  were  it 
true,  would  amount  to  sacrilege  no  less  revolting  than  that  of  your  own  Father 
Jarrige,  whom  you  yourselves  ordered  to  be  hanged  in  effigy,  for  having  said 
mass  "at  the  time  he  was  in  agreement  with  Geneva." 

What  surprises  me,  therefore,  is  not  the  little  scrupulosity  with  which  you  load 
them  with  crimes  of  the  foulest  and  falsest  description,  but  the  little  prudence  you 
display,  by  fixing  on  them  charges  so  destitute  of  plausibility.  You  dispose  of 
sins,  it  is  true,  at  your  pleasure;  but  do  you  mean  to  dispose  of  men’s  beliefs  too? 
Verily,  fathers,  if  the  suspicion  of  Calvinism  must  needs  fall  either  on  them  or  on 
you,  you  would  stand,  I  fear,  on  very  ticklish  ground.  Their  language  is  as  Catho¬ 
lic  as  yours;  but  their  conduct  confirms  their  faith,  and  your  conduct  belies  it. 
For  if  you  believe,  as  well  as  they  do,  that  the  bread  is  really  changed  into  the  body 
of  Jesus  Christ,  why  do  you  not  require,  as  they  do,  from  those  whom  you  advise 
to  approach  the  altar,  that  the  heart  of  stone  and  ice  should  be  sincerely  changed 


LETTER  XVI 


*37 

into  a  heart  of  flesh  and  of  love?  If  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  that  sacra¬ 
ment  in  a  state  of  death,  teaching  those  that  approach  it  to  die  to  the  world,  to 
sin,  and  to  themselves,  why  do  you  suffer  those  to  profane  it  in  whose  breasts 
evil  passions  continue  to  reign  in  all  their  life  and  vigour?  And  how  do  you  come 
to  judge  those  worthy  to  eat  the  bread  of  heaven,  who  are  not  worthy  to  eat  that 
of  earth? 

Precious  votaries,  truly,  whose  zeal  is  expended  in  persecuting  those  who  hon¬ 
our  this  sacred  mystery  by  so  many  holy  communions,  and  in  flattering  those 
who  dishonour  it  by  so  many  sacrilegious  desecrations!  How  comely  is  it,  in 
these  champions  of  a  sacrifice  so  pure  and  so  venerable,  to  collect  around  the 
table  of  Jesus  Christ  a  crowd  of  hardened  profligates,  reeking  from  their  debauch¬ 
eries;  and  to  plant  in  the  midst  of  them  a  priest,  whom  his  own  confessor  has 
hurried  from  his  obscenities  to  the  altar;  there,  in  the  place  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 
offer  up  that  most  holy  victim  to  the  God  of  holiness,  and  convey  it,  with  his 
polluted  hands,  into  mouths  as  thoroughly  polluted  as  his  own!  How  well  does 
it  become  those  who  pursue  this  course  "in  all  parts  of  the  world,"  in  conformity 
with  maxims  sanctioned  by  their  own  general  to  impute  to  the  author  of  Frequent 
Communion ,  and  to  the  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  the  crime  of  not  believing 
in  that  sacrament! 

Even  this,  however,  does  not  satisfy  them.  Nothing  less  will  satiate  their  rage 
than  to  accuse  their  opponents  of  having  renounced  Jesus  Christ  and  their  bap¬ 
tism.  This  is  no  air-built  fable,  like  those  of  your  invention;  it  is  a  fact,  and  denotes 
a  delirious  frenzy  which  marks  the  fatal  consummation  of  your  calumnies.  Such 
a  notorious  falsehood  as  this  would  not  have  been  in  hands  worthy  to  support  it, 
had  it  remained  in  those  of  your  good  friend  Filleau,  through  whom  you  ushered 
it  into  the  world:  your  Society  has  openly  adopted  it;  and  your  Father  Meynier 
maintained  it  the  other  day  to  be  "a  certain  truth"  that  Port-Royal  has,  for  the 
space  of  thirty-five  years,  been  forming  a  secret  plot,  of  which  M.  de  St.  Cyran 
and  M.  d’Ypres  have  been  the  ringleaders,  "to  ruin  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation 
— to  make  the  Gospel  pass  for  an  apocryphal  fable — to  exterminate  the  Christian 
religion,  and  to  erect  Deism  upon  the  ruins  of  Christianity."  Is  this  enough, 
fathers?  Will  you  be  satisfied  if  all  this  be  believed  of  the  objects  of  your  hate? 
Would  your  animosity  be  glutted  at  length,  if  you  could  but  succeed  in  making 
them  odious,  not  only  to  all  within  the  Church,  by  the  charge  of  " consenting  with 
Geneva"  of  which  you  accuse  them,  but  even  to  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ, 
though  beyond  the  pale  of  the  Church,  by  the  imputation  of  Deism ? 

But  whom  do  you  expect  to  convince,  upon  your  simple  asseveration,  without 
the  slightest  shadow  of  proof,  and  in  the  face  of  every  imaginable  contradiction, 
that  priests  who  preach  nothing  but  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  purity  of  the 
Gospel,  and  the  obligations  of  baptism,  have  renounced  at  once  their  baptism, 
the  Gospel,  and  Jesus  Christ?  Who  will  believe  it,  fathers?  Wretched  as  you  are,  do 
you  believe  it  yourselves?  What  a  sad  predicament  is  yours,  when  you  must  either 
prove  that  they  do  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  or  must  pass  for  the  most  aban¬ 
doned  calumniators.  Prove  it,  then,  fathers.  Name  that  " worthy  clergyman"  who, 
you  say,  attended  that  assembly  at  Bourg-Fontaine  in  1621,  and  discovered  to 
Brother  Filleau  the  design  there  concerted  of  overturning  the  Christian  religion. 
Name  those  six  persons  whom  you  allege  to  have  formed  that  conspiracy.  Name 
the  individual  who  is  designated  by  the  letters  A.  A.,  who  you  say  "was  not  Antony 


138  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Arnauld ”  (because  he  convinced  you  that  he  was  at  that  time  only  nine  years  of 
age),  "but  another  person ,  who  you  say  is  still  in  life ,  but  too  good  a  friend  of  M. 
Arnauld  not  to  be  known  to  him."  You  know  him,  then,  fathers;  and  consequently, 
if  you  are  not  destitute  of  religion  yourselves,  you  are  bound  to  delate  that  im¬ 
pious  wretch  to  the  king  and  parliament,  that  he  may  be  punished  according  to 
his  deserts.  You  must  speak  out,  fathers;  you  must  name  the  person,  or  submit  to 
the  disgrace  of  being  henceforth  regarded  in  no  other  light  than  as  common  liars, 
unworthy  of  being  ever  credited  again.  Good  Father  Valerien  has  taught  us  that 
this  is  the  way  in  which  such  characters  should  be  "put  to  the  rack”  and  brought 
to  their  senses.  Your  silence  upon  the  present  challenge  will  furnish  a  full  and 
satisfactory  confirmation  of  this  diabolical  calumny.  Your  blindest  admirers  will 
be  constrained  to  admit  that  it  will  be  "the  result,  not  of  your  goodness,  but  your 
impotency” ;  and  to  wonder  how  you  could  be  so  wicked  as  to  extend  your  hatred 
even  to  the  nuns  of  Port-Royal,  and  to  say,  as  you  do  in  page  14,  that  The  Secret 
Chaplet  of  the  Holy  Sacrament ,  composed  by  one  of  their  number,  was  the  first  fruit 
of  that  conspiracy  against  Jesus  Christ;  or,  as  in  page  95,  that  "they  have  imbibed 
all  the  detestable  principles  of  that  work”;  which  is,  according  to  your  account, 
"a  lesson  in  Deism.”  Your  falsehoods  regarding  that  book  have  already  been 
triumphantly  refuted,  in  the  defence  of  the  censure  of  the  late  Archbishop  of  Paris 
against  Father  Brisacier.  That  publication  you  are  incapable  of  answering;  and 
yet  you  do  not  scruple  to  abuse  it  in  a  more  shameful  manner  than  ever,  for  the 
purpose  of  charging  women,  whose  piety  is  universally  known,  with  the  vilest 
blasphemy. 

Cruel,  cowardly  persecutors!  Must,  then,  the  most  retired  cloisters  afford  no 
retreat  from  your  calumnies?  While  these  consecrated  virgins  are  employed,  night 
and  day,  according  to  their  institution,  in  adoring  Jesus  Christ  in  the  holy  sacra¬ 
ment,  you  cease  not,  night  nor  day,  to  publish  abroad  that  they  do  not  believe 
that  he  is  either  in  the  eucharist  or  even  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father;  and  you 
are  publicly  excommunicating  them  from  the  Church,  at  the  very  time  when  they 
are  in  secret  praying  for  the  whole  Church,  and  for  you!  You  blacken  with  your 
slanders  those  who  have  neither  ears  to  hear  nor  mouths  to  answer  you!  But  Jesus 
Christ,  in  whom  they  are  now  hidden,  not  to  appear  till  one  day  together  with 
him,  hears  you,  and  answers  for  them.  At  the  moment  I  am  now  writing,  that 
holy  and  terrible  voice  is  heard  which  confounds  nature  and  consoles  the  Church. 
And  I  fear,  fathers,  that  those  who  now  harden  their  hearts,  and  refuse  with 
obstinacy  to  hear  him,  while  he  speaks  in  the  character  of  God,  will  one  day  be 
compelled  to  hear  him  with  terror,  when  he  speaks  to  them  in  the  character  of  a 
Judge.  What  account,  indeed,  fathers,  will  you  be  able  to  render  to  him  of  the 
many  calumnies  you  have  uttered,  seeing  that  he  will  examine  them,  in  that  day, 
not  according  to  the  fantasies  of  Fathers  Dicastille,  Gans,  and  Pennalossa,  who 
justify  them,  but  according  to  the  eternal  laws  of  truth,  and  the  sacred  ordinances 
of  his  own  Church,  which,  so  far  from  attempting  to  vindicate  that  crime,  abhors 
it  to  such  a  degree  that  she  visits  it  with  the  same  penalty  as  wilful  murder?  By  the 
first  and  second  councils  of  Arles  she  has  decided  that  the  communion  shall  be 
denied  to  slanderers  as  well  as  murderers,  till  the  approach  of  death.  The  Council 
of  Lateran  has  judged  those  unworthy  of  admission  into  the  ecclesiastical  state 
who  have  been  convicted  of  the  crime,  even  though  they  may  have  reformed.  The 
popes  have  even  threatened  to  deprive  of  the  communion  at  death  those  who 


LETTER  XVI 


*39 

have  calumniated  bishops,  priests,  or  deacons.  And  the  authors  of  a  defamatory 
libel,  who  fail  to  prove  what  they  have  advanced,  are  condemned  by  Pope  Adrian 
to  be  whipped; — yes,  reverend  fathers ,  flagellentur  is  the  word.  So  strong  has  been 
the  repugnance  of  the  Church  at  all  times  to  the  errors  of  your  Society — a  Society 
so  thoroughly  depraved  as  to  invent  excuses  for  the  grossest  of  crimes,  such  as 
calumny,  chiefly  that  it  may  enjoy  the  greater  freedom  in  perpetrating  them  itself. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  fathers,  that  you  would  be  capable  of  producing  abun¬ 
dance  of  mischief  in  this  way,  had  God  not  permitted  you  to  furnish  with  your 
own  hands  the  means  of  preventing  the  evil,  and  of  rendering  your  slanders 
perfectly  innocuous;  for,  to  deprive  you  of  all  credibility,  it  was  quite  enough  to 
publish  the  strange  maxim  that  it  is  no  crime  to  calumniate.  Calumny  is  nothing, 
if  not  associated  with  a  high  reputation  for  honesty.  The  defamer  can  make  no 
impression,  unless  he  has  the  character  of  one  that  abhors  defamation  as  a  crime 
of  which  he  is  incapable.  And  thus,  fathers,  you  are  betrayed  by  your  own  prin¬ 
ciple.  You  establish  the  doctrine  to  secure  yourselves  a  safe  conscience,  that  you 
might  slander  without  risk  of  damnation,  and  be  ranked  with  those  "pious  and 
holy  calumniators"  of  whom  St.  Athanasius  speaks.  To  save  yourselves  from  hell, 
you  have  embraced  a  maxim  which  promises  you  this  security  on  the  faith  of  your 
doctors;  but  this  same  maxim,  while  it  guarantees  you,  according  to  their  idea, 
against  the  evils  you  dread  in  the  future  world,  deprives  you  of  all  the  advantage 
you  may  have  expected  to  reap  from  it  in  the  present;  so  that,  in  attempting  to 
escape  the  guilt,  you  have  lost  the  benefit  of  calumny.  Such  is  the  self-contrariety 
of  evil,  and  so  completely  does  it  confound  and  destroy  itself  by  its  own  intrinsic 
malignity. 

You  might  have  slandered,  therefore,  much  more  advantageously  for  your¬ 
selves,  had  you  professed  to  hold,  with  St.  Paul,  that  evil  speakers  are  not  worthy 
to  see  God;  for  in  this  case,  though  you  would  indeed  have  been  condemning 
yourselves,  your  slanders  would  at  least  have  stood  a  better  chance  of  being  be¬ 
lieved.  But,  by  maintaining,  as  you  have  done,  that  calumny  against  your  enemies 
is  no  crime,  your  slanders  will  be  discredited,  and  you  yourselves  damned  into  the 
bargain;  for  two  things  are  certain,  fathers:  first,  That  it  will  never  be  in  the  power 
of  your  grave  doctors  to  annihilate  the  justice  of  God;  and,  secondly,  That  you 
could  not  give  more  certain  evidence  that  you  are  not  of  the  Truth  than  by  your 
resorting  to  falsehood.  If  the  Truth  were  on  your  side,  she  would  fight  for  you — 
she  would  conquer  for  you;  and  whatever  enemies  you  might  have  to  encounter, 
"the  Truth  would  set  you  free"  from  them,  according  to  her  promise.  But  you 
have  had  recourse  to  falsehood,  for  no  other  design  than  to  support  the  errors 
with  which  you  flatter  the  sinful  children  of  this  world,  and  to  bolster  up  the 
calumnies  with  which  you  persecute  every  man  of  piety  who  sets  his  face  against 
these  delusions.  The  truth  being  diametrically  opposed  to  your  ends,  it  behooved 
you,  to  use  the  language  of  the  prophet,  "to  put  your  confidence  in  lies."  You 
have  said:  "The  scourges  which  afflict  mankind  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  us;  for 
we  have  made  lies  our  refuge,  and  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves."  But 
what  says  the  prophet  in  reply  to  such?  "Forasmuch,"  says  he,  "as  ye  have  put 
your  trust  in  calumny  and  tumult — sperastis  in  calumnia  et  in  tumultu — this  iniquity 
and  your  ruin  shall  be  like  that  of  a  high  wall  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at 
an  instant.  And  he  shall  break  it  as  the  breaking  of  the  potter’s  vessel  that  is 
shivered  in  pieces" — with  such  violence  that  "there  shall  not  be  found  in  the 


1 4o  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

bursting  of  it  a  shred  to  take  fire  from  the  hearth,  or  to  take  water  withal  out  of 
the  pit.”  "Because,”  as  another  prophet  says,  "ye  have  made  the  heart  of  the 
righteous  sad,  whom  I  have  not  made  sad;  and  ye  have  flattered  and  strengthened 
the  malice  of  the  wicked;  I  will  therefore  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hands, 
and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  their  Lord  and  yours.” 

Yes,  fathers,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  if  you  do  not  repent,  God  will  deliver  out  of 
your  hands  those  whom  you  have  so  long  deluded,  either  by  flattering  them  in 
their  evil  courses  with  your  licentious  maxims,  or  by  poisoning  their  minds  with 
your  slanders.  He  will  convince  the  former  that  the  false  rules  of  your  casuists  will 
not  screen  them  from  His  indignation ;  and  He  will  impress  on  the  minds  of  the 
latter  the  just  dread  of  losing  their  souls  by  listening  and  yielding  credit  to  your 
slanders,  as  you  lose  yours  by  hatching  these  slanders  and  disseminating  them 
through  the  world.  Let  no  man  be  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked;  none  may 
violate  with  impunity  the  commandment  which  He  has  given  us  in  the  Gospel, 
not  to  condemn  our  neighbour  without  being  well  assured  of  his  guilt.  And, 
consequently,  what  profession  soever  of  piety  those  may  make  who  lend  a  willing 
ear  to  your  lying  devices,  and  under  what  pretence  soever  of  devotion  they  may 
entertain  them,  they  have  reason  to  apprehend  exclusion  from  the  kingdom  of 
God,  solely  for  having  imputed  crimes  of  such  a  dark  complexion  as  heresy  and 
schism  to  Catholic  priests  and  holy  nuns,  upon  no  better  evidence  than  such  vile 
fabrications  as  yours.  "The  devil,”  says  M.  de  Geneve,  "is  on  the  tongue  of  him 
that  slanders,  and  in  the  ear  of  him  that  listens  to  the  slanderer.”  "And  evil  speak¬ 
ing,”  says  St.  Bernard,  "is  a  poison  that  extinguishes  charity  in  both  of  the  parties; 
so  that  a  single  calumny  may  prove  mortal  to  an  infinite  numbers  of  souls,  killing 
not  only  those  who  publish  it,  but  all  those  besides  by  whom  it  is  not  repudiated.” 

Reverend  fathers,  my  letters  were  not  wont  either  to  be  so  prolix,  or  to  follow 
so  closely  on  one  another.  Want  of  time  must  plead  my  excuse  for  both  of  these 
faults.  The  present  letter  is  a  very  long  one,  simply  because  I  had  no  leisure  to 
make  it  shorter.  You  know  the  reason  of  this  haste  better  than  I  do.  You  have 
been  unlucky  in  your  answers.  You  have  done  well,  therefore,  to  change  your 
plan;  but  I  am  afraid  that  you  will  get  no  credit  for  it,  and  that  people  will  say  it 
was  done  for  fear  of  the  Benedictines. 

I  have  just  come  to  learn  that  the  person  who  was  generally  reported  to  be  the 
author  of  your  Apologies ,  disclaims  them,  and  is  annoyed  at  their  having  been 
ascribed  to  him.  He  has  good  reason,  and  I  was  wrong  to  have  suspected  him  of 
any  such  thing;  for,  in  spite  of  the  assurances  which  I  received,  I  ought  to  have 
considered  that  he  was  a  man  of  too  much  good  sense  to  believe  your  accusations, 
and  of  too  much  honour  to  publish  them  if  he  did  not  believe  them.  There  are 
few  people  in  the  world  capable  of  your  extravagances;  they  are  peculiar  to  your¬ 
selves,  and  mark  your  character  too  plainly  to  admit  of  any  excuse  for  having 
failed  to  recognize  your  hand  in  their  concoction.  I  was  led  away  by  the  common 
report;  but  this  apology,  which  would  be  too  good  for  you,  is  not  sufficient  for 
me,  who  profess  to  advance  nothing  without  certain  proof.  In  no  other  instance 
have  I  been  guilty  of  departing  from  this  rule.  I  am  sorry  for  what  I  said.  I  retract 
it;  and  I  only  wish  that  you  may  profit  by  my  example. 


LETTER  XVII 


M1 


LETTER  XVII 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHER  ANNAT,  JESUIT 

January  23,  1657 

Reverend  Father, 

Your  former  behaviour  had  induced  me  to  believe  that  you  were  anxious  for  a 
truce  in  our  hostilities,  and  I  was  quite  disposed  to  agree  that  it  should  be  so.  Of 
late,  however,  you  have  poured  forth  such  a  volley  of  pamphlets,  in  such  rapid 
succession,  as  to  make  it  apparent  that  peace  rests  on  a  very  precarious  footing 
when  it  depends  on  the  silence  of  Jesuits.  I  know  not  if  this  rupture  will  prove 
very  advantageous  to  you;  but,  for  my  part,  I  am  far  from  regretting  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  which  it  affords  me  of  rebutting  that  stale  charge  of  heresy  with  which  your 
writings  abound. 

It  is  full  time,  indeed,  that  I  should,  once  for  all,  put  a  stop  to  the  liberty  you 
have  taken  to  treat  me  as  a  heretic — a  piece  of  gratuitous  impertinence  which 
seems  to  increase  by  indulgence,  and  which  is  exhibited  in  your  last  book  in  a 
style  of  such  intolerable  assurance  that,  were  I  not  to  answer  the  charge  as  it 
deserves,  I  might  lay  myself  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  actually  guilty.  So 
long  as  the  insult  was  confined  to  your  associates  I  despised  it,  as  I  did  a  thousand 
others  with  which  they  interlarded  their  productions.  To  these  my  Fifteenth  Letter 
was  a  sufficient  reply.  But  you  now  repeat  the  charge  with  a  different  air:  you  make 
it  the  main  point  of  your  vindication.  It  is,  in  fact,  almost  the  only  thing  in  the 
shape  of  argument  that  you  employ.  You  say  that,  "as  a  complete  answer  to  my 
fifteen  letters,  it  is  enough  to  say  fifteen  times  that  I  am  a  heretic;  and,  having 
been  pronounced  such,  I  deserve  no  credit."  In  short,  you  make  no  question  of 
my  apostasy,  but  assume  it  as  a  settled  point,  on  which  you  may  build  with  all 
confidence.  You  are  serious  then,  father,  it  would  seem,  in  deeming  me  a  heretic. 
I  shall  be  equally  serious  in  replying  to  the  charge. 

You  are  well  aware,  sir,  that  heresy  is  a  charge  of  so  grave  a  character  that  it  is  an 
act  of  high  presumption  to  advance,  without  being  prepared  to  substantiate  it.  I 
now  demand  your  proofs.  When  was  I  seen  at  Charenton?  When  did  I  fail  in  my 
presence  at  mass,  or  in  my  Christian  duty  to  my  parish  church?  What  act  of  union 
with  heretics,  or  of  schism  with  the  Church,  can  you  lay  to  my  charge?  What 
council  have  I  contradicted?  What  papal  constitution  have  I  violated?  You  must 

answer,  father,  else - You  know  what  I  mean.  And  what  do  you  answer?  I 

beseech  all  to  observe  it:  First  of  all,  you  assume  "that  the  author  of  the  letters  is  a 
Port-Royalist";  then  you  tell  us  "that  Port-Royal  is  declared  to  be  heretical";  and, 
therefore,  you  conclude,  "the  author  of  the  letters  must  be  a  heretic."  It  is  not  on 
me,  then,  father,  that  the  weight  of  this  indictment  falls,  but  on  Port-Royal;  and  I 
am  only  involved  in  the  crime  because  you  suppose  me  to  belong  to  that  establish¬ 
ment;  so  that  it  will  be  no  difficult  matter  for  me  to  exculpate  myself  from  the 
charge.  I  have  no  more  to  say  than  that  I  am  not  a  member  of  that  community; 
and  to  refer  you  to  my  letters,  in  which  I  have  declared  that  "I  am  a  private  indi¬ 
vidual";  and  again  in  so  many  words,  that  "I  am  not  of  Port-Royal,"  as  I  said  in 
my  Sixteenth  Letter ,  which  preceded  your  publication. 


142  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

You  must  fall  on  some  other  way,  then,  to  prove  me  heretic,  otherwise  the 
whole  world  will  be  convinced  that  it  is  beyond  your  power  to  make  good  your 
accusation.  Prove  from  my  writings  that  I  do  not  receive  the  constitution.  My 
letters  are  not  very  voluminous — there  are  but  sixteen  of  them — and  I  defy  you  or 
anybody  else  to  detect  in  them  the  slightest  foundation  for  such  a  charge.  I  shall, 
however,  with  your  permission,  produce  something  out  of  them  to  prove  the  re¬ 
verse.  When,  for  example,  I  say  in  the  Fourteenth  that,  "by  killing  our  brethren  in 
mortal  sin,  according  to  your  maxims,  we  are  damning  those  for  whom  Jesus 
Christ  died,"  do  I  not  plainly  acknowledge  that  Jesus  Christ  died  for  those  who 
may  be  damned,  and,  consequently,  declare  it  to  be  false  "that  he  died  only  for  the 
predestinated,"  which  is  the  error  condemned  in  the  fifth  proposition?  Certain  it 
is,  father,  that  I  have  not  said  a  word  in  behalf  of  these  impious  propositions, 
which  I  detest  with  all  my  heart.  And  even  though  Port-Royal  should  hold  them, 
I  protest  against  your  drawing  any  conclusion  from  this  against  me,  as,  thank  God, 
I  have  no  sort  of  connection  with  any  community  except  the  Catholic,  Apostolic 
and  Roman  Church,  in  the  bosom  of  which  I  desire  to  live  and  die,  in  communion 
with  the  Pope,  the  head  of  the  Church,  and  beyond  the  pale  of  which  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  there  is  no  salvation. 

How  are  you  to  get  at  a  person  who  talks  in  this  way,  father?  On  what  quarter 
will  you  assail  me,  since  neither  my  words  nor  my  writings  afford  the  slightest 
handle  to  your  accusations,  and  the  obscurity  in  which  my  person  is  enveloped 
forms  my  protection  against  your  threatenings?  You  feel  yourselves  smitten  by  an 
invisible  hand — a  hand,  however,  which  makes  your  delinquencies  visible  to  all 
the  earth;  and  in  vain  do  you  endeavour  to  attack  me  in  the  person  of  those  with 
whom  you  suppose  me  to  be  associated.  I  fear  you  not,  either  on  my  own  account 
or  on  that  of  any  other,  being  bound  by  no  tie  either  to  a  community  or  to  any 
individual  whatsoever.  All  the  influence  which  your  Society  possesses  can  be  of  no 
avail  in  my  case.  From  this  world  I  have  nothing  to  hope,  nothing  to  dread,  noth¬ 
ing  to  desire.  Through  the  goodness  of  God,  I  have  no  need  of  any  man’s  money 
or  any  man’s  patronage.  Thus,  my  father,  I  elude  all  your  attempts  to  lay  hold  of 
me.  You  may  touch  Port-Royal,  if  you  choose,  but  you  shall  not  touch  me.  You 
may  turn  people  out  of  the  Sorbonne,  but  that  will  not  turn  me  out  of  my  domicile. 
You  may  contrive  plots  against  priests  and  doctors,  but  not  against  me,  for  I  am 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  And  thus,  father,  you  never  perhaps  had  to  do,  in 
the  whole  course  of  your  experience,  with  a  person  so  completely  beyond  your 
reach,  and  therefore  so  admirably  qualified  for  dealing  with  your  errors — one  per¬ 
fectly  free — one  without  engagement,  entanglement,  relationship,  or  business  of 
any  kind — one,  too,  who  is  pretty  well  versed  in  your  maxims,  and  determined, 
as  God  shall  give  him  light,  to  discuss  them,  without  permitting  any  earthly  con¬ 
sideration  to  arrest  or  slacken  his  endeavours. 

Since,  then,  you  can  do  nothing  against  me,  what  good  purpose  can  it  serve  to 
publish  so  many  calumnies,  as  you  and  your  brethren  are  doing,  against  a  class  of 
persons  who  are  in  no  way  implicated  in  our  disputes?  You  shall  not  escape  under 
these  subterfuges:  you  shall  be  made  to  feel  the  force  of  the  truth  in  spite  of  them. 
How  does  the  case  stand?  I  tell  you  that  you  are  ruining  Christian  morality  by 
divorcing  it  from  the  love  of  God,  and  dispensing  with  its  obligation;  and  you 
talk  about  "the  death  of  Father  Mester" — a  person  whom  I  never  saw  in  my  life. 
I  tell  you  that  your  authors  permit  a  man  to  kill  another  for  the  sake  of  an  apple, 


LETTER  XVII 


143 

when  it  would  be  dishonourable  to  lose  it;  and  you  reply  by  informing  me  that 
somebody  "has  broken  into  the  poor-box  at  St.  Merri!"  Again,  what  can  you 
possibly  mean  by  mixing  me  up  perpetually  with  the  book  On  the  Holy  Virginity , 
written  by  some  father  of  the  Oratory,  whom  I  never  saw  any  more  than  his  book? 
It  is  rather  extraordinary,  father,  that  you  should  thus  regard  all  that  are  opposed 
to  you  as  if  they  were  one  person.  Your  hatred  would  grasp  them  all  at  once,  and 
would  hold  them  as  a  body  of  reprobates,  every  one  of  whom  is  responsible  for  all 
the  rest. 

There  is  a  vast  difference  between  Jesuits  and  all  their  opponents.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  you  compose  one  body,  united  under  one  head;  and  your  regula¬ 
tions,  as  I  have  shown,  prohibit  you  from  printing  anything  without  the  approba¬ 
tion  of  your  superiors,  who  are  responsible  for  all  the  errors  of  individual  writers, 
and  who  "cannot  excuse  themselves  by  saying  that  they  did  not  observe  the  errors 
in  any  publication,  for  they  ought  to  have  observed  them.  ’  ’  So  say  your  ordinances, 
and  so  say  the  letters  of  your  generals,  Aquaviva,  Vitelleschi,  &c.  We  have  good 
reason,  therefore,  for  charging  upon  you  the  errors  of  your  associates,  when  we 
find  they  are  sanctioned  by  your  superiors  and  the  divines  of  your  Society.  With 
me,  however,  father,  the  case  stands  otherwise.  I  have  not  subscribed  to  the  book 
of  the  Holy  Virginity.  All  the  alms-boxes  in  Paris  may  be  broken  into,  and  yet  I  am 
not  the  less  a  good  Catholic  for  all  that.  In  short,  I  beg  to  inform  you,  in  the 
plainest  terms,  that  nobody  is  responsible  for  my  letters  but  myself,  and  that  I  am 
responsible  for  nothing  but  my  letters. 

Here,  father,  I  might  fairly  enough  have  brought  our  dispute  to  an  issue,  with¬ 
out  saying  a  word  about  those  other  persons  whom  you  stigmatize  as  heretics,  in 
order  to  comprehend  me  under  the  condemnation.  But,  as  I  have  been  the  occa¬ 
sion  of  their  ill  treatment,  I  consider  myself  bound  in  some  sort  to  improve  the 
occasion,  and  I  shall  take  advantage  of  it  in  three  particulars.  One  advantage,  not 
inconsiderable  in  its  way,  is  that  it  will  enable  me  to  vindicate  the  innocence  of  so 
many  calumniated  individuals.  Another,  not  inappropriate  to  my  subject,  will  be 
to  disclose,  at  the  same  time,  the  artifices  of  your  policy  in  this  accusation.  But 
the  advantage  which  I  prize  most  of  all  is  that  it  affords  me  an  opportunity  of 
apprising  the  world  of  the  falsehood  of  that  scandalous  report  which  you  have 
been  so  busily  disseminating,  namely,  "that  the  Church  is  divided  by  a  new 
heresy."  And  as  you  are  deceiving  multitudes  into  the  belief  that  the  points  on 
which  you  are  raising  such  a  storm  are  essential  to  the  faith,  I  consider  it  of  the  last 
importance  to  quash  these  unfounded  impressions,  and  distinctly  to  explain  here 
what  these  points  are,  so  as  to  show  that,  in  point  of  fact,  there  are  no  heretics  in 
the  Church. 

I  presume,  then,  that  were  the  question  to  be  asked:  Wherein  consists  the 
heresy  of  those  called  JansenistsPt he  immediate  reply  would  be,  "These  people  hold 
that  the  commandments  of  God  are  impracticable  to  men,  that  grace  is  irresist¬ 
ible,  that  we  have  not  free  will  to  do  either  good  or  evil,  that  Jesus  Christ  did  not 
die  for  all  men,  but  only  for  the  elect ;  in  short,  they  maintain  the  five  propositions 
condemned  by  the  Pope."  Do  you  not  give  it  out  to  all  that  this  is  the  ground  on 
which  you  persecute  your  opponents?  Have  you  not  said  as  much  in  your  books, 
in  your  conversations,  in  your  catechisms?  A  specimen  of  this  you  gave  at  the  late 
Christmas  festival  at  St.  Louis.  One  of  your  little  shepherdesses  was  questioned 
thus: 


144  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

"For  whom  did  Jesus  Christ  come  into  the  world,  my  dear?" 

"For  all  men,  father." 

"Indeed,  my  child;  so  you  are  not  one  of  those  new  heretics  who  say  that  he 
came  only  for  the  elect?" 

Thus  children  are  led  to  believe  you,  and  many  others  besides  children;  for  you 
entertain  people  with  the  same  stuff  in  your  sermons  as  Father  Crasset  did  at 
Orleans,  before  he  was  laid  under  an  interdict.  And  I  frankly  own  that,  at  one 
time,  I  believed  you  myself.  You  had  given  me  precisely  the  same  idea  of  these 
good  people;  so  that,  when  you  pressed  them  on  these  propositions,  I  narrowly 
watched  their  answer,  determined  never  to  see  them  more,  if  they  did  not  renounce 
them  as  palpable  impieties. 

This,  however,  they  have  done  in  the  most  unequivocal  way.  M.  de  Sainte- 
Beuve,  king’s  professor  in  the  Sorbonne,  censured  these  propositions  in  his 
published  writings  long  before  the  Pope;  and  other  Augustinian  doctors,  in  var¬ 
ious  publications,  and,  among  others,  in  a  work  On  Victorious  Grace ,  reject  the 
same  articles  as  both  heretical  and  strange  doctrines.  In  the  preface  to  that  work 
they  say  that  these  propositions  are  "heretical  and  Lutheran,  forged  and  fabricated 
at  pleasure,  and  are  neither  to  be  found  in  Jansenius,  nor  in  his  defenders."  They 
complain  of  being  charged  with  such  sentiments,  and  address  you  in  the  words  of 
St.  Prosper,  the  first  disciple  of  St.  Augustine  their  master,  to  whom  the  semi- 
Pelagians  of  France  had  ascribed  similar  opinions,  with  the  view  of  bringing  him 
into  disgrace:  "There  are  persons  who  denounce  us,  so  blinded  by  passion  that 
they  have  adopted  means  for  doing  so  which  ruin  their  own  reputation.  They 
have,  for  this  purpose,  fabricated  propositions  of  the  most  impious  and  blas¬ 
phemous  character,  which  they  industriously  circulate,  to  make  people  believe 
that  we  maintain  them  in  the  wicked  sense  which  they  are  pleased  to  attach  to 
them.  But  our  reply  will  show  at  once  our  innocence,  and  the  malignity  of  these 
persons  who  have  ascribed  to  us  a  set  of  impious  tenets,  of  which  they  are  them¬ 
selves  the  sole  inventors." 

Truly,  father,  when  I  found  that  they  had  spoken  in  this  way  before  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  the  papal  constitution — when  I  saw  that  they  afterwards  received  that 
decree  with  all  possible  respect,  that  they  offered  to  subscribe  it,  and  that  M. 
Arnauld  had  declared  all  this  in  his  second  letter,  in  stronger  terms  than  I  can 
report  him,  I  should  have  considered  it  a  sin  to  doubt  their  soundness  in  the  faith. 
And,  in  fact,  those  who  were  formerly  disposed  to  refuse  absolution  to  M.  Ar¬ 
nauld ’s  friends,  have  since  declared  that,  after  his  explicit  disclaimer  of  the  errors 
imputed  to  him,  there  was  no  reason  left  for  cutting  off  either  him  or  them  from 
the  communion  of  the  Church.  Your  associates,  however,  have  acted  very  dif¬ 
ferently;  and  it  was  this  that  made  me  begin  to  suspect  that  you  were  actuated  by 
prejudice. 

You  threatened  first  to  compel  them  to  sign  that  constitution,  so  long  as  you 
thought  they  would  resist  it;  but  no  sooner  did  you  see  them  quite  ready  of  their 
own  accord  to  submit  to  it  than  we  heard  no  more  about  this.  Still,  however, 
though  one  might  suppose  this  ought  to  have  satisfied  you,  you  persisted  in  call¬ 
ing  them  heretics,  "because,"  said  you,  "their  heart  belies  their  hand;  they  are 
Catholics  outwardly,  but  inwardly  they  are  heretics." 

This,  father,  struck  me  as  very  strange  reasoning;  for  where  is  the  person  of 
whom  as  much  may  not  be  said  at  any  time?  And  what  endless  trouble  and  con- 


LETTER  XVII 


145 

fusion  would  ensue,  were  it  allowed  to  go  on!  "If,”  says  Pope  St.  Gregory,  " we  re¬ 
fuse  to  believe  a  confession  of  faith  made  in  conformity  to  the  sentiments  of  the 
Church,  we  cast  a  doubt  over  the  faith  of  all  Catholics  whatsoever.”  I  am  afraid, 
father,  to  use  the  words  of  the  same  pontiff  when  speaking  of  a  similar  dispute 
this  time,  "that  your  object  is  to  make  these  persons  heretics  in  spite  of  them¬ 
selves;  because  to  refuse  to  credit  those  who  testify  by  their  confession  that  they 
are  in  the  true  faith,  is  not  to  purge  heresy,  but  to  create  it — hoc  non  est  hceresim  pur - 
gare ,  sed  facere .”  But  what  confirmed  me  in  my  persuasion  that  there  was,  indeed, 
no  heretic  in  the  Church,  was  finding  that  our  so-called  heretics  had  vindicated 
themselves  so  successfully  that  you  were  unable  to  accuse  them  of  a  single  error 
in  the  faith,  and  that  you  were  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  assailing  them  on 
questions  of  fact  only,  touching  Jansenius,  which  could  not  possibly  be  construed 
into  heresy.  You  insist,  it  now  appears,  on  their  being  compelled  to  acknowledge 
"that  these  propositions  are  contained  in  Jansenius,  word  for  word,  every  one  of 
them,  in  so  many  terms,”  or,  as  you  express  it,  " Si ngu lares,  individuce ,  totidem  verbis 
apud Jansen  iurn  content ce." 

Thenceforth  your  dispute  became,  in  my  eyes,  perfectly  indifferent.  So  long  as 
I  believed  that  you  were  debating  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  propositions,  I  was 
all  attention,  for  that  quarrel  touched  the  faith;  but  when  I  discovered  that  the  bone 
of  contention  was  whether  they  were  to  be  found  word  for  word  in  Jansenius  or 
not,  as  religion  ceased  to  be  interested  in  the  controversy,  I  ceased  to  be  interested 
in  it  also.  Not  but  that  there  was  some  presumption  that  you  were  speaking  the 
truth;  because  to  say  that  such  and  such  expressions  are  to  be  found  word  for 
word  in  an  author,  is  a  matter  in  which  there  can  be  no  mistake.  I  do  not  wonder, 
therefore,  that  so  many  people,  both  in  France  and  at  Rome,  should  have  been  led 
to  believe,  on  the  authority  of  a  phrase  so  little  liable  to  suspicion,  that  Jansenius 
has  actually  taught  these  obnoxious  tenets.  And,  for  the  same  reason,  I  was  not  a 
little  surprised  to  learn  that  this  same  point  of  fact,  which  you  had  propounded  as 
so  certain  and  so  important,  was  false;  and  that,  after  being  challenged  to  quote 
the  pages  of  Jansenius  in  which  you  had  found  these  propositions  "word  for 
word,”  you  have  not  been  able  to  point  them  out  to  this  day. 

I  am  the  more  particular  in  giving  this  statement,  because,  in  my  opinion,  it 
discovers,  in  a  very  striking  light,  the  spirit  of  your  Society  in  the  whole  of  this 
affair;  and  because  some  people  will  be  astonished  to  find  that,  notwithstanding 
all  the  facts  above  mentioned,  you  have  not  ceased  to  publish  that  they  are  heretics 
still.  But  you  have  only  altered  the  heresy  to  suit  the  time;  for  no  sooner  had  they 
freed  themselves  from  one  charge  than  your  fathers,  determined  that  they  should 
never  want  an  accusation,  substituted  another  in  its  place.  Thus,  in  1653,  their 
heresy  lay  in  the  quality  of  the  propositions;  then  came  the  word  for  word  heresy; 
after  that  we  had  the  heart  heresy.  And  now  we  hear  nothing  of  any  of  these,  and 
they  must  be  heretics,  forsooth,  unless  they  sign  a  declaration  to  the  effect  x'that 
the  sense  of  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  is  contained  in  the  sense  of  the  five  propositions .” 

Such  is  your  present  dispute.  It  is  not  enough  for  you  that  they  condemn  the 
five  propositions,  and  everything  in  Jansenius  that  bears  any  resemblance  to  them, 
or  is  contrary  to  St.  Augustine;  for  all  that  they  have  done  already.  The  point  at 
issue  is  not,  for  example,  if  Jesus  Christ  died  for  the  elect  only — they  condemn 
that  as  much  as  you  do;  but,  is  Jansenius  of  that  opinion,  or  not?  And  here  I  de¬ 
clare,  more  strongly  than  ever,  that  your  quarrel  affects  me  as  little  as  it  affects  the 


146  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Church.  For  although  I  am  no  doctor,  any  more  than  you,  father,  I  can  easily  see, 
nevertheless,  that  it  has  no  connection  with  the  faith.  The  only  question  is  to 
ascertain  what  is  the  sense  of  Jansenius.  Did  they  believe  that  his  doctrine  cor¬ 
responded  to  the  proper  and  literal  sense  of  these  propositions,  they  would  con¬ 
demn  it;  and  they  refuse  to  do  so,  because  they  are  convinced  it  is  quite  the  re¬ 
verse;  so  that,  although  they  should  misunderstand  it,  still  they  would  not  be 
heretics,  seeing  they  understand  it  only  in  a  Catholic  sense. 

To  illustrate  this  by  an  example,  I  may  refer  to  the  conflicting  sentiments  of  St. 
Basil  and  St.  Athanasius,  regarding  the  writings  of  St.  Denis  of  Alexandria,  which 
St.  Basil,  conceiving  that  he  found  in  them  the  sense  of  Arius  against  the  equality 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  condemned  as  heretical,  but  which  St.  Athanasius,  on 
the  other  hand,  judging  them  to  contain  the  genuine  sense  of  the  Church,  main¬ 
tained  to  be  perfectly  orthodox.  Think  you,  then,  father,  that  St.  Basil,  who  held 
these  writings  to  be  Arian,  had  a  right  to  brand  St.  Athanasius  as  a  heretic  because 
he  defended  them?  And  what  ground  would  he  have  had  for  so  doing,  seeing  that 
it  was  not  Arianism  that  his  brother  defended,  but  the  true  faith  which  he  con¬ 
sidered  these  writings  to  contain?  Had  these  two  saints  agreed  about  the  true 
sense  of  these  writings,  and  had  both  recognized  this  heresy  in  them,  unquestion¬ 
ably  St.  Athanasius  could  not  have  approved  of  them  without  being  guilty  of 
heresy;  but  as  they  were  at  variance  respecting  the  sense  of  the  passage,  St.  Athan¬ 
asius  was  orthodox  in  vindicating  them,  even  though  he  may  have  understood 
them  wrong;  because  in  that  case  it  would  have  been  merely  an  error  in  a  matter  of 
fact,  and  because  what  he  defended  was  really  the  Catholic  faith,  which  he  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  contained  in  these  writings. 

I  apply  this  to  you,  father.  Suppose  you  were  agreed  upon  the  sense  of  Jansenius, 
and  your  adversaries  were  ready  to  admit  with  you  that  he  held,  for  example,  that 
grace  cannot  be  resisted;  those  who  refused  to  condemn  him  would  be  heretical.  But 
as  your  dispute  turns  upon  the  meaning  of  that  author,  and  they  believe  that, 
according  to  this  doctrine,  grace  may  be  resisted, ,  whatever  heresy  you  may  be  pleased 
to  attribute  to  him,  you  have  no  ground  to  brand  them  as  heretics,  seeing  they 
condemn  the  sense  which  you  put  on  Jansenius,  and  you  dare  not  condemn  the 
sense  which  they  put  on  him.  If,  therefore,  you  mean  to  convict  them,  show  that 
the  sense  which  they  ascribe  to  Jansenius  is  heretical;  for  then  they  will  be  heret¬ 
ical  themselves.  But  how  could  you  accomplish  this,  since  it  is  certain,  according 
to  your  own  showing,  that  the  meaning  which  they  give  to  his  language  has 
never  been  condemned? 

To  elucidate  the  point  still  further,  I  shall  assume  as  a  principle  what  you  your¬ 
selves  acknowledge — that  the  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace  has  never  been  condemned ,  and 
that  the  pope  has  not  touched  it  by  his  constitution.  And,  in  fact,  when  he  proposed  to 
pass  judgement  on  the  five  propositions,  the  question  of  efficacious  grace  was 
protected  against  all  censure.  This  is  perfectly  evident  from  the  judgements  of  the 
consulters  to  whom  the  Pope  committed  them  for  examination.  These  judgements 
I  have  in  my  possession,  in  common  with  many  other  persons  in  Paris,  and,  among 
the  rest,  the  Bishop  of  Montpelier,  who  brought  them  from  Rome.  It  appears  from 
this  document  that  they  were  divided  in  their  sentiments;  that  the  chief  persons 
among  them,  such  as  the  Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  the  commissary  of  the  Holy 
Office,  the  General  of  the  Augustinians,  and  others,  conceiving  that  these  propo¬ 
sitions  might  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  efficacious  grace ,  were  of  opinion  that 


LETTER  XVII 


i47 

they  ought  not  to  be  censured;  whereas  the  rest,  while  they  agreed  that  the  propo¬ 
sitions  would  not  have  merited  condemnation  had  they  borne  that  sense,  judged 
that  they  ought  to  be  censured,  because,  as  they  contended,  this  was  very  far  from 
being  their  proper  and  natural  sense.  The  Pope,  accordingly,  condemned  them; 
and  all  parties  have  acquiesced  in  his  judgement. 

It  is  certain,  then,  father,  that  efficacious  grace  has  not  been  condemned.  Indeed, 
it  is  so  powerfully  supported  by  St.  Augustine,  by  St.  Thomas,  and  all  his  school, 
by  a  great  many  popes  and  councils,  and  by  all  tradition,  that  to  tax  it  with  heresy 
would  be  an  act  of  impiety.  Now,  all  those  whom  you  condemn  as  heretics  declare 
that  they  find  nothing  in  Jansenius,  but  this  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace.  And 
this  was  the  only  point  which  they  maintained  at  Rome.  You  have  acknowledged 
this  yourself  when  you  declare  that  "when  pleading  before  the  pope,  they  did  not 
say  a  single  word  about  the  propositions,  but  occupied  the  whole  time  in  talking 
about  efficacious  grace."  So  that,  whether  they  be  right  or  wrong  in  this  supposi¬ 
tion,  it  is  undeniable,  at  least,  that  what  they  suppose  to  be  the  sense  is  not  heret¬ 
ical  sense;  and  that,  consequently,  they  are  no  heretics;  for,  to  state  the  matter  in 
two  words,  either  Jansenius  has  merely  taught  the  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace, 
and  in  this  case  he  has  no  errors;  or  he  has  taught  some  other  thing,  and  in  this 
case  he  has  no  defenders.  The  whole  question  turns  on  ascertaining  whether 
Jansenius  has  actually  maintained  something  different  from  efficacious  grace;  and, 
should  it  be  found  that  he  has,  you  will  have  the  honour  of  having  better  under¬ 
stood  him,  but  they  will  not  have  the  misfortune  of  having  erred  from  the  faith. 

It  is  matter  of  thankfulness  to  God,  then,  father,  that  there  is  in  reality  no 
heresy  in  the  Church.  The  question  relates  entirely  to  a  point  of  fact,  of  which  no 
heresy  can  be  made;  for  the  Church,  with  divine  authority,  decides  the  points  of 
faith,  and  cuts  off  from  her  body  all  who  refuse  to  receive  them.  But  she  does  not 
act  in  the  same  manner  in  regard  to  matters  of  fact.  And  the  reason  is  that  our  sal¬ 
vation  is  attached  to  the  faith  which  has  been  revealed  to  us,  and  which  is  pre¬ 
served  in  the  Church  by  tradition,  but  that  it  has  no  dependence  on  facts  which 
have  not  been  revealed  by  God.  Thus  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  the  command¬ 
ments  of  God  are  not  impracticable;  but  we  are  under  no  obligation  to  know  what 
Jansenius  has  said  upon  that  subject.  In  the  determination  of  points  of  faith,  God 
guides  the  Church  by  the  aid  of  His  unerring  Spirit;  whereas  in  matters  of  fact  He 
leaves  her  to  the  direction  of  reason  and  the  senses,  which  are  the  natural  judges  of 
such  matters.  None  but  God  was  able  to  instruct  the  Church  in  the  faith;  but  to 
learn  whether  this  or  that  proposition  is  contained  in  Jansenius,  all  we  require  to 
do  is  to  read  his  book.  And  from  hence  it  follows  that,  while  it  is  heresy  to  resist 
the  decisions  of  the  faith,  because  this  amounts  to  an  opposing  of  our  own  spirit 
to  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  no  heresy,  though  it  may  be  an  act  of  presumption,  to 
disbelieve  certain  particular  facts,  because  this  is  no  more  than  opposing  reason — 
it  may  be  enlightened  reason — to  an  authority  which  is  great  indeed,  but  in  this 
matter  not  infallible. 

What  I  have  now  advanced  is  admitted  by  all  theologians,  as  appears  from  the 
following  axiom  of  Cardinal  Bellarmine,  a  member  of  your  Society:  "General  and 
lawful  councils  are  incapable  of  error  in  defining  the  dogmas  of  faith;  but  they 
may  err  in  questions  of  fact."  In  another  place  he  says:  "The  pope,  as  pope,  and 
even  as  the  head  of  a  universal  council,  may  err  in  particular  controversies  of  fact, 
which  depend  principally  on  the  information  and  testimony  of  men."  Cardinal 


148  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Baronius  speaks  in  the  same  manner:  "Implicit  submission  is  due  to  the  decisions 
of  councils  in  points  of  faith;  but,  in  so  far  as  persons  and  their  writings  are  con¬ 
cerned,  the  censures  which  have  been  pronounced  against  them  have  not  been 
so  rigourously  observed,  because  there  is  none  who  may  not  chance  to  be  de¬ 
ceived  in  such  matters."  I  may  add  that,  to  prove  this  point,  the  Archbishop  of 
Toulouse  has  deduced  the  following  rule  from  the  letters  of  two  great  popes — 
St.  Leon  and  Pelagius  II:  "That  the  proper  object  of  councils  is  the  faith;  and 
whatsoever  is  determined  by  them,  independently  of  the  faith,  may  be  reviewed 
and  examined  anew:  whereas  nothing  ought  to  be  re-examined  that  has  been 
decided  in  a  matter  of  faith;  because,  as  Tertullian  observes,  the  rule  of  faith  alone 
is  immovable  and  irrevocable." 

Hence  it  has  been  seen  that,  while  general  and  lawful  councils  have  never  con¬ 
tradicted  one  another  in  points  of  faith,  because,  as  M.  de  Toulouse  has  said,  "it  is 
not  allowable  to  examine  de  novo  decisions  in  matters  of  faith";  several  instances 
have  occurred  in  which  these  same  councils  have  disagreed  in  points  of  fact,  where 
the  discussion  turned  upon  the  sense  of  an  author;  because,  as  the  same  prelate 
observes,  quoting  the  popes  as  his  authorities,  "everything  determined  in  councils, 
not  referring  to  the  faith,  may  be  reviewed  and  examined  de  novo."  An  example  of 
this  contrariety  was  furnished  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  councils,  which  differed  in 
their  interpretation  of  the  same  authors.  The  same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of 
two  popes,  about  a  proposition  maintained  by  certain  monks  of  Scythia.  Pope 
Hormisdas,  understanding  it  in  a  bad  sense,  had  condemned  it;  but  Pope  John  II, 
his  successor,  upon  re-examining  the  doctrine  understood  it  in  a  good  sense,  ap¬ 
proved  it,  and  pronounced  it  to  be  orthodox.  Would  you  say  that  for  this  reason 
one  of  these  popes  was  a  heretic?  And  must  you  not  consequently  acknowledge 
that,  provided  a  person  condemn  the  heretical  sense  which  a  pope  may  have 
ascribed  to  a  book,  he  is  no  heretic  because  he  declines  condemning  that  book, 
while  he  understands  it  in  a  sense  which  it  is  certain  the  pope  has  not  condemned? 
If  this  cannot  be  admitted,  one  of  these  popes  must  have  fallen  into  error. 

I  have  been  anxious  to  familiarize  you  with  these  discrepancies  among  Catholics 
regarding  questions  of  fact,  which  involve  the  understanding  of  the  sense  of  a 
writer,  showing  you  father  against  father,  pope  against  pope,  and  council  against 
council,  to  lead  you  from  these  to  other  examples  of  opposition,  similar  in  their 
nature,  but  somewhat  more  disproportioned  in  respect  of  the  parties  concerned. 
For,  in  the  instances  I  am  now  to  adduce,  you  will  see  councils  and  popes  ranged 
on  one  side,  and  Jesuits  on  the  other;  and  yet  you  have  never  charged  your  breth¬ 
ren  for  this  opposition  even  with  presumption,  much  less  with  heresy. 

You  are  well  aware,  father,  that  the  writings  of  Origen  were  condemned  by  a 
great  many  popes  and  councils,  and  particularly  by  the  fifth  general  council,  as 
chargeable  with  certain  heresies,  and,  among  others,  that  of  the  reconciliation  of  the 
devils  at  the  day  of  judgement.  Do  you  suppose  that,  after  this,  it  became  absolutely 
imperative,  as  a  test  of  Catholicism,  to  confess  that  Origen  actually  maintained 
these  errors,  and  that  it  is  not  enough  to  condemn  them,  without  attributing  them 
to  him?  If  this  were  true,  what  would  become  of  your  worthy  Father  Halloix, 
who  has  asserted  the  purity  of  Origen ’s  faith,  as  well  as  many  other  Catholics 
who  have  attempted  the  same  thing,  such  as  Pico  Mirandola,  and  Genebrard,  doctor 
of  the  Sorbonne?  Is  it  not,  moreover,  a  certain  fact,  that  the  same  fifth  general 
council  condemned  the  writings  of  Theodoret  against  St.  Cyril,  describing  them 


LETTER  XVII 


i49 

as  impious,  "contrary  to  the  true  faith,  and  tainted  with  the  Nestorian  heresy"? 
And  yet  this  has  not  prevented  Father  Sirmond,  a  Jesuit,  from  defending  him,  or 
from  saying,  in  his  life  of  that  father,  that  "his  writings  are  entirely  free  from  the 
heresy  of  Nestorius." 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  as  the  Church,  in  condemning  a  book,  assumes  that 
the  error  which  she  condemns  is  contained  in  that  book,  it  is  a  point  of  faith  to 
hold  that  error  as  condemned ;  but  it  is  not  a  point  of  faith  to  hold  that  the  book,  in 
fact,  contains  the  error  which  the  Church  supposes  it  does.  Enough  has  been  said, 

I  think,  to  prove  this;  I  shall,  therefore,  conclude  my  examples  by  referring  to  that 
of  Pope  Honorius,  the  history  of  which  is  so  well  known.  At  the  commencement 
of  the  seventh  century,  the  Church  being  troubled  by  the  heresy  of  the  Monoth¬ 
elites,  that  pope,  with  the  view  of  terminating  the  controversy,  passed  a  decree 
which  seemed  favourable  to  these  heretics,  at  which  many  took  offence.  The  affair, 
nevertheless,  passed  over  without  making  much  disturbance  during  his  pontifi¬ 
cate;  but  fifty  years  after,  the  Church  being  assembled  in  the  sixth  general  council, 
in  which  Pope  Agathon  presided  by  his  legates,  this  decree  was  impeached,  and, 
after  being  read  and  examined,  was  condemned  as  containing  the  heresy  of  the 
Monothelites,  and  under  that  character  burnt,  in  open  court,  along  with  the  other 
writings  of  these  heretics.  Such  was  the  respect  paid  to  this  decision,  and  such  the 
unanimity  with  which  it  was  received  throughout  the  whole  Church,  that  it  was 
afterwards  ratified  by  two  other  general  councils,  and  likewise  by  two  popes,  Leo 

II  and  Adrian  II,  the  latter  of  whom  lived  two  hundred  years  after  it  had  passed; 
and  this  universal  and  harmonious  agreement  remained  undisturbed  for  seven  or 
eight  centuries.  Of  late  years,  however,  some  authors,  and  among  the  rest  Cardinal 
Bellarmine,  without  seeming  to  dread  the  imputation  of  heresy,  have  stoutly 
maintained,  against  all  this  array  of  popes  and  councils,  that  the  writings  of 
Honorius  are  free  from  the  error  which  had  been  ascribed  to  them;  "because," 
says  the  cardinal,  "general  councils  being  liable  to  err  in  questions  of  fact,  we  have 
the  best  grounds  for  asserting  the  sixth  council  was  mistaken  with  regard  to  the 
fact  now  under  consideration;  and  that,  misconceiving  the  sense  of  the  Letters  of 
Honorius,  it  has  placed  this  pope  most  unjustly  in  the  rank  of  heretics."  Observe, 
then,  I  pray  you,  father,  that  a  man  is  not  heretical  for  saying  that  Pope  Honorius 
was  not  a  heretic;  even  though  a  great  many  popes  and  councils,  after  examining 
his  writings,  should  have  declared  that  he  was  so. 

I  now  come  to  the  question  before  us,  and  shall  allow  you  to  state  your  case  as 
favourably  as  you  can.  What  will  you  then  say,  father,  in  order  to  stamp  your  op¬ 
ponents  as  heretics?  That  "Pope  Innocent  X  has  declared  that  the  error  of  the  five 
propositions  is  to  be  found  in  Jansenius?"  I  grant  you  that;  what  inference  do  you 
draw  from  it?  That  "it  is  heretical  to  deny  that  the  error  of  the  five  propositions  is 
to  be  found  in  Jansenius?"  How  so,  father?  Have  we  not  here  a  question  of  fact 
exactly  similar  to  the  preceding  examples?  The  Pope  has  declared  that  the  error  of 
the  five  propositions  is  contained  in  Jansenius,  in  the  same  way  as  his  predecessors 
decided  that  the  errors  of  the  Nestorians  and  the  Monothelites  polluted  the  pages 
of  Theodoret  and  Honorius.  In  the  latter  case,  your  writers  hesitate  not  to  say  that, 
while  they  condemn  the  heresies,  they  do  not  allow  that  these  authors  actually 
maintained  them;  and,  in  like  manner,  your  opponents  now  say  that  they  con¬ 
demn  the  five  propositions,  but  cannot  admit  that  Jansenius  has  taught  them. 
Truly,  the  two  cases  are  as  like  as  they  could  well  be;  and,  if  there  be  any  disparity 


150  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

between  them,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  far  it  must  go  in  favour  of  the  present  question, 
by  a  comparison  of  many  particular  circumstances,  which  as  they  are  self-evident, 
I  do  not  specify.  How  comes  it  to  pass,  then,  that  when  placed  in  precisely  the 
same  predicament,  your  friends  are  Catholics  and  your  opponents  heretics?  On 
what  strange  principle  of  exception  do  you  deprive  the  latter  of  a  liberty  which 
you  freely  award  to  all  the  rest  of  the  faithful?  What  answer  will  you  make  to  this, 
father?  Will  you  say,  "The  pope  has  confirmed  his  constitution  by  a  brief."  To 
this  I  would  reply,  that  two  general  councils  and  two  popes  confirmed  the  con¬ 
demnation  of  the  letters  of  Honorius.  But  what  argument  do  you  found  upon  the 
language  of  that  brief,  in  which  all  that  the  Pope  says  is  that  "he  has  condemned 
the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  in  these  five  propositions"?  What  does  that  add  to  the 
constitution,  or  what  more  can  you  infer  from  it?  Nothing,  certainly,  except  that 
as  the  sixth  council  condemned  the  doctrine  of  Honorius,  in  the  belief  that  it  was 
the  same  with  that  of  the  Monothelites,  so  the  Pope  has  said  that  he  has  con¬ 
demned  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  in  these  five  propositions,  because  he  was  led 
to  suppose  it  was  the  same  with  that  of  the  five  propositions.  And  how  could  he 
do  otherwise  than  suppose  it?  Your  Society  published  nothing  else;  and  you  your¬ 
self,  father,  who  have  asserted  that  the  said  propositions  were  in  that  author  "word 
for  word,"  happened  to  be  in  Rome  (for  I  know  all  your  motions)  at  the  time  when 
the  censure  was  passed.  Was  he  to  distrust  the  sincerity  or  the  competence  of  so 
many  grave  ministers  of  religion?  And  how  could  he  help  being  convinced  of  the 
fact,  after  the  assurance  which  you  had  given  him  that  the  propositions  were  in 
that  author  "word  for  word"?  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  the  event  of  its  being 
found  that  Jansenius  has  not  supported  these  doctrines,  it  would  be  wrong  to  say, 
as  your  writers  have  done  in  the  cases  before  mentioned,  that  the  Pope  has  de¬ 
ceived  himself  in  this  point  of  fact,  which  it  is  painful  and  offensive  to  publish  at 
any  time;  the  proper  phrase  is  that  you  have  deceived  the  Pope,  which,  as  you  are 
now  pretty  well  known,  will  create  no  scandal. 

Determined,  however,  to  have  a  heresy  made  out,  let  it  cost  what  it  may,  you 
have  attempted,  by  the  following  manoeuvre,  to  shift  the  question  from  the  point 
of  fact,  and  make  it  bear  upon  a  point  of  faith.  "The  Pope,"  say  you,  "declares 
that  he  has  condemned  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  in  these  five  propositions;  there¬ 
fore  it  is  essential  to  the  faith  to  hold  that  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  touching  these 
five  propositions  is  heretical,  let  it  be  what  it  may."  Here  is  a  strange  point  of  faith, 
that  a  doctrine  is  heretical  be  what  it  may.  What!  if  Jansenius  should  happen  to 
maintain  that  "we  are  capable  of  resisting  internal  grace"  and  that  "it  is  false  to  say  that 
Jesus  Christ  died  for  the  elect  only,"  would  this  doctrine  be  condemned  just  because  it 
is  his  doctrine?  Will  the  proposition,  that  " man  has  a  freedom  of  will  to  do  good  or 
evil,"  be  true  when  found  in  the  Pope's  constitution,  and  false  when  discovered  in 
Jansenius?  By  what  fatality  must  he  be  reduced  to  such  a  predicament,  that  truth, 
when  admitted  into  his  book,  becomes  heresy?  You  must  confess,  then,  that  he,  is 
only  heretical  on  the  supposition  that  he  is  friendly  to  the  errors  condemned,  see¬ 
ing  that  the  constitution  of  the  Pope  is  the  rule  which  we  must  apply  to  Jansenius, 
to  judge  if  his  character  answer  the  description  there  given  of  him;  and,  according¬ 
ly,  the  question,  "Is  his  doctrine  heretical?"  must  be  resolved  by  another  question  of 
fact,  "Does  it  correspond  to  the  natural  sense  of  these  propositions?"  as  it  must  necessarily 
be  heretical  if  it  does  correspond  to  that  sense,  and  must  necessarily  be  orthodox 
if  it  be  of  an  opposite  character.  For,  in  one  word,  since,  according  to  the  Pope  and 


LETTER  XVII 


151 

the  bishops,  “the  propositions  are  condemned  in  their  proper  and  natural  sense," 
they  cannot  possibly  be  condemned  in  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  except  on  the  un¬ 
derstanding  that  the  sense  of  Jansenius  is  the  same  with  the  proper  and  natural 
sense  of  these  propositions;  and  this  I  maintain  to  be  purely  a  question  of  fact. 

The  question,  then,  still  rests  upon  the  point  of  fact,  and  cannot  possibly  be 
tortured  into  one  affecting  the  faith.  But  though  incapable  of  twisting  it  into  a 
matter  of  heresy,  you  have  it  in  your  power  to  make  it  a  pretext  for  persecution, 
and  might,  perhaps,  succeed  in  this,  were  there  not  good  reason  to  hope  that  no¬ 
body  will  be  found  so  blindly  devoted  to  your  interests  as  to  countenance  such  a 
disgraceful  proceeding,  or  inclined  to  compel  people,  as  you  wish  to  do,  to  sign  a 
declaration  that  they  condemn  these  propositions  in  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  without  ex¬ 
plaining  what  the  sense  of  Jansenius  is.  Few  people  are  disposed  to  sign  a  blank 
confession  of  faith.  Now  this  would  really  be  to  sign  one  of  that  description,  leav¬ 
ing  you  to  fill  up  the  blank  afterwards  with  whatsoever  you  pleased,  as  you  would 
be  at  liberty  to  interpret  according  to  your  own  taste  the  unexplained  sense  of 
Jansenius.  Let  it  be  explained,  then,  beforehand,  otherwise  we  shall  have,  I  fear, 
another  version  of  your  proximate  power,  without  any  sense  at  all — ahstrahendo  ah 
omni  sensu.  This  mode  of  proceeding,  you  must  be  aware,  does  not  take  with  the 
world.  Men  in  general  detest  all  ambiguity,  especially  in  the  matter  of  religion, 
where  it  is  highly  reasonable  that  one  should  know  at  least  what  one  is  asked  to 
condemn.  And  how  is  it  possible  for  doctors,  who  are  persuaded  that  Jansenius 
can  bear  no  other  sense  than  that  of  efficacious  grace,  to  consent  to  declare  that 
they  condemn  his  doctrine  without  explaining  it,  since,  with  their  present  con¬ 
victions,  which  no  means  are  used  to  alter,  this  would  be  neither  more  nor  less 
than  to  condemn  efficacious  grace,  which  cannot  be  condemned  without  sin? 
Would  it  not,  therefore,  be  a  piece  of  monstrous  tyranny  to  place  them  in  such  an 
unhappy  dilemma  that  they  must  either  bring  guilt  upon  their  souls  in  the  sight 
of  God,  by  signing  that  condemnation  against  their  consciences,  or  be  denounced 
as  heretics  for  refusing  to  sign  it? 

But  there  is  a  mystery  under  all  this.  You  Jesuits  cannot  move  a  step  without  a 
stratagem.  It  remains  for  me  to  explain  why  you  do  not  explain  the  sense  of 
Jansenius.  The  sole  purpose  of  my  writing  is  to  discover  your  designs,  and,  by 
discovering,  to  frustrate  them.  I  must,  therefore,  inform  those  who  are  not  already 
aware  of  the  fact  that  your  great  concern  in  this  dispute  being  to  uphold  the  suffi¬ 
cient  grace  of  your  Molina,  you  could  not  effect  this  without  destroying  the  effi¬ 
cacious  grace  which  stands  directly  opposed  to  it.  Perceiving,  however,  that  the 
latter  was  now  sanctioned  at  Rome  and  by  all  the  learned  in  the  Church,  and  unable 
to  combat  the  doctrine  on  its  own  merits,  you  resolved  to  attack  it  in  a  clandestine 
way,  under  the  name  of  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius.  You  were  resolved,  accordingly, 
to  get  Jansenius  condemned  without  explanation;  and,  to  gain  your  purpose,  gave 
out  that  his  doctrine  was  not  that  of  efficacious  grace,  so  that  every  one  might 
think  he  was  at  liberty  to  condemn  the  one  without  denying  the  other.  Hence 
your  efforts,  in  the  present  day,  to  impress  this  idea  upon  the  minds  of  such  as 
have  no  acquaintance  with  that  author;  an  object  which  you  yourself,  father,  have 
attempted,  by  means  of  the  following  ingenious  syllogism:  “The  pope  has  con¬ 
demned  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius;  but  the  pope  has  not  condemned  efficacious 
grace:  therefore,  the  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace  must  be  different  from  that  of 
Jansenius.”  If  this  mode  of  reasoning  were  conclusive,  it  might  be  demonstrated 


1 52  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

in  the  same  way  that  Honorius  and  all  his  defenders  are  heretics  of  the  same  kind. 
"The  sixth  council  has  condemned  the  doctrine  of  Honorius;  but  the  council  has 
not  condemned  the  doctrine  of  the  Church:  therefore  the  doctrine  of  Honorius  is 
different  from  that  of  the  Church;  and  therefore,  all  who  defend  him  are  heretics." 
It  is  obvious  that  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  this;  for  the  Pope  has  done  no 
more  than  condemn  the  doctrine  of  the  five  propositions,  which  was  represented 
to  him  as  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius. 

But  it  matters  not;  you  have  no  intention  to  make  use  of  this  logic  for  any 
length  of  time.  Poor  as  it  is,  it  will  last  sufficiently  long  to  serve  your  present  turn. 
All  that  you  wish  to  effect  by  it,  in  the  meantime,  is  to  induce  those  who  are  un¬ 
willing  to  condemn  efficacious  grace  to  condemn  Jansenius  with  less  scruple. 
When  this  object  has  been  accomplished,  your  argument  will  soon  be  forgotten, 
and  their  signatures,  remaining  as  an  eternal  testimony  in  condemnation  of  Jan¬ 
senius,  will  furnish  you  with  an  occasion  to  make  a  direct  attack  upon  efficacious 
grace  by  another  mode  of  reasoning  much  more  solid  than  the  former,  which  shall 
be  forthcoming  in  proper  time.  "The  doctrine  of  Jansenius,"  you  will  argue,  "has 
been  condemned  by  the  universal  subscriptions  of  the  Church.  Now  this  doctrine 
is  manifestly  that  of  efficacious  grace"  (and  it  will  be  easy  for  you  to  prove  that); 
"therefore  the  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace  is  condemned  even  by  the  confession 
of  his  defenders." 

Behold  your  reason  for  proposing  to  sign  the  condemnation  of  a  doctrine  with¬ 
out  giving  an  explanation  of  it!  Behold  the  advantage  you  expect  to  gain  from 
subscriptions  thus  procured!  Should  your  opponents,  however,  refuse  to  sub¬ 
scribe,  you  have  another  trap  laid  for  them.  Having  dexterously  combined  the 
question  of  faith  with  that  of  fact,  and  not  allowing  them  to  separate  between 
them,  nor  to  sign  the  one  without  the  other,  the  consequence  will  be  that,  because 
they  could  not  subscribe  the  two  together,  you  will  publish  it  in  all  directions  that 
they  have  refused  the  two  together.  And  thus  though,  in  point  of  fact,  they  simply 
decline  acknowledging  that  Jansenius  has  maintained  the  propositions  which  they 
condemn,  which  cannot  be  called  heresy,  you  will  boldly  assert  that  they  have 
refused  to  condemn  the  propositions  themselves,  and  that  it  is  this  that  constitutes 
their  heresy. 

Such  is  the  fruit  which  you  expect  to  reap  from  their  refusal,  and  which  will  be 
no  less  useful  to  you  than  what  you  might  have  gained  from  their  consent.  So 
that,  in  the  event  of  these  signatures  being  exacted,  they  will  fall  into  your  snares, 
whether  they  sign  or  not,  and  in  both  cases  you  will  gain  your  point;  such  is  your 
dexterity  in  uniformly  putting  matters  into  a  train  for  your  own  advantage,  what¬ 
ever  bias  they  may  happen  to  take  in  their  course! 

How  well  I  know  you,  father!  and  how  grieved  am  I  to  see  that  God  has  aban¬ 
doned  you  so  far  as  to  allow  you  such  happy  success  in  such  an  unhappy  course! 
Your  good  fortune  deserves  commiseration, and  can  excite  envy  only  in  the  breasts 
of  those  who  know  not  what  truly  good  fortune  is.  It  is  an  act  of  charity  to  thwart 
the  success  you  aim  at  in  the  whole  of  this  proceeding,  seeing  that  you  can  only 
reach  it  by  the  aid  of  falsehood,  and  by  procuring  credit  to  one  of  two  lies — either 
that  the  Church  has  condemned  efficacious  grace,  or  that  those  who  defend  that 
doctrine  maintain  the  five  condemned  errors. 

The  world  must,  therefore,  be  apprised  of  two  facts:  first,  That,  by  your  own 
confession,  efficacious  grace  has  not  been  condemned;  and  secondly,  That  no- 


LETTER  XVIII 


*53 

body  supports  these  errors.  So  that  it  may  be  known  that  those  who  refuse  to  sign 
what  you  are  so  anxious  to  exact  from  them,  refuse  merely  in  consideration  of  the 
question  of  fact;  and  that,  being  quite  ready  to  subscribe  that  of  faith,  they  cannot 
be  deemed  heretical  on  that  account;  because,  to  repeat  it  once  more,  though  it 
be  matter  of  faith  to  believe  these  propositions  to  be  heretical,  it  will  never  be 
matter  of  faith  to  hold  that  they  are  to  be  found  in  the  pages  of  Jansenius.  They 
are  innocent  of  all  error;  that  is  enough.  It  may  be  that  they  interpret  Jansenius  too 
favourably;  but  it  may  be  also  that  you  do  not  interpret  him  favourably  enough.  I 
do  not  enter  upon  this  question.  All  that  I  know  is  that,  according  to  your  maxims, 
you  believe  that  you  may,  without  sin,  publish  him  to  be  a  heretic  contrary  to 
your  own  knowledge;  whereas,  according  to  their  maxims,  they  cannot,  without 
sin,  declare  him  to  be  a  Catholic,  unless  they  are  persuaded  that  he  is  one.  They 
are,  therefore,  more  honest  than  you,  father;  they  have  examined  Jansenius  more 
faithfully  than  you;  they  are  no  less  intelligent  than  you;  they  are,  therefore,  no 
less  credible  witnesses  than  you.  But  come  what  may  of  this  point  of  fact,  they  are 
certainly  Catholics;  for,  in  order  to  be  so,  it  is  not  necessary  to  declare  that  another 
man  is  not  a  Catholic;  it  is  enough,  in  all  conscience,  if  a  person,  without  charg¬ 
ing  error  upon  anybody  else,  succeed  in  discharging  himself. 

Reverend  Father,  if  you  have  found  any  difficulty  in  deciphering  this  letter, 
which  is  certainly  not  printed  in  the  best  possible  type,  blame  nobody  but  your¬ 
self.  Privileges  are  not  so  easily  granted  to  me  as  they  are  to  you.  You  can  procure 
them  even  for  the  purpose  of  combating  miracles;  I  cannot  have  them  even  to 
defend  myself.  The  printing-houses  are  perpetually  haunted.  In  such  circum¬ 
stances,  you  yourself  would  not  advise  me  to  write  you  any  more  letters,  for  it  is 
really  a  sad  annoyance  to  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  an  Osnabruck  impression. 


LETTER  XVIII 

TO  THE  REVEREND  FATHER  ANNAT,  JESUIT 


March  24,  1657 

Reverend  Father, 

Long  have  you  laboured  to  discover  some  error  in  the  creed  or  conduct  of  your 
opponents;  but  I  rather  think  you  will  have  to  confess,  in  the  end,  that  it  is  a 
more  difficult  task  than  you  imagined  to  make  heretics  of  people  who,  are  not 
only  no  heretics,  but  who  hate  nothing  in  the  world  so  much  as  heresy.  In  my 
last  letter  I  succeeded  in  showing  that  you  accuse  them  of  one  heresy  after  an¬ 
other,  without  being  able  to  stand  by  one  of  the  charges  for  any  length  of  time; 
so  that  all  that  remained  for  you  was  to  fix  on  their  refusal  to  condemn  "the  sense 
of  Jansenius,"  which  you  insist  on  their  doing  without  explanation.  You  must 
have  been  sadly  in  want  of  heresies  to  brand  them  with,  when  you  were  reduced 
to  this.  For  who  ever  heard  of  a  heresy  which  nobody  could  explain?  The  answer 
was  ready,  therefore,  that  if  Jansenius  has  no  errors,  it  is  wrong  to  condemn  him; 
and  if  he  has,  you  were  bound  to  point  them  out,  that  we  might  know  at  least 
what  we  were  condemning.  This,  however,  you  have  never  yet  been  pleased  to  do; 


i54  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

but  you  have  attempted  to  fortify  your  position  by  decrees,  which  made  nothing 
in  your  favour,  as  they  gave  no  sort  of  explanation  of  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  said 
to  have  been  condemned  in  the  five  propositions.  This  was  not  the  way  to  ter¬ 
minate  the  dispute.  Had  you  mutually  agreed  as  to  the  genuine  sense  of  Jansenius, 
and  had  the  only  difference  between  you  been  as  to  whether  that  sense  was  hereti¬ 
cal  or  not,  in  that  case  the  decisions  which  might  pronounce  it  to  be  heretical 
would  have  touched  the  real  question  in  dispute.  But  the  great  dispute  being 
about  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  the  one  party  saying  that  they  could  see  nothing  in 
it  inconsistent  with  the  sense  of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  and  the  other 
party  asserting  that  they  saw  in  it  an  heretical  sense  which  they  would  not  express. 
It  is  clear  that  a  constitution  which  does  not  say  a  word  about  this  difference  of 
opinion,  and  which  only  condemns  in  general  and  without  explanation  the  sense 
of  Jansenius,  leaves  the  point  in  dispute  quite  undecided. 

You  have  accordingly  been  repeatedly  told  that  as  your  discussion  turns  on  a 
matter  of  fact,  you  would  never  be  able  to  bring  it  to  a  conclusion  without  de¬ 
claring  what  you  understand  by  the  sense  of  Jansenius.  But,  as  you  continued 
obstinate  in  your  refusal  to  make  this  explanation,  I  endeavored,  as  a  last  resource, 
to  extort  it  from  you,  by  hinting  in  my  last  letter  that  there  was  some  mystery 
under  the  efforts  you  were  making  to  procure  the  condemnation  of  this  sense 
without  explaining  it,  and  that  your  design  was  to  make  this  indefinite  censure 
recoil  some  day  or  other  upon  the  doctrine  of  efficacious  grace,  by  showing,  as 
you  could  easily  do,  that  this  was  exactly  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius.  This  has 
reduced  you  to  the  necessity  of  making  a  reply;  for,  had  you  pertinaciously  re¬ 
fused,  after  such  an  insinuation,  to  explain  your  views  of  that  sense,  it  would  have 
been  apparent  to  persons  of  the  smallest  penetration  that  you  condemned  it  in  the 
sense  of  efficacious  grace — a  conclusion  which,  considering  the  veneration  in 
which  the  Church  holds  holy  doctrine,  would  have  overwhelmed  you  with  dis¬ 
grace. 

You  have,  therefore,  been  forced  to  speak  out  your  mind;  and  we  find  it 
expressed  in  your  reply  to  that  part  of  my  letter  in  which  I  remarked,  that  "if 
Jansenius  was  capable  of  any  other  sense  than  that  of  efficacious  grace,  he  had  no 
defenders;  but  if  his  writings  bore  no  other  sense,  he  had  no  errors  to  defend." 
You  found  it  impossible  to  deny  this  position,  father;  but  you  have  attempted  to 
parry  it  by  the  following  distinction:  "It  is  not  sufficient,"  say  you,  "for  the  vin¬ 
dication  of  Jansenius,  to  allege  that  he  merely  holds  the  doctrine  of  efficacious 
grace,  for  that  may  be  held  in  two  ways — the  one  heretical,  according  to  Calvin, 
which  consists  in  maintaining  that  the  will,  when  under  the  influence  of  grace, 
has  not  the  power  of  resisting  it;  the  other  orthodox,  according  to  the  Thomists 
and  the  Sorbonists,  which  is  founded  on  the  principles  established  by  the  councils, 
and  which  is,  that  efficacious  grace  of  itself  governs  the  will  in  such  a  way  that  it 
still  has  the  power  of  resisting  it." 

All  this  we  grant,  father;  but  you  conclude  by  adding:  "Jansenius  would  be 
orthodox,  if  he  defended  efficacious  grace  in  the  sense  of  the  Thomists;  but  he  is 
heretical,  because  he  opposes  the  Thomists,  and  joins  issue  with  Calvin,  who 
denies  the  power  of  resisting  grace."  I  do  not  here  enter  upon  the  question  of 
fact,  whether  Jansenius  really  agrees  with  Calvin.  It  is  enough  for  my  purpose  that 
you  assert  that  he  does,  and  that  you  now  inform  me  that  by  the  sense  of  Jansen¬ 
ius  you  have  all  along  understood  nothing  more  than  the  sense  of  Calvin.  Was 


LETTER  XVIII 


i55 

this  all  you  meant,  then,  father?  Was  it  only  the  error  of  Calvin  that  you  were  so 
anxious  to  get  condemned,  under  the  name  of  "the  sense  of  Jansenius?”  Why  did 
you  not  tell  us  this  sooner?  You  might  have  saved  yourself  a  world  of  trouble; 
for  we  were  all  ready,  without  the  aid  of  bulls  or  briefs,  to  join  with  you  in  con¬ 
demning  that  error.  What  urgent  necessity  there  was  for  such  an  explanation! 
What  a  host  of  difficulties  has  it  removed!  We  were  quite  at  a  loss,  my  dear  father, 
to  know  what  error  the  popes  and  bishops  meant  to  condemn,  under  the  name 
of  "the  sense  of  Jansenius."  The  whole  Church  was  in  the  utmost  perplexity 
about  it,  and  not  a  soul  would  relieve  us  by  an  explanation.  This,  however,  has 
now  been  done  by  you,  father — you,  whom  the  whole  of  your  party  regard  as  the 
chief  and  prime  mover  of  all  their  councils,  and  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
whole  secret  of  this  proceeding.  You,  then,  have  told  us  that  the  sense  of  Jansen¬ 
ius  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  sense  of  Calvin,  which  has  been  condemned 
by  the  council.  Why,  this  explains  everything.  We  know  now  that  the  error  which 
they  intended  to  condemn,  under  these  terms — the  sense  of  Jansenius — is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  the  sense  of  Calvin;  and  that,  consequently,  we,  by  joining 
with  them  in  the  condemnation  of  Calvin’s  doctrine,  have  yielded  all  due  obedi¬ 
ence  to  these  decrees.  We  are  no  longer  surprised  at  the  zeal  which  the  popes  and 
some  bishops  manifested  against  "the  sense  of  Jansenius."  How,  indeed,  could 
they  be  otherwise  than  zealous  against  it,  believing,  as  they  did,  the  declarations 
of  those  who  publicly  affirmed  that  it  was  identically  the  same  with  that  of  Calvin? 

I  must  maintain,  then,  father,  that  you  have  no  further  reason  to  quarrel  with 
your  adversaries;  for  they  detest  that  doctrine  as  heartily  as  you  do.  I  am  only 
astonished  to  see  that  you  are  ignorant  of  this  fact,  and  that  you  have  such  an 
imperfect  acquaintance  with  their  sentiments  on  this  point,  which  they  have  so 
repeatedly  expressed  in  their  published  works.  I  flatter  myself  that,  were  you  more 
intimate  with  these  writings,  you  would  deeply  regret  your  not  having  made 
yourself  acquainted  sooner,  in  the  spirit  of  peace,  with  a  doctrine  which  is  in 
every  respect  so  holy  and  so  Christian,  but  which  passion,  in  the  absence  of 
knowledge,  now  prompts  you  to  oppose.  You  would  find,  father,  that  they  not 
only  hold  that  an  effective  resistance  may  be  made  to  those  feebler  graces  which 
go  under  the  name  of  exciting  or  inefficacious ,  from  their  not  terminating  in  the 
good  with  which  they  inspire  us;  but  that  they  are,  moreover,  as  firm  in  maintain¬ 
ing,  in  opposition  to  Calvin,  the  power  which  the  will  has  to  resist  even  efficacious 
and  victorious  grace,  as  they  are  in  contending  against  Molina  for  the  power  of 
this  grace  over  the  will,  and  fully  as  jealous  for  the  one  of  these  truths  as  they  are 
for  the  other.  They  know  too  well  that  man,  of  his  own  nature,  has  always  the 
power  of  sinning  and  of  resisting  grace;  and  that,  since  he  became  corrupt,  he 
unhappily  carries  in  his  breast  a  fount  of  concupiscence  which  infinitely  augments 
that  power;  but  that,  notwithstanding  this,  when  it  pleases  God  to  visit  him  with 
His  mercy,  He  makes  the  soul  do  what  He  wills,  and  in  the  manner  He  wills  it  to  be 
done,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  infallibility  of  the  divine  operation  does  not 
in  any  way  destroy  the  natural  liberty  of  man,  in  consequence  of  the  secret  and 
wonderful  ways  by  which  God  operates  this  change.  This  has  been  most  admir¬ 
ably  explained  by  St.  Augustine,  in  such  a  way  as  to  dissipate  all  those  imaginary 
inconsistencies  which  the  opponents  of  efficacious  grace  suppose  to  exist  between 
the  sovereign  power  of  grace  over  the  free-will  and  the  power  which  the  free-will 
has  to  resist  grace.  For,  according  to  this  great  saint,  whom  the  popes  and  the 


1 56  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Church  have  held  to  be  a  standard  authority  on  this  subject,  God  transforms  the 
heart  of  man,  by  shedding  abroad  in  it  a  heavenly  sweetness,  which  surmounting 
the  delights  of  the  flesh,  and  inducing  him  to  feel,  on  the  one  hand,  his  own 
mortality  and  nothingness,  and  to  discover,  on  the  other  hand,  the  majesty  and 
eternity  of  God,  makes  him  conceive  a  distaste  for  the  pleasures  of  sin  which 
interpose  between  him  and  incorruptible  happiness.  Finding  his  chiefest  joy  in 
the  God  who  charms  him,  his  soul  is  drawn  towards  Him  infallibly,  but  of  its  own 
accord,  by  a  motion  perfectly  free,  spontaneous,  love-impelled;  so  that  it  would 
be  its  torment  and  punishment  to  be  separated  from  Him.  Not  but  that  the  person 
has  always  the  power  of  forsaking  his  God,  and  that  he  may  not  actually  forsake 
Him,  provided  he  choose  to  do  it.  But  how  could  he  choose  such  a  course,  seeing 
that  the  will  always  inclines  to  that  which  is  most  agreeable  to  it,  and  that,  in  the 
case  we  now  suppose,  nothing  can  be  more  agreeable  than  the  possession  of  that 
one  good ,  which  comprises  in  itself  all  other  good  things?  " Quod  enim  (says  St. 
Augustine)  amplius  nos  delectat ,  secundum  operemur  necesse  est — Our  actions  are  nec¬ 
essarily  determined  by  that  which  affords  us  the  greatest  pleasure.” 

Such  is  the  manner  in  which  God  regulates  the  free  will  of  man  without  en¬ 
croaching  on  its  freedom,  and  in  which  the  free  will,  which  always  may,  but  never 
will,  resist  His  grace,  turns  to  God  with  a  movement  as  voluntary  as  it  is  irresisti¬ 
ble,  whensoever  He  is  pleased  to  draw  it  to  Himself  by  the  sweet  constraint  of  His 
efficacious  inspirations. 

These,  father,  are  the  divine  principles  of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  accord¬ 
ing  to  which  it  is  equally  true  that  we  have  the  power  of  resisting  grace ,  contrary  to 
Calvin’s  opinion,  and  that,  nevertheless,  to  employ  the  language  of  Pope  Clement 
VIII  in  his  paper  addressed  to  the  Congregation  de  Auxiliis ,  “God  forms  within  us 
the  motion  of  our  will,  and  effectually  disposes  of  our  hearts,  by  virtue  of  that  em¬ 
pire  which  His  supreme  majesty  has  over  the  volitions  of  men,  as  well  as  over  the 
other  creatures  under  heaven,  according  to  St.  Augustine.” 

On  the  same  principle,  it  follows  that  we  act  of  ourselves,  and  thus,  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  another  error  of  Calvin,  that  we  have  merits  which  are  truly  and  properly 
ours;  and  yet,  as  God  is  the  first  principle  of  our  actions,  and  as,  in  the  language  of 
St.  Paul,  He  "worketh  in  us  that  which  is  pleasing  in  his  sight” ;  "our  merits  are  the 
gifts  of  God,”  as  the  Council  of  Trent  says. 

By  means  of  this  distinction  we  demolish  the  profane  sentiment  of  Luther,  con¬ 
demned  by  that  Council,  namely,  that  "we  co-operate  in  no  way  whatever  towards 
our  salvation  any  more  than  inanimate  things”;  and,  by  the  same  mode  of  reason¬ 
ing,  we  overthrow  the  equally  profane  sentiment  of  the  school  of  Molina,  who 
will  not  allow  that  it  is  by  the  strength  of  divine  grace  that  we  are  enabled  to  co¬ 
operate  with  it  in  the  work  of  our  salvation,  and  who  thereby  comes  into  hostile 
collision  with  that  principle  of  faith  established  by  St.  Paul:  "That  it  is  God  who 
worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do.” 

In  fine,  in  this  way  we  reconcile  all  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  seem  quite 
inconsistent  with  each  other  such  as  the  following:  "Turn  ye  unto  God” — "Turn 
thou  us,  and  we  shall  be  turned” — "Cast  away  iniquity  from  you” — "It  is  God 
who  taketh  away  iniquity  from  His  people” — "Bring  forth  works  meet  for  repent¬ 
ance” — "Lord,  thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us” — "Make  ye  a  new  heart 
and  a  new  spirit” — "A  new  spirit  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  heart  will  I  create 
within  you,”  &c. 


LETTER  XVIII  157 

The  only  way  of  reconciling  these  apparent  contrarieties,  which  ascribe  our 
good  actions  at  one  time  to  God  and  at  another  time  to  ourselves,  is  to  keep  in 
view  the  distinction,  as  stated  by  St.  Augustine,  that  “our  actions  are  ours  in 
respect  of  the  free  will  which  produces  them;  but  that  they  are  also  of  God,  in 
respect  of  His  grace  which  enables  our  free  will  to  produce  them”;  and  that,  as  the 
same  writer  elsewhere  remarks,  “God  enables  us  to  do  what  is  pleasing  in  His  sight, 
by  making  us  will  to  do  even  what  we  might  have  been  unwilling  to  do.” 

It  thus  appears,  father,  that  your  opponents  are  perfectly  at  one  with  the  modern 
Thomists,  for  the  Thomists  hold  with  them  both  the  power  of  resisting  grace,  and 
the  infallibility  of  the  effect  of  grace;  of  which  latter  doctrine  they  profess  them¬ 
selves  the  most  strenuous  advocates,  if  we  may  judge  from  a  common  maxim  of 
their  theology,  which  Alvarez,  one  of  the  leading  men  among  them,  repeats  so 
often  in  his  book,  and  expresses  in  the  following  terms  (disp.  72,  n.  4):  “When 
efficacious  grace  moves  the  free  will,  it  infallibly  consents;  because  the  effect  of 
grace  is  such,  that,  although  the  will  has  the  power  of  withholding  its  consent,  it 
nevertheless  consents  in  effect.”  He  corroborates  this  by  a  quotation  from  his 
master,  St.  Thomas:  “The  will  of  God  cannot  fail  to  be  accomplished;  and,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  when  it  is  his  pleasure  that  a  man  should  consent  to  the  influence  of 
grace,  he  consents  infallibly,  and  even  necessarily,  not  by  an  absolute  necessity, 
but  by  a  necessity  of  infallibility.”  In  effecting  this,  divine  grace  does  not  trench 
upon  “the  power  which  man  has  to  resist  it,  if  he  wishes  to  do  so”;  it  merely 
prevents  him  from  wishing  to  resist  it.  This  has  been  acknowledged  by  your 
Father  Petau,  in  the  following  passage  (Book  i,  p.  602):  “The  grace  of  Jesus  Christ 
insures  infallible  perseverance  in  piety,  though  not  by  necessity;  for  a  person  may 
refuse  to  yield  his  consent  to  grace,  if  he  be  so  inclined,  as  the  council  states;  but 
that  same  grace  provides  that  he  shall  never  be  so  inclined.” 

This,  father,  is  the  uniform  doctrine  of  St.  Augustine,  of  St.  Prosper,  of  the 
fathers  who  followed  them,  of  the  councils,  of  St.  Thomas,  and  of  all  the  Thomists 
in  general.  It  is  likewise,  whatever  you  may  think  of  it,  the  doctrine  of  your  op¬ 
ponents.  And,  let  me  add,  it  is  the  doctrine  which  you  yourself  have  lately  sealed 
with  your  approbation.  I  shall  quote  your  own  words:  “The  doctrine  of  efficacious 
grace,  which  admits  that  we  have  a  power  of  resisting  it,  is  orthodox,  founded  on 
the  councils,  and  supported  by  the  Thomists  and  Sorbonists.”  Now,  tell  us  the 
plain  truth,  father;  if  you  had  known  that  your  opponents  really  held  this  doctrine, 
the  interests  of  your  Society  might  perhaps  have  made  you  scruple  before  pro¬ 
nouncing  this  public  approval  of  it;  but,  acting  on  the  supposition  that  they  were 
hostile  to  the  doctrine,  the  same  powerful  motive  has  induced  you  to  authorize 
sentiments  which  you  know  in  your  heart  to  be  contrary  to  those  of  your  Society; 
and  by  this  blunder,  in  your  anxiety  to  ruin  their  principles,  you  have  yourself  com¬ 
pletely  confirmed  them.  So  that,  by  a  kind  of  prodigy,  we  now  behold  the  advo¬ 
cates  of  efficacious  grace  vindicated  by  the  advocates  of  Molina — an  admirable 
instance  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  making  all  things  concur  to  advance  the  glory 
of  the  truth. 

Let  the  whole  world  observe,  then,  that,  by  your  own  admission,  the  truth  of 
this  efficacious  grace,  which  is  so  essential  to  all  the  acts  of  piety,  which  is  so  dear 
to  the  Church,  and  which  is  the  purchase  of  her  Saviour’s  blood,  is  so  indisputably 
Catholic  that  there  is  not  a  single  Catholic,  not  even  among  the  Jesuits,  who  would 
not  acknowledge  its  orthodoxy.  And  let  it  be  noticed,  at  the  same  time,  that,  ac- 


158  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

cording  to  your  own  confession,  not  the  slightest  suspicion  of  error  can  fall  on 
those  whom  you  have  so  often  stigmatized  with  it.  For  so  long  as  you  charged 
them  with  clandestine  heresies,  without  choosing  to  specify  them  by  name,  it  was 
as  difficult  for  them  to  defend  themselves  as  it  was  easy  for  you  to  bring  such  accu¬ 
sations.  But  now,  when  you  have  come  to  declare  that  the  error  which  constrains 
you  to  oppose  them,  is  the  heresy  of  Calvin  which  you  supposed  them  to  hold,  it 
must  be  apparent  to  every  one  that  they  are  innocent  of  all  error;  for  so  decidedly 
hostile  are  they  to  this,  the  only  error  you  charge  upon  them,  that  they  protest,  by 
their  discourses,  by  their  books,  by  every  mode,  in  short,  in  which  they  can  testify 
their  sentiments,  that  they  condemn  that  heresy  with  their  whole  heart,  and  in  the 
same  manner  as  it  has  been  condemned  by  the  Thomists,  whom  you  acknowledge, 
without  scruple,  to  be  Catholics,  and  who  have  never  been  suspected  to  be  any¬ 
thing  else. 

What  will  you  say  against  them  now,  father?  Will  you  say  that  they  are  heretics 
still,  because,  although  they  do  not  adopt  the  sense  of  Calvin,  they  will  not  allow 
that  the  sense  of  Jansenius  is  the  same  with  that  of  Calvin?  Will  you  presume  to 
say  that  this  is  matter  of  heresy?  Is  it  not  a  pure  question  of  fact,  with  which  heresy 
has  nothing  to  do?  It  would  be  heretical  to  say  that  we  have  not  the  power  of 
resisting  efficacious  grace;  but  would  it  be  so  to  doubt  that  Jansenius  held 
that  doctrine?  Is  this  a  revealed  truth?  Is  it  an  article  of  faith  which  must  be 
believed,  on  pain  of  damnation?  Or  is  it  not,  in  spite  of  you,  a  point  of  fact,  on 
account  of  which  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  hold  that  there  were  heretics  in  the 
Church? 

Drop  this  epithet,  then,  father,  and  give  them  some  other  name,  more  suited  to 
the  nature  of  your  dispute.  Tell  them,  they  are  ignorant  and  stupid — that  they 
misunderstand  Jansenius.  These  would  be  charges  in  keeping  with  your  contro¬ 
versy;  but  it  is  quite  irrelevant  to  call  them  heretics.  As  this,  however,  is  the  only 
charge  from  which  I  am  anxious  to  defend  them,  I  shall  not  give  myself  much 
trouble  to  show  that  they  rightly  understand  Jansenius.  All  I  shall  say  on  the  point, 
father,  is  that  it  appears  to  me  that,  were  he  to  be  judged  according  to  your  own 
rules,  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove  him  not  to  be  a  good  Catholic.  We  shall  try 
him  by  the  test  you  have  proposed.  "To  know,"  say  you,  "whether  Jansenius  is 
sound  or  not,  we  must  inquire  whether  he  defends  efficacious  grace  in  the  manner 
of  Calvin,  who  denies  that  man  has  the  power  of  resisting  it — in  which  case  he 
would  be  heretical;  or  in  the  manner  of  the  Thomists,  who  admit  that  it  may  be 
resisted — for  then  he  would  be  Catholic."  Judge,  then,  father,  whether  he  holds 
that  grace  may  be  resisted  when  he  says:  "That  we  have  always  a  power  to  resist 
grace,  according  to  the  council;  that  free  will  may  always  act  or  not  act,  will  or  not 
will,  consent  or  not  consent,  do  good  or  do  evil;  and  that  man,  in  this  life,  has 
always  these  two  liberties,  which  may  be  called  by  some  contradictions."  Judge, 
likewise,  if  he  be  not  opposed  to  the  error  of  Calvin,  as  you  have  described  it,  when 
he  occupies  a  whole  chapter  (21st)  in  showing  "that  the  Church  has  condemned 
that  heretic  who  denies  that  efficacious  grace  acts  on  the  free  will  in  the  manner 
which  has  been  so  long  believed  in  the  Church,  so  as  to  leave  it  in  the  power 
of  free  will  to  consent  or  not  to  consent;  whereas,  according  to  St.  Augustine  and 
the  council,  we  have  always  the  power  of  withholding  our  consent  if  we  choose; 
and  according  to  St.  Prosper,  God  bestows  even  upon  his  elect  the  will  to  perse¬ 
vere,  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  to  will  the  contrary."  And, 


LETTER  XVIII 


159 


in  one  word,  judge  if  he  does  not  agree  with  the  Thomists,  from  the  following  dec¬ 
laration  in  chapter  4th:  "That  all  that  the  Thomists  have  written  with  the  view  of 
reconciling  the  efficaciousness  of  grace  with  the  power  of  resisting  it,  so  entirely 
coincides  with  his  judgement  that  to  ascertain  his  sentiments  on  this  subject  we 
have  only  to  consult  their  writings.” 

Such  being  the  language  he  holds  on  these  heads  my  opinion  is  that  he  believes 
in  the  power  of  resisting  grace;  that  he  differs  from  Calvin  and  agrees  with  the 
Thomists,  because  he  has  said  so;  and  that  he  is,  therefore,  according  to  your  own 
showing,  a  Catholic.  If  you  have  any  means  of  knowing  the  sense  of  an  author 
otherwise  than  by  his  expressions;  and  if,  without  quoting  any  of  his  passages,  you 
are  disposed  to  maintain,  in  direct  opposition  to  his  own  words,  that  he  denies 
this  power  of  resistance,  and  that  he  is  for  Calvin  and  against  the  Thomists,  do 
not  be  afraid,  father,  that  I  will  accuse  you  of  heresy  for  that.  I  shall  only  say  that 
you  do  not  seem  properly  to  understand  Jansenius;  but  we  shall  not  be  the  less  on 
that  account  children  of  the  same  Church. 

How  comes  it,  then,  father,  that  you  manage  this  dispute  in  such  a  passionate 
spirit,  and  that  you  treat  as  your  most  cruel  enemies,  and  as  the  most  pestilent  of 
heretics,  a  class  of  persons  whom  you  cannot  accuse  of  any  error,  nor  of  anything 
whatever,  except  that  they  do  not  understand  Jansenius  as  you  do?  For  what  else 
in  the  world  do  you  dispute  about,  except  the  sense  of  that  author?  You  would 
have  them  to  condemn  it.  They  ask  what  you  mean  them  to  condemn.  You  reply 
that  you  mean  the  error  of  Calvin.  They  rejoin  that  they  condemn  that  error;  and 
with  this  acknowledgement  (unless  it  is  syllables  you  wish  to  condemn,  and  not 
the  thing  which  they  signify),  you  ought  to  rest  satisfied.  If  they  refuse  to  say 
that  they  condemn  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  it  is  because  they  believe  it  to  be  that  of 
St.  Thomas,  and  thus  this  unhappy  phrase  has  a  very  equivocal  meaning  betwixt 
you.  In  your  mouth  it  signifies  the  sense  of  Calvin;  in  theirs  the  sense  of  St. 
Thomas.  Your  dissensions  arise  entirely  from  the  different  ideas  which  you  attach 
to  the  same  term.  Were  I  made  umpire  in  the  quarrel,  I  would  interdict  the  use  of 
the  word  Jansenius,  on  both  sides;  and  thus,  by  obliging  you  merely  to  express 
what  you  understand  by  it,  it  would  be  seen  that  you  ask  nothing  more  than  the 
condemnation  of  Calvin,  to  which  they  willingly  agree;  and  that  they  ask  nothing 
more  than  the  vindication  of  the  sense  of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  in  which 
you  again  perfectly  coincide. 

I  declare,  then,  father,  that  for  my  part  I  shall  continue  to  regard  them  as  good 
Catholics,  whether  they  condemn  Jansenius,  on  finding  him  erroneous,  or  refuse 
to  condemn  him,  from  finding  that  he  maintains  nothing  more  than  what  you 
yourself  acknowledge  to  be  orthodox;  and  that  I  shall  say  to  them  what  St.  Jerome 
said  to  John,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  who  was  accused  of  holding  the  eight  proposi¬ 
tions  of  Origen:  "Either  condemn  Origen,  if  you  acknowledge  that  he  has  main¬ 
tained  these  errors,  or  else  deny  that  he  has  maintained  them — Aut  nega  hoc  dixisse 
eum  qui  arguitur;  aut  si  locutus  est  tali  a,  eum  damna  qui  dixerit." 

See,  father,  how  these  persons  acted,  whose  sole  concern  was  with  principles, 
and  not  with  persons;  whereas  you  who  aim  at  persons  more  than  principles,  con¬ 
sider  it  a  matter  of  no  consequence  to  condemn  errors,  unless  you  procure  the 
condemnation  of  the  individuals  to  whom  you  choose  to  impute  them. 

How  ridiculously  violent  your  conduct  is,  father!  and  how  ill  calculated  to  in¬ 
sure  success!  I  told  you  before,  and  I  repeat  it,  violence  and  verity  can  make  no 


160  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

impression  on  each  other.  Never  were  your  accusations  more  outrageous,  and 
never  was  the  innocence  of  your  opponents  more  discernible:  never  has  efficacious 
grace  been  attacked  with  greater  subtility,  and  never  has  it  been  more  trium¬ 
phantly  established.  You  have  made  the  most  desperate  efforts  to  convince  peo¬ 
ple  that  your  disputes  involved  points  of  faith;  and  never  was  it  more  apparent 
that  the  whole  controversy  turned  upon  a  mere  point  of  fact.  In  fine,  you  have 
moved  heaven  and  earth  to  make  it  appear  that  this  point  of  fact  is  founded  on 
truth;  and  never  were  people  more  disposed  to  call  it  in  question.  And  the  obvious 
reason  of  this  is  that  you  do  not  take  the  natural  course  to  make  them  believe  a 
point  of  fact,  which  is  to  convince  their  senses  and  point  out  to  them  in  a  book 
the  words  which  you  allege  are  to  be  found  in  it.  The  means  you  have  adopted  are 
so  far  removed  from  this  straightforward  course  that  the  most  obtuse  minds  are 
unavoidably  struck  by  observing  it.  Why  did  you  not  take  the  plan  which  I  fol¬ 
lowed  in  bringing  to  light  the  wicked  maxims  of  your  authors — which  was  to  cite 
faithfully  the  passages  of  their  writings  from  which  they  were  extracted?  This  was 
the  mode  followed  by  the  cures  of  Paris,  and  it  never  fails  to  produce  conviction. 
But,  when  you  were  charged  by  them  with  holding,  for  example,  the  proposition 
of  Father  Lamy,  that  a  'monk  may  kill  a  person  who  threatens  to  publish  calum¬ 
nies  against  himself  or  his  order,  when  he  cannot  otherwise  prevent  the  publica¬ 
tion,”  what  would  you  have  thought,  and  what  would  the  public  have  said,  if  they 
had  not  quoted  the  place  where  that  sentiment  is  literally  to  be  found?  or  if,  after 
having  been  repeatedly  demanded  to  quote  their  authority,  they  still  obstinately 
refused  to  do  it?  or  if,  instead  of  acceding  to  this,  they  had  gone  off  to  Rome  and 
procured  a  bull,  ordaining  all  men  to  acknowledge  the  truth  of  their  statement? 
Would  it  not  be  undoubtedly  concluded  that  they  had  surprised  the  Pope,  and 
that  they  would  never  have  had  recourse  to  this  extraordinary  method,  but  for 
want  of  the  natural  means  of  substantiating  the  truth,  which  matters  of  fact  fur¬ 
nish  to  all  who  undertake  to  prove  them?  Accordingly,  they  had  no  more  to  do 
than  to  tell  us  that  Father  Lamy  teaches  this  doctrine  in  Book  3,  disp.  36,  n.  118, 
page  544,  of  the  Douay  edition;  and  by  this  means  everybody  who  wished  to  see  it 
found  it  out,  and  nobody  could  doubt  about  it  any  longer.  This  appears  to  be  a 
very  easy  and  prompt  way  of  putting  an  end  to  controversies  of  fact,  when  one  has 
got  the  right  side  of  the  question. 

How  comes  it,  then,  father,  that  you  do  not  follow  this  plan?  You  said,  in  your 
book,  that  the  five  propositions  are  in  Jansenius,  word  for  word,  in  the  identical 
terms — iisdem  verbis .  You  were  told  they  were  not.  What  had  you  to  do  after  this, 
but  either  to  cite  the  page,  if  you  had  really  found  the  words,  or  to  acknowledge 
that  you  were  mistaken.  But  you  have  done  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  In  place 
of  this,  on  finding  that  all  the  passages  from  Jansenius,  which  you  sometimes 
adduce  for  the  purpose  of  hoodwinking  the  people,  are  not  "the  condemned 
propositions  in  their  individual  identity,”  as  you  had  engaged  to  show  us,  you 
present  us  with  Constitutions  from  Rome,  which,  without  specifying  any  par¬ 
ticular  place,  declare  that  the  propositions  have  been  extracted  from  his  book. 

I  am  sensible,  father,  of  the  respect  which  Christians  owe  to  the  Holy  See,  and 
your  antagonists  give  sufficient  evidence  of  their  resolution  ever  to  abide  by  its 
decisions.  Do  not  imagine  that  it  implied  any  deficiency  in  this  due  deference  on 
their  part  that  they  represented  to  the  pope,  with  all  the  submission  which  children 
owe  to  their  father,  and  members  to  their  head,  that  it  was  possible  he  might  be 


LETTER  XVIII  161 

deceived  on  this  point  of  fact — that  he  had  not  caused  it  to  be  investigated  during 
his  pontificate;  and  that  his  predecessor,  Innocent  X,  had  merely  examined  into 
the  heretical  character  of  the  propositions,  and  not  into  the  fact  of  their  connec¬ 
tion  with  Jansenius.  This  they  stated  to  the  commissary  of  the  Holy  Office,  one  of 
the  principal  examiners,  stating  that  they  could  not  be  censured  according  to  the 
sense  of  any  author,  because  they  had  been  presented  for  examination  on  their 
own  merits;  and  without  considering  to  what  author  they  might  belong:  further, 
that  upwards  of  sixty  doctors,  and  a  vast  number  of  other  persons  of  learning  and 
piety,  had  read  that  book  carefully  over,  without  ever  having  encountered  the 
proscribed  propositions,  and  that  they  have  found  some  of  a  quite  opposite  de¬ 
scription:  that  those  who  had  produced  that  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  Pope 
might  be  reasonably  presumed  to  have  abused  the  confidence  he  reposed  in  them, 
inasmuch  as  they  had  an  interest  in  decrying  that  author,  who  has  convicted 
Molina  of  upwards  of  fifty  errors:  that  what  renders  this  supposition  still  more 
probable  is  that  they  have  a  certain  maxim  among  them,  one  of  the  best  authenti¬ 
cated  in  their  whole  system  of  theology,  which  is,  “that  they  may,  without  crimi¬ 
nality,  calumniate  those  by  whom  they  conceive  themselves  to  be  unjustly  at¬ 
tacked”;  and  that,  accordingly,  their  testimony  being  so  suspicious,  and  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  the  other  party  so  respectable,  they  had  some  ground  for  supplicating 
his  holiness,  with  the  most  profound  humility,  that  he  would  ordain  an  investiga¬ 
tion  to  be  made  into  this  fact,  in  the  presence  of  doctors  belonging  to  both  parties, 
in  order  that  a  solemn  and  regular  decision  might  be  formed  on  the  point  in  dis¬ 
pute.  "Let  there  be  a  convocation  of  able  judges  (says  St.  Basil  on  a  similar  occa¬ 
sion,  Epistle  75);  let  each  of  them  be  left  at  perfect  freedom;  let  them  examine  my 
writings;  let  them  judge  if  they  contain  errors  against  the  faith;  let  them  read  the 
objections  and  the  replies;  that  so  a  judgement  may  be  given  in  due  form  and 
with  proper  knowledge  of  the  case,  and  not  a  defamatory  libel  without  examina¬ 
tion.” 

It  is  quite  vain  for  you,  father,  to  represent  those  who  would  act  in  the  manner  I 
have  now  supposed  as  deficient  in  proper  subjection  to  the  Holy  See.  The  popes 
are  very  far  from  being  disposed  to  treat  Christians  with  that  imperiousness  which 
some  would  fain  exercise  under  their  name.  "The  Church,”  says  Pope  St.  Gregory, 
"which  has  been  trained  in  the  school  of  humility,  does  not  command  with 
authority,  but  persuades  by  reason,  her  children  whom  she  believes  to  be  in  error, 
to  obey  what  she  has  taught  them.”  And  so  far  from  deeming  it  a  disgrace  to  re¬ 
view  a  judgement  into  which  they  may  have  been  surprised,  we  have  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  St.  Bernard  for  saying  that  they  glory  in  acknowledging  the  mistake. 
"The  Apostolic  See  (he  says,  Epistle  180)  can  boast  of  this  recommendation,  that 
it  never  stands  on  the  point  of  honour,  but  willingly  revokes  a  decision  that  has 
been  gained  from  it  by  surprise;  indeed,  it  is  highly  just  to  prevent  any  from 
profiting  by  an  act  of  injustice,  and  more  especially  before  the  Holy  See.” 

Such,  father,  are  the  proper  sentiments  with  which  the  popes  ought  to  be  in¬ 
spired  ;  for  all  divines  are  agreed  that  they  may  be  surprised,  and  that  their  supreme 
character,  so  far  from  warranting  them  against  mistakes,  exposes  them  the  more 
readily  to  fall  into  them,  on  account  of  the  vast  number  of  cares  which  claim  their 
attention.  This  is  what  the  same  St.  Gregory  says  to  some  persons  who  were  aston¬ 
ished  at  the  circumstance  of  another  pope  having  suffered  himself  to  be  deluded: 
"Why  do  you  wonder,”  says  he,  "that  we  should  be  deceived,  we  who  are  but 


1 62  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

men?  Have  you  not  read  that  David,  a  king  who  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  was 
induced,  by  giving  credit  to  the  falsehoods  of  Ziba,  to  pronounce  an  unjust  judge¬ 
ment  against  the  son  of  Jonathan?  Who  will  think  it  strange,  then,  that  we,  who 
are  not  prophets,  should  sometimes  be  imposed  upon  by  deceivers?  A  multi¬ 
plicity  of  affairs  presses  on  us,  and  our  minds,  which,  by  being  obliged  to  attend 
to  so  many  things  at  once,  apply  themselves  less  closely  to  each  in  particular,  are 
the  more  easily  liable  to  be  imposed  upon  in  individual  cases.”  Truly,  father,  I 
should  suppose  that  the  popes  know  better  than  you  whether  they  may  be  de¬ 
ceived  or  not.  They  themselves  tell  us  that  popes,  as  well  as  the  greatest  princes, 
are  more  exposed  to  deception  than  individuals  who  are  less  occupied  with  im¬ 
portant  avocations.  This  must  be  believed  on  their  testimony.  And  it  is  easy  to 
imagine  by  what  means  they  come  to  be  thus  overreached.  St.  Bernard,  in  the  let¬ 
ter  which  he  wrote  to  Innocent  II,  gives  us  the  following  description  of  the  proc¬ 
ess:  "It  is  no  wonder,  and  no  novelty,  that  the  human  mind  may  be  deceived, 
and  is  deceived.  You  are  surrounded  by  monks  who  come  to  you  in  the  spirit  of 
lying  and  deceit.  They  have  filled  your  ears  with  stories  against  a  bishop,  whose 
life  has  been  most  exemplary,  but  who  is  the  object  of  their  hatred.  These  persons 
bite  like  dogs,  and  strive  to  make  good  appear  evil.  Meanwhile,  most  holy  father, 
you  put  yourself  into  a  rage  against  your  own  son.  Why  have  you  afforded  matter 
of  joy  to  his  enemies?  Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of 
God.  I  trust  that,  when  you  have  ascertained  the  truth,  all  this  delusion,  which 
rests  on  a  false  report,  will  be  dissipated.  I  pray  the  spirit  of  truth  to  grant  you  the 
grace  to  separate  light  from  darkness,  and  to  favour  the  good  by  rejecting  the  evil.” 
You  see,  then,  father,  that  the  eminent  rank  of  the  popes  does  not  exempt  them 
from  the  influence  of  delusion;  and  I  may  now  add,  that  it  only  serves  to  render 
their  mistakes  more  dangerous  and  important  than  those  of  other  men.  This  is  the 
light  in  which  St.  Bernard  represents  them  to  Pope  Eugenius:  "There  is  another 
fault,  so  common  among  the  great  of  this  world  that  I  never  met  one  of  them  who 
v/as  free  from  it;  and  that  is,  holy  father,  an  excessive  credulity,  the  source  of 
numerous  disorders.  From  this  proceed  violent  persecutions  against  the  innocent, 
unfounded  prejudices  against  the  absent,  and  tremendous  storms  about  nothing 
( pro  nibilo).  This,  holy  father,  is  a  universal  evil,  from  the  influence  of  which,  if  you 
are  exempt,  I  shall  only  say  you  are  the  only  individual  among  all  your  compeers 
who  can  boast  of  that  privilege.” 

I  imagine,  father,  that  the  proofs  I  have  brought  are  beginning  to  convince  you 
that  the  popes  are  liable  to  be  surprised.  But,  to  complete  your  conversion,  I  shall 
merely  remind  you  of  some  examples,  which  you  yourself  have  quoted  in  your 
book,  of  popes  and  emperors  whom  heretics  have  actually  deceived.  You  will 
remember,  then,  that  you  have  told  us  that  Apollinarius  surprised  Pope  Damasius, 
in  the  same  way  that  Celestius  surprised  Zozimus.  You  inform  us,  besides,  that 
one  called  Athanasius  deceived  the  Emperor  Heraclius,  and  prevailed  on  him  to 
persecute  the  Catholics.  And  lastly,  that  Sergius  obtained  from  Honorius  that 
infamous  decretal  which  was  burned  at  the  sixth  council,  "by  playing  the  busy¬ 
body,”  as  you  say,  "about  the  person  of  that  pope.” 

It  appears,  then,  father,  by  your  own  confession,  that  those  who  act  this  part 
about  the  persons  of  kings  and  popes  do  sometimes  artfully  entice  them  to  perse¬ 
cute  the  faithful  defenders  of  the  truth,  under  the  persuasion  that  they  are  perse¬ 
cuting  heretics.  And  hence  the  popes,  who  hold  nothing  in  greater  horror  than 


LETTER  XVIII  163 

these  surprisals,  have,  by  a  letter  of  Alexander  III,  enacted  an  ecclesiastical  statute, 
which  is  inserted  in  the  canonical  law,  to  permit  the  suspension  of  the  execution  of 
their  bulls  and  decretals,  when  there  is  ground  to  suspect  that  they  have  been  im¬ 
posed  upon.  "If,”  says  that  pope  to  the  Archbishop  of  Ravenna,  "we  sometimes 
send  decretals  to  your  fraternity  which  are  opposed  to  your  sentiments,  give  your¬ 
selves  no  distress  on  that  account.  We  shall  expect  you  either  to  carry  them  respect¬ 
fully  into  execution,  or  to  send  us  the  reason  why  you  conceive  they  ought  not  to 
be  executed;  for  we  deem  it  right  that  you  should  not  execute  a  decree  which  may 
have  been  procured  from  us  by  artifice  and  surprise.”  Such  has  been  the  course 
pursued  by  the  popes,  whose  sole  object  is  to  settle  the  disputes  of  Christians,  and 
not  to  follow  the  passionate  counsels  of  those  who  strive  to  involve  them  in 
trouble  and  perplexity.  Following  the  advice  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  who  in  this 
followed  the  commandment  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  avoid  domination.  The  spirit 
which  appears  in  their  whole  conduct  is  that  of  peace  and  truth.  In  this  spirit  they 
ordinarily  insert  in  their  letters  this  clause,  which  is  tacitly  understood  in  them  all: 
"5/  ita  est;  si preces  veritate  nitantur — If  it  be  so  as  we  have  heard  it;  if  the  facts  be 
true.”  It  is  quite  clear,  if  the  popes  themselves  give  no  force  to  their  bulls,  except 
in  so  far  as  they  are  founded  on  genuine  facts,  that  it  is  not  the  bulls  alone  that 
prove  the  truth  of  the  facts,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  even  according  to  the  canon¬ 
ists,  it  is  the  truth  of  the  facts  which  renders  the  bulls  lawfully  admissible. 

In  what  way,  then,  are  we  to  learn  the  truth  of  facts?  It  must  be  by  the  eyes, 
father,  which  are  the  legitimate  judges  of  such  matters,  as  reason  is  the  proper 
judge  of  things  natural  and  intelligible,  and  faith  of  things  supernatural  and  re¬ 
vealed.  For,  since  you  will  force  me  into  this  discussion,  you  must  allow  me  to  tell 
you  that,  according  to  the  sentiments  of  the  two  greatest  doctors  of  the  Church, 
St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  these  three  principles  of  our  knowledge,  the  senses, 
reason,  and  faith,  have  each  their  separate  objects  and  their  own  degrees  of  cer¬ 
tainty.  And  as  God  has  been  pleased  to  employ  the  intervention  of  the  senses  to 
give  entrance  to  faith  (for  “faith  cometh  by  hearing”),  it  follows,  that  so  far 
from  faith  destroying  the  certainty  of  the  senses,  to  call  in  question  the  faithful 
report  of  the  senses  would  lead  to  the  destruction  of  faith.  It  is  on  this  principle 
that  St.  Thomas  explicitly  states  that  God  has  been  pleased  that  the  sensible  ac¬ 
cidents  should  subsist  in  the  eucharist,  in  order  that  the  senses,  which  judge  only 
of  these  accidents,  might  not  be  deceived. 

We  conclude,  therefore,  from  this,  that  whatever  the  proposition  may  be  that  is 
submitted  to  our  examination,  we  must  first  determine  its  nature,  to  ascertain  to 
which  of  those  three  principles  it  ought  to  be  referred.  If  it  relate  to  a  supernatural 
truth,  we  must  judge  of  it  neither  by  the  senses  nor  by  reason,  but  by  Scripture  and 
the  decisions  of  the  Church.  Should  it  concern  an  unrevealed  truth  and  something 
within  the  reach  of  natural  reason,  reason  must  be  its  proper  judge.  And  if  it 
embrace  a  point  of  fact,  we  must  yield  to  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  to  which  it 
naturally  belongs  to  take  cognizance  of  such  matters. 

So  general  is  this  rule  that,  according  to  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  when 
we  meet  with  a  passage  even  in  the  Scripture,  the  literal  meaning  of  which,  at  first 
sight,  appears  contrary  to  what  the  senses  or  reason  are  certainly  persuaded  of,  we 
must  not  attempt  to  reject  their  testimony  in  this  case,  and  yield  them  up  to  the 
authority  of  that  apparent  sense  of  the  Scripture,  but  we  must  interpret  the  Scrip¬ 
ture,  and  seek  out  therein  another  sense  agreeable  to  that  sensible  truth;  because, 


1 64  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

the  Word  of  God  being  infallible  in  the  facts  which  it  records,  and  the  informa¬ 
tion  of  the  senses  and  of  reason,  acting  in  their  sphere,  being  certain  also,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  there  must  be  an  agreement  between  these  two  sources  of  knowledge. 
And  as  Scripture  may  be  interpreted  in  different  ways,  whereas  the  testimony  of 
the  senses  is  uniform,  we  must  in  these  matters  adopt  as  the  true  interpretation  of 
Scripture  that  view  which  corresponds  with  the  faithful  report  of  the  senses.  "Two 
things,"  says  St.  Thomas,  "must  be  observed,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  St. 
Augustine:  first,  That  Scripture  has  always  one  true  sense;  and  secondly,  That  as  it 
may  receive  various  senses,  when  we  have  discovered  one  which  reason  plainly 
teaches  to  be  false,  we  must  not  persist  in  maintaining  that  this  is  the  natural  sense, 
but  search  out  another  with  which  reason  will  agree." 

St.  Thomas  explains  his  meaning  by  the  example  of  a  passage  in  Genesis  where 
it  is  written  that  "God  created  two  great  lights,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  also  the 
stars,"  in  which  the  Scriptures  appear  to  say  that  the  moon  is  greater  than  all  the 
stars;  but  as  it  is  evident,  from  unquestionable  demonstration,  that  this  is  false,  it 
is  not  our  duty,  says  that  saint,  obstinately  to  defend  the  literal  sense  of  that  pas¬ 
sage;  another  meaning  must  be  sought,  consistent  with  the  truth  of  the  fact,  such 
as  the  following,  "That  the  phrase  great  light ,  as  applied  to  the  moon,  denotes  the 
greatness  of  that  luminary  merely  as  it  appears  in  our  eyes,  and  not  the  magnitude 
of  its  body  considered  in  itself." 

An  opposite  mode  of  treatment,  so  far  from  procuring  respect  to  the  Scripture, 
would  only  expose  it  to  the  contempt  of  infidels;  because,  as  St.  Augustine  says, 
"when  they  found  that  we  believed,  on  the  authority  of  Scripture,  in  things  which 
they  assuredly  knew  to  be  false,  they  would  laugh  at  our  credulity  with  regard  to 
its  more  recondite  truths,  such  as  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  eternal  life." 
"And  by  this  means,"  adds  St.  Thomas,  "we  should  render  our  religion  contempt¬ 
ible  in  their  eyes,  and  shut  up  its  entrance  into  their  minds." 

And  let  me  add,  father,  that  it  would  in  the  same  manner  be  the  likeliest  means 
to  shut  up  the  entrance  of  Scripture  into  the  minds  of  heretics,  and  to  render  the 
pope’s  authority  contemptible  in  their  eyes,  to  refuse  all  those  the  name  of 
Catholics  who  would  not  believe  that  certain  words  were  in  a  certain  book,  where 
they  are  not  to  be  found,  merely  because  a  pope  by  mistake  has  declared  that  they 
are.  It  is  only  by  examining  a  book  that  we  can  ascertain  what  words  it  contains. 
Matters  of  fact  can  only  be  proved  by  the  senses.  If  the  position  which  you  main¬ 
tain  be  true,  show  it,  or  else  ask  no  man  to  believe  it — that  would  be  to  no  purpose. 
Not  all  the  powers  on  earth  can,  by  the  force  of  authority,  persuade  us  of  a  point 
of  fact,  any  more  than  they  can  alter  it;  for  nothing  can  make  that  to  be  not  which 
really  is. 

It  was  to  no  purpose,  for  example,  that  the  monks  of  Ratisbon  procured  from 
Pope  St.  Leo  IX  a  solemn  decree,  by  which  he  declared  that  the  body  of  St.  Denis, 
the  first  bishop  of  Paris,  who  is  generally  held  to  have  been  the  Areopagite,  had 
been  transported  out  of  France  and  conveyed  into  the  chapel  of  their  monastery.  It 
is  not  the  less  true,  for  all  this,  that  the  body  of  that  saint  always  lay,  and  lies  to 
this  hour,  in  the  celebrated  abbey  which  bears  his  name,  and  within  the  walls  of 
which  you  would  find  it  no  easy  matter  to  obtain  a  cordial  reception  to  this  bull, 
although  the  pope  has  therein  assured  us  that  he  has  examined  the  affair  "with  all 
possible  diligence  (, diligentissime ),  and  with  the  advice  of  many  bishops  and  prel¬ 
ates;  so  that  he  strictly  enjoins  all  the  French  ( districte pracipientes)  to  own  and  con- 


LETTER  XVIII  165 

fess  that  these  holy  relics  are  no  longer  in  their  country."  The  French,  however, 
who  knew  that  fact  to  be  untrue,  by  the  evidence  of  their  own  eyes,  and  who,  upon 
opening  the  shrine,  found  all  those  relics  entire,  as  the  historians  of  that  period 
inform  us,  believed  then,  as  they  have  always  believed  since,  the  reverse  of  what 
that  holy  pope  had  enjoined  them  to  believe,  well  knowing  that  even  saints  and 
prophets  are  liable  to  be  imposed  upon. 

It  was  to  equally  little  purpose  that  you  obtained  against  Galileo  a  decree  from 
Rome  condemning  his  opinion  respecting  the  motion  of  the  earth.  It  will  never 
be  proved  by  such  an  argument  as  this  that  the  earth  remains  stationary;  and  if  it 
can  be  demonstrated  by  sure  observation  that  it  is  the  earth  and  not  the  sun  that 
revolves,  the  efforts  and  arguments  of  all  mankind  put  together  will  not  hinder  our 
planet  from  revolving,  nor  hinder  themselves  from  revolving  along  with  her. 

Again,  you  must  not  imagine  that  the  letters  of  Pope  Zachary,  excommunicat¬ 
ing  St.  Virgilius  for  maintaining  the  existence  of  the  antipodes,  have  annihilated 
the  New  World;  nor  must  you  suppose  that,  although  he  declared  that  opinion  to 
be  a  most  dangerous  heresy,  the  King  of  Spain  was  wrong  in  giving  more  credence 
to  Christopher  Columbus,  who  came  from  the  place,  than  to  the  judgement  of  the 
pope,  who  had  never  been  there,  or  that  the  Church  has  not  derived  a  vast  benefit 
from  the  discovery,  inasmuch  as  it  has  brought  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  to  a 
great  multitude  of  souls  who  might  otherwise  have  perished  in  their  infidelity. 

You  see,  then,  father,  what  is  the  nature  of  matters  of  fact,  and  on  what  princi¬ 
ples  they  are  to  be  determined;  from  all  which,  to  recur  to  our  subject,  it  is  easy  to 
conclude  that,  if  the  five  propositions  are  not  in  Jansenius,  it  is  impossible  that 
they  can  have  been  extracted  from  him;  and  that  the  only  way  to  form  a  judge¬ 
ment  on  the  matter,  and  to  produce  universal  conviction,  is  to  examine  that  book 
in  a  regular  conference,  as  you  have  been  desired  to  do  long  ago.  Until  that  be 
done,  you  have  no  right  to  charge  your  opponents  with  contumacy;  for  they  are 
as  blameless  in  regard  to  the  point  of  fact  as  they  are  of  errors  in  point  of  faith 
— Catholics  in  doctrine,  reasonable  in  fact,  and  innocent  in  both. 

Who  can  help  feeling  astonishment,  then,  father,  to  see  on  the  one  side  a  vin¬ 
dication  so  complete,  and  on  the  other  accusations  so  outrageous!  Who  would 
suppose  that  the  only  question  between  you  relates  to  a  single  fact  of  no  im¬ 
portance,  which  the  one  party  wishes  the  other  to  believe  without  showing  it  to 
them!  And  who  would  ever  imagine  that  such  a  noise  should  have  been  made  in 
the  Church  for  nothing  ( pro  nihilo ),  as  good  St.  Bernard  says!  But  this  is  just  one 
of  the  principal  tricks  of  your  policy,  to  make  people  believe  that  everything  is  at 
stake,  when,  in  reality,  there  is  nothing  at  stake;  and  to  represent  to  those  in¬ 
fluential  persons  who  listen  to  you  that  the  most  pernicious  errors  of  Calvin,  and 
the  most  vital  principles  of  the  faith,  are  involved  in  your  disputes,  with  the  view 
of  inducing  them,  under  this  conviction,  to  employ  all  their  zeal  and  all  their 
authority  against  your  opponents,  as  if  the  safety  of  the  Catholic  religion  depended 
upon  it;  whereas,  if  they  came  to  know  that  the  whole  dispute  was  about  this 
paltry  point  of  fact,  they  would  give  themselves  no  concern  about  it,  but  would, 
on  the  contrary,  regret  extremely  that,  to  gratify  your  private  passions,  they  had 
made  such  exertions  in  an  affair  of  no  consequence  to  the  Church.  For,  in  fine,  to 
take  the  worst  view  of  the  matter,  even  though  it  should  be  true  that  Jansenius 
maintained  these  propositions,  what  great  misfortune  would  accrue  from  some 
persons  doubting  of  the  fact,  provided  they  detested  the  propositions,  as  they 


1 66  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

have  publicly  declared  that  they  do?  Is  it  not  enough  that  they  are  condemned  by 
everybody,  without  exception,  and  that,  too,  in  the  sense  in  which  you  have  ex¬ 
plained  that  you  wish  them  to  be  condemned?  Would  they  be  more  severely  cen¬ 
sured  by  saying  that  Jansenius  maintained  them?  What  purpose,  then,  would  be 
served  by  exacting  this  acknowledgment,  except  that  of  disgracing  a  doctor  and 
bishop,  who  died  in  the  communion  of  the  Church?  I  cannot  see  how  that  should 
be  accounted  so  great  a  blessing  as  to  deserve  to  be  purchased  at  the  expense  of  so 
many  disturbances.  What  interest  has  the  state,  or  the  pope,  or  bishops,  or  doc¬ 
tors,  or  the  Church  at  large,  in  this  conclusion?  It  does  not  affect  them  in  any  way 
whatever,  father;  it  can  affect  none  but  your  Society,  which  would  certainly  enjoy 
some  pleasure  from  the  defamation  of  an  author  who  has  done  you  some  little  in¬ 
jury.  Meanwhile  everything  is  in  confusion,  because  you  have  made  people  be¬ 
lieve  that  everything  is  in  danger.  This  is  the  secret  spring  giving  impulse  to  all 
those  mighty  commotions,  which  would  cease  immediately  were  the  real  state  of 
the  controversy  once  known.  And  therefore,  as  the  peace  of  the  Church  depended 
on  this  explanation,  it  was,  I  conceive,  of  the  utmost  importance  that  it  should  be 
given  that,  by  exposing  all  your  disguises,  it  might  be  manifest  to  the  whole 
world  that  your  accusations  were  without  foundation,  your  opponents  without 
error,  and  the  Church  without  heresy. 

Such,  father,  is  the  end  which  it  has  been  my  desire  to  accomplish;  an  end 
which  appears  to  me,  in  every  point  of  view,  so  deeply  important  to  religion  that  I 
am  at  a  loss  to  conceive  how  those  to  whom  you  furnish  so  much  occasion  for 
speaking  can  contrive  to  remain  in  silence.  Granting  that  they  are  not  affected 
with  the  personal  wrongs  which  you  have  committed  against  them,  those  which 
the  Church  suffers  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  have  forced  them  to  complain.  Be¬ 
sides,  I  am  not  altogether  sure  if  ecclesiastics  ought  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  their 
reputation  to  calumny,  especially  in  the  matter  of  religion.  They  allow,  you,  nev¬ 
ertheless,  to  say  whatever  you  please;  so  that,  had  it  not  been  for  the  opportunity 
which,  by  mere  accident,  you  afforded  me  of  taking  their  part,  the  scandalous  im¬ 
pressions  which  you  are  circulating  against  them  in  all  quarters  would,  in  all 
probability,  have  gone  forth  without  contradiction.  Their  patience,  I  confess, 
astonishes  me;  and  the  more  so  that  I  cannot  suspect  it  of  proceeding  either  from 
timidity  or  from  incapacity,  being  well  assured  that  they  want  neither  arguments 
for  their  own  vindication,  nor  zeal  for  the  truth.  And  yet  I  see  them  religiously  bent 
on  silence,  to  a  degree  which  appears  to  me  altogether  unjustifiable.  For  my  part, 
father,  I  do  not  believe  that  I  can  possibly  follow  their  example.  Leave  the  Church 
in  peace,  and  I  shall  leave  you  as  you  are,  with  all  my  heart;  but  so  long  as  you 
make  it  your  sole  business  to  keep  her  in  confusion,  doubt  not  but  that  there  shall 
always  be  found  within  her  bosom  children  of  peace  who  will  consider  themselves 
bound  to  employ  all  their  endeavours  to  preserve  her  tranquillity. 


LETTER  XIX 


167 


LETTER  XIX 

Fragment  of  a  nineteenth  provincial  letter, 

ADDRESSED  TO  FATHER  ANNAT 


Reverend  Sir, 

If  I  have  caused  you  some  dissatisfaction,  in  former  Letters ,  by  my  endeavours 
to  establish  the  innocence  of  those  whom  you  were  labouring  to  asperse,  I  shall 
afford  you  pleasure  in  the  present  by  making  you  acquainted  with  the  sufferings 
which  you  have  inflicted  upon  them.  Be  comforted,  my  good  father,  the  objects 
of  your  enmity  are  in  distress!  And  if  the  Reverend  the  Bishops  should  be  induced 
to  carry  out,  in  their  respective  dioceses,  the  advice  you  have  given  them,  to  cause 
to  be  subscribed  and  sworn  a  certain  matter  of  fact,  which  is,  in  itself,  not  credible, 
and  which  it  cannot  be  obligatory  upon  any  one  to  believe — you  will  indeed  suc¬ 
ceed  in  plunging  your  opponents  to  the  depth  of  sorrow,  at  witnessing  the  Church 
brought  into  so  abject  a  condition. 

Yes,  sir,  I  have  seen  them;  and  it  was  with  a  satisfaction  inexpressible!  I  have 
seen  these  holy  men;  and  this  was  the  attitude  in  which  they  were  found.  They 
were  not  wrapt  up  in  a  philosophic  magnanimity;  they  did  not  affect  to  exhibit 
that  indiscriminate  firmness  which  urges  implicit  obedience  to  every  momentary 
impulsive  duty;  nor  yet  were  they  in  a  frame  of  weakness  and  timidity,  which 
would  prevent  them  from  either  discerning  the  truth,  or  following  it  when  dis¬ 
cerned.  But  I  found  them  with  minds  pious,  composed,  and  unshaken;  impressed 
with  a  meek  deference  for  ecclesiastical  authority;  with  tenderness  of  spirit,  zeal 
for  truth,  and  a  desire  to  ascertain  and  obey  her  dictates:  filled  with  a  salutary  sus¬ 
picion  of  themselves,  distrusting  their  own  infirmity,  and  regretting  that  it  should 
be  thus  exposed  to  trial;  yet  withal,  sustained  by  a  modest  hope  that  their  Lord 
will  deign  to  instruct  them  by  his  illuminations,  and  sustain  them  by  his  power; 
and  believing  that  that  peace  of  their  Saviour,  whose  sacred  influences  it  is  their 
endeavour  to  maintain,  and  for  whose  cause  they  are  brought  into  suffering,  will 
be  at  once  their  guide  and  their  support!  I  have,  in  fine,  seen  them  maintaining 
a  character  of  Christian  piety,  whose  power . 

I  found  them  surrounded  by  their  friends,  who  had  hastened  to  impart  those 
counsels  which  they  deemed  the  most  fitting  in  their  present  exigency.  I  have 
heard  those  counsels;  I  have  observed  the  manner  in  which  they  were  received, 
and  the  answers  given:  and  truly,  my  father,  had  you  yourself  been  present,  I 
think  you  would  have  acknowledged  that,  in  their  whole  procedure,  there  was  the 
entire  absence  of  a  spirit  of  insubordination  and  schism;  and  that  their  only  desire 
and  aim  was  to  preserve  inviolate  two  things — to  them  infinitely  precious — peace 
and  truth. 

For,  after  due  representations  had  been  made  to  them  of  the  penalties  they 
would  draw  upon  themselves  by  their  refusal  to  sign  the  Constitution,  and  the 
scandal  it  might  cause  in  the  Church,  their  reply  was . 


CONTENTS:  PENSEES 


Section  I.  Thoughts  on  Mind  and  on  Style,  p.  171 

Section  II.  The  Misery  of  Man  Without  God,  p.  179 

Section  III.  Of  the  Necessity  of  the  Wager,  p.  205 

Section  IV.  Of  the  Means  of  Belief,  p.  217 

Section  V.  Justice  and  the  Reason  of  Effects,  p.  225 

Section  VI.  The  Philosophers,  p.  233 

Section  VII.  Morality  and  Doctrine,  p.  243 

Section  VIII.  The  Fundamentals  of  the  Christian  Religion,  p.  270 

Section  IX.  Perpetuity,  p.  277 

Section  X.  Typology,  p.  290 

Section  XI.  The  Prophecies,  p.  301 

Section  XII.  Proofs  of  Jesus  Christ,  p.  318 

Section  XIII.  The  Miracles,  p.  328 

Section  XIV.  Appendix:  Polemical  Fragments,  p.  342 


NOTE:  Passages  erased  by  Pascal  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets,  thus  [  J. 
Words ,  added  or  corrected  by  the  editor  of  the  text,  are  similarly  denoted,  but 
are  in  italics. 


PEN  SEES 


SECTION  I 

THOUGHTS  ON  MIND  AND  ON  STYLE 

i.  The  difference  between  the  mathematical  and  the  intuitive  mind. — In  the  one,  the 
principles  are  palpable,  but  removed  from  ordinary  use;  so  that  for  want  of  habit 
it  is  difficult  to  turn  one’s  mind  in  that  direction :  but  if  one  turns  it  thither  ever  so 
little,  one  sees  the  principles  fully,  and  one  must  have  a  quite  inaccurate  mind 
who  reasons  wrongly  from  principles  so  plain  that  it  is  almost  impossible  they 
should  escape  notice. 

But  in  the  intuitive  mind  the  principles  are  found  in  common  use  and  are  be¬ 
fore  the  eyes  of  everybody.  One  has  only  to  look,  and  no  effort  is  necessary  ;  it  is 
only  a  question  of  good  eyesight,  but  it  must  be  good,  for  the  principles  are  so 
subtle  and  so  numerous  that  it  is  almost  impossible  but  that  some  escape  notice. 
Now  the  omission  of  one  principle  leads  to  error;  thus  one  must  have  very  clear 
sight  to  see  all  the  principles  and,  in  the  next  place,  an  accurate  mind  not  to  draw 
false  deductions  from  known  principles. 

All  mathematicians  would  then  be  intuitive  if  they  had  clear  sight,  for  they  do 
not  reason  incorrectly  from  principles  known  to  them;  and  intuitive  minds  would 
be  mathematical  if  they  could  turn  their  eyes  to  the  principles  of  mathematics  to 
which  they  are  unused. 

The  reason,  therefore,  that  some  intuitive  minds  are  not  mathematical  is  that 
they  cannot  at  all  turn  their  attention  to  the  principles  of  mathematics.  But  the 
reason  that  mathematicians  are  not  intuitive  is  that  they  do  not  see  what  is  before 
them,  and  that,  accustomed  to  the  exact  and  plain  principles  of  mathematics,  and 
not  reasoning  till  they  have  well  inspected  and  arranged  their  principles,  they  are 
lost  in  matters  of  intuition  where  the  principles  do  not  allow  of  such  arrangement. 
They  are  scarcely  seen;  they  are  felt  rather  than  seen;  there  is  the  greatest  difficulty 
in  making  them  felt  by  those  who  do  not  of  themselves  perceive  them.  These 
principles  are  so  fine  and  so  numerous  that  a  very  delicate  and  very  clear  sense  is 
needed  to  perceive  them,  and  to  judge  rightly  and  justly  when  they  are  perceived, 
without  for  the  most  part  being  able  to  demonstrate  them  in  order  as  in  mathe¬ 
matics,  because  the  principles  are  not  known  to  us  in  the  same  way,  and  because  it 
would  be  an  endless  matter  to  undertake  it.  We  must  see  the  matter  at  once,  at 
one  glance,  and  not  by  a  process  of  reasoning,  at  least  to  a  certain  degree.  And 
thus  it  is  rare  that  mathematicians  are  intuitive  and  that  men  of  intuition  are  math¬ 
ematicians,  because  mathematicians  wish  to  treat  matters  of  intuition  mathemati- 


1 72  PENSEES 

cally  and  make  themselves  ridiculous,  wishing  to  begin  with  definitions  and  then 
with  axioms,  which  is  not  the  way  to  proceed  in  this  kind  of  reasoning.  Not  that 
the  mind  does  not  do  so,  but  it  does  it  tacitly,  naturally,  and  without  technical 
rules;  for  the  expression  of  it  is  beyond  all  men,  and  only  a  few  can  feel  it. 

Intuitive  minds,  on  the  contrary,  being  thus  accustomed  to  judge  at  a  single 
glance,  are  so  astonished  when  they  are  presented  with  propositions  of  which  they 
understand  nothing,  and  the  way  to  which  is  through  definitions  and  axioms  so 
sterile,  and  which  they  are  not  accustomed  to  see  thus  in  detail,  that  they  are  re¬ 
pelled  and  disheartened. 

But  dull  minds  are  never  either  intuitive  or  mathematical. 

Mathematicians  who  are  only  mathematicians  have  exact  minds,  provided  all 
things  are  explained  to  them  by  means  of  definitions  and  axioms;  otherwise  they 
are  inaccurate  and  insufferable,  for  they  are  only  right  when  the  principles  are  quite 
clear. 

And  men  of  intuition  who  are  only  intuitive  cannot  have  the  patience  to  reach 
to  first  principles  of  things  speculative  and  conceptual,  which  they  have  never  seen 
in  the  world  and  which  are  altogether  out  of  the  common. 

2.  There  are  different  kinds  of  right  understanding;  some  have  right  understand¬ 
ing  in  a  certain  order  of  things,  and  not  in  others,  where  they  go  astray.  Some 
draw  conclusions  well  from  a  few  premises,  and  this  displays  an  acute  judgment. 

Others  draw  conclusions  well  where  there  are  many  premises. 

For  example,  the  former  easily  learn  hydrostatics,  where  the  premises  are 
few,  but  the  conclusions  are  so  fine  that  only  the  greatest  acuteness  can  reach 
them. 

And  in  spite  of  that  these  persons  would  perhaps  not  be  great  mathematicians, 
because  mathematics  contain  a  great  number  of  premises,  and  there  is  perhaps  a 
kind  of  intellect  that  can  search  with  ease  a  few  premises  to  the  bottom  and  can¬ 
not  in  the  least  penetrate  those  matters  in  which  there  are  many  premises. 

There  are  then  two  kinds  of  intellect:  the  one  able  to  penetrate  acutely  and  deep¬ 
ly  into  the  conclusions  of  given  premises,  and  this  is  the  precise  intellect;  the  other 
able  to  comprehend  a  great  number  of  premises  without  confusing  them,  and  this 
is  the  mathematical  intellect.  The  one  has  force  and  exactness,  the  other  compre¬ 
hension.  Now  the  one  quality  can  exist  without  the  other;  the  intellect  can  be 
strong  and  narrow,  and  can  also  be  comprehensive  and  weak. 

3.  Those  who  are  accustomed  to  judge  by  feeling  do  not  understand  the  process 
of  reasoning,  for  they  would  understand  at  first  sight  and  are  not  used  to  seek  for 
principles.  And  others,  on  the  contrary,  who  are  accustomed  to  reason  from  prin¬ 
ciples,  do  not  at  all  understand  matters  of  feeling,  seeking  principles  and  being 
unable  to  see  at  a  glance. 

4.  Mathematics ,  intuition. — True  eloquence  makes  light  of  eloquence,  true  mor¬ 
ality  makes  light  of  morality;  that  is  to  say,  the  morality  of  the  judgement,  which 
has  no  rules,  makes  light  of  the  morality  of  the  intellect. 

For  it  is  to  judgement  that  perception  belongs,  as  science  belongs  to  intellect. 
Intuition  is  the  part  of  judgement,  mathematics  of  intellect. 

To  make  light  of  philosophy  is  to  be  a  true  philosopher. 


SECTION  I  173 

5.  Those  who  judge  of  a  work  by  rule  are  in  regard  to  others  as  those  who  have  a 
watch  are  in  regard  to  others.  One  says,  "It  is  two  hours  ago";  the  other  says,  "It 
is  only  three-quarters  of  an  hour."  I  look  at  my  watch,  and  say  to  the  one,  "You 
are  weary,"  and  to  the  other,  "Time  gallops  with  you";  for  it  is  only  an  hour  and 
a  half  ago,  and  I  laugh  at  those  who  tell  me  that  time  goes  slowly  with  me  and 
that  I  judge  by  imagination.  They  do  not  know  that  I  judge  by  my  watch. 

6.  Just  as  we  harm  the  understanding,  we  harm  the  feelings  also. 

The  understanding  and  the  feelings  are  moulded  by  intercourse;  the  under¬ 
standing  and  feelings  are  corrupted  by  intercourse.  Thus  good  or  bad  society  im¬ 
proves  or  corrupts  them.  It  is,  then,  all-important  to  know  how  to  choose  in  order 
to  improve  and  not  to  corrupt  them;  and  we  cannot  make  this  choice,  if  they  be 
not  already  improved  and  not  corrupted.  Thus  a  circle  is  formed,  and  those  are 
fortunate  who  escape  it. 

7.  The  greater  intellect  one  has,  the  more  originality  one  finds  in  men.  Ordi¬ 
nary  persons  find  no  difference  between  men. 

8.  There  are  many  people  who  listen  to  a  sermon  in  the  same  way  as  they  listen 
to  vespers. 

9.  When  we  wish  to  correct  with  advantage  and  to  show  another  that  he  errs, 
we  must  notice  from  what  side  he  views  the  matter,  for  on  that  side  it  is  usually 
true,  and  admit  that  truth  to  him,  but  reveal  to  him  the  side  on  which  it  is  false. 
He  is  satisfied  with  that,  for  he  sees  that  he  was  not  mistaken  and  that  he  only 
failed  to  see  all  sides.  Now,  no  one  is  offended  at  not  seeing  everything;  but  one 
does  not  like  to  be  mistaken,  and  that  perhaps  arises  from  the  fact  that  man  natu¬ 
rally  cannot  see  everything,  and  that  naturally  he  cannot  err  in  the  side  he  looks  at, 
since  the  perceptions  of  our  senses  are  always  true. 

10.  People  are  generally  better  persuaded  by  the  reasons  which  they  have  them¬ 
selves  discovered  than  by  those  which  have  come  into  the  mind  of  others. 

11.  All  great  amusements  are  dangerous  to  the  Christian  life;  but  among  all 
those  which  the  world  has  invented  there  is  none  more  to  be  feared  than  the  the¬ 
atre.  It  is  a  representation  of  the  passions  so  natural  and  so  delicate  that  it  excites 
them  and  gives  birth  to  them  in  our  hearts,  and,  above  all,  to  that  of  love,  princi¬ 
pally  when  it  is  represented  as  very  chaste  and  virtuous.  For  the  more  innocent  it 
appears  to  innocent  souls,  the  more  they  are  likely  to  be  touched  by  it.  Its  vio¬ 
lence  pleases  our  self-love,  which  immediately  forms  a  desire  to  produce  the  same 
effects  which  are  seen  so  well  represented;  and,  at  the  same  time,  we  make  our¬ 
selves  a  conscience  founded  on  the  propriety  of  the  feelings  which  we  see  there, 
by  which  the  fear  of  pure  souls  is  removed,  since  they  imagine  that  it  cannot  hurt 
their  purity  to  love  with  a  love  which  seems  to  them  so  reasonable. 

So  we  depart  from  the  theatre  with  our  heart  so  filled  with  all  the  beauty  and 
tenderness  of  love,  the  soul  and  the  mind  so  persuaded  of  its  innocence,  that  we 
are  quite  ready  to  receive  its  first  impressions,  or  rather  to  seek  an  opportunity  of 
awakening  them  in  the  heart  of  another,  in  order  that  we  may  receive  the  same 


PENSEES 


174 

pleasures  and  the  same  sacrifices  which  we  have  seen  so  well  represented  in  the 
theatre. 

12.  Scaramouch,  who  only  thinks  of  one  thing. 

The  doctor,  who  speaks  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  he  has  said  everything,  so 
full  is  he  of  the  desire  of  talking. 

13.  One  likes  to  see  the  error,  the  passion  of  Cleobuline,  because  she  is  uncon¬ 
scious  of  it.  She  would  be  displeasing,  if  she  were  not  deceived. 

14.  When  a  natural  discourse  paints  a  passion  or  an  effect,  one  feels  within  one¬ 
self  the  truth  of  what  one  reads,  which  was  there  before,  although  one  did  not 
know  it.  Hence  one  is  inclined  to  love  him  who  makes  us  feel  it,  for  he  has  not 
shown  us  his  own  riches,  but  ours.  And  thus  this  benefit  renders  him  pleasing  to 
us,  besides  that  such  community  of  intellect  as  we  have  with  him  necessarily  in¬ 
clines  the  heart  to  love. 

15.  Eloquence,  which  persuades  by  sweetness,  not  by  authority;  as  a  tyrant,  not 
as  a  king. 

16.  Eloquence  is  an  art  of  saying  things  in  such  a  way  (l)  that  those  to  whom 
we  speak  may  listen  to  them  without  pain  and  with  pleasure;  (2)  that  they  feel 
themselves  interested,  so  that  self-love  leads  them  more  willingly  to  reflection 
upon  it. 

It  consists,  then,  in  a  correspondence  which  we  seek  to  establish  between  the 
head  and  the  heart  of  those  to  whom  we  speak,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the 
other,  between  the  thoughts  and  the  expressions  which  we  employ.  This  assumes 
that  we  have  studied  well  the  heart  of  man  so  as  to  know  all  its  powers  and,  then, 
to  find  the  just  proportions  of  the  discourse  which  we  wish  to  adapt  to  them.  We 
must  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  those  who  are  to  hear  us,  and  make  trial  on  our 
own  heart  of  the  turn  which  we  give  to  our  discourse  in  order  to  see  whether  one 
is  made  for  the  other,  and  whether  we  can  assure  ourselves  that  the  hearer  will  be, 
as  it  were,  forced  to  surrender.  We  ought  to  restrict  ourselves,  so  far  as  possible, 
to  the  simple  and  natural,  and  not  to  magnify  that  which  is  little,  or  belittle  that 
which  is  great.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  thing  be  beautiful;  it  must  be  suitable  to 
the  subject,  and  there  must  be  in  it  nothing  of  excess  or  defect. 

17.  Rivers  are  roads  which  move,  and  which  carry  us  whither  we  desire  to  go. 

18.  When  we  do  not  know  the  truth  of  a  thing,  it  is  of  advantage  that  there 
should  exist  a  common  error  which  determines  the  mind  of  man,  as,  for  example, 
the  moon,  to  which  is  attributed  the  change  of  seasons,  the  progress  of  diseases, 
etc.  For  the  chief  malady  of  man  is  restless  curiosity  about  things  which  he  cannot 
understand;  and  it  is  not  so  bad  for  him  to  be  in  error  as  to  be  curious  to  no  pur¬ 
pose. 

The  manner  in  which  Epictetus,  Montaigne,  and  Salomon  de  Tultie  wrote  is 
the  most  usual,  the  most  suggestive,  the  most  remembered,  and  the  oftenest  quot¬ 
ed,  because  it  is  entirely  composed  of  thoughts  born  from  the  common  talk  of 


SECTION  I  175 

life.  As  when  we  speak  of  the  common  error  which  exists  among  men  that  the 
moon  is  the  cause  of  everything,  we  never  fail  to  say  that  Salomon  de  Tultie  says 
that,  when  we  do  not  know  the  truth  of  a  thing,  it  is  of  advantage  that  there  should 
exist  a  common  error,  etc.;  which  is  the  thought  above. 

19.  The  last  thing  one  settles  in  writing  a  book  is  what  one  should  put  in  first. 

20.  Order . — Why  should  I  undertake  to  divide  my  virtues  into  four  rather  than 
into  six?  Why  should  I  rather  establish  virtue  in  four,  in  two,  in  one?  Why  into 
Abstine  et  sustine1  rather  than  into  "Follow  Nature,"  or,  "Conduct  your  private  af¬ 
fairs  without  injustice,"  as  Plato,  or  anything  else?  But  there,  you  will  say,  every¬ 
thing  is  contained  in  one  word.  Yes,  but  it  is  useless  without  explanation,  and 
when  we  come  to  explain  it,  as  soon  as  we  unfold  this  maxim  which  contains  all 
the  rest,  they  emerge  in  that  first  confusion  which  you  desired  to  avoid.  So,  when 
they  are  all  included  in  one,  they  are  hidden  and  useless,  as  in  a  chest,  and  never 
appear  save  in  their  natural  confusion.  Nature  has  established  them  all  without  in¬ 
cluding  one  in  the  other. 

21.  Nature  has  made  all  her  truths  independent  of  one  another.  Our  art  makes 
one  dependent  on  the  other.  But  this  is  not  natural.  Each  keeps  its  own  place. 

22.  Let  no  one  say  that  I  have  said  nothing  new;  the  arrangement  of  the  subject 
is  new.  When  we  play  tennis,  we  both  play  with  the  same  ball,  but  one  of  us  places 
it  better. 

I  had  as  soon  it  said  that  I  used  words  employed  before.  And  in  the  same  way  if 
the  same  thoughts  in  a  different  arrangement  do  not  form  a  different  discourse, 
no  more  do  the  same  words  in  their  different  arrangement  form  different  thoughts! 

23.  Words  differently  arranged  have  a  different  meaning,  and  meanings  differ¬ 
ently  arranged  have  different  effects. 

24.  Language. — We  should  not  turn  the  mind  from  one  thing  to  another,  ex¬ 
cept  for  relaxation,  and  that  when  it  is  necessary  and  the  time  suitable,  and  not 
otherwise.  For  he  that  relaxes  out  of  season  wearies,  and  he  who  wearies  us  out  of 
season  makes  us  languid,  since  we  turn  quite  away.  So  much  does  our  perverse  lust 
like  to  do  the  contrary  of  what  those  wish  to  obtain  from  us  without  giving  us 
pleasure,  the  coin  for  which  we  will  do  whatever  is  wanted. 

25.  Eloquence. — It  requires  the  pleasant  and  the  real;  but  the  pleasant  must  itself 
be  drawn  from  the  true. 

26.  Eloquence  is  a  painting  of  thought;  and  thus  those  who,  after  having  paint¬ 
ed  it,  add  something  more,  make  a  picture  instead  of  a  portrait. 

27.  Miscellaneous.  Language. — Those  who  make  antitheses  by  forcing  words  are 
like  those  who  make  false  windows  for  symmetry.  Their  rule  is  not  to  speak  ac¬ 
curately,  but  to  make  apt  figures  of  speech. 

1” Abstain  and  uphold.”  Stoic  maxim. 


1 76  PENSEES 

28.  Symmetry  is  what  we  see  at  a  glance;  based  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  rea¬ 
son  for  any  difference,  and  based  also  on  the  face  of  man;  whence  it  happens  that 
symmetry  is  only  wanted  in  breadth,  not  in  height  or  depth. 

29.  When  we  see  a  natural  style,  we  are  astonished  and  delighted;  for  we  ex¬ 
pected  to  see  an  author,  and  we  find  a  man.  Whereas  those  who  have  good  taste, 
and  who,  seeing  a  book,  expect  to  find  a  man,  are  quite  surprised  to  find  an  au¬ 
thor.  Plus poetice  quam  humane  locutus  es.1  Those  honour  Nature  well  who  teach  that 
she  can  speak  on  everything,  even  on  theology. 

30.  We  only  consult  the  ear  because  the  heart  is  wanting.  The  rule  is  upright¬ 
ness. 

Beauty  of  omission,  of  judgement. 

31.  All  the  false  beauties  which  we  blame  in  Cicero  have  their  admirers,  and  in 
great  number. 

32.  There  is  a  certain  standard  of  grace  and  beauty  which  consists  in  a  certain 
relation  between  our  nature,  such  as  it  is,  weak  or  strong,  and  the  thing  which 
pleases  us. 

Whatever  is  formed  according  to  this  standard  pleases  us,  be  it  house,  song,  dis¬ 
course,  verse,  prose,  woman,  birds,  rivers,  trees,  rooms,  dress,  etc.  Whatever  is  not 
made  according  to  this  standard  displeases  those  who  have  good  taste. 

And  as  there  is  a  perfect  relation  between  a  song  and  a  house  which  are  made 
after  a  good  model,  because  they  are  like  this  good  model,  though  each  after  its 
kind;  even  so  there  is  a  perfect  relation  between  things  made  after  a  bad  model. 
Not  that  the  bad  model  is  unique,  for  there  are  many;  but  each  bad  sonnet,  for 
example,  on  whatever  false  model  it  is  formed,  is  just  like  a  woman  dressed  after 
that  model. 

Nothing  makes  us  understand  better  the  ridiculousness  of  a  false  sonnet  than 
to  consider  nature  and  the  standard  and,  then,  to  imagine  a  woman  or  a  house 
made  according  to  that  standard. 

33.  Poetical  beauty,— As  we  speakof  poetical  beauty,  sooughtwe  to  speak  ofmathe- 
matical  beauty  and  medical  beauty.  But  we  do  not  do  so;  and  the  reason  is  that 
we  know  well  what  is  the  object  of  mathematics,  and  that  it  consists  in  proofs, 
and  what  is  the  object  of  medicine,  and  that  it  consists  in  healing.  But  we  do  not 
know  in  what  grace  consists,  which  is  the  object  of  poetry.  We  do  not  know  the 
natural  model  which  we  ought  to  imitate;  and  through  lack  of  this  knowledge, 
we  have  coined  fantastic  terms,  "The  golden  age,”  "The  wonder  of  our  times,” 
"Fatal,”  etc.,  and  call  this  jargon  poetical  beauty. 

But  whoever  imagines  a  woman  after  this  model,  which  consists  in  saying  little 
things  in  big  words,  will  see  a  pretty  girl  adorned  with  mirrors  and  chains,  at 
whom  he  will  smile;  because  we  know  better  wherein  consists  the  charm  of  wom¬ 
an  than  the  charm  of  verse.  But  those  who  are  ignorant  would  admire  her  in  this 
dress,  and  there  are  many  villages  in  which  she  would  be  taken  for  the  queen; 
hence  we  call  sonnets  made  after  this  model  "Village  Queens.” 

^etronius,  90.  "You  have  spoken  more  as  a  poet  than  as  a  man.” 


SECTION  I  177 

34.  No  one  passes  in  the  world  as  skilled  in  verse  unless  he  has  put  up  the  sign 
of  a  poet,  a  mathematician,  etc.  But  educated  people  do  not  want  a  sign  and  draw 
little  distinction  between  the  trade  of  a  poet  and  that  of  an  embroiderer. 

People  of  education  are  not  called  poets  or  mathematicians,  etc.;  but  they  are 
all  these  and  judges  of  all  these.  No  one  guesses  what  they  are.  When  they  come 
into  society,  they  talk  on  matters  about  which  the  rest  are  talking.  We  do  not  ob¬ 
serve  in  them  one  quality  rather  than  another,  save  when  they  have  to  make  use  of 
it.  But  then  we  remember  it,  for  it  is  characteristic  of  such  persons  that  we  do  not 
say  of  them  that  they  are  fine  speakers,  when  it  is  not  a  question  of  oratory,  and 
that  we  say  of  them  that  they  are  fine  speakers,  when  it  is  such  a  question. 

It  is  therefore  false  praise  to  give  a  man  when  we  say  of  him,  on  his  entry,  that 
he  is  a  very  clever  poet;  and  it  is  a  bad  sign  when  a  man  is  not  asked  to  give  his 
judgement  on  some  verses. 

35.  We  should  not  be  able  to  say  of  a  man,  “He  is  a  mathematician,’ *  or  "a 
preacher,”  or  "eloquent”;  but  that  he  is  "a  gentleman.”  That  universal  quality 
alone  pleases  me.  It  is  a  bad  sign  when,  on  seeing  a  person,  you  remember  his 
book.  I  would  prefer  you  to  see  no  quality  till  you  meet  it  and  have  occasion  to 
use  it  ( Ne  quid  minis)}  for  fear  some  one  quality  prevail  and  designate  the  man. 
Let  none  think  him  a  fine  speaker,  unless  oratory  be  in  question,  and  then  let  them 
think  it. 

36.  Man  is  full  of  wants:  he  loves  only  those  who  can  satisfy  them  all.  "This 
one  is  a  good  mathematician,”  one  will  say.  But  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  mathe¬ 
matics;  he  would  take  me  for  a  proposition.  "That  one  is  a  good  soldier.”  He 
would  take  me  for  a  besieged  town.  I  need,  then,  an  upright  man  who  can  accom¬ 
modate  himself  generally  to  all  my  wants. 

37.  [Since  we  cannot  be  universal  and  know  all  that  is  to  be  known  of  every¬ 
thing,  we  ought  to  know  a  little  about  everything.  For  it  is  far  better  to  know 
something  about  everything  than  to  know  all  about  one  thing.  This  universality 
is  the  best.  If  we  can  have  both,  still  better;  but  if  we  must  choose,  we  ought  to 
choose  the  former.  And  the  world  feels  this  and  does  so;  for  the  world  is  often  a 
good  judge.]2 

38.  A  poet  and  not  an  honest  man. 

39.  If  lightning  fell  on  low  places,  etc.,  poets,  and  those  who  can  only  reason 
about  things  of  that  kind,  would  lack  proofs. 

40.  If  we  wished  to  prove  the  examples  which  we  take  to  prove  other  things,  we 
should  have  to  take  those  other  things  to  be  examples;  for,  as  we  always  believe 
the  difficulty  is  in  what  we  wish  to  prove,  we  find  the  examples  clearer  and  a  help 
to  demonstration. 

Thus,  when  we  wish  to  demonstrate  a  general  theorem,  we  must  give  the  rule 

^'Nothing  in  excess.” 

2 Passages  erased  by  Pascal  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets.  Words ,  added  or  corrected  by  the 
editor  of  the  text,  are  similarly  denoted,  but  are  in  italics. 


178  PENSEES 

as  applied  to  a  particular  case;  but  if  we  wish  to  demonstrate  a  particular  case,  we 
must  begin  with  the  general  rule.  For  we  always  find  the  thing  obscure  which  we 
wish  to  prove  and  that  clear  which  we  use  for  the  proof;  for,  when  a  thing  is  put 
forward  to  be  proved,  we  first  fill  ourselves  with  the  imagination  that  it  is,  there¬ 
fore,  obscure  and,  on  the  contrary,  that  what  is  to  prove  it  is  clear,  and  so  we 
understand  it  easily. 

41.  Epigrams  of  Martial. — Man  loves  malice,  but  not  against  one-eyed  men  nor 
the  unfortunate,  but  against  the  fortunate  and  proud.  People  are  mistaken  in 
thinking  otherwise. 

For  lust  is  the  source  of  all  our  actions,  and  humanity,  etc.  We  must  please 
those  who  have  humane  and  tender  feelings.  That  epigram  about  two  one-eyed 
people  is  worthless,  for  it  does  not  console  them  and  only  gives  a  point  to  the 
author’s  glory.  All  that  is  only  for  the  sake  of  the  author  is  worthless.  Ambitiosa 
recident  ornamenta.1 

42.  To  call  a  king  "Prince”  is  pleasing,  because  it  diminishes  his  rank. 

43.  Certain  authors,  speaking  of  their  works,  say:  "My  book,”  "My  com¬ 
mentary,”  "My  history,”  etc.  They  resemble  middle-class  people  who  have  a  house 
of  their  own  and  always  have  "My  house”  on  their  tongue.  They  would  do  better 
to  say:  "Our  book,”  "Our  commentary,”  "Our  history,”  etc.,  because  there  is  in 
them  usually  more  of  other  people’s  than  their  own. 

44.  Do  you  wish  people  to  believe  good  of  you?  Don’t  speak. 

45.  Languages  are  ciphers,  wherein  letters  are  not  changed  into  letters,  but 
words  into  words,  so  that  an  unknown  language  is  decipherable. 

46.  A  maker  of  witticisms,  a  bad  character. 

47.  There  are  some  who  speak  well  and  write  badly.  For  the  place  and  the 
audience  warm  them,  and  draw  from  their  minds  more  than  they  think  of  without 
that  warmth. 

48.  When  we  find  words  repeated  in  a  discourse  and,  in  trying  to  correct  them, 
discover  that  they  are  so  appropriate  that  we  would  spoil  the  discourse,  we  must 
leave  them  alone.  This  is  the  test;  and  our  attempt  is  the  work  of  envy,  which  is 
blind,  and  does  not  see  that  repetition  is  not  in  this  place  a  fault;  for  there  is  no 
general  rule. 

49.  To  mask  nature  and  disguise  her.  No  more  king,  pope,  bishop — but  august 
monarch ,  etc.;  not  Paris — the  capital  of  the  kingdom.  There  are  places  in  which  we 
ought  to  call  Paris,  Paris ,  and  others  in  which  we  ought  to  call  it  the  capital  of 
the  kingdom. 

50.  The  same  meaning  changes  with  the  words  which  express  it.  Meanings  re- 

^orace,  Epistle  to  the  Pisos ,  447.  'They  curtailed  pretentious  ornaments.” 


SECTION  II  179 

ceive  their  dignity  from  words  instead  of  giving  it  to  them.  Examples  should  be 
sought  .... 

51.  Sceptic,  for  obstinate. 

52.  No  one  calls  another  a  Cartesian  but  he  who  is  one  himself,  a  pedant  but  a 
pedant,  a  provincial  but  a  provincial;  and  I  would  wager  it  was  the  printer  who 
put  it  on  the  title  of  Letters  to  a  Provincial. 

53.  A  carriage  upset  or  overturned ,  according  to  the  meaning.  To  spread  abroad  or 
upset ,  according  to  the  meaning.  (The  argument  by  force  of  M.  le  Maitre  over  the 
friar.) 

54.  Miscellaneous. — A  form  of  speech,  "I  should  have  liked  to  apply  myself  to 
that.” 

55.  The  aperitive  virtue  of  a  key,  the  attractive  virtue  of  a  hook. 

56.  To  guess:  "The  part  that  I  take  in  your  trouble.”  The  Cardinal  did  not  want 
to  be  guessed. 

"My  mind  is  disquieted.”  I  am  disquieted  vs  better. 

57.  I  always  feel  uncomfortable  under  such  compliments  as  these:  "I  have 
given  you  a  great  deal  of  trouble,”  "I  am  afraid  I  am  boring  you,”  "I  fear  this  is 
too  long.”  We  either  carry  our  audience  with  us,  or  irritate  them. 

58.  You  are  ungraceful:  "Excuse  me,  pray.”  Without  that  excuse  I  would  not 
have  known  there  was  anything  amiss.  "With  reverence  be  it  spoken  ...”  The 
only  thing  bad  is  their  excuse. 

39.  "To  extinguish  the  torch  of  sedition”;  too  luxuriant.  "The  restlessness  of 
his  genius”;  two  superfluous  grand  words. 


SECTION  II 

THE  MISERY  OF  MAN  WITHOUT  GOD 

60.  First  part:  Misery  of  man  without  God. 

Second  part:  Happiness  of  man  with  God. 

Or,  First  part:  That  nature  is  corrupt.  Proved  by  nature  itself. 

Second  part:  That  there  is  a  Redeemer.  Proved  by  Scripture. 

61.  Order. — I  might  well  have  taken  this  discourse  in  an  order  like  this:  to  show 
the  vanity  of  all  conditions  of  men,  to  show  the  vanity  of  ordinary  lives,  and  then 
the  vanity  of  philosophic  lives,  sceptics,  stoics;  but  the  order  would  not  have  been 
kept.  I  know  a  little  what  it  is,  and  how  few  people  understand  it.  No  human 


i8o  PENSEES 

science  can  keep  it.  Saint  Thomas  did  not  keep  it.  Mathematics  keep  it,  but  they 
are  useless  on  account  of  their  depth. 

62.  Preface  to  the  first  part. — To  speak  of  those  who  have  treated  of  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  self;  of  the  divisions  of  Charron,  which  sadden  and  weary  us;  of  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  Montaigne;  that  he  was  quite  aware  of  his  want  of  method  and  shunned 
it  by  jumping  from  subject  to  subject;  that  he  sought  to  be  fashionable. 

His  foolish  project  of  describing  himself!  And  this  not  casually  and  against  his 
maxims,  since  every  one  makes  mistakes,  but  by  his  maxims  themselves,  and  by 
first  and  chief  design.  For  to  say  silly  things  by  chance  and  weakness  is  a  common 
misfortune,  but  to  say  them  intentionally  is  intolerable,  and  to  say  such  as  that . . . 

63.  Montaigne . — Montaigne’s  faults  are  great.  Lewd  words;  this  is  bad,  notwith¬ 
standing  Mademoiselle  de  Gournay.  Credulous;  people  without  eyes .  Ignorant; 
squaring  the  circle,  a  greater  world.  His  opinions  on  suicide,  on  death.  He  suggests 
an  indifference  about  salvation,  without  fear  and  without  repentance.  As  his  book  was 
not  written  with  a  religious  purpose,  he  was  not  bound  to  mention  religion;  but  it 
is  always  our  duty  not  to  turn  men  from  it.  One  can  excuse  his  rather  free  and 
licentious  opinions  on  some  relations  of  life;  but  one  cannot  excuse  his  thor¬ 
oughly  pagan  views  on  death,  for  a  man  must  renounce  piety  altogether, 
if  he  does  not  at  least  wish  to  die  like  a  Christian.  Now,  through  the  whole  of  his 
book  his  only  conception  of  death  is  a  cowardly  and  effeminate  one. 

64.  It  is  not  in  Montaigne,  but  in  myself,  that  I  find  all  that  I  see  in  him. 

65.  What  good  there  is  in  Montaigne  can  only  have  been  acquired  with  difficulty. 
The  evil  that  is  in  him,  I  mean  apart  from  his  morality,  could  have  been  corrected 
in  a  moment,  if  he  had  been  informed  that  he  made  too  much  of  trifles  and  spoke 
too  much  of  himself. 

66.  One  must  know  oneself.  If  this  does  not  serve  to  discover  truth,  it  at  least 
serves  as  a  rule  of  life,  and  there  is  nothing  better. 

67.  The  vanity  of  the  sciences. — Physical  science  will  not  console  me  for  the  ig¬ 
norance  of  morality  in  the  time  of  affliction.  But  the  science  of  ethics  will  always 
console  me  for  the  ignorance  of  the  physical  sciences. 

68.  Men  are  never  taught  to  be  gentlemen  and  are  taught  everything  else;  and 
they  never  plume  themselves  so  much  on  the  rest  of  their  knowledge  as  on  know¬ 
ing  how  to  be  gentlemen.  They  only  plume  themselves  on  knowing  the  one  thing 
they  do  not  know. 

69.  The  infinites ,  the  mean. — When  we  read  too  fast  or  too  slowly,  we  understand 
nothing. 

70.  Nature  .  .  .  — [Nature  has  set  us  so  well  in  the  centre,  that  if  we  change  one 
side  of  the  balance,  we  change  the  other  also.  I  act.  Ta  f&a  Tpexu-  This  makes  me 

Montaigne,  Essays ,  ii.37;  ii-4* 


SECTION  II  181 

believe  that  the  springs  in  our  brain  are  so  adjusted  that  he  who  touches  one 
touches  also  its  contrary.] 

71.  Too  much  and  too  little  wine.  Give  him  none,  he  cannot  find  truth;  give 
him  too  much,  the  same. 

72.  Mans  disproportion. — [This  is  where  our  innate  knowledge  leads  us.  If  it  be 
not  true,  there  is  no  truth  in  man;  and  if  it  be  true,  he  finds  therein  great  cause  for 
humiliation,  being  compelled  to  abase  himself  in  one  way  or  another.  And  since 
he  cannot  exist  without  this  knowledge,  I  wish  that,  before  entering  on  deeper 
researches  into  nature,  he  would  consider  her  both  seriously  and  at  leisure,  that  he 
would  reflect  upon  himself  also,  and  knowing  what  proportion  there  is  .  .  .]  Let 
man  then  contemplate  the  whole  of  nature  in  her  full  and  grand  majesty,  and  turn 
his  vision  from  the  low  objects  which  surround  him.  Let  him  gaze  on  that  bril¬ 
liant  light,  set  like  an  eternal  lamp  to  illumine  the  universe;  let  the  earth  appear  to 
him  a  point  in  comparison  with  the  vast  circle  described  by  the  sun;  and  let  him 
wonder  at  the  fact  that  this  vast  circle  is  itself  but  a  very  fine  point  in  comparison 
with  that  described  by  the  stars  in  their  revolution  round  the  firmament.  But  if  our 
view  be  arrested  there,  let  our  imagination  pass  beyond;  it  will  sooner  exhaust  the 
power  of  conception  than  nature  that  of  supplying  material  for  conception.  The 
whole  visible  world  is  only  an  imperceptible  atom  in  the  ample  bosom  of  nature. 
No  idea  approaches  it.  We  may  enlarge  our  conceptions  beyond  all  imaginable 
space;  we  only  produce  atoms  in  comparison  with  the  reality  of  things.  It  is  an 
infinite  sphere,  the  centre  of  which  is  everywhere,  the  circumference  nowhere.  In 
short,  it  is  the  greatest  sensible  mark  of  the  almighty  power  of  God  that  imagina¬ 
tion  loses  itself  in  that  thought. 

Returning  to  himself,  let  man  consider  what  he  is  in  comparison  with  all  exist¬ 
ence;  let  him  regard  himself  as  lost  in  this  remote  corner  of  nature;  and  from  the 
little  cell  in  which  he  finds  himself  lodged,  I  mean  the  universe,  let  him  estimate 
at  their  true  value  the  earth,  kingdoms,  cities,  and  himself.  What  is  a  man  in  the 
Infinite? 

But  to  show  him  another  prodigy  equally  astonishing,  let  him  examine  the 
most  delicate  things  he  knows.  Let  a  mite  be  given  him,  with  its  minute  body  and 
parts  incomparably  more  minute,  limbs  with  their  joints,  veins  in  the  limbs,  blood 
in  the  veins,  humours  in  the  blood,  drops  in  the  humours,  vapours  in  the  drops. 
Dividing  these  last  things  again,  let  him  exhaust  his  powers  of  conception,  and 
let  the  last  object  at  which  he  can  arrive  be  now  that  of  our  discourse.  Perhaps  he 
will  think  that  here  is  the  smallest  point  in  nature.  I  will  let  him  see  therein  a  new 
abyss.  I  will  paint  for  him  not  only  the  visible  universe,  but  all  that  he  can  con¬ 
ceive  of  nature’s  immensity  in  the  womb  of  this  abridged  atom.  Let  him  see  therein 
an  infinity  of  universes,  each  of  which  has  its  firmament,  its  planets,  its  earth,  in 
the  same  proportion  as  in  the  visible  world;  in  each  earth  animals,  and  in  the  last 
mites,  in  which  he  will  find  again  all  that  the  first  had,  finding  still  in  these  others 
the  same  thing  without  end  and  without  cessation.  Let  him  lose  himself  in  won¬ 
ders  as  amazing  in  their  littleness  as  the  others  in  their  vastness.  For  who  will  not 
be  astounded  at  the  fact  that  our  body,  which  a  little  while  ago  was  imperceptible 
in  the  universe,  itself  imperceptible  in  the  bosom  of  the  whole,  is  now  a  colossus, 
a  world,  or  rather  a  whole,  in  respect  of  the  nothingness  which  we  cannot  reach? 


182 


PENSEES 

He  who  regards  himself  in  this  light  will  be  afraid  of  himself,  and  observing  him¬ 
self  sustained  in  the  body  given  him  by  nature  between  those  two  abysses  of  the 
Infinite  and  Nothing,  will  tremble  at  the  sight  of  these  marvels;  and  I  think  that, 
as  his  curiosity  changes  into  admiration,  he  will  be  more  disposed  to  contemplate 
them  in  silence  than  to  examine  them  with  presumption. 

For,  in  fact,  what  is  man  in  nature?  A  Nothing  in  comparison  with  the  Infinite, 
an  All  in  comparison  with  the  Nothing,  a  mean  between  nothing  and  everything. 
Since  he  is  infinitely  removed  from  comprehending  the  extremes,  the  end  of  things 
and  their  beginning  are  hopelessly  hidden  from  him  in  an  impenetrable  secret; 
he  is  equally  incapable  of  seeing  the  Nothing  from  which  he  was  made,  and  the 
Infinite  in  which  he  is  swallowed  up. 

What  will  he  do  then,  but  perceive  the  appearance  of  the  middle  of  things,  in  an 
eternal  despair  of  knowing  either  their  beginning  or  their  end.  All  things  proceed 
from  the  Nothing,  and  are  borne  towards  the  Infinite.  Who  will  follow  these  mar¬ 
vellous  processes?  The  Author  of  these  wonders  understands  them.  None  other 
can  do  so. 

Through  failure  to  contemplate  these  Infinites,  men  have  rashly  rushed  into 
the  examination  of  nature,  as  though  they  bore  some  proportion  to  her.  It  is 
strange  that  they  have  wished  to  understand  the  beginnings  of  things,  and  thence 
to  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  the  whole,  with  a  presumption  as  infinite  as  their 
object.  For  surely  this  design  cannot  be  formed  without  presumption  or  without  a 
capacity  infinite  like  nature. 

If  we  are  well  informed,  we  understand  that,  as  nature  has  graven  her  image  and 
that  of  her  Author  on  all  things,  they  almost  all  partake  of  her  double  infinity. 
Thus  we  see  that  all  the  sciences  are  infinite  in  the  extent  of  their  researches.  For 
who  doubts  that  geometry,  for  instance,  has  an  infinite  infinity  of  problems  to  solve? 
They  are  also  infinite  in  the  multitude  and  fineness  of  their  premises;  for  it  is  clear 
that  those  which  are  put  forward  as  ultimate  are  not  self-supporting,  but  are  based 
on  others  which,  again  having  others  for  their  support,  do  not  permit  of  finality. 
But  we  represent  some  as  ultimate  for  reason,  in  the  same  way  as  in  regard  to 
material  objects  we  call  that  an  indivisible  point  beyond  which  our  senses  can  no 
longer  perceive  anything,  although  by  its  nature  it  is  infinitely  divisible. 

Of  these  two  Infinites  of  science,  that  of  greatness  is  the  most  palpable,  and 
hence  a  few  persons  have  pretended  to  know  all  things.  "1  will  speak  of  the 
whole,”  said  Democritus. 

But  the  infinitely  little  is  the  least  obvious.  Philosophers  have  much  oftener 
claimed  to  have  reached  it,  and  it  is  here  they  have  all  stumbled.  This  has  given 
rise  to  such  common  titles  as  First  Principles ,  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  and  the  like, 
as  ostentatious  in  fact,  though  not  in  appearance,  as  that  one  which  blinds  us, 
De  omni  scibili.1 

We  naturally  believe  ourselves  far  more  capable  of  reaching  the  centre  of  things 
than  of  embracing  their  circumference.  The  visible  extent  of  the  world  visibly 
exceeds  us;  but  as  we  exceed  little  things,  we  think  ourselves  more  capable  of 
knowing  them.  And  yet  we  need  no  less  capacity  for  attaining  the  Nothing  than 
the  All.  Infinite  capacity  is  required  for  both,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  whoever 
shall  have  understood  the  ultimate  principles  of  being  might  also  attain  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  Infinite.  The  one  depends  on  the  other,  and  one  leads  to  the 

1Title  given  by  Pico  della  Mirandola  to  one  of  his  proposed  nine  hundred  theses,  in  i486. 


SECTION  II  183 

other.  These  extremes  meet  and  reunite  by  force  of  distance  and  find  each  other  in 
God,  and  in  God  alone. 

Let  us,  then,  take  our  compass;  we  are  something,  and  we  are  not  everything. 
The  nature  of  our  existence  hides  from  us  the  knowledge  of  first  beginnings  which 
are  born  of  the  Nothing;  and  the  littleness  of  our  being  conceals  from  us  the  sight 
of  the  Infinite. 

Our  intellect  holds  the  same  position  in  the  world  of  thought  as  our  body  occu¬ 
pies  in  the  expanse  of  nature. 

Limited  as  we  are  in  every  way,  this  state  which  holds  the  mean  between  two 
extremes  is  present  in  all  our  impotence.  Our  senses  perceive  no  extreme.  Too 
much  sound  deafens  us;  too  much  light  dazzles  us;  too  great  distance  or  prox¬ 
imity  hinders  our  view.  Too  great  length  and  too  great  brevity  of  discourse  tend  to 
obscurity;  too  much  truth  is  paralysing  (I  know  some  who  cannot  understand  that 
to  take  four  from  nothing  leaves  nothing).  First  principles  are  too  self-evident  for 
us;  too  much  pleasure  disagrees  with  us.  Too  many  concords  are  annoying  in 
music;  too  many  benefits  irritate  us;  we  wish  to  have  the  wherewithal  to  over¬ 
pay  our  debts.  Benefiaa  eo  usque  Iceta  sunt  dum  videntur  exsolvi  posse;  ubi  multum 
antevenere ,  pro  gratia  odium  redditur }  We  feel  neither  extreme  heat  nor  extreme 
cold.  Excessive  qualities  are  prejudicial  to  us  and  not  perceptible  by  the  senses; 
we  do  not  feel  but  suffer  them.  Extreme  youth  and  extreme  age  hinder  the 
mind,  as  also  too  much  and  too  little  education.  In  short,  extremes  are  for  us 
as  though  they  were  not,  and  we  are  not  within  their  notice.  They  escape  us,  or 
we  them. 

This  is  our  true  state;  this  is  what  makes  us  incapable  of  certain  knowledge  and 
of  absolute  ignorance.  We  sail  within  a  vast  sphere,  ever  drifting  in  uncertainty, 
driven  from  end  to  end.  When  we  think  to  attach  ourselves  to  any  point  and  to 
fasten  to  it,  it  wavers  and  leaves  us;  and  if  we  follow  it,  it  eludes  our  grasp,  slips 
past  us,  and  vanishes  for  ever.  Nothing  stays  for  us.  This  is  our  natural  condition 
and  yet  most  contrary  to  our  inclination;  we  burn  with  desire  to  find  solid  ground 
and  an  ultimate  sure  foundation  whereon  to  build  a  tower  reaching  to  the  Infinite. 
But  our  whole  groundwork  cracks,  and  the  earth  opens  to  abysses. 

Let  us,  therefore,  not  look  for  certainty  and  stability.  Our  reason  is  always  de¬ 
ceived  by  fickle  shadows;  nothing  can  fix  the  finite  between  the  two  Infinites, 
which  both  enclose  and  fly  from  it. 

If  this  be  well  understood,  I  think  that  we  shall  remain  at  rest,  each  in  the  state 
wherein  nature  has  placed  him.  As  this  sphere  which  has  fallen  to  us  as  our  lot  is 
always  distant  from  either  extreme,  what  matters  it  that  man  should  have  a  little 
more  knowledge  of  the  universe?  If  he  has  it,  he  but  gets  a  little  higher.  Is  he  not 
always  infinitely  removed  from  the  end,  and  is  not  the  duration  of  our  life  equally 
removed  from  eternity,  even  if  it  lasts  ten  years  longer? 

In  comparison  with  these  Infinites,  all  finites  are  equal,  and  I  see  no  reason  for 
fixing  our  imagination  on  one  more  than  on  another.  The  only  comparison  which 
we  make  of  ourselves  to  the  finite  is  painful  to  us. 

If  man  made  himself  the  first  object  of  study,  he  would  see  how  incapable  he  is 
of  going  further.  How  can  a  part  know  the  whole?  But  he  may  perhaps  aspire  to 
know  at  least  the  parts  to  which  he  bears  some  proportion.  But  the  parts  of  the 

Tacitus,  Annals ,  iv.18.  "Kindnesses  are  agreeable  so  long  as  one  thinks  them  possible  to 
render;  further,  recognition  makes  way  for  hatred." 


PENSEES 


184 

world  are  all  so  related  and  linked  to  one  another  that  I  believe  it  impossible  to 
know  one  without  the  other  and  without  the  whole. 

Man,  for  instance,  is  related  to  all  he  knows.  He  needs  a  place  wherein  to  abide, 
time  through  which  to  live,  motion  in  order  to  live,  elements  to  compose  him, 
warmth  and  food  to  nourish  him,  air  to  breathe.  He  sees  light;  he  feels  bodies; 
in  short,  he  is  in  a  dependent  alliance  with  everything.  To  know  man,  then, 
it  is  necessary  to  know  how  it  happens  that  he  needs  air  to  live,  and,  to  know 
the  air,  we  must  know  how  it  is  thus  related  to  the  life  of  man,  etc.  Flame  can¬ 
not  exist  without  air;  therefore,  to  understand  the  one,  we  must  understand  the 
other. 

Since  everything,  then,  is  cause  and  effect,  dependent  and  supporting,  mediate 
and  immediate,  and  all  is  held  together  by  a  natural  though  imperceptible  chain 
which  binds  together  things  most  distant  and  most  different,  I  hold  it  equally  im¬ 
possible  to  know  the  parts  without  knowing  the  whole  and  to  know  the  whole 
without  knowing  the  parts  in  detail. 

[The  eternity  of  things  in  itself  or  in  God  must  also  astonish  our  brief  duration. 
The  fixed  and  constant  immobility  of  nature,  in  comparison  with  the  continual 
change  which  goes  on  within  us,  must  have  the  same  effect.] 

And  what  completes  our  incapability  of  knowing  things  is  the  fact  that  they 
are  simple  and  that  we  are  composed  of  two  opposite  natures,  different  in  kind, 
soul  and  body.  For  it  is  impossible  that  our  rational  part  should  be  other  than 
spiritual;  and  if  any  one  maintain  that  we  are  simply  corporeal,  this  would  far 
more  exclude  us  from  the  knowledge  of  things,  there  being  nothing  so  incon¬ 
ceivable  as  to  say  that  matter  knows  itself.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  how  it 
should  know  itself. 

So,  if  we  are  simply  material,  we  can  know  nothing  at  all;  and  if  we  are  com¬ 
posed  of  mind  and  matter,  we  cannot  know  perfectly  things  which  are  simple, 
whether  spiritual  or  corporeal.  Hence  it  comes  that  almost  all  philosophers  have 
confused  ideas  of  things,  and  speak  of  material  things  in  spiritual  terms,  and  of 
spiritual  things  in  material  terms.  For  they  say  boldly  that  bodies  have  a  tendency 
to  fall,  that  they  seek  after  their  centre,  that  they  fly  from  destruction,  that  they 
fear  the  void,  that  they  have  inclinations,  sympathies,  antipathies,  all  of  which 
attributes  pertain  only  to  mind.  And  in  speaking  of  minds,  they  consider  them  as 
in  a  place,  and  attribute  to  them  movement  from  one  place  to  another;  and  these 
are  qualities  which  belong  only  to  bodies. 

Instead  of  receiving  the  ideas  of  these  things  in  their  purity,  we  colour  them 
with  our  own  qualities,  and  stamp  with  our  composite  being  all  the  simple  things 
which  we  contemplate. 

Who  would  not  think,  seeing  us  compose  all  things  of  mind  and  body,  but  that 
this  mixture  would  be  quite  intelligible  to  us?  Yet  it  is  the  very  thing  we  least 
understand.  Man  is  to  himself  the  most  wonderful  object  in  nature;  for  he  cannot 
conceive  what  the  body  is,  still  less  what  the  mind  is,  and  least  of  all  how  a  body 
should  be  united  to  a  mind.  This  is  the  consummation  of  his  difficulties,  and  yet  it 
is  his  very  being.  Modus  quo  corporibus  adherent  spiritus  comprehendi  ab  hominibus 
non  potest ,  et  hoc  tamen  homo  est.1  Finally,  to  complete  the  proof  of  our  weakness,  I 
shall  conclude  with  these  two  considerations.  .  . 

1St.  Augustine,  City  of  God ,  xxi.io.”  The  manner  in  which  the  spirit  is  united  to  the  body 
can  not  be  understood  by  man;  and  yet  it  is  man.” 


SECTION  II 


185 

73.  [But  perhaps  this  subject  goes  beyond  the  capacity  of  reason.  Let  us  there¬ 
fore  examine  her  solutions  to  problems  within  her  powers.  If  there  be  anything  to 
which  her  own  interest  must  have  made  her  apply  herself  most  seriously,  it  is  the 
inquiry  into  her  own  sovereign  good.  Let  us  see,  then,  wherein  these  strong  and 
clear-sighted  souls  have  placed  it  and  whether  they  agree. 

One  says  that  the  sovereign  good  consists  in  virtue,  another  in  pleasure,  another 
in  the  knowledge  of  nature,  another  in  truth,  Felix  qui potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas,1 
another  in  total  ignorance,  another  in  indolence,  others  in  disregarding  appear¬ 
ances,  another  in  wondering  at  nothing,  nihil  admirari prope  res  una  qua  possit  facere 
etservare  beatum ,2  and  the  true  sceptics  in  their  indifference,  doubt,  and  perpetual 
suspense,  and  others,  wiser,  think  to  find  a  better  definition.  We  are  well  satisfied. 

To  transpose  after  the  laws  to  the  following  title. 

We  must  see  if  this  fine  philosophy  has  gained  nothing  certain  from  so  long  and 
so  intent  study;  perhaps  at  least  the  soul  will  know  itself.  Let  us  hear  the  rulers  of 
the  world  on  this  subject.  What  have  they  thought  of  her  substance?  394. 3  Have 
they  been  more  fortunate  in  locating  her?  395.3  What  have  they  found  out  about 
her  origin,  duration,  and  departure?  399-3 

Is,  then,  the  soul  too  noble  a  subject  for  their  feeble  lights?  Let  us,  then,  abase 
her  to  matter  and  see  if  she  knows  whereof  is  made  the  very  body  which  she  ani¬ 
mates  and  those  others  which  she  contemplates  and  moves  at  her  will.  What  have 
those  great  dogmatists,  who  are  ignorant  of  nothing,  known  of  this  matter?  Harum 
sententiarum ,4  393. 3 

This  would  doubtless  suffice,  if  Reason  were  reasonable.  She  is  reasonable 
enough  to  admit  that  she  has  been  unable  to  find  anything  durable,  but  she  does 
not  yet  despair  of  reaching  it;  she  is  as  ardent  as  ever  in  this  search,  and  is  confident 
she  has  within  her  the  necessary  powers  for  this  conquest.  We  must  therefore  con¬ 
clude,  and,  after  having  examined  her  powers  in  their  effects,  observe  them  in 
themselves,  and  see  if  she  has  a  nature  and  a  grasp  capable  of  laying  hold  of  the 
truth.] 

74.  A  letter  On  the  Foolishness  of  Human  Knowledge  and  Philosophy . 

This  letter  before  Diversion. 

Felix  qui  potuit .  .  .  Nihil  admirari. 

280  kinds  of  sovereign  good  in  Montaigne. 

73.  Part  I,  1,  2,  c.  1,  section  4.5 

[Probability. — It  will  not  be  difficult  to  put  the  case  a  stage  lower,  and  make  it 
appear  ridiculous.  To  begin  at  the  very  beginning.]  What  is  more  absurd  than  to 
say  that  lifeless  bodies  have  passions,  fears,  hatreds — that  insensible  bodies,  life¬ 
less  and  incapable  of  life,  have  passions  which  presuppose  at  least  a  sensitive  soul 
to  feel  them,  nay  more,  that  the  object  of  their  dread  is  the  void?  What  is  there  in 
the  void  that  could  make  them  afraid?  Nothing  is  more  shallow  and  ridiculous. 

'Virgil,  Georgies ,  ii.489.  "Happy  is  he  who  is  able  to  know  the  causes  of  things." 

2Horace,  Epistles ,  I.vi.l.  "To  be  astonished  at  nothing  is  nearly  the  only  thing  which  can 
give  and  conserve  happiness." 

3Montaigne,  Essays ,  ii.12 

4Cicero,  Disputationes  Tusculanae ,  i,  n.  Harum  sententiarum  quae  vera  sit ,  Deus  aliquis  viderit • 
"Which  of  these  opinions  is  the  truth,  a  god  will  see." 

6 Treatise  on  the  Vacuum. 


PENSEES 


1 86 

This  is  not  all;  it  is  said  that  they  have  in  themselves  a  source  of  movement  to 
shun  the  void.  Have  they  arms,  legs,  muscles,  nerves? 

7  6.  To  write  against  those  who  made  too  profound  a  study  of  science:  Descartes. 

77.  I  cannot  forgive  Descartes.  In  all  his  philosophy  he  would  have  been  quite 
willing  to  dispense  with  God.  But  he  had  to  make  Him  give  a  fillip  to  set  the 
world  in  motion;  beyond  this,  he  has  no  further  need  of  God. 

78.  Descartes  useless  and  uncertain. 

79.  [Descartes. — We  must  say  summarily:  "This  is  made  by  figure  and  motion,” 
for  it  is  true.  But  to  say  what  these  are,  and  to  compose  the  machine,  is  ridiculous. 
For  it  is  useless,  uncertain,  and  painful.  And  were  it  true,  we  do  not  think  all 
philosophy  is  worth  one  hour  of  pain.] 

80.  How  comes  it  that  a  cripple  does  not  offend  us,  but  that  a  fool  does?  Be¬ 
cause  a  cripple  recognises  that  we  walk  straight,  whereas  a  fool  declares  that  it  is 
we  who  are  silly;  if  it  were  not  so,  we  should  feel  pity  and  not  anger. 

Epictetus  asks  still  more  strongly:  "Why  are  we  not  angry  if  we  are  told  that  we 
have  a  headache,  and  why  are  we  angry  if  we  are  told  that  we  reason  badly,  or 
choose  wrongly"?  The  reason  is  that  we  are  quite  certain  that  we  have  not  a  head¬ 
ache,  or  are  not  lame,  but  we  are  not  so  sure  that  we  make  a  true  choice.  So,  having 
assurance  only  because  we  see  with  our  whole  sight,  it  puts  us  into  suspense  and 
surprise  when  another  with  his  whole  sight  sees  the  opposite,  and  still  more  so 
when  a  thousand  others  deride  our  choice.  For  we  must  prefer  our  own  lights  to 
those  of  so  many  others,  and  that  is  bold  and  difficult.  There  is  never  this  con¬ 
tradiction  in  the  feelings  towards  a  cripple. 

81.  It  is  natural  for  the  mind  to  believe  and  for  the  will  to  love;  so  that,  for  want 
of  true  objects,  they  must  attach  themselves  to  false. 

82.  Imagination . — It  is  that  deceitful  part  in  man,  that  mistress  of  error  and  fal¬ 
sity,  the  more  deceptive  that  she  is  not  always  so;  for  she  would  be  an  infallible  rule 
of  truth,  if  she  were  an  infallible  rule  of  falsehood.  But  being  most  generally  false, 
she  gives  no  sign  of  her  nature,  impressing  the  same  character  on  the  true  and  the 
false. 

I  do  not  speak  of  fools,  I  speak  of  the  wisest  men;  and  it  is  among  them  that 
the  imagination  has  the  great  gift  of  persuasion.  Reason  protests  in  vain;  it  can¬ 
not  set  a  true  value  on  things. 

This  arrogant  power,  the  enemy  of  reason,  who  likes  to  rule  and  dominate  it, 
has  established  in  man  a  second  nature  to  show  how  all-powerful  she  is.  She 
makes  men  happy  and  sad,  healthy  and  sick,  rich  and  poor;  she  compels  reason  to 
believe,  doubt,  and  deny;  she  blunts  the  senses,  or  quickens  them;  she  has  her 
fools  and  sages;  and  nothing  vexes  us  more  than  to  see  that  she  fills  her  devotees 
with  a  satisfaction  far  more  full  and  entire  than  does  reason.  Those  who  have  a 
lively  imagination  are  a  great  deal  more  pleased  with  themselves  than  the  wise  can 
reasonably  be.  They  look  down  upon  men  with  haughtiness;  they  argue  with 


SECTION  II  187 

boldness  and  confidence,  others  with  fear  and  diffidence;  and  this  gaiety  of  coun¬ 
tenance  often  gives  them  the  advantage  in  the  opinion  of  the  hearers,  such  favour 
have  the  imaginary  wise  in  the  eyes  of  judges  of  like  nature.  Imagination  cannot 
make  fools  wise;  but  she  can  make  them  happy,  to  the  envy  of  reason  which  can 
only  make  its  friends  miserable;  the  one  covers  them  with  glory,  the  other  with 
shame. 

What  but  this  faculty  of  imagination  dispenses  reputation,  awards  respect  and 
veneration  to  persons,  works,  laws,  and  the  great?  How  insufficient  are  all  the 
riches  of  the  earth  without  her  consent! 

Would  you  not  say  that  this  magistrate,  whose  venerable  age  commands  the  re¬ 
spect  of  a  whole  people,  is  governed  by  pure  and  lofty  reason,  and  that  he  judges 
causes  according  to  their  true  nature  without  considering  those  mere  trifles  which 
only  affect  the  imagination  of  the  weak?  See  him  go  to  sermon,  full  of  devout  zeal, 
strengthening  his  reason  with  the  ardour  of  his  love.  He  is  ready  to  listen  with 
exemplary  respect.  Let  the  preacher  appear,  and  let  nature  have  given  him  a  hoarse 
voice  or  a  comical  cast  of  countenance,  or  let  his  barber  have  given  him  a  bad 
shave,  or  let  by  chance  his  dress  be  more  dirtied  than  usual,  then,  however  great 
the  truths  he  announces,  I  wager  our  senator  loses  his  gravity. 

If  the  greatest  philosopher  in  the  world  find  himself  upon  a  plank  wider  than 
actually  necessary,  but  hanging  over  a  precipice,  his  imagination  will  prevail, 
though  his  reason  convince  him  of  his  safety.  Many  cannot  bear  the  thought  with¬ 
out  a  cold  sweat.  I  will  not  state  all  its  effects. 

Every  one  knows  that  the  sight  of  cats  or  rats,  the  crushing  of  a  coal,  etc.,  may 
unhinge  the  reason.  The  tone  of  voice  affects  the  wisest,  and  changes  the  force  of 
a  discourse  or  a  poem. 

Love  or  hate  alters  the  aspect  of  justice.  How  much  greater  confidence  has  an 
advocate,  retained  with  a  large  fee,  in  the  justice  of  his  cause!  How  much  better 
does  his  bold  manner  make  his  case  appear  to  the  judges,  deceived  as  they  are  by 
appearances!  How  ludicrous  is  reason,  blown  with  a  breath  in  every  direction! 

I  should  have  to  enumerate  almost  every  action  of  men  who  scarce  waver  save 
under  her  assaults.  For  reason  has  been  obliged  to  yield,  and  the  wisest  reason 
takes  as  her  own  principles  those  which  the  imagination  of  man  has  everywhere 
rashly  introduced.  [He  who  would  follow  reason  only  would  be  deemed  foolish 
by  the  generality  of  men.  We  must  judge  by  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  man¬ 
kind.  Because  it  has  pleased  them,  we  must  work  all  day  for  pleasures  seen  to  be 
imaginary;  and,  after  sleep  has  refreshed  our  tired  reason,  we  must  forthwith  start 
up  and  rush  after  phantoms,  and  suffer  the  impressions  of  this  mistress  of  the 
world.  This  is  one  of  the  sources  of  error,  but  it  is  not  the  only  one.] 

Our  magistrates  have  known  well  this  mystery.  Their  red  robes,  the  ermine  in 
which  they  wrap  themselves  like  furry  cats,  the  courts  in  which  they  administer 
justice,  the  fleurs-de-lis ,  and  all  such  august  apparel  were  necessary;  if  the  physicians 
had  not  their  cassocks  and  their  mules,  if  the  doctors  had  not  their  square  caps  and 
their  robes  four  times  too  wide,  they  would  never  have  duped  the  world,  which 
cannot  resist  so  original  an  appearance.  If  magistrates  had  true  justice,  and  if 
physicians  had  the  true  art  of  healing,  they  would  have  no  occasion  for  square 
caps;  the  majesty  of  these  sciences  would  of  itself  be  venerable  enough.  But  having 
only  imaginary  knowledge,  they  must  employ  those  silly  tools  that  strike  the 
imagination  with  which  they  have  to  deal;  and  thereby,  in  fact,  they  inspire  respect. 


PENSEES 


1 88 

Soldiers  alone  are  not  disguised  in  this  manner,  because  indeed  their  part  is  the 
most  essential;  they  establish  themselves  by  force,  the  others  by  show. 

Therefore  our  kings  seek  out  no  disguises.  They  do  not  mask  themselves  in 
extraordinary  costumes  to  appear  such;  but  they  are  accompanied  by  guards  and 
halberdiers.  Those  armed  and  red-faced  puppets  who  have  hands  and  power  for 
them  alone,  those  trumpets  and  drums  which  go  before  them,  and  those  legions 
round  about  them,  make  the  stoutest  tremble.  They  have  not  dress  only,  they 
have  might.  A  very  refined  reason  is  required  to  regard  as  an  ordinary  man  the 
Grand  Turk,  in  his  superb  seraglio,  surrounded  by  forty  thousand  janissaries. 

We  cannot  even  see  an  advocate  in  his  robe  and  with  his  cap  on  his  head,  with¬ 
out  a  favourable  opinion  of  his  ability.  The  imagination  disposes  of  everything;  it 
makes  beauty,  justice,  and  happiness,  which  is  everything  in  the  world.  I  should 
much  like  to  see  an  Italian  work,  of  which  I  only  know  the  title,  which  alone  is 
worth  many  books,  Della  opinione  regina  del  mondo .  I  approve  of  the  book  without 
knowing  it,  save  the  evil  in  it,  if  any.  These  are  pretty  much  the  effects  of  that 
deceptive  faculty,  which  seems  to  have  been  expressly  given  us  to  lead  us  into 
necessary  error.  We  have,  however,  many  other  sources  of  error. 

Not  only  are  old  impressions  capable  of  misleading  us;  the  charms  of  novelty 
have  the  same  power.  Hence  arise  all  the  disputes  of  men,  who  taunt  each  other 
either  with  following  the  false  impressions  of  childhood  or  with  running  rashly 
after  the  new.  Who  keeps  the  due  mean?  Let  him  appear  and  prove  it.  There  is  no 
principle,  however  natural  to  us  from  infancy,  which  may  not  be  made  to  pass  for 
a  false  impression  either  of  education  or  of  sense. 

"Because,”  say  some,  "you  have  believed  from  childhood  that  a  box  was  empty 
when  you  saw  nothing  in  it,  you  have  believed  in  the  possibility  of  a  vacuum.  This 
is  an  illusion  of  your  senses,  strengthened  by  custom,  which  science  must  correct.” 
"Because,”  say  others,  "you  have  been  taught  at  school  that  there  is  no  vacuum, 
you  have  perverted  your  common  sense  which  clearly  comprehended  it,  and  you 
must  correct  this  by  returning  to  your  first  state.”  Which  has  deceived  you,  your 
senses  or  your  education? 

We  have  another  source  of  error  in  diseases.  They  spoil  the  judgement  and  the 
senses;  and  if  the  more  serious  produce  a  sensible  change,  I  do  not  doubt  that 
slighter  ills  produce  a  proportionate  impression. 

Our  own  interest  is  again  a  marvellous  instrument  for  nicely  putting  out  our 
eyes.  The  justest  man  in  the  world  is  not  allowed  to  be  judge  in  his  own  cause;  I 
know  some  who,  in  order  not  to  fall  into  this  self-love,  have  been  perfectly  unjust 
out  of  opposition.  The  sure  way  of  losing  a  just  cause  has  been  to  get  it  recom¬ 
mended  to  these  men  by  their  near  relatives. 

Justice  and  truth  are  two  such  subtle  points  that  our  tools  are  too  blunt  to  touch 
them  accurately.  If  they  reach  the  point,  they  either  crush  it,  or  lean  all  round, 
more  on  the  false  than  on  the  true. 

[Man  is  so  happily  formed  that  he  has  no  .  .  .  good  of  the  true,  and  several  ex¬ 
cellent  of  the  false.  Let  us  now  see  how  much  .  .  .  But  the  most  powerful  cause  of 
error  is  the  war  existing  between  the  senses  and  reason.] 

83.  We  must  thus  begin  the  chapter  on  the  deceptive  powers.  Man  is  only  a  subject  full 
of  error,  natural  and  ineffaceable,  without  grace.  Nothing  shows  him  the  truth. 
Everything  deceives  him.  These  two  sources  of  truth,  reason  and  the  senses,  be- 


SECTION  II  189 

sides  being  both  wanting  in  sincerity,  deceive  each  other  in  turn.  The  senses  mis¬ 
lead  the  Reason  with  false  appearances,  and  receive  from  Reason  in  their  turn  the 
same  trickery  which  they  apply  to  her;  Reason  has  her  revenge.  The  passions  of 
the  soul  trouble  the  senses,  and  make  false  impressions  upon  them.  They  rival 
each  other  in  falsehood  and  deception. 

But  besides  those  errors  which  arise  accidentally  and  through  lack  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  with  these  heterogeneous  faculties  .  .  . 

84.  The  imagination  enlarges  little  objects  so  as  to  fill  our  souls  with  a  fantastic 
estimate;  and,  with  rash  insolence,  it  belittles  the  great  to  its  own  measure,  as 
when  talking  of  God. 

85.  Things  which  have  most  hold  on  us,  as  the  concealment  of  our  few  posses¬ 
sions,  are  often  a  mere  nothing.  It  is  a  nothing  which  our  imagination  magnifies 
into  a  mountain.  Another  turn  of  the  imagination  would  make  us  discover  this 
without  difficulty. 

86.  [My  fancy  makes  me  hate  a  croaker,  and  one  who  pants  when  eating.  Fancy 
has  great  weight.  Shall  we  profit  by  it?  Shall  we  yield  to  this  weight  because  it  is 
natural?  No,  but  by  resisting  it ...  ] 

87.  Na  iste  magno  conatu  magnas  nugas  dixerit } 

583. 2  Quasi  quidquam  infelicius  sit  homini  cui sua  figmenta  dominantur ? 

88.  Children  who  are  frightened  at  the  face  they  have  blackened  are  but  chil¬ 
dren.  But  how  shall  one  who  is  so  weak  in  his  childhood  become  really  strong 
when  he  grows  older?  We  only  change  our  fancies.  All  that  is  made  perfect  by 
progress  perishes  also  by  progress.  All  that  has  been  weak  can  never  become 
absolutely  strong.  We  say  in  vain,  "He  has  grown,  he  has  changed";  he  is  also 
the  same. 

89.  Custom  is  our  nature.  He  who  is  accustomed  to  the  faith  believes  in  it,  can 
no  longer  fear  hell,  and  believes  in  nothing  else.  He  who  is  accustomed  to  believe 
that  the  king  is  terrible  .  .  .  etc.  Who  doubts,  then,  that  our  soul,  being  accustomed 
to  see  number,  space,  motion,  believes  that  and  nothing  else? 

90.  Quod  crebro  videt  non  miratur ,  etiamsi  cur  fiat  nescit;  quod  ante  non  viderit ,  id  si 
evenerit ,  ostentum  esse  censet .4 

91.  Spongia  solis. — When  we  see  the  same  effect  always  recur,  we  infer  a  natural 
necessity  in  it,  as  that  there  will  be  a  tomorrow,  etc.  But  Nature  often  deceives  us, 
and  does  not  subject  herself  to  her  own  rules. 

Terence,  Heauton  Timorumenos,  III.v.8.  "There  is  one  who  will  say  great  foolishness  with 
great  effort." 

2Montaigne,  Essays ,  ii.12. 

3Pliny,  ii.7.  "As  though  there  were  anyone  more  unhappy  than  a  man  dominated  by  his 
imagination." 

4Cicero,  De  Divinatione  ii.22.  "A  common  happening  does  not  astonish,  even  though  the 
cause  is  unknown;  an  event  such  as  one  has  never  seen  before  passes  for  a  prodigy." 


1 9o  PENSEES 

92.  What  are  our  natural  principles  but  principles  of  custom?  In  children  they 
are  those  which  they  have  received  from  the  habits  of  their  fathers,  as  hunting  in 
animals.  A  different  custom  will  cause  different  natural  principles.  This  is  seen  in 
experience;  and  if  there  are  some  natural  principles  ineradicable  by  custom,  there 
are  also  some  customs  opposed  to  nature,  ineradicable  by  nature  or  by  a  second 
custom.  This  depends  on  disposition. 

93.  Parents  fear  lest  the  natural  love  of  their  children  may  fade  away.  What  kind 
of  nature  is  that  which  is  subject  to  decay?  Custom  is  a  second  nature  which 
destroys  the  former.  But  what  is  nature?  For  is  custom  not  natural?  I  am  much 
afraid  that  nature  is  itself  only  a  first  custom,  as  custom  is  a  second  nature. 

94.  The  nature  of  man  is  wholly  natural,  omne  animal} 

There  is  nothing  he  may  not  make  natural;  there  is  nothing  natural  he  may  not 
lose. 

95.  Memory,  joy,  are  intuitions;  and  even  mathematical  propositions  become 
intuitions,  for  education  produces  natural  intuitions,  and  natural  intuitions  are 
erased  by  education. 

96.  When  we  are  accustomed  to  use  bad  reasons  for  proving  natural  effects,  we 
are  not  willing  to  receive  good  reasons  when  they  are  discovered.  An  example  may 
be  given  from  the  circulation  of  the  blood  as  a  reason  why  the  vein  swells  below 
the  ligature. 

97.  The  most  important  affair  in  life  is  the  choice  of  a  calling;  chance  decides  it. 
Custom  makes  men  masons,  soldiers,  slaters.  "He  is  a  good  slater,"  says  one,  and, 
speaking  of  soldiers,  remarks,  "They  are  perfect  fools."  But  others  affirm,  "There 
is  nothing  great  but  war;  the  rest  of  men  are  good  for  nothing."  We  choose  our 
callings  according  as  we  hear  this  or  that  praised  or  despised  in  our  childhood,  for 
we  naturally  love  truth  and  hate  folly.  These  words  move  us;  the  only  error  is  in 
their  application.  So  great  is  the  force  of  custom  that,  out  of  those  whom  nature 
has  only  made  men,  are  created  all  conditions  of  men.  For  some  districts  are 
full  of  masons,  others  of  soldiers,  etc.  Certainly  nature  is  not  so  uniform.  It  is 
custom  then  which  does  this,  for  it  constrains  nature.  But  sometimes  nature  gains 
the  ascendancy  and  preserves  man's  instinct,  in  spite  of  all  custom,  good  or  bad. 

98.  Bias  leading  to  error. — It  is  a  deplorable  thing  to  see  all  men  deliberating  on 
means  alone,  and  not  on  the  end.  Each  thinks  how  he  will  acquit  himself  in  his 
condition;  but  as  for  the  choice  of  condition,  or  of  country,  chance  gives  them  to 
us. 

It  is  a  pitiable  thing  to  see  so  many  Turks,  heretics,  and  infidels  follow  the  way 
of  their  fathers  for  the  sole  reason  that  each  has  been  imbued  with  the  prejudice 
that  it  is  the  best.  And  that  fixes  for  each  man  his  condition  of  locksmith,  soldier, 
etc. 

Hence  savages  care  nothing  for  Providence. 

illusion  to  Gen.  7.14.  Ipsi  et  omne  animal  secundus  genus  suum.  "And  every  beast  after  his 
kind." 


SECTION  II  191 

99.  There  is  an  universal  and  essential  difference  between  the  actions  of  the  will 
and  all  other  actions. 

The  will  is  one  of  the  chief  factors  in  belief,  not  that  it  creates  belief,  but  because 
things  are  true  or  false  according  to  the  aspect  in  which  we  look  at  them.  The  will, 
which  prefers  one  aspect  to  another,  turns  away  the  mind  from  considering  the 
qualities  of  all  that  it  does  not  like  to  see;  and  thus  the  mind,  moving  in  accord 
with  the  will,  stops  to  consider  the  aspect  which  it  likes  and  so  judges  by  what  it 
sees. 

100.  Self-love. — The  nature  of  self-love  and  of  this  human  Ego  is  to  love  self  only 
and  consider  self  only.  But  what  will  man  do?  He  cannot  prevent  this  object  that 
he  loves  from  being  full  of  faults  and  wants.  He  wants  to  be  great,  and  he  sees 
himself  small.  He  wants  to  be  happy,  and  he  sees  himself  miserable.  He  wants  to 
be  perfect,  and  he  sees  himself  full  of  imperfections.  He  wants  to  be  the  object  of 
love  and  esteem  among  men,  and  he  sees  that  his  faults  merit  only  their  hatred  and 
contempt.  This  embarrassment  inwhich  he  finds  himself  produces  in  him  the  most 
unrighteous  and  criminal  passion  that  can  be  imagined;  for  he  conceives  a  mortal 
enmity  against  that  truth  which  reproves  him  and  which  convinces  him  of  his 
faults.  He  would  annihilate  it,  but,  unable  to  destroy  it  in  its  essence,  he  destroys 
it  as  far  as  possible  in  his  own  knowledge  and  in  that  of  others;  that  is  to  say,  he 
devotes  all  his  attention  to  hiding  his  faults  both  from  others  and  from  himself, 
and  he  cannot  endure  either  that  others  should  point  them  out  to  him,  or  that  they 
should  see  them. 

Truly  it  is  an  evil  to  be  full  of  faults;  but  it  is  a  still  greater  evil  to  be  full  of  them 
and  to  be  unwilling  to  recognise  them,  since  that  is  to  add  the  further  fault  of  a 
voluntary  illusion.  We  do  not  like  others  to  deceive  us;  we  do  not  think  it  fair 
that  they  should  be  held  in  higher  esteem  by  us  than  they  deserve;  it  is  not,  then, 
fair  that  we  should  deceive  them  and  should  wish  them  to  esteem  us  more  highly 
than  we  deserve. 

Thus,  when  they  discover  only  the  imperfections  and  vices  which  we  really  have, 
it  is  plain  they  do  us  no  wrong,  since  it  is  not  they  who  cause  them;  they  rather  do 
us  good,  since  they  help  us  to  free  ourselves  from  an  evil,  namely,  the  ignorance  of 
these  imperfections.  We  ought  not  to  be  angry  at  their  knowing  our  faults  and 
despising  us;  it  is  but  right  that  they  should  know  us  for  what  we  are  and  should 
despise  us,  if  we  are  contemptible. 

Such  are  the  feelings  that  would  arise  in  a  heart  full  of  equity  and  justice.  What 
must  we  say  then  of  our  own  heart,  when  we  see  it  in  a  wholly  different  disposition? 
For  is  it  not  true  that  we  hate  truth  and  those  who  tell  it  us,  and  that  we  like  them 
to  be  deceived  in  our  favour,  and  prefer  to  be  esteemed  by  them  as  being  other 
than  what  we  are  in  fact?  One  proof  of  this  makes  me  shudder.  The  Catholic  reli¬ 
gion  does  not  bind  us  to  confess  our  sins  indiscriminately  to  everybody;  it  allows 
them  to  remain  hidden  from  all  other  men  save  one,  to  whom  she  bids  us  reveal 
the  innermost  recesses  of  our  heart  and  show  ourselves  as  we  are.  There  is  only  this 
one  man  in  the  world  whom  she  orders  us  to  undeceive,  and  she  binds  him  to  an 
inviolable  secrecy,  which  makes  this  knowledge  to  him  as  if  it  were  not.  Can  we 
imagine  anything  more  charitable  and  pleasant?  And  yet  the  corruption  of  man  is 
such  that  he  finds  even  this  law  harsh;  and  it  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  which  has 
caused  a  great  part  of  Europe  to  rebel  against  the  Church. 


PENSEES 


192 

How  unjust  and  unreasonable  is  the  heart  of  man,  which  feels  it  disagreeable  to 
be  obliged  to  do  in  regard  to  one  man  what  in  some  measure  it  were  right  to  do  to 
all  men!  For  is  it  right  that  we  should  deceive  men? 

There  are  different  degrees  in  this  aversion  to  truth;  but  all  may  perhaps  be  said 
to  have  it  in  some  degree,  because  it  is  inseparable  from  self-love.  It  is  this  false 
delicacy  which  makes  those  who  are  under  the  necessity  of  reproving  others 
choose  so  many  windings  and  middle  courses  to  avoid  offence.  They  must  lessen 
our  faults,  appear  to  excuse  them,  intersperse  praises  and  evidence  of  love  and  es¬ 
teem.  Despite  all  this,  the  medicine  does  not  cease  to  be  bitter  to  self-love.  It  takes 
as  little  as  it  can,  always  with  disgust,  and  often  with  a  secret  spite  against  those 
who  administer  it. 

Hence  it  happens  that,  if  any  have  some  interest  in  being  loved  by  us,  they  are 
averse  to  render  us  a  service  which  they  know  to  be  disagreeable.  They  treat  us  as 
we  wish  to  be  treated.  We  hate  the  truth,  and  they  hide  it  from  us.  We  desire  flat¬ 
tery,  and  they  flatter  us.  We  like  to  be  deceived,  and  they  deceive  us. 

So  each  degree  of  good  fortune  which  raises  us  in  the  world  removes  us  farther 
from  truth,  because  we  are  most  afraid  of  wounding  those  whose  affection  is  most 
useful  and  whose  dislike  is  most  dangerous.  A  prince  may  be  the  byword  of  all 
Europe,  and  he  alone  will  know  nothing  of  it.  I  am  not  astonished.  To  tell  the 
truth  is  useful  to  those  to  whom  it  is  spoken,  but  disadvantageous  to  those  who  tell 
it,  because  it  makes  them  disliked.  Now  those  who  live  with  princes  love  their 
own  interests  more  than  that  of  the  prince  whom  they  serve;  and  so  they  take  care 
not  to  confer  on  him  a  benefit  so  as  to  injure  themselves. 

This  evil  is  no  doubt  greater  and  more  common  among  the  higher  classes;  but 
the  lower  are  not  exempt  from  it,  since  there  is  always  some  advantage  in  making 
men  love  us.  Human  life  is  thus  only  a  perpetual  illusion;  men  deceive  and  flatter 
each  other.  No  one  speaks  of  us  in  our  presence  as  he  does  of  us  in  our  absence. 
Human  society  is  founded  on  mutual  deceit;  few  friendships  would  endure  if  each 
knew  what  his  friend  said  of  him  in  his  absence,  although  he  then  spoke  in  sin¬ 
cerity  and  without  passion. 

Man  is,  then,  only  disguise,  falsehood,  and  hypocrisy,  both  in  himself  and  in 
regard  to  others.  He  does  not  wish  any  one  to  tell  him  the  truth;  he  avoids  telling 
it  to  others,  and  all  these  dispositions,  so  removed  from  justice  and  reason,  have  a 
natural  root  in  his  heart. 

101. 1  set  it  down  as  a  fact  that  if  all  men  knew  what  each  said  of  the  other,  there 
would  not  be  four  friends  in  the  world.  This  is  apparent  from  the  quarrels  which 
arise  from  the  indiscreet  tales  told  from  time  to  time.  [I  say,  further,  all  men  would 
be  ...  ] 

102.  Some  vices  only  lay  hold  of  us  by  means  of  others,  and  these,  like  branches, 
fall  on  removal  of  the  trunk. 

103.  The  example  of  Alexander's  chastity  has  not  made  so  many  continent  as 
that  of  his  drunkenness  has  made  intemperate.  It  is  not  shameful  not  to  be  as 
virtuous  as  he,  and  it  seems  excusable  to  be  no  more  vicious.  We  do  not  believe 
ourselves  to  be  exactly  sharing  in  the  vices  of  the  vulgar  when  we  see  that  we  are 
sharing  in  those  of  great  men;  and  yet  we  do  not  observe  that  in  these  matters  they 


SECTION  II 


x93 

are  ordinary  men.  We  hold  on  to  them  by  the  same  end  by  which  they  hold  on  to 
the  rabble;  for,  however  exalted  they  are,  they  are  still  united  at  some  point  to  the 
lowest  of  men.  They  are  not  suspended  in  the  air,  quite  removed  from  our  society. 
No,  no;  if  they  are  greater  than  we,  it  is  because  their  heads  are  higher;  but  their 
feet  are  as  low  as  ours.  They  are  all  on  the  same  level,  and  rest  on  the  same  earth; 
and  by  that  extremity  they  are  as  low  as  we  are,  as  the  meanest  folk,  as  infants,  and 
as  the  beasts. 

104.  When  our  passion  leads  us  to  do  something,  we  forget  our  duty;  for  ex¬ 
ample,  we  like  a  book  and  read  it,  when  we  ought  to  be  doing  something  else. 
Now,  to  remind  ourselves  of  our  duty,  we  must  set  ourselves  a  task  we  dislike;  we 
then  plead  that  we  have  something  else  to  do  and  by  this  means  remember  our 
duty. 

105.  How  difficult  it  is  to  submit  anything  to  the  judgement  of  another,  with¬ 
out  prejudicing  his  judgement  by  the  manner  in  which  we  submit  it!  If  we  say, 
"I  think  it  beautiful/'  "I  think  it  obscure,”  or  the  like,  we  either  entice  the  imagi¬ 
nation  into  that  view,  or  irritate  it  to  the  contrary.  It  is  better  to  say  nothing;  and 
then  the  other  judges  according  to  what  really  is,  that  is  to  say,  according  as  it 
then  is  and  according  as  the  other  circumstances,  not  of  our  making,  have  placed 
it.  But  we  at  least  shall  have  added  nothing,  unless  it  be  that  silence  also  produces 
an  effect,  according  to  the  turn  and  the  interpretation  which  the  other  will  be  dis¬ 
posed  to  give  it,  or  as  he  will  guess  it  from  gestures  or  countenance,  or  from  the 
tone  of  the  voice,  if  he  is  a  physiognomist.  So  difficult  is  it  not  to  upset  a  judge¬ 
ment  from  its  natural  place,  or,  rather,  so  rarely  is  it  firm  and  stable! 

106.  By  knowing  each  man’s  ruling  passion,  we  are  sure  of  pleasing  him;  and 
yet  each  has  his  fancies,  opposed  to  his  true  good,  in  the  very  idea  which  he  has  of 
the  good.  It  is  a  singularly  puzzling  fact. 

107.  Lustravit  lampade  terras} — The  weather  and  my  mood  have  little  connection. 
I  have  my  foggy  and  my  fine  days  within  me;  my  prosperity  or  misfortune  has  lit¬ 
tle  to  do  with  the  matter.  I  sometimes  struggle  against  luck,  the  glory  of  mastering 
it  makes  me  master  it  gaily;  whereas  I  am  sometimes  surfeited  in  the  midst  of 
good  fortune. 

108.  Although  people  may  have  no  interest  in  what  they  are  saying,  we  must  not 
absolutely  conclude  from  this  that  they  are  not  lying;  for  there  are  some  people 
who  lie  for  the  mere  sake  of  lying. 

109.  When  we  are  well  we  wonder  what  we  would  do  if  we  were  ill,  but  when  we 
are  ill  we  take  medicine  cheerfully;  the  illness  persuades  us  to  do  so.  We  have  no 
longer  the  passions  and  desires  for  amusements  and  promenades  which  health 
gave  to  us,  but  which  are  incompatible  with  the  necessities  of  illness.  Nature  gives 
us,  then,  passions  and  desires  suitable  to  our  present  state.  We  are  only  troubled  by 
the  fears  which  we,  and  not  nature,  give  ourselves,  for  they  add  to  the  state  in 
which  we  are  the  passions  of  the  state  in  which  we  are  not. 

Corner,  Odyssey ,  xviii.  135. 


PENSEES 


194 

As  nature  makes  us  always  unhappy  in  every  state,  our  desires  picture  to  us  a 
happy  state;  because  they  add  to  the  state  in  which  we  are  the  pleasures  of  the 
state  in  which  we  are  not.  And  if  we  attained  to  these  pleasures,  we  should  not  be 
happy  after  all;  because  we  should  have  other  desires  natural  to  this  new  state. 

We  must  particularise  this  general  proposition.  .  .  . 

no.  The  consciousness  of  the  falsity  of  present  pleasures,  and  the  ignorance  of 
the  vanity  of  absent  pleasures,  cause  inconstancy. 

in.  Inconstancy. — We  think  we  are  playing  on  ordinary  organs  when  playing 
upon  man.  Men  are  organs,  it  is  true,  but,  odd,  changeable,  variable  [with  pipes 
not  arranged  in  proper  order.]  Those  who  only  know  how  to  play  on  ordinary 
organs  will  not  produce  harmonies  on  these.  We  must  know  where  [the  keys]  are. 

1 12.  Inconstancy. — Things  have  different  qualities,  and  the  soul  different  in¬ 
clinations;  for  nothing  is  simple  which  is  presented  to  the  soul,  and  the  soul  never 
presents  itself  simply  to  any  object.  Hence  it  comes  that  we  weep  and  laugh  at  the 
same  thing. 

1 13.  Inconstancy  and  oddity . — To  live  only  by  work,  and  to  rule  over  the  most 
powerful  State  in  the  world,  are  very  opposite  things.  They  are  united  in  the  per¬ 
son  of  the  great  Sultan  of  the  Turks. 

1 14.  Variety  is  as  abundant  as  all  tones  of  the  voice,  all  ways  of  walking,  cough¬ 
ing,  blowing  the  nose,  sneezing.  We  distinguish  vines  by  their  fruit,  and  call  them 
the  Condrien,  the  Desargues,  and  such  and  such  a  stock.  Is  this  all?  Has  a  vine  ever 
produced  two  bunches  exactly  the  same,  and  has  a  bunch  two  grapes  alike,  etc.? 

I  can  never  judge  of  the  same  thing  exactly  in  the  same  way.  I  cannot  judge  of 
my  work,  while  doing  it.  I  must  do  as  the  artists,  stand  at  a  distance,  but  not  too 
far.  How  far,  then?  Guess. 

1 15.  Variety. — Theology  is  a  science,  but  at  the  same  time  how  many  sciences? 
A  man  is  a  whole;  but  if  we  dissect  him,  will  he  be  the  head,  the  heart,  the  stomach, 
the  veins,  each  vein,  each  portion  of  a  vein,  the  blood,  each  humour  in  the  blood? 

A  town,  a  country-place,  is  from  afar  a  town  and  a  country -place.  But,  as  we 
draw  near,  there  are  houses,  trees,  tiles,  leaves,  grass,  ants,  limbs  of  ants,  in  infinity. 
All  this  is  contained  under  the  name  of  country-place. 

1 16.  Thoughts. — All  is  one,  all  is  different.  How  many  natures  exist  in  man? 
How  many  vocations?  And  by  what  chance  does  each  man  ordinarily  choose  what 
he  has  heard  praised?  A  well-turned  heel. 

117.  The  heel  of  a  slipper. — "  Ah!  How  well  this  is  turned!  Here  is  a  clever  work¬ 
man!  How  brave  is  this  soldier!”  This  is  the  source  of  our  inclinations  and  of  the 
choice  of  conditions.  "How  much  this  man  drinks!  How  little  that  one”!  This 
makes  people  sober  or  drunk,  soldiers,  cowards,  etc. 

1 18.  Chief  talent,  that  which  rules  the  rest. 


SECTION  II  195 

1 19.  Nature  imitates  herself.  A  seed  grown  in  good  ground  brings  forth  fruit.  A 
principle  instilled  into  a  good  mind  brings  forth  fruit.  Numbers  imitate  space, 
which  is  of  a  different  nature. 

All  is  made  and  led  by  the  same  master,  root,  branches,  and  fruits;  principles 
and  consequences. 

120.  [Nature  diversifies  and  imitates;  art  imitates  and  diversifies.] 

12 1.  Nature  always  begins  the  same  things  again,  the  years,  the  days,  the  hours; 
in  like  manner  spaces  and  numbers  follow  each  other  from  beginning  to  end. 
Thus  is  made  a  kind  of  infinity  and  eternity.  Not  that  anything  in  all  this  is  infinite 
and  eternal,  but  these  finite  realities  are  infinitely  multiplied.  Thus  it  seems  to  me 
to  be  only  the  number  which  multiplies  them  that  is  infinite. 

122.  Time  heals  griefs  and  quarrels,  for  we  change  and  are  no  longer  the  same 
persons.  Neither  the  offender  nor  the  offended  are  any  more  themselves.  It  is  like 
a  nation  which  we  have  provoked,  but  meet  again  after  two  generations.  They  are 
still  Frenchmen,  but  not  the  same. 

123.  He  no  longer  loves  the  person  whom  he  loved  ten  years  ago.  I  quite 
believe  it.  She  is  no  longer  the  same,  nor  is  he.  He  was  young,  and  she  also; 
she  is  quite  different.  He  would  perhaps  love  her  yet,  if  she  were  what  she  was 
then. 

124.  We  view  things  not  only  from  different  sides,  but  with  different  eyes;  we 
have  no  wish  to  find  them  alike. 

125.  Contraries. — Man  is  naturally  credulous  and  incredulous,  timid  and  rash. 

126.  Description  of  man:  dependency,  desire  of  independence,  need. 

127.  Condition  of  man:  inconstancy,  weariness,  unrest. 

128.  The  weariness  which  is  felt  by  us  in  leaving  pursuits  to  which  we  are  at¬ 
tached.  A  man  dwells  at  home  with  pleasure;  but  if  he  sees  a  woman  who  charms 
him,  or  if  he  enjoys  himself  in  play  for  five  or  six  days,  he  is  miserable  if  he  returns 
to  his  former  way  of  living.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  that. 

129.  Our  nature  consists  in  motion;  complete  rest  is  death. 

130.  Restlessness. — If  a  soldier,  or  labourer,  complain  of  the  hardship  of  his  lot, 
set  him  to  do  nothing. 

131.  Weariness. — Nothing  is  so  insufferable  to  man  as  to  be  completely  at  rest, 
without  passions,  without  business,  without  diversion,  without  study.  He  then 
feels  his  nothingness,  his  forlornness,  his  insufficiency,  his  dependence,  his  weak¬ 
ness,  his  emptiness.  There  will  immediately  arise  from  the  depth  of  his  heart 
weariness,  gloom,  sadness,  fretfulness,  vexation,  despair. 


PENSEES 


196 

132.  Methinks  Caesar  was  too  old  to  set  about  amusing  himself  with  conquer¬ 
ing  the  world.  Such  sport  was  good  for  Augustus  or  Alexander.  They  were  still 
young  men  and  thus  difficult  to  restrain.  But  Caesar  should  have  been  more  ma¬ 
ture. 

133.  Two  faces  which  resemble  each  other  make  us  laugh,  when  together,  by 
their  resemblance,  though  neither  of  them  by  itself  makes  us  laugh. 

134.  How  useless  is  painting,  which  attracts  admiration  by  the  resemblance  of 
things,  the  originals  of  which  we  do  not  admire! 

135.  The  struggle  alone  pleases  us,  not  the  victory.  We  love  to  see  animals  fight¬ 
ing,  not  the  victor  infuriated  over  the  vanquished.  We  would  only  see  the  vic¬ 
torious  end;  and,  as  soon  as  it  comes,  we  are  satiated.  It  is  the  same  in  play,  and  the 
same  in  the  search  for  truth.  In  disputes  we  like  to  see  the  clash  of  opinions,  but 
not  at  all  to  contemplate  truth  when  found.  To  observe  it  with  pleasure,  we  have 
to  see  it  emerge  out  of  strife.  So  in  the  passions,  there  is  pleasure  in  seeing  the  col¬ 
lision  of  two  contraries;  but  when  one  acquires  the  mastery,  it  becomes  only  bru¬ 
tality.  We  never  seek  things  for  themselves,  but  for  the  search.  Likewise  in  plays, 
scenes  which  do  not  rouse  the  emotion  of  fear  are  worthless,  so  are  extreme  and 
hopeless  misery,  brutal  lust,  and  extreme  cruelty. 

136.  A  mere  trifle  consoles  us,  for  a  mere  trifle  distresses  us. 

137.  Without  examining  every  particular  pursuit,  it  is  enough  to  comprehend 
them  under  diversion. 

138.  Men  naturally  slaters  and  of  all  callings,  save  in  their  own  rooms. 

139.  Diversion. — When  I  have  occasionally  set  myself  to  consider  the  different 
distractions  of  men,  the  pains  and  perils  to  which  they  expose  themselves  at  court 
or  in  war,  whence  arise  so  many  quarrels,  passions,  bold  and  often  bad  ventures, 
etc.,  I  have  discovered  that  all  the  unhappiness  of  men  arises  from  one  single  fact, 
that  they  cannot  stay  quietly  in  their  own  chamber.  A  man  who  has  enough  to  live 
on,  if  he  knew  how  to  stay  with  pleasure  at  home,  would  not  leave  it  to  go  to  sea 
or  to  besiege  a  town.  A  commission  in  the  army  would  not  be  bought  so  dearly, 
but  that  it  is  found  insufferable  not  to  budge  from  the  town;  and  men  only  seek 
conversation  and  entering  games,  because  they  cannot  remain  with  pleasure  at 
home. 

But,  on  further  consideration,  when,  after  finding  the  cause  of  all  our  ills,  I  have 
sought  to  discover  the  reason  of  it,  I  have  found  that  there  is  one  very  real  reason, 
namely,  the  natural  poverty  of  our  feeble  and  mortal  condition,  so  miserable  that 
nothing  can  comfort  us  when  we  think  of  it  closely. 

Whatever  condition  we  picture  to  ourselves,  if  we  muster  all  the  good  things 
which  it  is  possible  to  possess,  royalty  is  the  finest  position  in  the  world.  Yet,  when 
we  imagine  a  king  attended  with  every  pleasure  he  can  feel,  if  he  be  without  diver¬ 
sion  and  be  left  to  consider  and  reflect  on  what  he  is,  this  feeble  happiness  will 
not  sustain  him;  he  will  necessarily  fall  into  forebodings  of  dangers,  of  revolutions 


SECTION  II  197 

which  may  happen,  and,  finally,  of  death  and  inevitable  disease;  so  that,  if  he  be 
without  what  is  called  diversion,  he  is  unhappy  and  more  unhappy  than  the  least 
of  his  subjects  who  plays  and  diverts  himself. 

Hence  it  comes  that  play  and  the  society  of  women,  war  and  high  posts,  are  so 
sought  after.  Not  that  there  is  in  fact  any  happiness  in  them,  or  that  men  imagine 
true  bliss  to  consist  in  money  won  at  play,  or  in  the  hare  which  they  hunt;  wewould 
not  take  these  as  a  gift.  We  do  not  seek  that  easy  and  peaceful  lot  which  permits 
us  to  think  of  our  unhappy  condition,  nor  the  dangers  of  war,  nor  the  labour  of  of¬ 
fice,  but  the  bustle  which  averts  these  thoughts  of  ours  and  amuses  us. 

Reasons  why  we  like  the  chase  better  than  the  quarry. 

Hence  it  comes  that  men  so  much  love  noise  and  stir;  hence  it  comes  that  the 
prison  is  so  horrible  a  punishment;  hence  it  comes  that  the  pleasure  of  solitude  is 
a  thing  incomprehensible.  And  it  is,  in  fact,  the  greatest  source  of  happiness  in 
the  condition  of  kings  that  men  try  incessantly  to  divert  them  and  to  procure  for 
them  all  kinds  of  pleasures. 

The  king  is  surrounded  by  persons  whose  only  thought  is  to  divert  the  king  and 
to  prevent  his  thinking  of  self.  For  he  is  unhappy,  king  though  he  be,  if  he  think  of 
himself. 

This  is  all  that  men  have  been  able  to  discover  to  make  themselves  happy.  And 
those  who  philosophise  on  the  matter,  and  who  think  men  unreasonable  for 
spending  a  whole  day  in  chasing  a  hare  which  they  would  not  have  bought,  scarce 
know  our  nature.  The  hare  in  itself  would  not  screen  us  from  the  sight  of  death 
and  calamities;  but  the  chase,  which  turns  away  our  attention  from  these,  does 
screen  us. 

The  advice  given  to  Pyrrhus,  to  take  the  rest  which  he  was  about  to  seek  with 
so  much  labour,  was  full  of  difficulties. 

[To  bid  a  man  live  quietly  is  to  bid  him  live  happily.  It  is  to  advise  him  to  be  in 
a  state  perfectly  happy,  in  which  he  can  think  at  leisure  without  finding  therein  a 
cause  of  distress.  This  is  to  misunderstand  nature.] 

As  men  who  naturally  understand  their  own  condition  avoid  nothing  so  much 
as  rest,  so  there  is  nothing  they  leave  undone  in  seeking  turmoil.  Not  that  they 
have  an  instinctive  knowledge  of  true  happiness  .  .  . 

So  we  are  wrong  in  blaming  them.  Their  error  does  not  lie  in  seeking  excite¬ 
ment,  if  they  seek  it  only  as  a  diversion ;  the  evil  is  that  they  seek  it  as  if  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  objects  of  their  quest  would  make  them  really  happy.  In  this  respect  it 
is  right  to  call  their  quest  a  vain  one.  Hence  in  all  this  both  the  censurers  and  the 
censured  do  not  understand  man’s  true  nature.] 

And  thus,  when  we  take  the  exception  against  them,  that  what  they  seek  with 
such  fervour  cannot  satisfy  them,  if  they  replied — as  they  should  do  if  they  con¬ 
sidered  the  matter  thoroughly — that  they  sought  in  it  only  a  violent  and  impetu¬ 
ous  occupation  which  turned  their  thoughts  from  self,  and  that  they  therefore 
chose  an  attractive  object  to  charm  and  ardently  attract  them,  they  would  leave 
their  opponents  without  a  reply.  But  they  do  not  make  this  reply,  because  they  do 
not  know  themselves.  They  do  not  know  that  it  is  the  chase,  and  not  the  quarry, 
which  they  seek. 

Dancing:  We  must  consider  rightly  where  to  place  our  feet. — A  gentleman  sin¬ 
cerely  believes  that  hunting  is  great  and  royal  sport;  but  a  beater  is  not  of  this 
opinion. 


PENSEES 


198 

They  imagine  that,  if  they  obtained  such  a  post,  they  would  then  rest  with 
pleasure  and  are  insensible  of  the  insatiable  nature  of  their  desire.  They  think  they 
are  truly  seeking  quiet,  and  they  are  only  seeking  excitement. 

They  have  a  secret  instinct  which  impels  them  to  seek  amusement  and  occupa¬ 
tion  abroad,  and  which  arises  from  the  sense  of  their  constant  unhappiness.  They 
have  another  secret  instinct,  a  remnant  of  the  greatness  of  our  original  nature, 
which  teaches  them  that  happiness  in  reality  consists  only  in  rest  and  not  in  stir. 
And  of  these  two  contrary  instincts  they  form  within  themselves  a  confused  idea, 
which  hides  itself  from  their  view  in  the  depths  of  their  soul,  inciting  them  to  aim 
at  rest  through  excitement,  and  always  to  fancy  that  the  satisfaction  which  they 
have  not  will  come  to  them,  if,  by  surmounting  whatever  difficulties  confront 
them,  they  can  thereby  open  the  door  to  rest. 

Thus  passes  away  all  man’s  life.  Men  seek  rest  in  a  struggle  against  difficulties; 
and  when  they  have  conquered  these,  rest  becomes  insufferable.  For  we  think 
either  of  the  misfortunes  we  have  or  of  those  which  threaten  us.  And  even  if  we 
should  see  ourselves  sufficiently  sheltered  on  all  sides,  weariness  of  its  own  accord 
would  not  fail  to  arise  from  the  depths  of  the  heart  wherein  it  has  its  natural  roots 
and  to  fill  the  mind  with  its  poison. 

Thus  so  wretched  is  man  that  he  would  weary  even  without  any  cause  for  wea¬ 
riness  from  the  peculiar  state  of  his  disposition;  and  so  frivolous  is  he  that,  though 
full  of  a  thousand  reasons  for  weariness,  the  least  thing,  such  as  playing  billiards 
or  hitting  a  ball,  is  sufficient  to  amuse  him. 

But  will  you  say  what  object  has  he  in  all  this?  The  pleasure  of  bragging  to¬ 
morrow  among  his  friends  that  he  has  played  better  than  another.  So  others  sweat 
in  their  own  rooms  to  show  to  the  learned  that  they  have  solved  a  problem  in 
algebra,  which  no  one  had  hitherto  been  able  to  solve.  Many  more  expose  them¬ 
selves  to  extreme  perils,  in  my  opinion  as  foolishly,  in  order  to  boast  afterwards 
that  they  have  captured  a  town.  Lastly,  others  wear  themselves  out  in  studying  all 
these  things,  not  in  order  to  become  wiser,  but  only  in  order  to  prove  that  they 
know  them;  and  these  are  the  most  senseless  of  the  band,  since  they  are  so  know¬ 
ingly,  whereas  one  may  suppose  of  the  others  that,  if  they  knew  it,  they  would  no 
longer  be  foolish. 

This  man  spends  his  life  without  weariness  in  playing  every  day  for  a  small  stake. 
Give  him  each  morning  the  money  he  can  win  each  day,  on  condition  he  does  not 
play;  you  make  him  miserable.  It  will  perhaps  be  said  that  he  seeks  the  amuse¬ 
ment  of  play  and  not  the  winnings.  Make  him,  then,  play  for  nothing;  he  will  not 
become  excited  over  it  and  will  feel  bored.  It  is,  then,  not  the  amusement  alone 
that  he  seeks;  a  languid  and  passionless  amusement  will  weary  him.  He  must  get 
excited  over  it  and  deceive  himself  by  the  fancy  that  he  will  be  happy  to  win  what 
he  would  not  have  as  a  gift  on  condition  of  not  playing;  and  he  must  make  for 
himself  an  object  of  passion,  and  excite  over  it  his  desire,  his  anger,  his  fear,  to  ob¬ 
tain  his  imagined  end,  as  children  are  frightened  at  the  face  they  have  blackened. 

Whence  comes  it  that  this  man,  who  lost  his  only  son  a  few  months  ago,  or  who 
this  morning  was  in  such  trouble  through  being  distressed  by  lawsuits  and  quar¬ 
rels,  now  no  longer  thinks  of  them?  Do  not  wonder;  he  is  quite  taken  up  in  look¬ 
ing  out  for  the  boar  which  his  dogs  have  been  hunting  so  hotly  for  the  last  six 
hours.  He  requires  nothing  more.  However  full  of  sadness  a  man  may  be,  he  is 
happy  for  the  time,  if  you  can  prevail  upon  him  to  enter  into  some  amusement;  and 


SECTION  II  199 

however  happy  a  man  may  be,  he  will  soon  be  discontented  and  wretched,  if  he  be 
not  diverted  and  occupied  by  some  passion  or  pursuit  which  prevents  weariness 
from  overcoming  him.  Without  amusement  there  is  no  joy;  with  amusement  there 
is  no  sadness.  And  this  also  constitutes  the  happiness  of  persons  in  high  position, 
that  they  have  a  number  of  people  to  amuse  them  and  have  the  power  to  keep 
themselves  in  this  state. 

Consider  this.  What  is  it  to  be  superintendent,  chancellor,  first  president,  but  to 
be  in  a  condition  wherein  from  early  morning  a  large  number  of  people  come  from 
all  quarters  to  see  them,  so  as  not  to  leave  them  an  hour  in  the  day  in  which  they 
can  think  of  themselves?  And  when  they  are  in  disgrace  and  sent  back  to  their 
country  houses,  where  they  lack  neither  wealth  nor  servants  to  help  them  on  occa¬ 
sion,  they  do  not  fail  to  be  wretched  and  desolate,  because  no  one  prevents  them 
from  thinking  of  themselves. 

140.  [How  does  it  happen  that  this  man,  so  distressed  at  the  death  of  his  wife 
and  his  only  son,  or  who  has  some  great  lawsuit  which  annoys  him,  is  not  at  this 
moment  sad,  and  that  he  seems  so  free  from  all  painful  and  disquieting  thoughts? 
We  need  not  wonder;  for  a  ball  has  been  served  him,  and  he  must  return  it  to  his 
companion.  He  is  occupied  in  catching  it  in  its  fall  from  the  roof,  to  win  a  game. 
How  can  he  think  of  his  own  affairs,  pray,  when  he  has  this  other  matter  in  hand? 
Here  is  a  care  worthy  of  occupying  this  great  soul  and  taking  away  from  him  every 
other  thought  of  the  mind.  This  man,  born  to  know  the  universe,  to  judge  all  causes, 
to  govern  a  whole  state,  is  altogether  occupied  and  taken  up  with  the  business  of 
catching  a  hare.  And  if  he  does  not  lower  himself  to  this  and  wants  always  to  be  on 
the  strain,  he  will  be  more  foolish  still,  because  he  would  raise  himself  above 
humanity;  and  after  all,  he  is  only  a  man,  that  is  to  say  capable  of  little  and  of  much, 
of  all  and  of  nothing;  he  is  neither  angel  nor  brute,  but  man.l 

14 1.  Men  spend  their  time  in  following  a  ball  or  a  hare;  it  is  the  pleasure  even 
of  kings. 

142.  Diversion — Is  not  the  royal  dignity  sufficiently  great  in  itself  to  make  its  pos¬ 
sessor  happy  by  the  mere  contemplation  of  what  he  is?  Must  he  be  diverted  from 
this  thought  like  ordinary  folk?  I  see  well  that  a  man  is  made  happy  by  diverting 
him  from  the  view  of  his  domestic  sorrows  so  as  to  occupy  all  his  thoughts  with  the 
care  of  dancing  well.  But  will  it  be  the  same  with  a  king,  and  will  he  be  happier  in 
the  pursuit  of  these  idle  amusements  than  in  the  contemplation  of  his  greatness? 
And  what  more  satisfactory  object  could  be  presented  to  his  mind?  Would  it  not 
be  a  deprivation  of  his  delight  for  him  to  occupy  his  soul  with  the  thought  of  how 
to  adjust  his  steps  to  the  cadence  of  an  air,  or  of  how  to  throw  a  [ball]  skilfully, 
instead  of  leaving  it  to  enjoy  quietly  the  contemplation  of  the  majestic  glory  which 
encompasses  him?  Let  us  make  the  trial;  let  us  leave  a  king  all  alone  to  reflect  on 
himself  quite  at  leisure,  without  any  gratification  of  the  senses,  without  any  care 
in  his  mind,  without  society;  and  we  will  see  that  a  king  without  diversion  is  a 
man  full  of  wretchedness.  So  this  is  carefully  avoided,  and  near  the  persons  of 
kings  there  never  fail  to  be  a  great  number  of  people  who  see  to  it  that  amuse¬ 
ment  follows  business,  and  who  watch  all  the  time  of  their  leisure  to  supply  them 
with  delights  and  games,  so  that  there  is  no  blank  in  it.  In  fact,  kings  are  sur- 


200  PENSEES 

rounded  with  persons  who  are  wonderfully  attentive  in  taking  care  that  the  king 
be  not  alone  and  in  a  state  to  think  of  himself,  knowing  well  that  he  will  be  miser¬ 
able,  king  though  he  be,  if  he  meditate  on  self. 

In  all  this  I  am  not  talking  of  Christian  kings  as  Christians,  but  only  as  kings. 

143.  Diversion . — Men  are  entrusted  from  infancy  with  the  care  of  their  honour, 
their  property,  their  friends,  and  even  with  the  property  and  the  honour  of  their 
friends.  They  are  overwhelmed  with  business,  with  the  study  of  languages,  and 
with  physical  exercise;  and  they  are  made  to  understand  that  they  cannot  be  happy 
unless  their  health,  their  honour,  their  fortune  and  that  of  their  friends  be  in  good 
condition,  and  that  a  single  thing  wanting  will  make  them  unhappy.  Thus  they 
are  given  cares  and  business  which  make  them  bustle  about  from  break  of  day. — 
It  is,  you  will  exclaim,  a  strange  way  to  make  them  happy!  What  more  could  be 
done  to  make  them  miserable? — Indeed!  what  could  be  done?  We  should  only 
have  to  relieve  them  from  all  these  cares;  for  then  they  would  see  themselves:  they 
would  reflect  on  what  they  are,  whence  they  came,  whither  they  go,  and  thus  we 
cannot  employ  and  divert  them  too  much.  And  this  is  why,  after  having  given 
them  so  much  business,  we  advise  them,  if  they  have  some  time  for  relaxation,  to 
employ  it  in  amusement,  in  play,  and  to  be  always  fully  occupied. 

How  hollow  and  full  of  ribaldry  is  the  heart  of  man! 

144.  I  spent  a  long  time  in  the  study  of  the  abstract  sciences,  and  was  dis¬ 
heartened  by  the  small  number  of  fellow-students  in  them.  When  I  commenced 
the  study  of  man,  I  saw  that  these  abstract  sciences  are  not  suited  to  man  and  that 
I  was  wandering  farther  from  my  own  state  in  examining  them  than  others  in  not 
knowing  them.  I  pardoned  their  little  knowledge;  but  I  thought  at  least  to  find 
many  companions  in  the  study  of  man  and  that  it  was  the  true  study  which  is 
suited  to  him.  I  have  been  deceived;  still  fewer  study  it  than  geometry.  It  is  only 
from  the  want  of  knowing  how  to  study  this  that  we  seek  the  other  studies.  But  is 
it  not  that  even  here  is  not  the  knowledge  which  man  should  have  and  that  for  the 
purpose  of  happiness  it  is  better  for  him  not  to  know  himself? 

145.  [One  thought  alone  occupies  us;  we  cannot  think  of  two  things  at  the 
same  time.  This  is  lucky  for  us  according  to  the  world,  not  according  to  God.] 

146.  Man  is  obviously  made  to  think.  It  is  his  whole  dignity  and  his  whole 
merit;  and  his  whole  duty  is  to  think  as  he  ought.  Now,  the  order  of  thought  is  to 
begin  with  self,  and  with  its  Author  and  its  end. 

Now,  of  what  does  the  world  think?  Never  of  this,  but  of  dancing,  playing  the 
lute,  singing,  making  verses,  running  at  the  ring,  etc.,  fighting,  making  oneself 
king,  without  thinking  what  it  is  to  be  a  king  and  what  to  be  a  man. 

147.  We  do  not  content  ourselves  with  the  life  we  have  in  ourselves  and  in  our 
own  being;  we  desire  to  live  an  imaginary  life  in  the  mind  of  others,  and  for  this 
purpose  we  endeavour  to  shine.  We  labour  unceasingly  to  adorn  and  preserve  this 
imaginary  existence  and  neglect  the  real.  And  if  we  possess  calmness,  or  gener¬ 
osity,  or  truthfulness,  we  are  eager  to  make  it  known,  so  as  to  attach  these  virtues  to 
that  imaginary  existence.  We  would  rather  separate  them  from  ourselves  to  join 


SECTION  II 


201 


them  to  it;  and  we  would  willingly  be  cowards  in  order  to  acquire  the  reputation 
of  being  brave.  A  great  proof  of  the  nothingness  of  our  being,  not  to  be  satisfied 
with  the  one  without  the  other,  and  to  renounce  the  one  for  the  other!  For  he 
would  be  infamous  who  would  not  die  to  preserve  his  honour. 

148.  We  are  so  presumptuous  that  we  would  wish  to  be  known  by  all  the  world, 
even  by  people  who  shall  come  after,  when  we  shall  be  no  more;  and  we  are  so 
vain  that  the  esteem  of  five  or  six  neighbours  delights  and  contents  us. 

149.  We  do  not  trouble  ourselves  about  being  esteemed  in  the  towns  through 
which  we  pass.  But  if  we  are  to  remain  a  little  while  there,  we  are  so  concerned. 
How  long  is  necessary?  A  time  commensurate  with  our  vain  and  paltry  life. 

150.  Vanity  is  so  anchored  in  the  heart  of  man  that  a  soldier,  a  soldier’s  servant, 
a  cook,  a  porter  brags  and  wishes  to  have  his  admirers.  Even  philosophers  wish  for 
them.  Those  who  write  against  it  want  to  have  the  glory  of  having  written  well; 
and  those  who  read  it  desire  the  glory  of  having  read  it.  I  who  write  this  have  per¬ 
haps  this  desire,  and  perhaps  those  who  will  read  it .  .  . 

1 51.  Glory. — Admiration  spoils  all  from  infancy.  Ah!  How  well  said!  Ah!  How 
well  done!  How  well-behaved  he  is!  etc. 

The  children  of  Port-Royal,  who  do  not  receive  this  stimulus  of  envy  and  glory, 
fall  into  carelessness. 

152.  Pride. —  Curiosity  is  only  vanity.  Most  frequently  we  wish  to  know  but  to 
talk.  Otherwise  we  would  not  take  a  sea  voyage  in  order  never  to  talk  of  it,  and  for 
the  sole  pleasure  of  seeing  without  hope  of  ever  communicating  it. 

1 53.  Of  the  desire  of  being  esteemed  by  those  with  whom  we  are. — Pride  takes  such 
natural  possession  of  us  in  the  midst  of  our  woes,  errors,  etc.  We  even  lose  our 
life  with  joy,  provided  people  talk  of  it. 

Vanity:  play,  hunting,  visiting,  false  shame,  a  lasting  name. 

154.  [I  have  no  friends  to  your  advantage.] 

155.  A  true  friend  is  so  great  an  advantage,  even  for  the  greatest  lords,  in  or¬ 
der  that  he  may  speak  well  of  them  and  back  them  in  their  absence,  that  they 
should  do  all  to  have  one.  But  they  should  choose  well;  for,  if  they  spend  all  their 
efforts  in  the  interests  of  fools,  it  will  be  of  no  use,  however  well  these  may  speak 
of  them;  and  these  will  not  even  speak  well  of  them  if  they  find  themselves  on 
the  weakest  side,  for  they  have  no  influence;  and  thus  they  will  speak  ill  of  them 
in  company. 

156.  Ferox  gens,  nullam  esse  vitam  sine  armis  rati } — They  prefer  death  to  peace; 
others  prefer  death  to  war. 

Every  opinion  may  be  held  preferable  to  life,  the  love  of  which  is  so  strong  and 
so  natural. 

Tivy,  xxxiv.17.  "A  brutal  people,  for  whom,  when  they  have  not  armour,  there  is  not  life." 


202  PENSEES 

157.  Contradiction:  comtempt  for  our  existence,  to  die  for  nothing,  hatred  of 
our  existence. 

158.  Pursuits. — The  charm  of  fame  is  so  great  that  we  like  every  object  to  which 
it  is  attached,  even  death. 

159.  Noble  deeds  are  most  estimable  when  hidden.  When  I  see  some  of  these 
in  history,  they  please  me  greatly.  But  after  all  they  have  not  been  quite  hidden, 
since  they  have  been  known;  and  though  people  have  done  what  they  could  to 
hide  them,  the  little  publication  of  them  spoils  all,  for  what  was  best  in  them  was 
the  wish  to  hide  them. 

160.  Sneezing  absorbs  all  the  functions  of  the  soul,  as  well  as  work  does;  but 
we  do  not  draw  therefrom  the  same  conclusions  against  the  greatness  of  man,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  against  his  will.  And  although  we  bring  it  on  ourselves,  it  is  neverthe¬ 
less  against  our  will  that  we  sneeze.  It  is  not  in  view  of  the  act  itself;  it  is  for  an¬ 
other  end.  And  thus  it  is  not  a  proof  of  the  weakness  of  man  and  of  his  slavery 
under  that  action. 

It  is  not  disgraceful  for  man  to  yield  to  pain,  and  it  is  disgraceful  to  yield 
to  pleasure.  This  is  not  because  pain  comes  to  us  from  without,  and  we  our¬ 
selves  seek  pleasure;  for  it  is  possible  to  seek  pain,  and  yield  to  it  purposely,  with¬ 
out  this  kind  of  baseness.  Whence  comes  it,  then,  that  reason  thinks  it  honour¬ 
able  to  succumb  under  stress  of  pain,  and  disgraceful  to  yield  to  the  attack  of 
pleasure?  It  is  because  pain  does  not  tempt  and  attract  us.  It  is  we  ourselves  who 
choose  it  voluntarily,  and  will  it  to  prevail  over  us.  So  that  we  are  masters  of  the 
situation;  and  in  this  man  yields  to  himself.  But  in  pleasure  it  is  man  who  yields 
to  pleasure.  Now  only  mastery  and  sovereignty  bring  glory,  and  only  slavery 
brings  shame. 

161.  Vanity. — How  wonderful  it  is  that  a  thing  so  evident  as  the  vanity  of  the 
world  is  so  little  known,  that  it  is  a  strange  and  surprising  thing  to  say  that  it  is 
foolish  to  seek  greatness? 

162.  He  who  will  know  fully  the  vanity  of  man  has  only  to  consider  the  causes 
and  effects  of  love.  The  cause  is  a  je  ne  sais  quoi  (Corneille),  and  the  effects  are 
dreadful.  This/V  ne  sais  quoi ,  so  small  an  object  that  we  cannot  recognise  it,  agitates 
a  whole  country,  princes,  armies,  the  entire  world. 

Cleopatra’s  nose:  had  it  been  shorter,  the  whole  aspect  of  the  world  would  have 
been  altered. 

163.  Vanity. — The  cause  and  the  effects  of  love:  Cleopatra. 

164.  He  who  does  not  see  the  vanity  of  the  world  is  himself  very  vain.  Indeed 
who  do  not  see  it  but  youths  who  are  absorbed  in  fame,  diversion,  and  the  thought 
of  the  future?  But  take  away  diversion,  and  you  will  see  them  dried  up  with  weari¬ 
ness.  They  feel  then  their  nothingness  without  knowing  it;  for  it  is  indeed  to  be 
unhappy  to  be  in  insufferable  sadness  as  soon  as  we  are  reduced  to  thinking  of  self 
and  have  no  diversion. 


SECTION  II  203 

165.  Thoughts. — In  omnibus  requiem  quvesivi}  If  our  condition  were  truly  happy, 
we  would  not  need  diversion  from  thinking  of  it  in  order  to  make  ourselves  happy. 

166.  Diversion. — Death  is  easier  to  bear  without  thinking  of  it  than  is  the  thought 
of  death  without  peril. 

167.  The  miseries  of  human  life  has  established  all  this:  as  men  have  seen  this, 
they  have  taken  up  diversion. 

168.  Diversion. — As  men  are  not  able  to  fight  against  death,  misery,  ignorance, 
they  have  taken  it  into  their  heads,  in  order  to  be  happy,  not  to  think  of  them  at  all. 

169.  Despite  these  miseries,  man  wishes  to  be  happy,  and  only  wishes  to  be 
happy,  and  cannot  wish  not  to  be  so.  But  how  will  he  set  about  it?  To  be  happy  he 
would  have  to  make  himself  immortal;  but,  not  being  able  to  do  so,  it  has  oc¬ 
curred  to  him  to  prevent  himself  from  thinking  of  death. 

170.  Diversion. — If  man  were  happy,  he  would  be  the  more  so,  the  less  he  was 
diverted,  like  the  Saints  and  God.  Yes;  but  is  it  not  to  be  happy  to  have  a  faculty 
of  being  amused  by  diversion?  No;  for  that  comes  from  elsewhere  and  from  with¬ 
out,  and  thus  is  dependent,  and  therefore  subject  to  be  disturbed  by  a  thousand 
accidents,  which  bring  inevitable  griefs. 

17 1.  Misery. — The  only  thing  which  consoles  us  for  our  miseries  is  diversion, 
and  yet  this  is  the  greatest  of  our  miseries.  For  it  is  this  which  principally  hinders 
us  from  reflecting  upon  ourselves  and  which  makes  us  insensibly  ruin  ourselves. 
Without  this  we  should  be  in  a  state  of  weariness,  and  this  weariness  would  spur 
us  to  seek  a  more  solid  means  of  escaping  from  it.  But  diversion  amuses  us,  and 
leads  us  unconsciously  to  death. 

172.  We  do  not  rest  satisfied  with  the  present.  We  anticipate  the  future  as  too 
slow  in  coming,  as  if  in  order  to  hasten  its  course;  or  we  recall  the  past,  to  stop  its 
too  rapid  flight.  So  imprudent  are  we  that  we  wander  in  the  times  which  are  not 
ours  and  do  not  think  of  the  only  one  which  belongs  to  us;  and  so  idle  are  we  that 
we  dream  of  those  times  which  are  no  more  and  thoughtlessly  overlook  that 
which  alone  exists.  For  the  present  is  generally  painful  to  us.  We  conceal  it  from 
our  sight,  because  it  troubles  us;  and,  if  it  be  delightful  to  us,  we  regret  to  see  it 
pass  away.  We  try  to  sustain  it  by  the  future  and  think  of  arranging  matters  which 
are  not  in  our  power,  for  a  time  which  we  have  no  certainty  of  reaching. 

Let  each  one  examine  his  thoughts,  and  he  will  find  them  all  occupied  with  the 
past  and  the  future.  We  scarcely  ever  think  of  the  present;  and  if  we  think  of  it,  it 
is  only  to  take  light  from  it  to  arrange  the  future.  The  present  is  never  our  end. 
The  past  and  the  present  are  our  means;  the  future  alone  is  our  end.  So  we  never 
live,  but  we  hope  to  live;  and,  as  we  are  always  preparing  to  be  happy,  it  is  inevi¬ 
table  we  should  never  be  so. 

173.  They  say  that  eclipses  foretoken  misfortune,  because  misfortunes  are  com- 

^cclus.  24.11.  "With  all  these  I  have  sought  rest.” 


204  PENSEES 

mon,  so  that,  as  evil  happens  so  often,  they  often  foretell  it;  whereas  if  they  said 
that  they  predict  good  fortune,  they  would  often  be  wrong.  They  attribute  good 
fortune  only  to  rare  conjunctions  of  the  heavens;  so  they  seldom  fail  in  prediction. 

174.  Misery. — Solomon  and  Job  have  best  known  and  best  spoken  of  the  misery 
of  man ;  the  former  the  most  fortunate,  and  the  latter  the  most  unfortunate  of  men ; 
the  former  knowing  the  vanity  of  pleasures  from  experience,  the  latter  the  reality 
of  evils. 

175.  We  know  ourselves  so  little  that  many  think  they  are  about  to  die  when 
they  are  well,  and  many  think  they  are  well  when  they  are  near  death,  unconscious 
of  approaching  fever,  or  of  the  abscess  ready  to  form  itself. 

176.  Cromwell  was  about  to  ravage  all  Christendom;  the  royal  family  was  un¬ 
done,  and  his  own  for  ever  established,  save  for  a  little  grain  of  sand  which  formed 
in  his  ureter.  Rome  herself  was  trembling  under  him;  but  this  small  piece  of  gravel 
having  formed  there,  he  is  dead,  his  family  cast  down,  all  is  peaceful,  and  the  king 
is  restored. 

177.  [Three  hosts.]  Would  he  who  had  possessed  the  friendship  of  the  King  of 
England,  the  King  of  Poland,  and  the  Queen  of  Sweden,  have  believed  he  would 
lack  a  refuge  and  shelter  in  the  world? 

178.  Macrobius:  on  the  innocents  slain  by  Herod. 

179.  When  Augustus  learnt  that  Herod’s  own  son  was  amongst  the  infants 
under  two  years  of  age,  whom  he  had  caused  to  be  slain,  he  said  that  it  was  better 
to  be  Herod’s  pig  than  his  son.  Macrobius,  Saturnalia ,  ii.  4. 

180.  The  great  and  the  humble  have  the  same  misfortunes,  the  same  griefs,  the 
same  passions;  but  the  one  is  at  the  top  of  the  wheel,  and  the  other  near  the  centre, 
and  so  less  disturbed  by  the  same  revolutions. 

1 8 1.  We  are  so  unfortunate  that  we  can  only  take  pleasure  in  a  thing  on  con¬ 
dition  of  being  annoyed  if  it  turn  out  ill,  as  a  thousand  things  can  do,  and  do 
every  hour.  He  who  should  find  the  secret  of  rejoicing  in  the  good,  without 
troubling  himself  with  its  contrary  evil,  would  have  hit  the  mark.  It  is  perpetual 
motion. 

182.  Those  who  have  always  good  hope  in  the  midst  of  misfortunes,  and  who 
are  delighted  with  good  luck,  are  suspected  of  being  very  pleased  with  the  ill  suc¬ 
cess  of  the  affair,  if  they  are  not  equally  distressed  by  bad  luck;  and  they  are  over¬ 
joyed  to  find  these  pretexts  of  hope,  in  order  to  show  that  they  are  concerned  and 
to  conceal  by  the  joy  which  they  feign  to  feel  that  which  they  have  at  seeing  the 
failure  of  the  matter. 

183.  We  run  carelessly  to  the  precipice,  after  we  have  put  something  before  us 
to  prevent  us  seeing  it. 


SECTION  III 


205 


SECTION  III 

OF  THE  NECESSITY  OF  THE  WAGER 

1 84.  A  letter  to  incite  to  the  search  after  God. 

And  then  to  make  people  seek  Him  among  the  philosophers,  sceptics,  and  dog¬ 
matists,  who  disquiet  him  who  inquires  of  them. 

185.  The  conduct  of  God,  who  disposes  all  things  kindly,  is  to  put  religion  into 
the  mind  by  reason,  and  into  the  heart  by  grace.  But  to  will  to  put  it  into  the  mind 
and  heart  by  force  and  threats  is  not  to  put  religion  there,  but  terror;  terorrem  potius 
quam  religionem } 

1 86.  Nisi  terrerentur  et  non  docereniur ,  improba  quasi  dominatio  videretur  (St.  Augus¬ 
tine,  Epistle  48  or  49), 2  Contra  Mendacium  ad  Consentium. 

187.  Order. — Men  despise  religion;  they  hate  it  and  fear  it  is  true.  To  remedy 
this,  we  must  begin  by  showing  that  religion  is  not  contrary  to  reason;  that  it  is 
venerable,  to  inspire  respect  for  it;  then  we  must  make  it  lovable,  to  make  good 
men  hope  it  is  true;  finally,  we  must  prove  it  is  true. 

Venerable,  because  it  has  perfect  knowledge  of  man;  lovable  because  it  promises 
the  true  good. 

188.  In  every  dialogue  and  discourse,  we  must  be  able  to  say  to  those  who  take 
offence,  "Of  what  do  you  complain?" 

189.  To  begin  by  pitying  unbelievers;  they  are  wretched  enough  by  their  con¬ 
dition.  We  ought  only  to  revile  them  where  it  is  beneficial;  but  this  does  them 
harm. 

190.  To  pity  atheists  who  seek,  for  are  they  not  unhappy  enough?  To  inveigh 
against  those  who  make  a  boast  of  it. 

19 1.  And  will  this  one  scoff  at  the  other?  Who  ought  to  scoff?  And  yet,  the  lat¬ 
ter  does  not  scoff  at  the  other,  but  pities  him. 

192.  To  reproach  Milton  with  not  being  troubled,  since  God  will  reproach  him. 

193.  Quid fiet  hominibus  qui  minima  contemnunt ,  major  a  non  credunt ?z 

194.  ..  .  Let  them  at  least  learn  what  is  the  religion  they  attack,  before  attacking 

^’Terror  which  is  more  powerful  than  religion.’' 

2”From  fear  that  they  are  being  led  by  terror,  without  guidance,  domination  appears  tyran¬ 
nical.” 

3”  What  will  become  of  men  who  mistake  small  things  and  do  not  believe  in  greater?” 


20  6 


PENSEES 


it.  If  this  religion  boasted  of  having  a  clear  view  of  God,  and  of  possessing  it 
open  and  unveiled,  it  would  be  attacking  it  to  say  that  we  see  nothing  in  the  world 
which  shows  it  with  this  clearness.  But  since,  on  the  contrary,  it  says  that  men  are 
in  darkness  and  estranged  from  God,  that  He  has  hidden  Himself  from  their 
knowledge,  that  this  is  in  fact  the  name  which  He  gives  Himself  in  the  Scriptures, 
Deus  absconditus y1  and  finally,  if  it  endeavours  equally  to  establish  these  two  things: 
that  God  has  set  up  in  the  Church  visible  signs  to  make  Himself  known  to  those 
who  should  seek  Him  sincerely,  and  that  He  has  nevertheless  so  disguised  them 
that  He  will  only  be  perceived  by  those  who  seek  Him  with  all  their  heart;  what 
advantage  can  they  obtain,  when,  in  the  negligence  with  which  they  make  pro¬ 
fession  of  being  in  search  of  the  truth,  they  cry  out  that  nothing  reveals  it  to  them; 
and  since  that  darkness  in  which  they  are,  and  with  which  they  upbraid  the  Church, 
establishes  only  one  of  the  things  which  she  affirms,  without  touching  the  other, 
and,  very  far  from  destroying,  proves  her  doctrine? 

In  order  to  attack  it,  they  should  have  protested  that  they  had  made  every  effort 
to  seek  Him  everywhere,  and  even  in  that  which  the  Church  proposes  for  their 
instruction,  but  without  satisfaction.  If  they  talked  in  this  manner,  they  would  in 
truth  be  attacking  one  of  her  pretensions.  But  I  hope  here  to  show  that  no  reason¬ 
able  person  can  speak  thus,  and  I  venture  even  to  say  that  no  one  has  ever  done  so. 
We  know  well  enough  how  those  who  are  of  this  mind  behave.  They  believe  they 
have  made  great  efforts  for  their  instruction  when  they  have  spent  a  few  hours  in 
reading  some  book  of  Scripture  and  have  questioned  some  priests  on  the  truths  of 
the  faith.  After  that,  they  boast  of  having  made  vain  search  in  books  and  among 
men.  But,  verily,  I  will  tell  them  what  I  have  often  said,  that  this  negligence  is 
insufferable.  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  trifling  interests  of  some  stranger, 
that  we  should  treat  it  in  this  fashion;  the  matter  concerns  ourselves  and  our  all. 

The  immortality  of  the  soul  is  a  matter  which  is  of  so  great  consequence  to  us 
and  which  touches  us  so  profoundly  that  we  must  have  lost  all  feeling  to  be  in¬ 
different  as  to  knowing  what  it  is.  All  our  actions  and  thoughts  must  take  such 
different  courses,  according  as  there  are  or  are  not  eternal  joys  to  hope  for,  that  it 
is  impossible  to  take  one  step  with  sense  and  judgment  unless  we  regulate  our 
course  by  our  view  of  this  point  which  ought  to  be  our  ultimate  end. 

Thus  our  first  interest  and  our  first  duty  is  to  enlighten  ourselves  on  this  subject, 
whereon  depends  all  our  conduct.  Therefore  among  those  who  do  not  believe,  I 
make  a  vast  difference  between  those  who  strive  with  all  their  power  to  inform 
themselves  and  those  who  live  without  troubling  or  thinking  about  it. 

I  can  have  only  compassion  for  those  who  sincerely  bewail  their  doubt,  who 
regard  it  as  the  greatest  of  misfortunes,  and  who,  sparing  no  effort  to  escape  it, 
make  of  this  inquiry  their  principal  and  most  serious  occupation. 

But  as  for  those  who  pass  their  life  without  thinking  of  this  ultimate  end  of 
life,  and  who,  for  this  sole  reason  that  they  do  not  find  within  themselves  the 
lights  which  convince  them  of  it,  neglect  to  seek  them  elsewhere,  and  to  examine 
thoroughly  whether  this  opinion  is  one  of  those  which  people  receive  with  credu¬ 
lous  simplicity,  or  one  of  those  which,  although  obscure  in  themselves,  have 
nevertheless  a  solid  and  immovable  foundation,  I  look  upon  them  in  a  manner 
quite  different. 

This  carelessness  in  a  matter  which  concerns  themselves,  their  eternity,  their  all, 

!Is.  45.15.  "Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself." 


SECTION  III  207 

moves  me  more  to  anger  than  pity;  it  astonishes  and  shocks  me;  it  is  to  me  mon¬ 
strous.  I  do  not  say  this  out  of  the  pious  zeal  of  a  spiritual  devotion.  I  expect,  on 
the  contrary,  that  we  ought  to  have  this  feeling  from  principles  of  human  interest 
and  self-love;  for  this  we  need  only  see  what  the  least  enlightened  persons  see. 

We  do  not  require  great  education  of  the  mind  to  understand  that  here  is  no 
real  and  lasting  satisfaction;  that  our  pleasures  are  only  vanity;  that  our  evils  are 
infinite;  and,  lastly,  that  death,  which  threatens  us  every  moment,  must  infallibly 
place  us  within  a  few  years  under  the  dreadful  necessity  of  being  for  ever  either 
annihilated  or  unhappy. 

There  is  nothing  more  real  than  this,  nothing  more  terrible.  Be  we  as  heroic  as 
we  like,  that  is  the  end  which  awaits  the  noblest  life  in  the  world.  Let  us  reflect  on 
this  and  then  say  whether  it  is  not  beyond  doubt  that  there  is  no  good  in  this  life 
but  in  the  hope  of  another;  that  we  are  happy  only  in  proportion  as  we  draw  near 
it;  and  that,  as  there  are  no  more  woes  for  those  who  have  complete  assurance  of 
eternity,  so  there  is  no  more  happiness  for  those  who  have  no  insight  into  it. 

Surely  then  it  is  a  great  evil  thus  to  be  in  doubt,  but  it  is  at  least  an  indispensable 
duty  to  seek  when  we  are  in  such  doubt;  and  thus  the  doubter  who  does  not  seek 
is  altogether  completely  unhappy  and  completely  wrong.  And  if  besides  this  he  is 
easy  and  content,  professes  to  be  so,  and  indeed  boasts  of  it;  if  it  is  this  state  itself 
which  is  the  subject  of  his  joy  and  vanity,  I  have  no  words  to  describe  so  silly  a 
creature. 

How  can  people  hold  these  opinions?  What  joy  can  we  find  in  the  expectation 
of  nothing  but  hopeless  misery?  What  reason  for  boasting  that  we  are  in  impene¬ 
trable  darkness?  And  how  can  it  happen  that  the  following  argument  occurs  to  a 
reasonable  man? 

"I  know  not  who  put  me  into  the  world,  nor  what  the  world  is,  nor  what  I  my¬ 
self  am.  I  am  in  terrible  ignorance  of  everything.  I  know  not  what  my  body  is,  nor 
my  senses,  nor  my  soul,  not  even  that  part  of  me  which  thinks  what  I  say,  which 
reflects  on  all  and  on  itself,  and  knows  itself  no  more  than  the  rest.  I  see  those 
frightful  spaces  of  the  universe  which  surround  me,  and  I  find  myself  tied  to  one 
corner  of  this  vast  expanse,  without  knowing  why  I  am  put  in  this  place  rather 
than  in  another,  nor  why  the  short  time  which  is  given  me  to  live  is  assigned  to  me 
at  this  point  rather  than  at  another  of  the  whole  eternity  which  was  before  me  or 
which  shall  come  after  me.  I  see  nothing  but  infinites  on  all  sides,  which  surround 
me  as  an  atom  and  as  a  shadow  which  endures  only  for  an  instant  and  returns  no 
more.  All  I  know  is  that  I  must  soon  die,  but  what  I  know  least  is  this  very  death 
which  I  cannot  escape. 

"As  I  know  not  whence  I  come,  so  I  know  not  whither  I  go.  I  know  only  that, 
in  leaving  this  world,  I  fall  for  ever  either  into  annihilation  or  into  the  hands  of  an 
angry  God,  without  knowing  to  which  of  these  two  states  I  shall  be  for  ever  as¬ 
signed.  Such  is  my  state,  full  of  weakness  and  uncertainty.  And  from  all  this  I 
conclude  that  I  ought  to  spend  all  the  days  of  my  life  without  caring  to  inquire  in¬ 
to  what  must  happen  to  me.  Perhaps  I  might  find  some  solution  to  my  doubts,  but 
I  will  not  take  the  trouble,  nor  take  a  step  to  seek  it;  and  after  treating  with  scorn 
those  who  are  concerned  with  this  care,  I  will  go  without  foresight  and  without 
fear  to  try  the  great  event,  and  let  myself  be  led  carelessly  to  death,  uncertain  of 
the  eternity  of  my  future  state." 

Who  would  desire  to  have  for  a  friend  a  man  who  talks  in  this  fashion?  Who 


208 


PENSEES 


would  choose  him  out  from  others  to  tell  him  of  his  affairs?  Who  would  have  re¬ 
course  to  him  in  affliction?  And  indeed  to  what  use  in  life  could  one  put  him? 

In  truth,  it  is  the  glory  of  religion  to  have  for  enemies  men  so  unreasonable; 
and  their  opposition  to  it  is  so  little  dangerous  that  it  serves,  on  the  contrary,  to 
establish  its  truths.  For  the  Christian  faith  goes  mainly  to  establish  these  two  facts: 
the  corruption  of  nature,  and  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.  Now  I  contend  that,  if 
these  men  do  not  serve  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  redemption  by  the  holiness  of 
their  behaviour,  they  at  least  serve  admirably  to  show  the  corruption  of  nature  by 
sentiments  so  unnatural. 

Nothing  is  so  important  to  man  as  his  own  state,  nothing  is  so  formidable  to 
him  as  eternity;  and  thus  it  is  not  natural  that  there  should  be  men  indifferent  to 
the  loss  of  their  existence,  and  to  the  perils  of  everlasting  suffering.  They  are  quite 
different  with  regard  to  all  other  things.  They  are  afraid  of  mere  trifles;  they  fore¬ 
see  them;  they  feel  them.  And  this  same  man  who  spends  so  many  days  and  nights 
in  rage  and  despair  for  the  loss  of  office,  or  for  some  imaginary  insult  to  his 
honour,  is  the  very  one  who  knows  without  anxiety  and  without  emotion  that  he 
will  lose  all  by  death.  It  is  a  monstrous  thing  to  see  in  the  same  heart  and  at  the 
same  time  this  sensibility  to  trifles  and  this  strange  insensibility  to  the  greatest  ob¬ 
jects.  It  is  an  incomprehensible  enchantment,  and  a  supernatural  slumber,  which 
indicates  as  its  cause  an  all-powerful  force. 

There  must  be  a  strange  confusion  in  the  nature  of  man,  that  he  should  boast  of 
being  in  that  state  in  which  it  seems  incredible  that  a  single  individual  should  be. 
However,  experience  has  shown  me  so  great  a  number  of  such  persons  that  the 
fact  would  be  surprising,  if  we  did  not  know  that  the  greater  part  of  those  who 
trouble  themselves  about  the  matter  are  disingenuous  and  not,  in  fact,  what  they 
say.  They  are  people  who  have  heard  it  said  that  it  is  the  fashion  to  be  thus  daring. 
It  is  what  they  call  "shaking  off  the  yoke,”  and  they  try  to  imitate  this.  But  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  make  them  understand  how  greatly  they  deceive  them¬ 
selves  in  thus  seeking  esteem.  This  is  not  the  way  to  gain  it,  even  I  say  among  those 
men  of  the  world  who  take  a  healthy  view  of  things  and  who  know  that  the  only 
way  to  succeed  in  this  life  is  to  make  ourselves  appear  honourable,  faithful,  judi¬ 
cious,  and  capable  of  useful  service  to  a  friend;  because  naturally  men  love  only 
what  may  be  useful  to  them.  Now,  what  do  we  gain  by  hearing  it  said  of  a  man 
that  he  has  now  thrown  off  the  yoke,  that  he  does  not  believe  there  is  a  God  who 
watches  our  actions,  that  he  considers  himself  the  sole  master  of  his  conduct,  and 
that  he  thinks  he  is  accountable  for  it  only  to  himself?  Does  he  think  that  he  has 
thus  brought  us  to  have  henceforth  complete  confidence  in  him  and  to  look  to 
him  for  consolation,  advice,  and  help  in  every  need  of  life?  Do  they  profess  to  have 
delighted  us  by  telling  us  that  they  hold  our  soul  to  be  only  a  little  wind  and  smoke, 
especially  by  telling  us  this  in  a  haughty  and  self-satisfied  tone  of  voice?  Is  this  a 
thing  to  say  gaily?  Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  a  thing  to  say  sadly,  as  the  saddest 
thing  in  the  world? 

If  they  thought  of  it  seriously,  they  would  see  that  this  is  so  bad  a  mistake,  so 
contrary  to  good  sense,  so  opposed  to  decency,  and  so  removed  in  every  respect 
from  that  good  breeding  which  they  seek,  that  they  would  be  more  likely  to  cor¬ 
rect  than  to  pervert  those  who  had  an  inclination  to  follow  them.  And,  indeed, 
make  them  give  an  account  of  their  opinions,  and  of  the  reasons  which  they  have 
for  doubting  religion,  and  they  will  say  to  you  things  so  feeble  and  so  petty,  that 


SECTION  III  209 

they  will  persuade  you  of  the  contrary.  The  following  is  what  a  person  one  day 
said  to  such  a  one  very  appositely:  "If  you  continue  to  talk  in  this  manner,  you 
will  really  make  me  religious."  And  he  was  right,  for  who  would  not  have  a  hor¬ 
ror  of  holding  opinions  in  which  he  would  have  such  contemptible  persons  as 
companions! 

Thus  those  who  only  feign  these  opinions  would  be  very  unhappy,  if  they  re¬ 
strained  their  natural  feelings  in  order  to  make  themselves  the  most  conceited  of 
men.  If,  at  the  bottom  of  their  heart,  they  are  troubled  at  not  having  more  light, 
let  them  not  disguise  the  fact;  this  avowal  will  not  be  shameful.  The  only  shame  is 
to  have  none.  Nothing  reveals  more  an  extreme  weakness  of  mind  than  not  to 
know  the  misery  of  a  godless  man.  Nothing  is  more  indicative  of  a  bad  disposition 
of  heart  than  not  to  desire  the  truth  of  eternal  promises.  Nothing  is  more  das¬ 
tardly  than  to  act  with  bravado  before  God.  Let  them  then  leave  these  impieties  to 
those  who  are  sufficiently  ill-bred  to  be  really  capable  of  them.  Let  them  at  least  be 
honest  men,  if  they  cannot  be  Christians.  Finally,  let  them  recognise  that  there  are 
two  kinds  of  people  one  can  call  reasonable;  those  who  serve  God  with  all  their 
heart  because  they  know  Him,  and  those  who  seek  Him  with  all  their  heart  be¬ 
cause  they  do  not  know  Him. 

But  as  for  those  who  live  without  knowing  Him  and  without  seeking  Him, 
they  judge  themselves  so  little  worthy  of  their  own  care,  that  they  are  not  worthy 
of  the  care  of  others;  and  it  needs  all  the  charity  of  the  religion  which  they  despise, 
not  to  despise  them  even  to  the  point  of  leaving  them  to  their  folly.  But  because 
this  religion  obliges  us  always  to  regard  them,  so  long  as  they  are  in  this  life,  as 
capable  of  the  grace  which  can  enlighten  them,  and  to  believe  that  they  may,  in  a 
little  time,  be  more  replenished  with  faith  than  we  are,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  may  fall  into  the  blindness  wherein  they  are,  we  must  do  for  them  what  we 
would  they  should  do  for  us  if  we  were  in  their  place,  and  call  upon  them  to  have 
pity  upon  themselves,  and  to  take  at  least  some  steps  in  the  endeavour  to  find  light. 
Let  them  give  to  reading  this  some  of  the  hours  which  they  otherwise  employ  so 
uselessly;  whatever  aversion  they  may  bring  to  the  task,  they  will  perhaps  gain 
something,  and  at  least  will  not  lose  much.  But  as  for  those  who  bring  to  the  task 
perfect  sincerity  and  a  real  desire  to  meet  with  truth,  those  I  hope  will  be  satisfied 
and  convinced  of  the  proofs  of  a  religion  so  divine,  which  I  have  here  collected, 
and  in  which  I  have  followed  somewhat  after  this  order  .  .  . 

195.  Before  entering  into  the  proofs  of  the  Christian  religion,  I  find  it  necessary  to 
point  out  the  sinfulness  of  those  men  who  live  in  indifference  to  the  search  for 
truth  in  a  matter  which  is  so  important  to  them,  and  which  touches  them  so  nearly. 

Of  all  their  errors,  this  doubtless  is  the  one  which  most  convicts  them  of  fool¬ 
ishness  and  blindness,  and  in  which  it  is  easiest  to  confound  them  by  the  first 
glimmerings  of  common  sense  and  by  natural  feelings. 

For  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  duration  of  this  life  is  but  a  moment;  that 
the  state  of  death  is  eternal,  whatever  may  be  its  nature;  and  that  thus  all  our  ac¬ 
tions  and  thoughts  must  take  such  different  directions,  according  to  the  state  of 
that  eternity,  that  it  is  impossible  to  take  one  step  with  sense  and  judgement,  unless 
we  regulate  our  course  by  the  truth  of  that  point  which  ought  to  be  our  ultimate 
end. 

There  is  nothing  clearer  than  this;  and  thus,  according  to  the  principles  of 


210  PENSEES 

reason,  the  condua  of  men  is  wholly  unreasonable,  if  they  do  not  take  another 
course. 

On  this  point,  therefore,  we  condemn  those  who  live  without  thought  of  the 
ultimate  end  of  life,  w7ho  let  themselves  be  guided  by  their  own  inclinations  and 
their  own  pleasures  without  reflection  and  without  concern,  and,  as  if  they  could 
annihilate  eternity  by  turning  awray  their  thought  from  it,  think  only  of  making 
themselves  happy  for  the  moment. 

Yet  this  eternity  exists,  and  death,  which  must  open  into  it  and  threatens  them 
every  hour,  must  in  a  little  time  infallibly  put  them  under  the  dreadful  necessity 
of  being  either  annihilated  or  unhappy  for  ever,  without  knowing  w'hich  of  these 
eternities  is  for  ever  prepared  for  them. 

This  is  a  doubt  of  terrible  consequence.  They  are  in  peril  of  eternal  woe  and 
thereupon,  as  if  the  matter  were  not  worth  the  trouble,  they  neglect  to  inquire 
whether  this  is  one  of  those  opinions  w7hich  people  receive  with  too  credulous  a 
facility,  or  one  of  those  wfliich,  obscure  in  themselves,  have  a  very  firm,  though 
hidden,  foundation.  Thus  they  know7  not  whether  there  be  truth  or  falsity  in  the 
matter,  nor  whether  there  be  strength  or  weakness  in  the  proofs.  They  have  them 
before  their  eyes;  they  refuse  to  look  at  them;  and  in  that  ignorance  they  choose 
all  that  is  necessary  to  fall  into  this  misfortune  if  it  exists,  to  await  death  to  make 
trial  of  it,  yet  to  be  very  content  in  this  state,  to  make  profession  of  it,  and  indeed 
to  boast  of  it.  Can  wre  think  seriously  of  the  importance  of  this  subject  without 
being  horrified  at  condua  so  extravagant? 

This  resting  in  ignorance  is  a  monstrous  thing,  and  they  wiio  pass  their  life  in  it 
must  be  made  to  feel  its  extravagance  and  stupidity,  by  having  it  show7n  to  them, 
so  that  they  may  be  confounded  by  the  sight  of  their  folly.  For  this  is  how7  men 
reason,  when  they  choose  to  live  in  such  ignorance  of  what  they  are  and  without 
seeking  enlightenment.  "I  know  not,”  they  say  .  .  . 

196.  Men  lack  heart;  they  w7ould  not  make  a  friend  of  it. 

197.  To  be  insensible  to  the  extent  of  despising  interesting  things,  and  to  be¬ 
come  insensible  to  the  point  which  interests  us  most. 

198.  The  sensibility  of  man  to  trifles,  and  his  insensibility  to  great  things,  indi¬ 
cates  a  strange  inversion. 

199.  Let  us  imagine  a  number  of  men  in  chains  and  all  condemned  to  death, 
where  some  are  killed  each  day  in  the  sight  of  the  others,  and  those  who  remain 
see  their  own  fate  in  that  of  their  fellows  and  w7ait  their  turn,  looking  at  each 
other  sorrowfully  and  without  hope.  It  is  an  image  of  the  condition  of  men. 

200.  A  man  in  a  dungeon,  ignorant  whether  his  sentence  be  pronounced  and 
having  only  one  hour  to  learn  it,  but  this  hour  enough,  if  he  knew  that  it  is  pro¬ 
nounced,  to  obtain  its  repeal,  would  act  unnaturally  in  spending  that  hour,  not  in 
ascertaining  his  sentence,  but  in  playing  piquet.  So  it  is  against  nature  that  man, 
etc.  It  is  making  heavy  the  hand  of  God. 

Thus  not  only  the  zeal  of  those  who  seek  Him  proves  God,  but  also  the  blind¬ 
ness  of  those  who  seek  Him  not. 


SECTION  III 


21 1 


201.  All  the  objections  of  this  one  and  that  one  only  go  against  themselves,  and 
not  against  religion.  All  that  infidels  say  .  .  . 

202.  [From  those  who  are  in  despair  at  being  without  faith,  we  see  that  God 
does  not  enlighten  them;  but  as  to  the  rest,  we  see  there  is  a  God  who  makes  them 
blind.] 

203.  Fascinatio  nugacitatis.1 — That  passion  may  not  harm  us,  let  us  act  as  if  we 
had  only  eight  hours  to  live. 

204.  If  we  ought  to  devote  eight  hours  of  life,  we  ought  to  devote  a  hundred 
years. 

205.  When  I  consider  the  short  duration  of  my  life,  swallowed  up  in  the  eternity 
before  and  after,  the  little  space  which  I  fill  and  even  can  see,  engulfed  in  the  in¬ 
finite  immensity  of  spaces  of  which  I  am  ignorant  and  which  know  me  not,  I  am 
frightened  and  am  astonished  at  being  here  rather  than  there;  for  there  is  no  reason 
why  here  rather  than  there,  why  now  rather  than  then.  Who  has  put  me  here?  By 
whose  order  and  direction  have  this  place  and  time  been  allotted  to  me?  Memoria 
hospitis  unius  diet  prcetereuntis? 

206.  The  eternal  silence  of  these  infinite  spaces  frightens  me. 

207.  How  many  kingdoms  know  us  not! 

208.  Why  is  my  knowledge  limited?  Why  my  stature?  Why  my  life  to  one 
hundred  years  rather  than  to  a  thousand?  What  reason  has  nature  had  for  giving 
me  such,  and  for  choosing  this  number  rather  than  another  in  the  infinity  of  those 
from  which  there  is  no  more  reason  to  choose  one  than  another,  trying  nothing  else? 

209.  Art  thou  less  a  slave  by  being  loved  and  favoured  by  thy  master?  Thou  art 
indeed  well  off,  slave.  Thy  master  favours  thee;  he  will  soon  beat  thee. 

210.  The  last  act  is  tragic,  however  happy  all  the  rest  of  the  play  is;  at  the  last  a 
little  earth  is  thrown  upon  our  head,  and  that  is  the  end  for  ever. 

2 1 1 .  We  are  fools  to  depend  upon  the  society  of  our  fellow-men.  Wretched  as  we 
are,  powerless  as  we  are,  they  will  not  aid  us;  we  shall  die  alone.  We  should  there¬ 
fore  act  as  if  we  were  alone,  and  in  that  case  should  we  build  fine  houses,  etc.  We 
should  seek  the  truth  without  hesitation  ;  and,  if  we  refuse  it,  we  show  that  we  value 
the  esteem  of  men  more  than  the  search  for  truth. 

212.  Instability. — It  is  a  horrible  thing  to  feel  all  that  we  possess  slipping  away. 

213.  Between  us  and  heaven  or  hell  there  is  only  life,  which  is  the  frailest  thing 
in  the  world. 

1W'isd.  of  Sol.  4.12.  "Bewitching  of  naughtiness.” 

2Wisd.  of  Sol.  5.15.  "The  remembrance  of  a  guest  that  tarrieth  but  a  day.” 


212  PENSEES 

214.  Injustice . — That  presumption  should  be  joined  to  meanness  is  extreme  in¬ 
justice. 

215.  To  fear  death  without  danger,  and  not  in  danger,  for  one  must  be  a  man. 

216.  Sudden  death  alone  is  feared;  hence  confessors  stay  with  lords. 

217.  An  heir  finds  the  title-deeds  of  his  house.  Will  he  say,  "Perhaps  they  are 
forged"  and  neglect  to  examine  them? 

218.  Dungeon. — I  approve  of  not  examining  the  opinion  of  Copernicus;  but 
this  .  .  .!  It  concerns  all  our  life  to  know  whether  the  soul  be  mortal  or  immortal. 

219.  It  is  certain  that  the  mortality  or  immortality  of  the  soul  must  make  an 
entire  difference  to  morality.  And  yet  philosophers  have  constructed  their  ethics 
independently  of  this:  they  discuss  to  pass  an  hour. 

Plato,  to  incline  to  Christianity. 

220.  The  fallacy  of  philosophers  who  have  not  discussed  the  immortality  of  the 
soul.  The  fallacy  of  their  dilemma  in  Montaigne. 

221.  Atheists  ought  to  say  what  is  perfectly  evident;  now  it  is  not  perfectly 
evident  that  the  soul  is  material. 

222.  Atheists. — What  reason  have  they  for  saying  that  we  cannot  rise  from  the 
dead?  What  is  more  difficult,  to  be  born  or  to  rise  again;  that  what  has  never  been 
should  be,  or  that  what  has  been  should  be  again?  Is  it  more  difficult  to  come  into 
existence  than  to  return  to  it?  Habit  makes  the  one  appear  easy  to  us;  want  of 
habit  makes  the  other  impossible.  A  popular  way  of  thinking! 

Why  cannot  a  virgin  bear  a  child?  Does  a  hen  not  lay  eggs  without  a  cock?  What 
distinguishes  these  outwardly  from  others?  And  who  has  told  us  that  the  hen  may 
not  form  the  germ  as  well  as  the  cock? 

223.  What  have  they  to  say  against  the  resurrection,  and  against  the  child-bear¬ 
ing  of  the  Virgin?  Which  is  the  more  difficult,  to  produce  a  man  or  an  animal,  or 
to  reproduce  it?  And  if  they  had  never  seen  any  species  of  animals,  could  they  have 
conjectured  whether  they  were  produced  without  connection  with  each  other? 

224.  How  I  hate  these  follies  of  not  believing  in  the  Eucharist,  etc.!  If  the  Gos¬ 
pel  be  true,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  God,  what  difficulty  is  there? 

225.  Atheism  shows  strength  of  mind,  but  only  to  a  certain  degree. 

226.  Infidels,  who  profess  to  follow  reason,  ought  to  be  exceedingly  strong  in 
reason.  What  say  they  then?  "Do  we  not  see,"  say  they,  "that  the  brutes  live  and 
die  like  men,  and  Turks  like  Christians?  They  have  their  ceremonies,  their  prophets, 
their  doctors,  their  saints,  their  monks,  like  us,"  etc.  (Is  this  contrary  to  Scrip¬ 
ture?  Does  it  not  say  all  this?) 


SECTION  III 


213 

If  you  care  but  little  to  know  the  truth,  here  is  enough  of  it  to  leave  you  in 
repose.  But  if  you  desire  with  all  your  heart  to  know  it,  it  is  not  enough;  look  at  it 
in  detail.  This  would  be  sufficient  for  a  question  in  philosophy;  but  not  here, 
where  it  concerns  your  all.  And  yet,  after  a  trifling  reflection  of  this  kind,  we  go  to 
amuse  ourselves,  etc.  Let  us  inquire  of  this  same  religion  whether  it  does  not  give 
a  reason  for  this  obscurity;  perhaps  it  will  teach  it  to  us. 

227.  Order  by  dialogues. — What  ought  I  to  do?  I  see  only  darkness  everywhere. 
Shall  I  believe  I  am  nothing?  Shall  I  believe  I  am  God? 

"All  things  change  and  succeed  each  other."  You  are  mistaken;  there  is  .  .  . 

228.  Objection  of  atheists:  "But  we  have  no  light." 

229.  This  is  what  I  see  and  what  troubles  me.  I  look  on  all  sides,  and  I  see  only 
darkness  everywhere.  Nature  presents  to  me  nothing  which  is  not  matter  of  doubt 
and  concern.  If  I  saw  nothing  there  which  revealed  a  Divinity,  I  would  come  to  a 
negative  conclusion;  if  I  saw  everywhere  the  signs  of  a  Creator,  I  would  re¬ 
main  peacefully  in  faith.  But,  seeing  too  much  to  deny  and  too  little  to  be  sure,  I  am 
in  a  state  to  be  pitied;  wherefore  I  have  a  hundred  times  wished  that  if  a  God  main¬ 
tains  Nature,  she  should  testify  to  Him  unequivocally,  and  that,  if  the  signs  she 
gives  are  deceptive,  she  should  suppress  them  altogether;  that  she  should  say  every¬ 
thing  or  nothing,  that  I  might  see  which  cause  I  ought  to  follow.  Whereas  in  my 
present  state,  ignorant  of  what  I  am  or  of  what  I  ought  to  do,  I  know  neither  my 
condition  nor  my  duty.  My  heart  inclines  wholly  to  know  where  is  the  true  good, 
in  order  to  follow  it;  nothing  would  be  too  dear  to  me  for  eternity. 

I  envy  those  whom  I  see  living  in  the  faith  with  such  carelessness  and  who  make 
such  a  bad  use  of  a  gift  of  which  it  seems  to  me  I  would  make  such  a  different  use. 

230.  It  is  incomprehensible  that  God  should  exist,  and  it  is  incomprehensible 
that  He  should  not  exist;  that  the  soul  should  be  joined  to  the  body,  and  that  we 
should  have  no  soul;  that  the  world  should  be  created,  and  that  it  should  not  be 
created,  etc.;  that  original  sin  should  be,  and  that  it  should  not  be. 

231.  Do  you  believe  it  to  be  impossible  that  God  is  infinite,  without  parts?  Yes. 
I  wish  therefore  to  show  you  an  infinite  and  indivisible  thing.  It  is  a  point  moving 
everywhere  with  an  infinite  velocity;  for  it  is  one  in  all  places  and  is  all  totality  in 
every  place. 

Let  this  effect  of  nature,  which  previously  seemed  to  you  impossible,  make  you 
know  that  there  may  be  others  of  which  you  are  still  ignorant.  Do  not  draw  this 
conclusion  from  your  experiment,  that  there  remains  nothing  for  you  to  know; 
but  rather  that  there  remains  an  infinity  for  you  to  know. 

232.  Infinite  movement,  the  point  which  fills  everything,  the  moment  of  rest; 
infinite  without  quantity,  indivisible  and  infinite. 

233.  Infinite — nothing. — Our  soul  is  cast  into  a  body,  where  it  finds  number, time, 
dimension.  Thereupon  it  reasons,  and  calls  this  nature  necessity,  and  can  believe 
nothing  else. 


PENSEES 


214 

Unity  joined  to  infinity  adds  nothing  to  it,  no  more  than  one  foot  to  an  infinite 
measure.  The  finite  is  annihilated  in  the  presence  of  the  infinite,  and  becomes  a  pure 
nothing.  So  our  spirit  before  God,  so  our  justice  before  divine  justice.  There  is 
not  so  great  a  disproportion  between  our  justice  and  that  of  God  as  between  unity 
and  infinity. 

The  justice  of  God  must  be  vast  like  His  compassion.  Now  justice  to  the 
outcast  is  less  vast  and  ought  less  to  offend  our  feelings  than  mercy  towards  the 
elect. 

We  know  that  there  is  an  infinite,  and  are  ignorant  of  its  nature.  As  we  know  it 
to  be  false  that  numbers  are  finite,  it  is  therefore  true  that  there  is  an  infinity  in 
number.  But  we  do  not  know  what  it  is.  It  is  false  that  it  is  even,  it  is  false  that  it 
is  odd ;  for  the  addition  of  a  unit  can  make  no  change  in  its  nature.  Yet  it  is  a  num¬ 
ber,  and  every  number  is  odd  or  even  (this  is  certainly  true  of  every  finite  number). 
So  we  may  well  know  that  there  is  a  God  without  knowing  what  He  is.  Is  there 
not  one  substantial  truth,  seeing  there  are  so  many  things  which  are  not  the  truth 
itself? 

We  know  then  the  existence  and  nature  of  the  finite,  because  we  also  are  finite 
and  have  extension.  We  know  the  existence  of  the  infinite  and  are  ignorant  of 
its  nature,  because  it  has  extension  like  us,  but  not  limits  like  us.  But  we  know 
neither  the  existence  nor  the  nature  of  God,  because  He  has  neither  extension 
nor  limits. 

But  by  faith  we  know  His  existence;  in  glory  we  shall  know  His  nature.  Now,  I 
have  already  shown  that  we  may  well  know  the  existence  of  a  thing,  without  know¬ 
ing  its  nature. 

Let  us  now  speak  according  to  natural  lights. 

If  there  is  a  God,  He  is  infinitely  incomprehensible,  since,  having  neither  parts 
nor  limits.  He  has  no  affinity  to  us.  We  are  then  incapable  of  knowing  either  what 
He  is  or  if  He  is.  This  being  so,  who  will  dare  to  undertake  the  decision  of  the 
question?  Not  we,  who  have  no  affinity  to  Him. 

Who  then  will  blame  Christians  for  not  being  able  to  give  a  reason  for  their  be¬ 
lief,  since  they  profess  a  religion  for  which  they  cannot  give  a  reason?  They  declare, 
in  expounding  it  to  the  world,  that  it  is  a  foolishness,  stultitiam ;l  and  then  you 
complain  that  they  do  not  prove  it!  If  they  proved  it,  they  would  not  keep  their 
word;  it  is  in  lacking  proofs  that  they  are  not  lacking  in  sense.  "Yes,  but  although 
this  excuses  those  who  offer  it  as  such  and  takes  away  from  them  the  blame  of 
putting  it  forward  without  reason,  it  does  not  excuse  those  who  receive  it."  Let  us 
then  examine  this  point,  and  say,  "God  is,  or  He  is  not."  But  to  which  side  shall 
we  incline?  Reason  can  decide  nothing  here.  There  is  an  infinite  chaos  which 
separates  us.  A  game  is  being  played  at  the  extremity  of  this  infinite  distance 
where  heads  or  tails  will  turn  up.  What  will  you  wager?  According  to  reason,  you 
can  do  neither  the  one  thing  nor  the  other;  according  to  reason,  you  can  defend 
neither  of  the  propositions. 

Do  not,  then,  reprove  for  error  those  wrho  have  made  a  choice;  for  you  know 
nothing  about  it.  "No,  but  I  blame  them  for  having  made,  not  this  choice,  but  a 
choice;  for  again  both  he  who  chooses  heads  and  he  who  chooses  tails  are  equally 
at  fault,  they  are  both  in  the  wrong.  The  true  course  is  not  to  wager  at  all." 

Yes;  but  you  must  wager.  It  is  not  optional.  You  are  embarked.  Which  will  you 

XI  Cor.  1. 21. 


SECTION  III  215 

choose  then?  Let  us  see.  Since  you  must  choose,  let  us  see  which  interests  you 
least.  You  have  two  things  to  lose,  the  true  and  the  good;  and  two  things  to  stake, 
your  reason  and  your  will,  your  knowledge  and  your  happiness;  and  your  nature 
has  two  things  to  shun,  error  and  misery.  Your  reason  is  no  more  shocked  in 
choosing  one  rather  than  the  other,  since  you  must  of  necessity  choose.  This  is 
one  point  settled.  But  your  happiness?  Let  us  weigh  the  gain  and  the  loss  in 
wagering  that  God  is.  Let  us  estimate  these  two  chances.  If  you  gain,  you  gain  all; 
if  you  lose,  you  lose  nothing.  Wager,  then,  without  hesitation  that  He  is.  'That  is 
very  fine.  Yes,  I  must  wager;  but  I  may  perhaps  wager  too  much.”  Let  us  see. 
Since  there  is  an  equal  risk  of  gain  and  of  loss,  if  you  had  only  to  gain  two  lives, 
instead  of  one,  you  might  still  wager.  But  if  there  were  three  lives  to  gain,  you 
would  have  to  play  (since  you  are  under  the  necessity  of  playing),  and  you  would 
be  imprudent,  when  you  are  forced  to  play,  not  to  chance  your  life  to  gain  three 
at  a  game  where  there  is  an  equal  risk  of  loss  and  gain.  But  there  is  an  eternity  of 
life  and  happiness.  And  this  being  so,  if  there  were  an  infinity  of  chances,  of 
which  one  only  would  be  for  you,  you  would  still  be  right  in  wagering  one  to  win 
two,  and  you  would  act  stupidly,  being  obliged  to  play,  by  refusing  to  stake  one 
life  against  three  at  a  game  in  which  out  of  an  infinity  of  chances  there  is  one 
for  you,  if  there  were  an  infinity  of  an  infinitely  happy  life  to  gain.  But  there  is 
here  an  infinity  of  an  infinitely  happy  life  to  gain,  a  chance  of  gain  against  a  finite 
number  of  chances  of  loss,  and  what  you  stake  is  finite.  It  is  all  divided;  where  - 
ever  the  infinite  is  and  there  is  not  an  infinity  of  chances  of  loss  against  that  of 
gain,  there  is  no  time  to  hesitate,  you  must  give  all.  And  thus,  when  one  is  forced 
to  play,  he  must  renounce  reason  to  preserve  his  life,  rather  than  risk  it  for  infinite 
gain,  as  likely  to  happen  as  the  loss  of  nothingness. 

For  it  is  no  use  to  say  it  is  uncertain  if  we  will  gain,  and  it  is  certain  that  we  risk, 
and  that  the  infinite  distance  between  the  certainty  of  what  is  staked  and  the  un¬ 
certainty  of  what  will  be  gained,  equals  the  finite  good  which  is  certainly  staked 
against  the  uncertain  infinite.  It  is  not  so,  as  every  player  stakes  a  certainty  to 
gain  an  uncertainty,  and  yet  he  stakes  a  finite  certainty  to  gain  a  finite  uncer¬ 
tainty,  without  transgressing  against  reason.  There  is  not  an  infinite  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  certainty  staked  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  gain;  that  is  untrue.  In 
truth,  there  is  an  infinity  between  the  certainty  of  gain  and  the  certainty  of  loss. 
But  the  uncertainty  of  the  gain  is  proportioned  to  the  certainty  of  the  stake  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  proportion  of  the  chances  of  gain  and  loss.  Hence  it  comes  that,  if 
there  are  as  many  risks  on  one  side  as  on  the  other,  the  course  is  to  play  even;  and 
then  the  certainty  of  the  stake  is  equal  to  the  uncertainty  of  the  gain,  so  far  is  it 
from  fact  that  there  is  an  infinite  distance  between  them.  And  so  our  proposition 
is  of  infinite  force,  when  there  is  the  finite  to  stake  in  a  game  where  there  are  equal 
risks  of  gain  and  of  loss,  and  the  infinite  to  gain.  This  is  demonstrable;  and  if  men 
are  capable  of  any  truths,  this  is  one. 

”1  confess  it,  I  admit  it.  But,  still,  is  there  no  means  of  seeing  the  faces  of  the 
cards?”  Yes,  Scripture  and  the  rest,  etc.  "Yes,  but  I  have  my  hands  tied  and  my 
mouth  closed;  I  am  forced  to  wager,  and  am  not  free.  I  am  not  released,  and  am 
so  made  that  I  cannot  believe.  What,  then,  would  you  have  me  do?” 

True.  But  at  least  learn  your  inability  to  believe,  since  reason  brings  you  to 
this,  and  yet  you  cannot  believe.  Endeavour,  then,  to  convince  yourself,  not  by 
increase  of  proofs  of  God,  but  by  the  abatement  of  your  passions.  You  would  like 


PENSEES 


216 

to  attain  faith  and  do  not  know  the  way;  you  would  like  to  cure  yourself  of  un¬ 
belief  and  ask  the  remedy  for  it.  Learn  of  those  who  have  been  bound  like  you, 
and  who  now  stake  all  their  possessions.  These  are  people  who  know  the  way 
which  you  would  follow,  and  who  are  cured  of  an  ill  of  which  you  would  be 
cured.  Follow  the  way  by  which  they  began;  by  acting  as  if  they  believed,  taking 
the  holy  water,  having  masses  said,  etc.  Even  this  will  naturally  make  you  believe, 
and  deaden  your  acuteness.  "But  this  is  what  I  am  afraid  of."  And  why?  What 
have  you  to  lose? 

But  to  show  you  that  this  leads  you  there,  it  is  this  which  will  lessen  the  pas¬ 
sions,  which  are  your  stumbling-blocks. 

The  end  of  this  discourse. — Now,  what  harm  will  befall  you  in  taking  this  side? 
You  will  be  faithful,  honest,  humble,  grateful,  generous,  a  sincere  friend,  truthful. 
Certainly  you  will  not  have  those  poisonous  pleasures,  glory  and  luxury;  but  will 
you  not  have  others?  I  will  tell  you  that  you  will  thereby  gain  in  this  life,  and  that, 
at  each  step  you  take  on  this  road,  you  will  see  so  great  certainty  of  gain,  so  much 
nothingness  in  what  you  risk,  that  you  will  at  last  recognise  that  you  have  wagered 
for  something  certain  and  infinite,  for  which  you  have  given  nothing. 

"Ah!  This  discourse  transports  me,  charms  me,"  etc. 

If  this  discourse  pleases  you  and  seems  impressive,  know  that  it  is  made  by  a 
man  who  has  knelt,  both  before  and  after  it,  in  prayer  to  that  Being,  infinite  and 
without  parts,  before  whom  he  lays  all  he  has,  for  you  also  to  lay  before  Him  all 
you  have  for  your  own  good  and  for  His  glory,  that  so  strength  may  be  given  to 
lowliness. 

234.  If  we  must  not  act  save  on  a  certainty,  we  ought  not  to  act  on  religion,  for 
it  is  not  certain.  But  how  many  things  we  do  on  an  uncertainty,  sea  voyages,  bat¬ 
tles!  I  say  then  we  must  do  nothing  at  all,  for  nothing  is  certain,  and  that  there  is 
more  certainty  in  religion  than  there  is  as  to  whether  we  may  see  to-morrow;  for 
it  is  not  certain  that  we  may  see  to-morrow,  and  it  is  certainly  possible  that  we 
may  not  see  it.  We  cannot  say  as  much  about  religion.  It  is  not  certain  that  it  is; 
but  who  will  venture  to  say  that  it  is  certainly  possible  that  it  is  not?  Now  when 
we  work  for  to-morrow,  and  so  on  an  uncertainty,  we  act  reasonably;  for  we  ought 
to  work  for  an  uncertainty  according  to  the  doctrine  of  chance  which  was  demon¬ 
strated  above. 

Saint  Augustine  has  seen  that  we  work  for  an  uncertainty,  on  sea,  in  battle,  etc. 
But  he  has  not  seen  the  doctrine  of  chance  which  proves  that  we  should  do  so. 
Montaigne  has  seen  that  we  are  shocked  at  a  fool,  and  that  habit  is  all-powerful; 
but  he  has  not  seen  the  reason  of  this  effect. 

All  these  persons  have  seen  the  effects,  but  they  have  not  seen  the  causes.  They 
are,  in  comparison  with  those  who  have  discovered  the  causes,  as  those  who  have 
only  eyes  are  in  comparison  with  those  who  have  intellect.  For  the  effects  are 
perceptible  by  sense,  and  the  causes  are  visible  only  to  the  intellect.  And  although 
these  effects  are  seen  by  the  mind,  this  mind  is,  in  comparison  with  the  mind  which 
sees  the  causes,  as  the  bodily  senses  are  in  comparison  with  the  intellect. 

235.  Rem  viderunt ,  causam  non  viderunt } 

rThey  have  seen  the  thing;  they  have  not  seen  the  cause.”  St.  Augustine,  Contra  Pelagium , 
iv.6o. 


SECTION  IV  217 

236.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  chance,  you  ought  to  put  yourself  to  the 
trouble  of  searching  for  the  truth;  for  if  you  die  without  worshipping  the  True 
Cause,  you  are  lost.  "But,”  say  you,  "if  He  had  wished  me  to  worship  Him,  He 
would  have  left  me  signs  of  His  will.”  He  has  done  so;  but  you  neglect  them. 
Seek  them,  therefore;  it  is  well  worth  it. 

237.  Chances . — We  must  live  differently  in  the  world,  according  to  these  dif¬ 
ferent  assumptions:  (1)  that  we  could  always  remain  in  it;  (2)  that  it  is  certain 
that  we  shall  not  remain  here  long,  and  uncertain  if  we  shall  remain  here  one 
hour.  This  last  assumption  is  our  condition. 

238.  What  do  you  then  promise  me,  in  addition  to  certain  troubles,  but  ten 
years  of  self-love  (for  ten  years  is  the  chance),  to  try  hard  to  please  without  suc¬ 
cess? 

2 39.  Objection. — Those  who  hope  for  salvation  are  so  far  happy;  but  they  have 
as  a  counterpoise  the  fear  of  hell. 

Reply. — Who  has  most  reason  to  fear  hell:  he  who  is  in  ignorance  whether  there 
is  a  hell,  and  who  is  certain  of  damnation  if  there  is;  or  he  who  certainly  believes 
there  is  a  hell  and  hopes  to  be  saved  if  there  is? 

240.  "I  would  soon  have  renounced  pleasure,”  say  they,  "had  I  faith.”  For  my 
part  I  tell  you,  "You  would  soon  have  faith,  if  you  renounced  pleasure.”  Now,  it 
is  for  you  to  begin.  If  I  could,  I  would  give  you  faith.  I  cannot  do  so,  nor  there¬ 
fore  test  the  truth  of  what  you  say.  But  you  can  well  renounce  pleasure  and  test 
whether  what  I  say  is  true. 

241.  Order. — I  would  have  far  more  fear  of  being  mistaken,  and  of  finding  that 
the  Christian  religion  was  true,  than  of  not  being  mistaken  in  believing  it  true. 


SECTION  IV 
OF  THE  MEANS  OF  BELIEF 

242.  Preface  to  the  second  part. — To  speak  of  those  who  have  treated  of  this  mat¬ 
ter. 

I  admire  the  boldness  with  which  these  persons  undertake  to  speak  of  God.  In 
addressing  their  argument  to  infidels,  their  first  chapter  is  to  prove  Divinity  from 
the  works  of  nature.  I  should  not  be  astonished  at  their  enterprise,  if  they  were 
addressing  their  argument  to  the  faithful;  for  it  is  certain  that  those  who  have  the 
living  faith  in  their  hearts  see  at  once  that  all  existence  is  none  other  than  the  work 
of  the  God  whom  they  adore.  But  for  those  in  whom  this  light  is  extinguished, 
and  in  whom  we  purpose  to  rekindle  it,  persons  destitute  of  faith  and  grace,  who, 
seeking  with  all  their  light  whatever  they  see  in  nature  that  can  bring  them  to  this 
knowledge,  find  only  obscurity  and  darkness;  to  tell  them  that  they  have  only  to 
look  at  the  smallest  things  which  surround  them,  and  they  will  see  God  openly, 


2 1 8 


PENSEES 


to  give  them,  as  a  complete  proof  of  this  great  and  important  matter,  the  course 
of  the  moon  and  planets,  and  to  claim  to  have  concluded  the  proof  with  such  an 
argument,  is  to  give  them  ground  for  believing  that  the  proofs  of  our  religion  are 
very  weak.  And  I  see  by  reason  and  experience  that  nothing  is  more  calculated  to 
arouse  their  contempt. 

It  is  not  after  this  manner  that  Scripture  speaks,  which  has  a  better  knowledge 
of  the  things  that  are  of  God.  It  says,  on  the  contrary,  that  God  is  a  hidden  God, 
and  that,  since  the  corruption  of  nature,  He  has  left  men  in  a  darkness  from  which 
they  can  escape  only  through  Jesus  Christ,  without  whom  all  communion  with 
God  is  cut  off.  Nemo  novit  Patrem ,  nisi  Filius,  et  cui  voluerit  Filius  revelare } 

This  is  what  Scripture  points  out  to  us,  when  it  says  in  so  many  places  that 
those  who  seek  God  find  Him.  It  is  not  of  that  light,  "like  the  noonday  sun," 
that  this  is  said.  We  do  not  say  that  those  who  seek  the  noonday  sun,  or  water  in 
the  sea,  shall  find  them;  and  hence  the  evidence  of  God  must  not  be  of  this  na¬ 
ture.  So  it  tells  us  elsewhere:  Vere  tu  es  Dens  absconditus? 

243.  It  is  an  astounding  fact  that  no  canonical  writer  has  ever  made  use  of  na¬ 
ture  to  prove  God.  They  all  strive  to  make  us  believe  in  Him.  David,  Solomon, 
etc.,  have  never  said,  "There  is  no  void,  therefore  there  is  a  God."  They  must  have 
had  more  knowledge  than  the  most  learned  people  who  came  after  them,  and  who 
have  all  made  use  of  this  argument.  This  is  worthy  of  attention. 

244.  "Why!  Do  you  not  say  yourself  that  the  heavens  and  birds  prove  God?" 
No.  "And  does  your  religion  not  say  so"?  No.  For  although  it  is  true  in  a  sense 
for  some  souls  to  whom  God  gives  this  light,  yet  it  is  false  with  respect  to  the 
majority  of  men. 

245.  There  are  three  sources  of  belief:  reason,  custom,  inspiration.  The  Chris¬ 
tian  religion,  which  alone  has  reason,  does  not  acknowledge  as  her  true  children 
those  who  believe  without  inspiration.  It  is  not  that  she  excludes  reason  and  cus¬ 
tom.  On  the  contrary,  the  mind  must  be  opened  to  proofs,  must  be  confirmed  by 
custom  and  offer  itself  in  humbleness  to  inspirations,  which  alone  can  produce  a 
true  and  saving  effect.  Ne  evacuetur  crux  Christi? 

246.  Order. — After  the  letter  That  we  ought  to  seek  God ,  to  write  the  letter  On  re¬ 
moving  obstacles ;  which  is  the  discourse  on  "the  machine,"  on  preparing  the  ma¬ 
chine,  on  seeking  by  reason. 

247.  Order. — A  letter  of  exhortation  to  a  friend  to  induce  him  to  seek.  And  he 
will  reply,  "But  what  is  the  use  of  seeking?  Nothing  is  seen."  Then  to  reply  to 
him,  "Do  not  despair."  And  he  will  answer  that  he  would  be  glad  to  find  some 
light,  but  that,  according  to  this  very  religion,  if  he  believed  in  it,  it  will  be  of  no 
use  to  him,  and  that  therefore  he  prefers  not  to  seek.  And  to  answer  to  that:  The 
machine. 

xMatt  1 1.27.  ‘'Neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the 
Son  will  reveal  him." 

2Is.  45.15.  "Verily,  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself." 

3I  Cor.  1. 17.  "Lest  the  cross  of  Christ  should  be  made  of  none  effect." 


SECTION  IV  219 

248.  A  letter  which  indicates  the  use  of proofs  by  the  machine . — Faith  is  different  from 
proof;  the  one  is  human,  the  other  is  a  gift  of  God  .Justus  ex  fide  vivitMt  is  this  faith 
that  God  Himself  puts  into  the  heart,  of  which  the  proof  is  often  the  instrument, 
fides  ex  audituf  but  this  faith  is  in  the  heart,  and  makes  us  not  say  scio,  but  credo  z 

249.  It  is  superstition  to  put  one’s  hope  in  formalities;  but  it  is  pride  to  be  un¬ 
willing  to  submit  to  them. 

250.  The  external  must  be  joined  to  the  internal  to  obtain  anything  from  God, 
that  is  to  say,  we  must  kneel,  pray  with  the  lips,  etc.,  in  order  that  proud  man, 
who  would  not  submit  himself  to  God,  may  be  now  subject  to  the  creature.  To 
expect  help  from  these  externals  is  superstition;  to  refuse  to  join  them  to  the  inter¬ 
nal  is  pride. 

251.  Other  religions,  as  the  pagan,  are  more  popular,  for  they  consist  in  ex¬ 
ternals.  But  they  are  not  for  educated  people.  A  purely  intellectual  religion  would 
be  more  suited  to  the  learned,  but  it  would  be  of  no  use  to  the  common  people. 
The  Christian  religion  alone  is  adapted  to  all,  being  composed  of  externals  and 
internals.  It  raises  the  common  people  to  the  internal,  and  humbles  the  proud 
to  the  external;  it  is  not  perfect  without  the  two,  for  the  people  must  understand 
the  spirit  of  the  letter,  and  the  learned  must  submit  their  spirit  to  the  letter. 

252.  For  we  must  not  misunderstand  ourselves;  we  are  as  much  automatic  as 
intellectual;  and  hence  it  comes  that  the  instrument  by  which  conviction  is  at¬ 
tained  is  not  demonstrated  alone.  How  few  things  are  demonstrated!  Proofs  only 
convince  the  mind.  Custom  is  the  source  of  our  strongest  and  most  believed 
proofs.  It  bends  the  automaton,  which  persuades  the  mind  without  its  thinking 
about  the  matter.  Who  has  demonstrated  that  there  will  be  a  to-morrow  and  that 
we  shall  die?  And  what  is  more  believed?  It  is,  then,  custom  which  persuades  us  of 
it;  it  is  custom  that  makes  so  many  men  Christians;  custom  that  makes  them 
Turks,  heathens,  artisans,  soldiers,  etc.  (Faith  in  baptism  is  more  received  among 
Christians  than  among  Turks.)  Finally,  we  must  have  recourse  to  it  when  once 
the  mind  has  seen  where  the  truth  is,  in  order  to  quench  our  thirst,  and  steep  our¬ 
selves  in  that  belief,  which  escapes  us  at  every  hour;  for  always  to  have  proofs 
ready  is  too  much  trouble.  We  must  get  an  easier  belief,  which  is  that  of  custom, 
which,  without  violence,  without  art,  without  argument,  makes  us  believe  things 
and  inclines  all  our  powers  to  this  belief,  so  that  our  soul  falls  naturally  into  it. 
It  is  not  enough  to  believe  only  by  force  of  conviction,  when  the  automaton  is  in¬ 
clined  to  believe  the  contrary.  Both  our  parts  must  be  made  to  believe,  the  mind 
by  reasons  which  it  is  sufficient  to  have  seen  once  in  a  lifetime,  and  the  automaton 
by  custom,  and  by  not  allowing  it  to  incline  to  the  contrary.  Inclina  cor  meum,  Deus .4 

The  reason  acts  slowly,  with  so  many  examinations  and  on  so  many  principles, 
which  must  be  always  present,  that  at  every  hour  it  falls  asleep,  or  wanders,  through 
want  of  having  all  its  principles  present.  Feeling  does  not  act  thus;  it  acts  in  a 

^om.  1. 17.  “The  just  shall  live  by  faith.” 

2Rom.  10.17.  " Faith  cometh  by  hearing.” 

3"I  know.”  "I  believe.” 

4Ps.  119.36.  "Incline  my  heart,  O  Lord.” 


220  PENSEES 

moment,  and  is  always  ready  to  act.  We  must  then  put  our  faith  in  feeling;  other¬ 
wise  it  will  be  always  vacillating. 

253.  Two  extremes:  to  exclude  reason,  to  admit  reason  only. 

234.  It  is  not  a  rare  thing  to  have  to  reprove  the  world  for  too  much  docility. 
It  is  a  natural  vice  like  credulity,  and  as  pernicious.  Superstition. 

255.  Piety  is  different  from  superstition. 

To  carry  piety  as  far  as  superstition  is  to  destroy  it. 

The  heretics  reproach  us  for  this  superstitious  submission.  This  is  to  do  what 
they  reproach  us  for  .  .  . 

Infidelity,  not  to  believe  in  the  Eucharist,  because  it  is  not  seen. 

Superstition  to  believe  propositions.  Faith,  etc. 

256.  I  say  there  are  few  true  Christians,  even  as  regards  faith.  There  are  many 
who  believe  but  from  superstition.  There  are  many  who  do  not  believe  solely  from 
wickedness.  Few  are  between  the  two. 

In  this  I  do  not  include  those  who  are  of  truly  pious  character,  nor  all  those 
who  believe  from  a  feeling  in  their  heart. 

257.  There  are  only  three  kinds  of  persons;  those  who  serve  God,  having  found 
Him;  others  who  are  occupied  in  seeking  Him,  not  having  found  Him;  while  the 
remainder  live  without  seeking  Him  and  without  having  found  Him.  The  first 
are  reasonable  and  happy,  the  last  are  foolish  and  unhappy;  those  between  are 
unhappy  and  reasonable. 

258.  Unusquisque  sibi  Deum  fin  git} 

Disgust. 

259.  Ordinary  people  have  the  power  of  not  thinking  of  that  about  which  they 
do  not  wish  to  think.  "Do  not  meditate  on  the  passages  about  the  Messiah,"  said 
the  Jew  to  his  son.  Thus  our  people  often  act.  Thus  are  false  religions  preserved, 
and  even  the  true  one,  in  regard  to  many  persons. 

But  there  are  some  who  have  not  the  power  of  thus  preventing  thought,  and 
who  think  so  much  the  more  as  they  are  forbidden.  These  undo  false  religions  and 
even  the  true  one,  if  they  do  not  find  solid  arguments. 

260.  They  hide  themselves  in  the  press  and  call  numbers  to  their  rescue.  Tumult. 

Authority . — So  far  from  making  it  a  rule  to  believe  a  thing  because  you  have 

heard  it,  you  ought  to  believe  nothing  without  putting  yourself  into  the  position 
as  if  you  had  never  heard  it. 

It  is  your  own  assent  to  yourself,  and  the  constant  voice  of  your  own  reason, 
and  not  of  others,  that  should  make  you  believe. 

Belief  is  so  important!  A  hundred  contradictions  might  be  true.  If  antiquity 
were  the  rule  of  belief,  men  of  ancient  time  would  then  be  without  rule.  If  general 
consent,  if  men  had  perished? 

1'W^isd.  of  Sol.  15.8,16.  "He  moulds  a  God  .  .  .  like  unto  himself.” 


SECTION  IV 


221 


False  humanity,  pride. 

Lift  the  curtain.  You  try  in  vain;  if  you  must  either  believe,  or  deny,  or  doubt. 
Shall  we  then  have  no  rule?  We  judge  that  animals  do  well  what  they  do.  Is  there 
no  rule  whereby  to  judge  men? 

To  deny,  to  believe,  and  to  doubt  well,  are  to  a  man  what  the  race  is  to  a  horse. 

Punishment  of  those  who  sin,  error. 

261.  Those  who  do  not  love  the  truth  take  as  a  pretext  that  it  is  disputed,  and 
that  a  multitude  deny  it.  And  so  their  error  arises  only  from  this,  that  they  do  not 
love  either  truth  or  charity.  Thus  they  are  without  excuse. 

262.  Superstition  and  lust.  Scruples,  evil  desires.  Evil  fear;  fear,  not  such  as 
comes  from  a  belief  in  God,  but  such  as  comes  from  a  doubt  whether  He  exists 
or  not.  True  fear  comes  from  faith;  false  fear  comes  from  doubt.  True  fear  is 
joined  to  hope,  because  it  is  born  of  faith,  and  because  men  hope  in  the  God 
in  whom  they  believe.  False  fear  is  joined  to  despair,  because  men  fear  the 
God  in  whom  they  have  no  belief.  The  former  fear  to  lose  Him;  the  latter  fear  to 
find  Him. 

263.  "A  miracle,"  says  one,  "would  strengthen  my  faith."  He  says  so  when  he 
does  not  see  one.  Reasons,  seen  from  afar,  appear  to  limit  our  view;  but  when  they 
are  reached,  we  begin  to  see  beyond.  Nothing  stops  the  nimbleness  of  our  mind. 
There  is  no  rule,  say  we,  which  has  not  some  exceptions,  no  truth  so  general  which 
has  not  some  aspect  in  which  it  fails.  It  is  sufficient  that  it  be  not  absolutely  uni¬ 
versal  to  give  us  a  pretext  for  applying  the  exceptions  to  the  present  subject  and 
for  saying,  "This  is  not  always  true;  there  are  therefore  cases  where  it  is  not  so.” 
It  only  remains  to  show  that  this  is  one  of  them;  and  that  is  why  we  are  very  awk¬ 
ward  or  unlucky,  if  we  do  not  find  one  some  day. 

264.  We  do  not  weary  of  eating  and  sleeping  every  day,  for  hunger  and  sleep¬ 
iness  recur.  Without  that  we  should  weary  of  them.  So,  without  the  hunger  for 
spiritual  things,  we  weary  of  them.  Hunger  after  righteousness,  the  eighth  beauti- 
tude. 

265.  Faith  indeed  tells  what  the  senses  do  not  tell,  but  not  the  contrary  of  what 
they  see.  It  is  above  them  and  not  contrary  to  them. 

266.  How  many  stars  have  telescopes  revealed  to  us  which  did  not  exist  for  our 
philosophers  of  old!  We  freely  attack  Holy  Scripture  on  the  great  number  of  stars, 
saying,  "There  are  only  one  thousand  and  twenty-eight,  we  know  it."  There  is 
grass  on  the  earth,  we  see  it — from  the  moon  we  would  not  see  it — and  on  the 
grass  are  leaves,  and  in  these  leaves  are  small  animals;  but  after  that  no  more.  O 
presumptuous  man!  The  compounds  are  composed  of  elements,  and  the  ele¬ 
ments  not.  O  presumptuous  man!  Here  is  a  fine  reflection.  We  must  not  say  that 
there  is  anything  which  we  do  not  see.  We  must  then  talk  like  others,  but  not 
think  like  them. 

267.  The  last  proceeding  of  reason  is  to  recognise  that  there  is  an  infinity  of 


222 


PENSEES 

things  which  are  beyond  it.  It  is  but  feeble  if  it  does  not  see  so  far  as  to  know  this. 
But  if  natural  things  are  beyond  it,  what  will  be  said  of  supernatural? 

268.  Submission . — We  must  know  where  to  doubt,  where  to  feel  certain,  where 
to  submit.  He  who  does  not  do  so  understands  not  the  force  of  reason.  There  are 
some  who  offend  against  these  three  rules,  either  by  affirming  everything  as 
demonstrative,  from  want  of  knowing  what  demonstration  is;  or  by  doubting 
everything,  from  want  of  knowing  where  to  submit;  or  by  submitting  in  every¬ 
thing,  from  want  of  knowing  where  they  must  judge. 

269.  Submission  is  the  use  of  reason  in  which  consists  true  Christianity. 

270.  Saint  Augustine. — Reason  would  never  submit,  if  it  did  not  judge  that  there 
are  some  occasions  on  which  it  ought  to  submit.  It  is  then  right  for  it  to  submit, 
when  it  judges  that  it  ought  to  submit. 

271.  Wisdom  sends  us  to  childhood.  Nisi  efficiamini sicut parvuli} 

272.  There  is  nothing  so  conformable  to  reason  as  this  disavowal  of  reason. 

273.  If  we  submit  everything  to  reason,  our  religion  will  have  no  mysterious 
and  supernatural  element.  If  we  offend  the  principles  of  reason,  our  religion  will 
be  absurd  and  ridiculous. 

274.  All  our  reasoning  reduces  itself  to  yielding  to  feeling. 

But  fancy  is  like,  though  contrary  to,  feeling,  so  that  we  cannot  distinguish  be¬ 
tween  these  contraries.  One  person  says  that  my  feeling  is  fancy,  another  that  his 
fancy  is  feeling.  We  should  have  a  rule.  Reason  offers  itself;  but  it  is  pliable  in 
every  sense;  and  thus  there  is  no  rule. 

275.  Men  often  take  their  imagination  for  their  heart;  and  they  believe  they  are 
converted  as  soon  as  they  think  of  being  converted. 

276.  M.  de  Roannez  said:  "Reasons  come  to  me  afterwards,  but  at  first  a  thing 
pleases  or  shocks  me  without  my  knowing  the  reason,  and  yet  it  shocks  me  for 
that  reason  which  I  only  discover  afterwards."  But  I  believe,  not  that  it  shocked 
him  for  the  reasons  which  were  found  afterwards,  but  that  these  reasons  were  only 
found  because  it  shocked  him. 

277.  The  heart  has  its  reasons,  which  reason  does  not  know.  We  feel  it  in  a 
thousand  things.  I  say  that  the  heart  naturally  loves  the  Universal  Being,  and  also 
itself  naturally,  according  as  it  gives  itself  to  them;  and  it  hardens  itself  against 
one  or  the  other  at  its  will.  You  have  rejected  the  one  and  kept  the  other.  Is  it 
by  reason  that  you  love  yourself? 

278.  It  is  the  heart  which  experiences  God,  and  not  the  reason.  This,  then,  is 
faith:  God  felt  by  the  heart,  not  by  the  reason. 

^att.  18.3.  ‘’Except  ye  become  as  litde  children." 


SECTION  IV  223 

Faith  is  a  gift  of  God ;  do  not  believe  that  we  said  it  was  a  gift  of  reasoning.  Other 
religions  do  not  say  this  of  their  faith.  They  only  give  reasoning  in  order  to  arrive 
at  it,  and  yet  it  does  not  bring  them  to  it. 

279.  Faith  is  a  gift  of  God;  do  not  believe  that  we  said  it  was  a  gift  of  reasoning. 
Other  religions  do  not  say  this  of  their  faith.  They  only  gave  reasoning  in  order  to 
arrive  at  it,  and  yet  it  does  not  bring  them  to  it. 

280.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  very  far  from  the  love  of  Him. 

281.  Heart,  instinct,  principles. 

282.  We  know  truth,  not  only  by  the  reason,  but  also  by  the  heart,  and  it  is  in 
this  last  way  that  we  know  first  principles;  and  reason,  which  has  no  part  in  it, 
tries  in  vain  to  impugn  them.  The  sceptics,  who  have  only  this  for  their  object, 
labour  to  no  purpose.  We  know  that  we  do  not  dream,  and,  however  impossible 
it  is  for  us  to  prove  it  by  reason,  this  inability  demonstrates  only  the  weakness  of 
our  reason,  but  not,  as  they  affirm,  the  uncertainty  of  all  our  knowledge.  For  the 
knowledge  of  first  principles,  as  space,  time,  motion,  number,  is  as  sure  as  any 
of  those  which  we  get  from  reasoning.  And  reason  must  trust  these  intuitions  of 
the  heart,  and  must  base  them  on  every  argument.  (We  have  intuitive  knowledge 
of  the  tri-dimensional  nature  of  space  and  of  the  infinity  of  number,  and  reason 
then  shows  that  there  are  no  two  square  numbers  one  of  which  is  double  of  the 
other.  Principles  are  intuited,  propositions  are  inferred,  all  with  certainty,  though 
in  different  ways.)  And  it  is  as  useless  and  absurd  for  reason  to  demand  from  the 
heart  proofs  of  her  first  principles,  before  admitting  them,  as  it  would  be  for  the 
heart  to  demand  from  reason  an  intuition  of  all  demonstrated  propositions  before 
accepting  them. 

This  inability  ought,  then,  to  serve  only  to  humble  reason,  which  would  judge 
all,  but  not  to  impugn  our  certainty,  as  if  only  reason  were  capable  of  instructing 
us.  Would  to  God,  on  the  contrary,  that  we  had  never  need  of  it,  and  that  we 
knew  everything  by  instinct  and  intuition!  But  nature  has  refused  us  this  boon. 
On  the  contrary,  she  has  given  us  but  very  little  knowledge  of  this  kind;  and  all  the 
rest  can  be  acquired  only  by  reasoning. 

Therefore,  those  to  whom  God  has  imparted  religion  by  intuition  are  very 
fortunate  and  justly  convinced.  But  to  those  who  do  not  have  it,  we  can  give  it 
only  by  reasoning,  waiting  for  God  to  give  them  spiritual  insight,  without  which 
faith  is  only  human  and  useless  for  salvation. 

283.  Order. — Against  the  objection  that  Scripture  has  no  order. 

The  heart  has  its  own  order;  the  intellect  has  its  own,  which  is  by  principle  and 
demonstration.  The  heart  has  another.  We  do  not  prove  that  we  ought  to  be  loved 
by  enumerating  in  order  the  causes  of  love;  that  would  be  ridiculous. 

Jesus  Christ  and  Saint  Paul  employ  the  rule  of  love,  not  of  intellect;  for  they 
would  warm,  not  instruct.  It  is  the  same  with  Saint  Augustine.  This  order  consists 
chiefly  in  digressions  on  each  point  to  indicate  the  end,  and  keep  it  always  in  sight. 

284.  Do  not  wonder  to  see  simple  people  believe  without  reasoning.  God  imparts 


PENSEES 


224 

to  them  love  of  Him  and  hatred  of  self.  He  inclines  their  heart  to  believe.  Men 
will  never  believe  with  a  saving  and  real  faith,  unless  God  inclines  their  heart;  and 
they  will  believe  as  soon  as  He  inclines  it.  And  this  is  what  David  knew  well, 
when  he  said:  Inclina  cor  meum ,  Deus ,  in  .  .  } 

285.  Religion  is  suited  to  all  kinds  of  minds.  Some  pay  attention  only  to  its 
establishment,  and  this  religion  is  such  that  its  very  establishment  suffices  to 
prove  its  truth.  Others  trace  it  even  to  the  apostles.  The  more  learned  go  back  to 
the  beginning  of  the  world.  The  angels  see  it  better  still,  and  from  a  more  distant 
time. 

286.  Those  who  believe  without  having  read  the  Testaments,  do  so  because 
they  have  an  inward  disposition  entirely  holy,  and  all  that  they  hear  of  our  religion 
conforms  to  it.  They  feel  that  a  God  has  made  them;  they  desire  only  to  love  God; 
they  desire  to  hate  themselves  only.  They  feel  that  they  have  no  strength  in  them¬ 
selves;  that  they  are  incapable  of  coming  to  God;  and  that  if  God  does  not 
come  to  them,  they  can  have  no  communion  with  Him.  And  they  hear  our  religion 
say  that  men  must  love  God  only,  and  hate  self  only;  but  that,  all  being  corrupt 
and  unworthy  of  God,  God  made  Himself  man  to  unite  Himself  to  us.  No  more 
is  required  to  persuade  men  who  have  this  disposition  in  their  heart,  and  who 
have  this  knowledge  of  their  duty  and  of  their  inefficiency. 

287.  Those  whom  we  see  to  be  Christians  without  the  knowledge  of  the  proph¬ 
ets  and  evidences,  nevertheless  judge  of  their  religion  as  well  as  those  who  have 
that  knowledge.  They  judge  of  it  by  the  heart,  as  others  judge  of  it  by  the  intel¬ 
lect.  God  Himself  inclines  them  to  believe,  and  thus  they  are  most  effectively 
convinced. 

I  confess  indeed  that  one  of  those  Christians  who  believe  without  proofs  will 
not,  perhaps,  be  capable  of  convincing  an  infidel  who  will  say  the  same  of  him¬ 
self.  But  those  who  know  the  proofs  of  religion  will  prove  without  difficulty  that 
such  a  believer  is  truly  inspired  by  God,  though  he  cannot  prove  it  himself. 

For  God  having  said  in  His  prophecies  (which  are  undoubtedly  prophecies) 
that  in  the  reign  of  Jesus  Christ  He  would  spread  His  spirit  abroad  among  nations, 
and  that  the  youths  and  maidens  and  children  of  the  Church  would  prophesy;  it 
is  certain  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  these  and  not  in  the  others. 

288.  Instead  of  complaining  that  God  had  hidden  Himself,  you  will  give  Him 
thanks  for  not  having  revealed  so  much  of  Himself;  and  you  will  also  give  Him 
thanks  for  not  having  revealed  Himself  to  haughty  sages,  unworthy  to  know  so 
holy  a  God. 

Two  kinds  of  persons  know  Him:  those  who  have  a  humble  heart,  and  who 
love  lowliness,  whatever  kind  of  intellect  they  may  have,  high  or  low;  and  those 
who  have  sufficient  understanding  to  see  the  truth,  whatever  opposition  they 
may  have  to  it. 

289.  Proof. — 1.  The  Christian  religion,  by  its  establishment,  having  established 
itself  so  strongly,  so  gently,  whilst  so  contrary  to  nature.  2.  The  sanctity,  the  dig- 

ipS.  119.36.  "Incline  my  heart,  O  Lord,  unto  thy  testimonies." 


SECTION  V  225 

nity,  and  the  humility  of  a  Christian  soul.  3.  The  miracles  of  Holy  Scripture. 
4.  Jesus  Christ  in  particular.  5.  The  apostles  in  particular.  6.  Moses  and  the  proph¬ 
ets  in  particular.  7.  The  Jewish  people.  8.  The  prophecies.  9.  Perpetuity;  no 
religion  has  perpetuity.  10.  The  doctrine  which  gives  a  reason  for  everything. 
11.  The  sanctity  of  this  law.  12.  By  the  course  of  the  world. 

Surely,  after  considering  what  is  life  and  what  is  religion,  we  should  not  refuse 
to  obey  the  inclination  to  follow  it,  if  it  comes  into  our  heart;  and  it  is  certain  that 
there  is  no  ground  for  laughing  at  those  who  follow  it. 

290.  Proofs  of  religion. — Morality,  doctrine,  miracles,  prophecies,  types. 


SECTION  V 

JUSTICE  AND  THE  REASON  OF  EFFECTS 

291.  In  the  letter  On  Injustice  can  come  the  ridiculousness  of  the  law  that  the 
elder  gets  all.  "My  friend,  you  were  born  on  this  side  of  the  mountain,  it  is  there¬ 
fore  just  that  your  elder  brother  gets  everything." 

"Why  do  you  kill  me"? 

292.  He  lives  on  the  other  side  of  the  water. 

293.  "Why  do  you  kill  me?  What!  do  you  not  live  on  the  other  side  of  the 
water?  If  you  lived  on  this  side,  my  friend,  I  should  be  an  assassin,  and  it  would  be 
unjust  to  slay  you  in  this  manner.  But  since  you  live  on  the  other  side,  I  am  a  hero, 
and  it  is  just." 

294.  On  what  shall  man  found  the  order  of  the  world  which  he  would  govern? 
Shall  it  be  on  the  caprice  of  each  individual?  What  confusion!  Shall  it  be  on  jus¬ 
tice?  Man  is  ignorant  of  it. 

Certainly,  had  he  known  it,  he  would  not  have  established  this  maxim,  the 
most  general  of  all  that  obtain  among  men,  that  each  should  follow  the  custom  of 
his  own  country.  The  glory  of  true  equity  would  have  brought  all  nations  under 
subjection,  and  legislators  would  not  have  taken  as  their  model  the  fancies  and 
caprice  of  Persians  and  Germans  instead  of  this  unchanging  justice.  We  would 
have  seen  it  set  up  in  all  the  States  on  earth  and  in  all  times;  whereas  we  see  neither 
justice  nor  injustice  which  does  not  change  its  nature  with  change  in  climate. 
Three  degrees  of  latitude  reverse  all  jurisprudence;  a  meridian  decides  the  truth. 
Fundamental  laws  change  after  a  few  years  of  possession;  right  has  its  epochs; 
the  entry  of  Saturn  into  the  Lion  marks  to  us  the  origin  of  such  and  such  a  crime. 
A  strange  justice  that  is  bounded  by  a  river!  Truth  on  this  side  of  the  Pyrenees, 
error  on  the  other  side. 

Men  admit  that  justice  does  not  consist  in  these  customs,  but  that  it  resides  in 
natural  laws,  common  to  every  country.  They  would  certainly  maintain  it  ob¬ 
stinately,  if  reckless  chance  which  has  distributed  human  laws  had  encountered 
even  one  which  was  universal;  but  the  farce  is  that  the  caprice  of  men  has  so  many 
vagaries  that  there  is  no  such  law. 


226  PENSEES 

Theft,  incest,  infanticide,  parricide,  have  all  had  a  place  among  virtuous  actions. 
Can  anything  be  more  ridiculous  than  that  a  man  should  have  the  right  to  kill  me 
because  he  lives  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  and  because  his  ruler  has  a  quarrel 
with  mine,  though  I  have  none  with  him? 

Doubtless  there  are  natural  laws;  but  good  reason  once  corrupted  has  corrupted 
all.  Nihil  amplius  nostrum  est;  quod  nostrum  dicimus ,  artis  est.1  Ex  senatus — consultis  et 
plebiscites  crimina  exercentur }  Ut  olim  vitiis ,  sic  nunc  legibus  labor amus? 

The  result  of  this  confusion  is  that  one  affirms  the  essence  of  justice  to  be  the 
authority  of  the  legislator;  another,  the  interest  of  the  sovereign;  another,  present 
custom,  and  this  is  the  most  sure.  Nothing,  according  to  reason  alone,  is  just  in 
itself;  all  changes  with  time.  Custom  creates  the  whole  of  equity,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  it  is  accepted.  It  is  the  mystical  foundation  of  its  authority;  whoever 
carries  it  back  to  first  principles  destroys  it.  Nothing  is  so  faulty  as  those  laws 
which  correct  faults.  He  who  obeys  them  because  they  are  just  obeys  a  justice 
which  is  imaginary  and  not  the  essence  of  law;  it  is  quite  self-contained,  it  is  law 
and  nothing  more.  He  who  will  examine  its  motive  will  find  it  so  feeble  and  so 
trifling  that,  if  he  be  not  accustomed  to  contemplate  the  wonders  of  human  imag¬ 
ination,  he  will  marvel  that  one  century  has  gained  for  it  so  much  pomp  and 
reverence.  The  art  of  opposition  and  of  revolution  is  to  unsettle  established  cus¬ 
toms,  sounding  them  even  to  their  source,  to  point  out  their  want  of  authority 
and  justice.  We  must,  it  is  said,  get  back  to  the  natural  and  fundamental  laws  of 
the  State,  which  an  unjust  custom  has  abolished.  It  is  a  game  certain  to  result  in 
the  loss  of  all;  nothing  will  be  just  on  the  balance.  Yet  people  readily  lend  their 
ear  to  such  arguments.  They  shake  off  the  yoke  as  soon  as  they  recognise  it; 
and  the  great  profit  by  their  ruin  and  by  that  of  these  curious  investigators  of  ac¬ 
cepted  customs.  But  from  a  contrary  mistake  men  sometimes  think  they  can 
justly  do  everything  which  is  not  without  an  example.  That  is  why  the  wisest 
of  legislators  said  that  it  was  necessary  to  deceive  men  for  their  own  good; 
and  another,  a  good  politician,  Cum  veritatem  qua  liberetur  ignoret ,  expedit  quod 
fallatur .4  We  must  not  see  the  fact  of  usurpation;  law  was  once  introduced  with¬ 
out  reason,  and  has  become  reasonable.  We  must  make  it  regarded  as  authori¬ 
tative,  eternal,  and  conceal  its  origin,  if  we  do  not  wish  that  it  should  soon  come 
to  an  end. 

295.  Mine,  thine. — "This  dog  is  mine,"  said  those  poor  children;  "that  is  my 
place  in  the  sun."  Here  is  the  beginning  and  the  image  of  the  usurpation  of  all  the 
earth. 

296.  When  the  question  for  consideration  is  whether  we  ought  to  make  war 
and  kill  so  many  men — condemn  so  many  Spaniards  to  death — only  one  man  is 
judge,  and  he  is  an  interested  party.  There  should  be  a  third,  who  is  disinterested. 

Cicero,  De  finibus ,  v.21.  "There  is  no  longer  anything  which  is  ours;  what  I  call  ours  is 
conventional.” 

2Seneca,  Epistles ,  xcv.  "It  is  by  virtue  of  senatus-consultes  and  plebiscites  that  one  commits 
crimes.” 

3Tacitus,  Annals ,  iii.25.  "Once  we  suffered  from  our  vices;  today  we  suffer  from  our 
laws.” 

4Saint  Augustine,  City  of  God,  iv.27.  "As  he  has  ignored  the  truth  which  frees,  it  is  right  he 
is  mistaken.” 


SECTION  V  227 

297.  Vert  juris \ — We  have  it  no  more;  if  we  had  it,  we  should  take  conformity 
to  the  customs  of  a  country  as  the  rule  of  justice.  It  is  here  that,  not  finding  justice, 
we  have  found  force,  etc. 

29 8.  Justice,  might . — It  is  right  that  what  is  just  should  be  obeyed;  it  is  necessary 
that  what  is  strongest  should  be  obeyed.  Justice  without  might  is  helpless;  might 
without  justice  is  tyrannical.  Justice  without  might  is  gainsaid,  because  there  are 
always  offenders;  might  without  justice  is  condemned.  We  must  then  combine 
justice  and  might  and,  for  this  end,  make  what  is  just  strong,  or  what  is  strong  just. 

Justice  is  subject  to  dispute;  might  is  easily  recognised  and  is  not  disputed.  So 
we  cannot  give  might  to  justice,  because  might  has  gainsaid  justice  and  has  de¬ 
clared  that  it  is  she  herself  who  is  just.  And  thus,  being  unable  to  make  what  is 
just  strong,  we  have  made  what  is  strong  just. 

299.  The  only  universal  rules  are  the  laws  of  the  country  in  ordinary  affairs  and 
of  the  majority  in  others.  Whence  comes  this?  From  the  might  which  is  in  them. 
Hence  it  comes  that  kings,  who  have  power  of  a  different  kind,  do  not  follow  the 
majority  of  their  ministers. 

No  doubt  equality  of  goods  is  just;  but,  being  unable  to  cause  might  to  obey 
justice,  men  have  made  it  just  to  obey  might.  Unable  to  strengthen  justice,  they 
have  justified  might;  so  that  the  just  and  the  strong  should  unite,  and  there  should 
be  peace,  which  is  the  sovereign  good. 

300.  "When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  goods,  his  goods  are  in  peace." 

301.  Why  do  we  follow  the  majority?  Is  it  because  they  have  more  reason?  No, 
because  they  have  more  power. 

Why  do  we  follow  the  ancient  laws  and  opinions?  Is  it  because  they  are 
more  sound?  No,  but  because  they  are  unique  and  remove  from  us  the  root  of 
difference. 

302.  ...  It  is  the  effect  of  might,  not  of  custom.  For  those  who  are  capable  of 
originality  are  few;  the  greater  number  will  only  follow  and  refuse  glory  to  those 
inventors  who  seek  it  by  their  inventions.  And  if  these  are  obstinate  in  their  wish 
to  obtain  glory  and  despise  those  who  do  not  invent,  the  latter  will  call  them  ridic¬ 
ulous  names  and  will  beat  them  with  a  stick.  Let  no  one,  then,  boast  of  his 
subtlety,  or  let  him  keep  his  complacency  to  himself. 

303.  Might  is  the  sovereign  of  the  world,  and  not  opinion.  But  opinion  makes 
use  of  might.  It  is  might  that  makes  opinion.  Gentleness  is  beautiful  in  our 
opinion.  Why?  Because  he  who  will  dance  on  a  rope  will  be  alone,  and  I  will 
gather  a  stronger  mob  of  people  who  will  say  that  it  is  unbecoming. 

304.  The  cords  which  bind  the  respect  of  men  to  each  other  are  in  general  cords 
of  necessity;  for  there  must  be  different  degrees,  all  men  wishing  to  rule,  and  not 
all  being  able  to  do  so,  but  some  being  able. 

Let  us,  then,  imagine  we  see  society  in  the  process  of  formation.  Men  will 

Cicero,  De  officiis ,  iii,  17.  "Concerning  true  law." 


228 


PENSEES 


doubtless  fight  till  the  stronger  party  overcomes  the  weaker,  and  a  dominant  party 
is  established.  But  when  this  is  once  determined,  the  masters,  who  do  not  desire 
the  continuation  of  strife,  then  decree  that  the  power  which  is  in  their  hands  shall 
be  transmitted  as  they  please.  Some  place  it  in  election  by  the  people,  others  in 
hereditary  succession,  etc. 

And  this  is  the  point  where  imagination  begins  to  play  its  part.  Till  now  power 
makes  fact;  now  power  is  sustained  by  imagination  in  a  certain  party,  in  France  in 
the  nobility,  in  Switzerland  in  the  burgesses,  etc. 

These  cords  which  bind  the  respect  of  men  to  such  and  such  an  individual  are 
therefore  the  cords  of  imagination. 

305.  The  Swiss  are  offended  by  being  called  gentlemen ,  and  prove  themselves 
true  plebeians  in  order  to  be  thought  worthy  of  great  office. 

306.  As  duchies,  kingships,  and  magistracies  are  real  and  necessary,  because 
might  rules  all,  they  exist  everywhere  and  always.  But  since  only  caprice  makes 
such  and  such  a  one  a  ruler,  the  principle  is  not  constant,  but  subject  to  variation, 
etc. 

307.  The  chancellor  is  grave  and  clothed  with  ornaments,  for  his  position  is 
unreal.  Not  so  the  king;  he  has  power  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  imagination. 
Judges,  physicians,  etc.,  appeal  only  to  the  imagination. 

308.  The  habit  of  seeing  kings  accompanied  by  guards,  drums,  officers,  and  all 
the  paraphernalia  which  mechanically  inspire  respect  and  awe,  makes  their  coun¬ 
tenance,  when  sometimes  seen  alone  without  these  accompaniments,  impress 
respect  and  awe  on  their  subjects;  because  we  cannot  separate  in  thought  their 
persons  from  the  surroundings  with  which  we  see  them  usually  joined.  And  the 
world,  which  knows  not  that  this  effect  is  the  result  of  habit,  believes  that  it  arises 
by  a  natural  force,  whence  come  these  words,  "The  character  of  Divinity  is 
stamped  on  his  countenance,"  etc. 

309  .Justice, — As  custom  determines  what  is  agreeable,  so  also  does  it  determine 
justice. 

310.  King  and  tyrant. — I,  too,  will  keep  my  thoughts  secret. 

I  will  take  care  on  every  journey. 

Greatness  of  establishment,  respect  for  establishment. 

The  pleasure  of  the  great  is  the  power  to  make  people  happy. 

The  property  of  riches  is  to  be  given  liberally. 

The  property  of  each  thing  must  be  sought.  The  property  of  power  is  to  pro¬ 
tect. 

When  force  attacks  humbug,  when  a  private  soldier  takes  the  square  cap  off  a 
first  president,  and  throws  it  out  of  the  window. 

31 1.  The  government  founded  on  opinion  and  imagination  reigns  for  some 
time,  and  this  government  is  pleasant  and  voluntary;  that  founded  on  might  lasts 
for  ever.  Thus  opinion  is  the  queen  of  the  world,  but  might  is  its  tyrant. 


SECTION  V  229 

312.  Justice  is  what  is  established;  and  thus  all  our  established  laws  will  neces¬ 
sarily  be  regarded  as  just  without  examination,  since  they  are  established. 

313.  Sound  opinions  of  the  people. — Civil  wars  are  the  greatest  of  evils.  They  are 
inevitable,  if  we  wish  to  reward  desert;  for  all  will  say  they  are  deserving.  The  evil 
we  have  to  fear  from  a  fool  who  succeeds  by  right  of  birth,  is  neither  so  great  nor 
so  sure. 

314.  God  has  created  all  for  Himself.  He  has  bestowed  upon  Himself  the  power 
of  pain  and  pleasure. 

You  can  apply  it  to  God,  or  to  yourself.  If  to  God,  the  Gospel  is  the  rule.  If  to 
yourself,  you  will  take  the  place  of  God.  As  God  is  surrounded  by  persons  full  of 
charity,  who  ask  of  Him  the  blessings  of  charity  that  are  in  His  power,  so  .  .  .  rec¬ 
ognise,  then,  and  learn  that  you  are  only  a  king  of  lust,  and  take  the  ways  of  lust. 

315.  The  reason  of  effects. — It  is  wonderful  that  men  would  not  have  me  honour  a 
man  clothed  in  brocade  and  followed  by  seven  or  eight  lackeys!  Why!  He  will 
have  me  thrashed,  if  I  do  not  salute  him.  This  custom  is  a  farce.  It  is  the  same  with 
a  horse  in  fine  trappings  in  comparison  with  another!  Montaigne  is  a  fool  not  to 
see  what  difference  there  is,  to  wonder  at  our  finding  any,  and  to  ask  the  reason. 
"Indeed,"  says  he,  "how  comes  it,"  etc.  .  .  . 

316.  Sound  opinions  of  the  people. — To  be  spruce  is  not  altogether  foolish,  for  it 
proves  that  a  great  number  of  people  work  for  one.  It  shows  by  one's  hair,  that  one 
has  a  valet,  a  perfumer,  etc.,  by  one's  band,  thread,  lace,  .  .  .  etc.  Now  it  is  not 
merely  superficial  nor  merely  outward  show  to  have  many  arms  at  command.  The 
more  arms  one  has,  the  more  powerful  one  is.  To  be  spruce  is  to  show  one’s  power. 

317.  Deference  means,  "Put  yourself  to  inconvenience."  This  is  apparently 
silly,  but  is  quite  right.  For  it  is  to  say,  "I  would  indeed  put  myself  to  inconven¬ 
ience  if  you  required  it,  since  indeed  I  do  so  when  it  is  of  no  service  to  you." 
Deference  further  serves  to  distinguish  the  great.  Now  if  deference  was  displayed 
by  sitting  in  an  arm-chair,  we  should  show  deference  to  everybody,  and  so  no  dis¬ 
tinction  would  be  made;  but,  being  put  to  inconvenience,  we  distinguish  very  well. 

318.  He  has  four  lackeys. 

319.  How  rightly  do  we  distinguish  men  by  external  appearances  rather  than  by 
internal  qualities!  Which  of  us  two  shall  have  precedence?  Who  will  give  place  to 
the  other?  The  least  clever.  But  I  am  as  clever  as  he.  We  should  have  to  fight  over 
this.  He  has  four  lackeys,  and  I  have  only  one.  This  can  be  seen;  we  have  only  to 
count.  It  falls  to  me  to  yield,  and  I  am  a  fool  if  I  contest  the  matter.  By  this  means 
we  are  at  peace,  which  is  the  greatest  of  boons. 

320.  The  most  unreasonable  things  in  the  world  become  most  reasonable,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  unruliness  of  men.  What  is  less  reasonable  than  to  choose  the  eldest 
son  of  a  queen  to  rule  a  State?  We  do  not  choose  as  captain  of  a  ship  the  passenger 
who  is  of  the  best  family. 


230  PENSEES 

This  law  would  be  absurd  and  unjust;  but,  because  men  are  so  themselves  and 
always  will  be  so,  it  becomes  reasonable  and  just.  For  whom  will  men  choose,  as 
the  most  virtuous  and  able?  We  at  once  come  to  blows,  as  each  claims  to  be  the 
most  virtuous  and  able.  Let  us  then  attach  this  quality  to  something  indisputable. 
This  is  the  king's  eldest  son.  That  is  clear,  and  there  is  no  dispute.  Reason  can  do 
no  better,  for  civil  war  is  the  greatest  of  evils. 

321.  Children  are  astonished  to  see  their  comrades  respected. 

322.  To  be  of  noble  birth  is  a  great  advantage.  In  eighteen  years  it  places  a  man 
within  the  select  circle,  known  and  respected,  as  another  would  have  merited  in 
fifty  years.  It  is  a  gain  of  thirty  years  without  trouble. 

323.  What  is  the  Ego? 

Suppose  a  man  puts  himself  at  a  window  to  see  those  who  pass  by.  If  I  pass  by, 
can  I  say  that  he  placed  himself  there  to  see  me?  No;  for  he  does  not  think  of  me 
in  particular.  But  does  he  who  loves  someone  on  account  of  beauty  really  love 
that  person?  No;  for  the  small-pox,  which  will  kill  beauty  without  killing  the  per¬ 
son,  will  cause  him  to  love  her  no  more. 

And  if  one  loves  me  for  my  judgement,  memory,  he  does  not  love  me ,  for  I 
can  lose  these  qualities  without  losing  myself.  Where,  then,  is  this  Ego,  if  it  be 
neither  in  the  body  nor  in  the  soul?  And  how  love  the  body  or  the  soul,  except 
for  these  qualities  which  do  not  constitute  me ,  since  they  are  perishable?  For  it  is 
impossible  and  would  be  unjust  to  love  the  soul  of  a  person  in  the  abstract 
and  whatever  qualities  might  be  therein.  We  never,  then,  love  a  person,  but  only 
qualities. 

Let  us,  then,  jeer  no  more  at  those  who  are  honoured  on  account  of  rank  and 
office;  for  we  love  a  person  only  on  account  of  borrowed  qualities. 

324.  The  people  have  very  sound  opinions,  for  example: 

1.  In  having  preferred  diversion  and  hunting  to  poetry.  The  half-learned  laugh  at 
it,  and  glory  in  being  above  the  folly  of  the  world ;  but  the  people  are  right  for  a 
reason  which  these  do  not  fathom. 

2.  In  having  distinguished  men  by  external  marks,  as  birth  or  wealth.  The  world 
again  exults  in  showing  how  unreasonable  this  is;  but  it  is  very  reasonable.  Sav¬ 
ages  laugh  at  an  infant  king. 

3.  In  being  offended  at  a  blow,  or  in  desiring  glory  so  much.  But  it  is  very  de¬ 
sirable  on  account  of  the  other  essential  goods  which  are  joined  to  it;  and  a  man 
who  has  received  a  blow,  without  resenting  it,  is  overwhelmed  with  taunts  and 
indignities. 

4.  In  working  for  the  uncertain;  in  sailing  on  the  sea;  in  walking  over  a  plank. 

325.  Montaigne  is  wrong.  Custom  should  be  followed  only  because  it  is  cus¬ 
tom,  and  not  because  it  is  reasonable  or  just.  But  people  follow  it  for  this  sole 
reason,  that  they  think  it  just.  Otherwise  they  would  follow  it  no  longer,  although 
it  were  the  custom;  for  they  will  only  submit  to  reason  or  justice.  Custom  without 
this  would  pass  for  tyranny;  but  the  sovereignty  of  reason  and  justice  is  no  more 
tyrannical  than  that  of  desire.  They  are  principles  natural  to  man. 


SECTION  V  231 

It  would,  therefore,  be  right  to  obey  laws  and  customs,  because  they  are  laws; 
but  we  should  know  that  there  is  neither  truth  nor  justice  to  introduce  into  them, 
that  we  know  nothing  of  these,  and  so  must  follow  what  is  accepted.  By  this  means 
we  would  never  depart  from  them.  But  people  cannot  accept  this  doctrine;  and,  as 
they  believe  that  truth  can  be  found,  and  that  it  exists  in  law  and  custom,  they  be¬ 
lieve  them  and  take  their  antiquity  as  a  proof  of  their  truth,  and  not  simply  of 
their  authority  apart  from  truth.  Thus  they  obey  laws,  but  they  are  liable  to  revolt 
when  these  are  proved  to  be  valueless;  and  this  can  be  shown  of  all,  looked  at  from 
a  certain  aspect. 

326.  Injustice. — It  is  dangerous  to  tell  the  people  that  the  laws  are  unjust;  for 
they  obey  them  only  because  they  think  them  just.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  to  tell 
them  at  the  same  time  that  they  must  obey  them  because  they  are  laws,  just  as  they 
must  obey  superiors,  not  because  they  are  just,  but  because  they  are  superiors.  In 
this  way  all  sedition  is  prevented,  if  this  can  be  made  intelligible  and  it  be  under¬ 
stood  what  is  the  proper  definition  of  justice. 

327.  The  world  is  a  good  judge  of  things,  for  it  is  in  natural  ignorance,  which  is 
man’s  true  state.  The  sciences  have  two  extremes  which  meet.  The  first  is  the  pure 
natural  ignorance  in  which  all  men  find  themselves  at  birth.  The  other  extreme  is 
that  reached  by  great  intellects,  who,  having  run  through  all  that  men  can  know, 
find  they  know  nothing,  and  comeback  again  to  that  same  ignorance  from  which 
they  set  out;  but  this  is  a  learned  ignorance  which  is  conscious  of  itself.  Those  be¬ 
tween  the  two,  who  have  departed  from  natural  ignorance  and  not  been  able  to 
reach  the  other,  have  some  smattering  of  this  vain  knowledge  and  pretend  to  be 
wise.  These  trouble  the  world  and  are  bad  judges  of  everything.  The  people  and 
the  wise  constitute  the  world;  these  despise  it,  and  are  despised.  They  judge  badly 
of  everything,  and  the  world  judges  rightly  of  them. 

328.  The  reason  of  effects. — Continual  alternation  of  pro  and  con. 

We  have,  then,  shown  that  man  is  foolish,  by  the  estimation  he  makes  of  things 
which  are  not  essential;  and  all  these  opinions  are  destroyed.  We  have  next  shown 
that  all  these  opinions  are  very  sound  and  that  thus,  since  all  these  vanities  are  well 
founded,  the  people  are  not  so  foolish  as  is  said.  And  so  we  have  destroyed  the 
opinion  which  destroyed  that  of  the  people. 

But  we  must  now  destroy  this  last  proposition  and  show  that  it  remains  always 
true  that  the  people  are  foolish,  though  their  opinions  are  sound  because  they  do 
not  perceive  the  truth  where  it  is,  and,  as  they  place  it  where  it  is  not,  their  opinions 
are  always  very  false  and  very  unsound. 

329.  The  reason  of  effects. — The  weakness  of  man  is  the  reason  why  so  many 
things  are  considered  fine,  as  to  be  good  at  playing  the  lute.  It  is  only  an  evil  be¬ 
cause  of  our  weakness. 

330.  The  power  of  kings  is  founded  on  the  reason  and  on  the  folly  of  the 
people,  and  specially  on  their  folly.  The  greatest  and  most  important  thing 
in  the  world  has  weakness  for  its  foundation,  and  this  foundation  is  wonder¬ 
fully  sure;  for  there  is  nothing  more  sure  than  this,  that  the  people  will  be 


PENSEES 


232 

weak.  What  is  based  on  sound  reason  is  very  ill-founded  as  the  estimate  of  wisdom. 

331.  We  can  only  think  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  in  grand  academic  robes.  They 
were  honest  men,  like  others,  laughing  with  their  friends,  and,  when  they  diverted 
themselves  with  writing  their  Laws  and  the  Politics ,  they  did  it  as  an  amusement.  That 
part  of  their  life  was  the  least  philosophic  and  the  least  serious;  the  most  philo¬ 
sophic  was  to  live  simply  and  quietly.  If  they  wrote  on  politics,  it  was  as  if  laying 
down  rules  for  a  lunatic  asylum;  and  if  they  presented  the  appearance  of  speaking 
of  a  great  matter,  it  was  because  they  knew  that  the  madmen,  to  whom  they  spoke, 
thought  they  were  kings  and  emperors.  They  entered  into  their  principles  in  order 
to  make  their  madness  as  little  harmful  as  possible. 

332.  Tyranny  consists  in  the  desire  of  universal  power  beyond  its  scope. 

There  are  different  assemblies  of  the  strong,  the  fair,  the  sensible,  the  pious,  in 

which  each  man  rules  at  home,  not  elsewhere.  And  sometimes  they  meet,  and  the 
strong  and  the  fair  foolishly  fight  as  to  who  shall  be  master,  for  their  mastery  is 
of  different  kinds.  They  do  not  understand  one  another,  and  their  fault  is  the  de¬ 
sire  to  rule  everywhere.  Nothing  can  effect  this,  not  even  might,  which  is  of  no 
use  in  the  kingdom  of  the  wise,  and  is  only  mistress  of  external  actions. 

Tyranny —  ...  So  these  expressions  are  false  and  tyrannical:  "I  am  fair,  there¬ 
fore  I  must  be  feared.  I  am  strong,  therefore  I  must  be  loved.  I  am  .  .  .” 

Tyranny  is  the  wish  to  have  in  one  way  what  can  only  be  had  in  another.  We 
render  different  duties  to  different  merits;  the  duty  of  love  to  the  pleasant;  the 
duty  of  fear  to  the  strong;  duty  of  belief  to  the  learned. 

We  must  render  these  duties;  it  is  unjust  to  refuse  them,  and  unjust  to  ask 
others.  And  so  it  is  false  and  tyrannical  to  say,  "He  is  not  strong,  therefore  I  will 
not  esteem  him;  he  is  not  able,  therefore  I  will  not  fear  him." 

333.  Have  you  never  seen  people  who,  in  order  to  complain  of  the  little  fuss  you 
make  about  them,  parade  before  you  the  example  of  great  men  who  esteem  them? 
In  answer  I  reply  to  them,  "Show  me  the  merit  whereby  you  have  charmed  these 
persons,  and  I  also  will  esteem  you." 

334.  The  reason  of  effects. — Lust  and  force  are  the  source  of  all  our  actions;  lust 
causes  voluntary  actions,  force  involuntary  ones. 

335.  The  reason  of  effects. — It  is,  then,  true  to  say  that  all  the  world  is  under  a  de¬ 
lusion;  for,  although  the  opinions  of  the  people  are  sound,  they  are  not  so  as  con¬ 
ceived  by  them,  since  they  think  the  truth  to  be  where  it  is  not.  Truth  is  indeed  in 
their  opinions,  but  not  at  the  point  where  they  imagine  it.  [Thus]  it  is  true  that  we 
must  honour  noblemen,  but  not  because  noble  birth  is  real  superiority,  etc. 

336.  The  reason  of  effects. — We  must  keep  our  thought  secret,  and  judge  every¬ 
thing  by  it,  while  talking  like  the  people. 

337.  The  reason  of  effects.  Degrees.  The  people  honour  persons  of  high  birth.  The 
semi-learned  despise  them,  saying  that  birth  is  not  a  personal,  but  a  chance  supe¬ 
riority.  The  learned  honour  them,  not  for  popular  reasons,  but  for  secret  reasons. 


SECTION  VI  233 

Devout  persons,  who  have  more  zeal  than  knowledge,  despise  them,  in  spite  of 
that  consideration  which  makes  them  honoured  by  the  learned,  because  they 
judge  them  by  a  new  light  which  piety  gives  them.  But  perfect  Christians  honour 
them  by  another  and  higher  light.  So  arise  a  succession  of  opinions  for  and  against, 
according  to  the  light  one  has. 

338.  True  Christians,  nevertheless,  comply  with  folly,  not  because  they  re¬ 
spect  folly,  but  the  command  of  God,  who  for  the  punishment  of  men  has  made 
them  subject  to  these  follies.  Omnis  creatura  subjecta  est  vanitati.1  Liberabitur }  Thus 
Saint  Thomas  explains  the  passage  in  Saint  James  on  giving  place  to  the  rich,  that, 
if  they  do  it  not  in  the  sight  of  God,  they  depart  from  the  command  of  religion. 


SECTION  VI 
THE  PHILOSOPHERS 

339.  I  can  well  conceive  a  man  without  hands,  feet,  head  (for  it  is  only  experience 
which  teaches  us  that  the  head  is  more  necessary  than  feet).  But  I  cannot  conceive 
man  without  thought  ;  he  would  be  a  stone  or  a  brute. 

340.  The  arithmetical  machine  produces  effects  which  approach  nearer  to 
thought  than  all  the  actions  of  animals.  But  it  does  nothing  which  would  enable 
us  to  attribute  will  to  it,  as  to  the  animals. 

341.  The  account  of  the  pike  and  frog  of  Liancourt.  They  do  it  always,  and  never 
otherwise,  nor  any  other  thing  showing  mind. 

342.  If  an  animal  did  by  mind  what  it  does  by  instinct,  and  if  it  spoke  by  mind 
what  it  speaks  by  instinct,  in  hunting  and  in  warning  its  mates  that  the  prey  is 
found  or  lost,  it  would  indeed  also  speak  in  regard  to  those  things  which  affect  it 
closer,  as  example,  "Gnaw  me  this  cord  which  is  wounding  me,  and  which  I  can¬ 
not  reach." 

343.  The  beak  of  the  parrot,  which  it  wipes,  although  it  is  clean. 

344.  Instinct  and  reason,  marks  of  two  natures. 

345.  Reason  commands  us  far  more  imperiously  than  a  master;  for  in  disobey¬ 
ing  the  one  we  are  unfortunate,  and  in  disobeying  the  other  we  are  fools. 

346.  Thought  constitutes  the  greatness  of  man. 

347.  Man  is  but  a  reed,  the  most  feeble  thing  in  nature;  but  he  is  a  thinking 
reed.  The  entire  universe  need  not  arm  itself  to  crush  him.  A  vapour,  a  drop  of 

Tccles.  3.19.  "for  all  is  vanity/’ 

2Rom.  8.20-21.  "It  shall  be  delivered." 


234  PENSEES 

water  suffices  to  kill  him.  But,  if  the  universe  were  to  crush  him,  man  would  still 
be  more  noble  than  that  which  killed  him,  because  he  knows  that  he  dies  and  the 
advantage  which  the  universe  has  over  him;  the  universe  knows  nothing  of  this. 

All  our  dignity  consists,  then,  in  thought.  By  it  we  must  elevate  ourselves,  and 
not  by  space  and  time  which  we  cannot  fill.  Let  us  endeavour,  then,  to  think  well; 
this  is  the  principle  of  morality. 

348.  A  thinking  reed. — It  is  not  from  space  that  I  must  seek  my  dignity,  but 
from  the  government  of  my  thought.  I  shall  have  no  more  if  I  possess  worlds.  By 
space  the  universe  encompasses  and  swallows  me  up  like  an  atom;  by  thought  I 
comprehend  the  world. 

349.  Immateriality  of  the  soul. — Philosophers  who  have  mastered  their  passions. 
What  matter  could  do  that? 

350.  The  Stoics. — They  conclude  that  what  has  been  done  once  can  be  done  al¬ 
ways,  and  that,  since  the  desire  of  glory  imparts  some  power  to  those  whom  it 
possesses,  others  can  do  likewise.  There  are  feverish  movements  which  health 
cannot  imitate. 

Epictetus  concludes  that,  since  there  are  consistent  Christians,  every  man  can 
easily  be  so. 

351.  Those  great  spiritual  efforts,  which  the  soul  sometimes  assays,  are  things 
on  which  it  does  not  lay  hold.  It  only  leaps  to  them,  not  as  upon  a  throne,  for  ever, 
but  merely  for  an  instant. 

352.  The  strength  of  a  man’s  virtue  must  not  be  measured  by  his  efforts,  but  by 
his  ordinary  life. 

353.  I  do  not  admire  the  excess  of  a  virtue  as  of  valour,  except  I  see  at  the  same 
time  the  excess  of  the  opposite  virtue,  as  in  Epaminondas,  who  had  the  greatest 
valour  and  the  greatest  kindness.  For  otherwise  it  is  not  to  rise,  it  is  to  fall.  We  do  not 
display  greatness  by  going  to  one  extreme,  but  in  touching  both  at  once,  and  filling 
all  the  intervening  space.  But  perhaps  this  is  only  a  sudden  movement  of  the  soul 
from  one  to  the  other  extreme,  and  in  fact  it  is  ever  at  one  point  only,  as  in  the  case 
of  a  firebrand.  Be  it  so,  but  at  least  this  indicates  agility  if  not  expanse  of  soul. 

354.  Man’s  nature  is  not  always  to  advance;  it  has  its  advances  and  retreats. 

Fever  has  its  cold  and  hot  fits;  and  the  cold  proves  as  well  as  the  hot  the  great¬ 
ness  of  the  fire  of  fever. 

The  discoveries  of  men  from  age  to  age  turn  out  the  same.  The  kindness  and 
the  malice  of  the  world  in  general  are  the  same.  Plerumque  grata  principihus  vices } 

355.  Continuous  eloquence  wearies. 

Princes  and  kings  sometimes  play.  They  are  not  always  on  their  thrones.  They 
weary  there.  Grandeur  must  be  abandoned  to  be  appreciated.  Continuity  in  every¬ 
thing  is  unpleasant.  Cold  is  agreeable,  that  we  may  get  warm. 

Horace,  Odes>  m.xxix.  13.  ’’Changes  nearly  always  please  the  great.” 


SECTION  VI  235 

Nature  acts  by  progress,  itus  et  reditus.  It  goes  and  returns,  then  advances  fur¬ 
ther,  then  twice  as  much  backwards,  then  more  forward  than  ever,  etc. 

The  tide  of  the  sea  behaves  in  the  same  manner;  and  so,  apparently,  does  the 
sun  in  its  course. 

356.  The  nourishment  of  the  body  is  little  by  little.  Fullness  of  nourishment  and 
smallness  of  substance. 

357.  When  we  would  pursue  virtues  to  their  extremes  on  either  side,  vices 
present  themselves,  which  insinuate  themselves  insensibly  there,  in  their  insen¬ 
sible  journey  towards  the  infinitely  little;  and  vices  present  themselves  in  a  crowd 
towards  the  infinitely  great,  so  that  we  lose  ourselves  in  them  and  no  longer  see 
virtues.  We  find  fault  with  perfection  itself. 

358.  Man  is  neither  angel  nor  brute,  and  the  unfortunate  thing  is  that  he  who 
would  act  the  angel  acts  the  brute. 

359.  We  do  not  sustain  ourselves  in  virtue  by  our  own  strength,  but  by  the 
balancing  of  two  opposed  vices,  just  as  we  remain  upright  amidst  two  contrary 
gales.  Remove  one  of  the  vices,  and  we  fall  into  the  other. 

360.  What  the  Stoics  propose  is  so  difficult  and  foolish! 

The  Stoics  lay  down  that  all  those  who  are  not  at  the  high  degree  of  wisdom  are 
equally  foolish  and  vicious,  as  those  who  are  two  inches  under  water. 

361 .  The  sovereign  good .  Dispute  about  the  sovereign  good. — Ut  sis  contentus  temetipso  et 
ex  te  nascentibus  bonis }  There  is  a  contradiction,  for  in  the  end  they  advise  suicide. 
Oh!  What  a  happy  life,  from  which  we  are  to  free  ourselves  as  from  the  plague! 

362.  Ex  senatus-consultis  et  plebiscitis  .  .  . 

To  ask  like  passages. 

363.  Ex  senatus-consultis  et  plebiscitis  scelera  exercentur.  Seneca.2  588. 3 

Nihil  tam  absurde  did  potest  quod  non  dicatur  ab  aliquo  philosophorum .4 

Quibusdam  destinatis  sententiis  consecrati  quce  non  probant  coguntur  defendere} 

Ut  omnium  rerum  sic  litter  arum  quoque  intemperantia  labor amus? 

Id  maxime  quemque  decet ,  quod  est  cu] usque  suum  maxime? 

Hos  natura  modos primum  dedit .8 

Seneca,  Epistles ,  xx.8.  "In  order  that  you  are  satisfied  with  yourself  and  the  good  that  is 
born  from  you." 

2See  P.  226,  Note  2 

3Montaigne,  Essays ,  ii.12. 

4Cicero,  De  Divinatione ,  ii.58.  "There  is  nothing  so  absurd  that  it  has  not  been  said  by  some 
philosopher." 

6Cicero,  Disputationes  Tusculanae ,  ii.2.  "Devoted  to  certain  fixed  opinions,  they  are  forced  to 
defend  what  they  hardly  approve." 

6Seneca,  Epistles ,  cvi.  "We  suffer  from  an  excess  of  literature  as  from  an  excess  of  anything." 

7Cicero,  De  officiis ,  i.31.  "What  suits  each  one  best  is  what  is  to  him  the  most  natural." 

8Virgil,  The  Georgies ,  ii,  20.  "Nature  gave  them  first  these  limits." 


PENSEES 


236 

Paucis  opus  est  litteris  ad  bonam  mentem } 

Si  quando  turpe  non  sit ,  tamen  non  est  non  turpe  quum  id  a  multitudine  laudeturP 

Mi  hi  sic  usus  est ,  tihi  ut  opus  est  facto ,  facP 

364.  Rarum  est  enim  ut  satis  se  quisque  vereatur P 

Tot  circa  unum  caput  tumultuantes  deosP 

Nihil  turpius  quam  cognitioni  assertionem  prce  cur  rereP 

Nec  me  pudet ,  ut  istos ,  fateri  nescire  quid  nesciam ? 

Melius  non  incipient P 

365.  Thought. — All  the  dignity  of  man  consists  in  thought.  Thought  is,  therefore, 
by  its  nature  a  wonderful  and  incomparable  thing.  It  must  have  strange  defects  to 
be  contemptible.  But  it  has  such,  so  that  nothing  is  more  ridiculous.  How  great 
it  is  in  its  nature!  How  vile  it  is  in  its  defects! 

But  what  is  this  thought?  How  foolish  it  is! 

366.  The  mind  of  this  sovereign  judge  of  the  world  is  not  so  independent  that  it 
is  not  liable  to  be  disturbed  by  the  first  din  about  it.  The  noise  of  a  cannon  is  not 
necessary  to  hinder  its  thoughts;  it  needs  only  the  creaking  of  a  weathercock  or  a 
pulley.  Do  not  wonder  if  at  present  it  does  not  reason  well;  a  fly  is  buzzing  in  its 
ears  ;  that  is  enough  to  render  it  incapable  of  good  judgement.  If  you  wish  it  to  be 
able  to  reach  the  truth,  chase  away  that  animal  which  holds  its  reason  in  check  and 
disturbs  that  powerful  intellect  which  rules  towns  and  kingdoms.  Here  is  a  comi¬ 
cal  god!  0  ridicolosissimo  eroe! 

367.  The  power  of  flies;  they  win  battles,  hinder  our  soul  from  acting,  eat  our 
body. 

368.  When  it  is  said  that  heat  is  only  the  motions  of  certain  molecules,  and  light 
the  conatus  recedendi  which  we  feel,  it  astonishes  us.  What!  Is  pleasure  only  the  bal¬ 
let  of  our  spirits?  We  have  conceived  so  different  an  idea  of  it!  And  these  sensa¬ 
tions  seem  so  removed  from  those  others  which  we  say  are  the  same  as  those  with 
which  we  compare  them!  The  sensation  from  the  fire,  that  warmth  which  affects 
us  in  a  manner  wholly  different  from  touch,  the  reception  of  sound  and  light,  all 
this  appears  to  us  mysterious,  and  yet  it  is  material  like  the  blow  of  a  stone.  It  is 
true  that  the  smallness  of  the  spirits  which  enter  into  the  pores  touches  other 
nerves,  but  there  are  always  some  nerves  touched. 

369.  Memory  is  necessary  for  all  the  operations  of  reason. 

Seneca,  Epistles ,  cvi.  "Wisdom  does  not  demand  much  teaching.” 

2Cicero,  De  finibus  bonorum  et  malorum.  "What  is  not  shameful  begins  to  become  so  when  it 
is  approved  by  the  multitude.” 

Terence,  Heauton  Timorumenos ,  I.i.21.  "That  is  how  I  use  it;  you  must  do  as  you  wish.” 

4Quintillian,  x.7.  "It  is  rare  that  one  sufficiently  respects  one’s  self.” 

BSeneca  the  Elder,  Suasoriae ,  i.4.  "So  many  gods  are  busy  around  a  single  head.” 

6Cicero,  Academica ,  i.45.  "Nothing  is  more  shameful  than  to  affirm  before  knowing.” 

7Cicero,  Disputationes  Tusculanae ,  i.25.  "I  have  not  shame,  as  they  do,  to  admit  that  I  know 
not  what  I  do  not  know.” 

8Seneca,  Epistles ,  lxxii.  "It  is  easier  not  to  begin  .  .  .  .” 


SECTION  VI  237 

370.  [Chance  gives  rise  to  thoughts,  and  chance  removes  them;  no  art  can  keep 
or  acquire  them. 

A  thought  has  escaped  me.  I  wanted  to  write  it  down.  I  write  instead  that  it  has 
escaped  me.] 

371.  [When  I  was  small,  I  hugged  my  book;  and  because  it  sometimes  hap¬ 
pened  to  me  to  .  .  .  in  believing  I  hugged  it,  I  doubted.  .  .  .  ] 

372.  In  writing  down  my  thought,  it  sometimes  escapes  me;  but  this  makes  me 
remember  my  weakness,  that  I  constantly  forget.  This  is  as  instructive  to  me  as 
my  forgotten  thought;  for  I  strive  only  to  know  my  nothingness. 

373.  Scepticism. — I  shall  here  write  my  thoughts  without  order,  and  not  perhaps 
in  unintentional  confusion;  that  is  true  order,  which  will  always  indicate  my  ob¬ 
ject  by  its  very  disorder.  I  should  do  too  much  honour  to  my  subject,  if  I  treated 
it  with  order,  since  I  want  to  show  that  it  is  incapable  of  it. 

374.  What  astonishes  me  most  is  to  see  that  all  the  world  is  not  astonished  at  its 
own  weakness.  Men  act  seriously,  and  each  follows  his  own  mode  of  life,  not  be¬ 
cause  it  is  in  fact  good  to  follow  since  it  is  the  custom,  but  as  if  each  man  knew 
certainly  where  reason  and  justice  are.  They  find  themselves  continually  deceived, 
and,  by  a  comical  humility,  think  it  is  their  own  fault  and  not  that  of  the  art 
which  they  claim  always  to  possess.  But  it  is  well  there  are  so  many  such  people  in 
the  world,  who  are  not  sceptics  for  the  glory  of  scepticism,  in  order  to  show  that 
man  is  quite  capable  of  the  most  extravagant  opinions,  since  he  is  capable  of  be¬ 
lieving  that  he  is  not  in  a  state  of  natural  and  inevitable  weakness,  but,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  of  natural  wisdom. 

Nothing  fortifies  scepticism  more  than  that  there  are  some  who  are  not  sceptics; 
if  all  were  so,  they  would  be  wrong. 

375.  [I  have  passed  a  great  part  of  my  life  believing  that  there  was  justice,  and  in 
this  I  was  not  mistaken;  for  there  is  justice  according  as  God  has  willed  to  reveal 
it  to  us.  But  I  did  not  take  it  so,  and  this  is  where  I  made  a  mistake;  for  I  believed 
that  our  justice  was  essentially  just,  and  that  I  had  that  whereby  to  know  and  judge 
of  it.  But  I  have  so  often  found  my  right  judgement  at  fault,  that  at  last  I  have 
come  to  distrust  myself  and  then  others.  I  have  seen  changes  in  all  nations  and 
men,  and  thus,  after  many  changes  of  judgement  regarding  true  justice,  I  have 
recognised  that  our  nature  was  but  in  continual  change,  and  I  have  not  changed 
since;  and  if  I  changed,  I  would  confirm  my  opinion. 

The  sceptic  Arcesilaus,  who  became  a  dogmatist.] 

37 6.  This  sect  derives  more  strength  from  its  enemies  than  from  its  friends; 
for  the  weakness  of  man  is  far  more  evident  in  those  who  know  it  not  than  in 
those  who  know  it. 

377.  Discourses  on  humility  are  a  source  of  pride  in  the  vain  and  of  humility  in 
the  humble.  So  those  on  scepticism  cause  believers  to  affirm.  Few  men  speak  hum¬ 
bly  of  humility,  chastely  of  chastity,  few  doubtingly  of  scepticism.  We  are  only 


PENSEES 


238 

falsehood,  duplicity,  contradiction;  we  both  conceal  and  disguise  ourselves  from 
ourselves. 

378.  Scepticism. — Excess,  like  defect  of  intellect,  is  accused  of  madness.  Nothing 
is  good  but  mediocrity.  The  majority  has  settled  that  and  finds  fault  with  him  who 
escapes  it  at  whichever  end.  I  will  not  oppose  it.  I  quite  consent  to  put  myself 
there,  and  refuse  to  be  at  the  lower  end,  not  because  it  is  low,  but  because  it  is  an 
end;  for  I  would  likewise  refuse  to  be  placed  at  the  top.  To  leave  the  mean  is  to 
abandon  humanity.  The  greatness  of  the  human  soul  consists  in  knowing  how  to 
preserve  the  mean.  So  far  from  greatness  consisting  in  leaving  it,  it  consists  in  not 
leaving  it. 

379.  It  is  not  good  to  have  too  much  liberty.  It  is  not  good  to  have  all  one 
wants. 

380.  All  good  maxims  are  in  the  world.  We  only  need  to  apply  them.  For  in¬ 
stance,  we  do  not  doubt  that  we  ought  to  risk  our  lives  in  defence  of  the  public 
good;  but  for  religion,  no. 

It  is  true  there  must  be  inequality  among  men ;  but  if  this  be  conceded,  the  door 
is  opened  not  only  to  the  highest  power,  but  to  the  highest  tyranny. 

We  must  relax  our  minds  a  little;  but  this  opens  the  door  to  the  greatest  de¬ 
bauchery.  Let  us  mark  the  limits.  There  are  no  limits  in  things.  Laws  would  put 
them  there,  and  the  mind  cannot  suffer  it. 

381.  When  we  are  too  young,  we  do  not  judge  well;  so,  also,  when  we  are  too 
old.  If  we  do  not  think  enough,  or  if  we  think  too  much  on  any  matter,  we  get 
obstinate  and  infatuated  with  it.  If  one  considers  one’s  work  immediately  after 
having  done  it,  one  is  entirely  prepossessed  in  its  favour;  by  delaying  too  long, 
one  can  no  longer  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it.  So  with  pictures  seen  from  too  far  or 
too  near;  there  is  but  one  exact  point  which  is  the  true  place  wherefrom  to  look  at 
them:  the  rest  are  too  near,  too  far,  too  high,  or  too  low.  Perspective  determines 
that  point  in  the  art  of  painting.  But  who  shall  determine  it  in  truth  and  morality? 

382.  When  all  is  equally  agitated,  nothing  appears  to  be  agitated,  as  in  a  ship. 
When  all  tend  to  debauchery,  none  appears  to  do  so.  He  who  stops  draws  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  excess  of  others,  like  a  fixed  point. 

383.  The  licentious  tell  men  of  orderly  lives  that  they  stray  from  nature’s  path, 
while  they  themselves  follow  it;  as  people  in  a  ship  think  those  move  who  are  on 
the  shore.  On  all  sides  the  language  is  similar.  We  must  have  a  fixed  point  in  order 
to  judge.  The  harbour  decides  for  those  who  are  in  a  ship;  but  where  shall  we  find 
a  harbour  in  morality? 

384.  Contradiction  is  a  bad  sign  of  truth;  several  things  which  are  certain  are 
contradicted;  several  things  which  are  false  pass  without  contradiction.  Contra¬ 
diction  is  not  a  sign  of  falsity,  nor  the  want  of  contradiction  a  sign  of  truth. 

385.  Scepticism. — Each  thing  here  is  partly  true  and  partly  false.  Essential  truth  is 


SECTION  VI  239 

not  so;  it  is  altogether  pure  and  altogether  true.  This  mixture  dishonours  and  an¬ 
nihilates  it.  Nothing  is  purely  true,  and  thus  nothing  is  true,  meaning  by  that 
pure  truth.  You  will  say  it  is  true  that  homicide  is  wrong.  Yes;  for  we  know  well 
the  wrong  and  the  false.  But  what  will  you  say  is  good?  Chastity?  I  say  no  ;  for  the 
world  would  come  to  an  end.  Marriage?  No;  continence  is  better.  Not  to  kill?  No; 
for  lawlessness  would  be  horrible,  and  the  wicked  would  kill  all  the  good.  To  kill? 
No;  for  that  destroys  nature.  We  possess  truth  and  goodness  only  in  part,  and 
mingled  with  falsehood  and  evil. 

386.  If  we  dreamt  the  same  thing  every  night,  it  would  affect  us  as  much  as  the 
objects  we  see  every  day.  And  if  an  artisan  were  sure  to  dream  every  night  for 
twelve  hours'  duration  that  he  was  a  king,  I  believe  he  would  be  almost  as  happy 
as  a  king,  who  should  dream  every  night  for  twelve  hours  on  end  that  he  was  an 
artisan. 

If  we  were  to  dream  every  night  that  we  were  pursued  by  enemies  and  harassed 
by  these  painful  phantoms,  or  that  we  passed  every  day  in  different  occupations, 
as  in  making  a  voyage,  we  should  su  ffer  almost  as  much  as  if  it  were  real,  and  should 
fear  to  sleep,  as  we  fear  to  wake  when  we  dread  in  fact  to  enter  on  such  mishaps. 
And,  indeed,  it  would  cause  pretty  nearly  the  same  discomforts  as  the  reality. 

But  since  dreams  are  all  different,  and  each  single  one  is  diversified,  what  is  seen 
in  them  affects  us  much  less  than  what  we  see  when  awake,  because  of  its  con¬ 
tinuity,  which  is  not,  however,  so  continuous  and  level  as  not  to  change  too;  but 
it  changes  less  abruptly,  except  rarely,  as  when  we  travel,  and  then  we  say,  "It 
seems  to  me  I  am  dreaming."  For  life  is  a  dream  a  little  less  inconstant. 

387.  [It  may  be  that  there  are  true  demonstrations;  but  this  is  not  certain.  Thus, 
this  proves  nothing  else  but  that  it  is  not  certain  that  all  is  uncertain,  to  the  glory 
of  scepticism.] 

388.  Good  sense. — They  are  compelled  to  say,  "You  are  not  acting  in  good 
faith;  we  are  not  asleep,"  etc.  How  I  love  to  see  this  proud  reason  humiliated  and 
suppliant!  For  this  is  not  the  language  of  a  man  whose  right  is  disputed,  and  who 
defends  it  with  the  power  of  armed  hands.  He  is  not  foolish  enough  to  declare 
that  men  are  not  acting  in  good  faith,  but  he  punishes  this  bad  faith  with  force. 

389.  Ecclesiastes  shows  that  man  without  God  is  in  total  ignorance  and  in¬ 
evitable  misery.  For  it  is  wretched  to  have  the  wish,  but  not  the  power.  Now  he 
would  be  happy  and  assured  of  some  truth,  and  yet  he  can  neither  know,  nor 
desire  not  to  know.  He  cannot  even  doubt. 

390.  My  God!  How  foolish  this  talk  is!  "Would  God  have  made  the  world  to 
damn  it?  Would  He  ask  so  much  from  persons  so  weak"?  etc.  Scepticism  is  the 
cure  for  this  evil,  and  will  take  down  this  vanity. 

391.  Conversation. — Great  words:  Religion,  I  deny  it. 

Conversation. — Scepticism  helps  religion. 

392.  Against  Scepticism. — [.  .  .  It  is,  then,  a  strange  fact  that  we  cannot  define 


24o  PENSEES 

these  things  without  obscuring  them,  while  we  speak  of  them  with  all  assurance.] 
We  assume  that  all  conceive  of  them  in  the  same  way;  but  we  assume  it  quite 
gratuitously,  for  w7e  have  no  proof  of  it.  I  see,  in  truth,  that  the  same  words  are  ap¬ 
plied  on  the  same  occasions,  and  that  every  time  two  men  see  a  body  change  its 
place,  they  both  express  their  view7  of  this  same  fact  by  the  same  word,  both  say¬ 
ing  that  it  has  moved;  and  from  this  conformity  of  application  we  derive  a  strong 
conviction  of  a  conformity  of  ideas.  But  this  is  not  absolutely  or  finally  convincing 
though  there  is  enough  to  support  a  bet  on  the  affirmative,  since  we  know  that  we 
often  draw  the  same  conclusions  from  different  premises. 

This  is  enough, at  least,  to  obscure  the  matter;not  that  it  completely  extinguishes 
the  natural  light  which  assures  us  of  these  things.  The  academicians  would  have 
won.  But  this  dulls  it  and  troubles  the  dogmatists  to  the  glory  of  the  sceptical 
crow7d,  which  consists  in  this  doubtful  ambiguity  and  in  a  certain  doubtful  dim¬ 
ness  from  wffiich  our  doubts  cannot  take  away  all  the  clearness,  nor  our  own 
natural  lights  chase  away  all  the  darkness. 

393.  It  is  a  singular  thing  to  consider  that  there  are  people  in  the  world  who, 
having  renounced  all  the  laws  of  God  and  nature,  have  made  laws  for  themselves 
which  they  strictly  obey,  as,  for  instance,  the  soldiers  of  Mahomet,  robbers, 
heretics,  etc.  It  is  the  same  with  logicians.  It  seems  that  their  license  must  be  with¬ 
out  any  limits  or  barriers,  since  they  have  broken  through  so  many  that  are  so  just 
and  sacred. 

394.  All  the  principles  of  sceptics,  stoics,  atheists,  etc.,  are  true.  But  their  con¬ 
clusions  are  false,  because  the  opposite  principles  are  also  true. 

395.  Instinct ,  reason. — We  have  an  incapacity  of  proof,  insurmountable  by  all 
dogmatism.  We  have  an  idea  of  truth,  invincible  to  all  scepticism. 

396.  Two  things  instruct  man  about  his  whole  nature;  instince  and  experience. 

397.  The  greatness  of  man  is  great  in  that  he  knows  himself  to  be  miserable.  A 
tree  does  not  know  itself  to  be  miserable.  It  is  then  being  miserable  to  know  one¬ 
self  to  be  miserable;  but  it  is  also  being  great  to  know7  that  one  is  miserable. 

398.  All  these  same  miseries  prove  man’s  greatness.  They  are  the  miseries  of  a 
great  lord,  of  a  deposed  king. 

399.  We  are  not  miserable  without  feeling  it.  A  ruined  house  is  not  miserable. 
Man  only  is  miserable.  Ego  vir  videns.1 

400.  The  greatness  of  man. — We  have  so  great  an  idea  of  the  soul  of  man  that  we 
cannot  endure  being  despised,  or  not  being  esteemed  by  any  soul;  and  all  the 
happiness  of  men  consists  in  this  esteem. 

401.  Glory. — The  brutes  do  not  admire  each  other.  A  horse  does  not  admire  his 
companion.  Not  that  there  is  no  rivalry  between  them  in  a  race,  but  that  is  of  no 

Tam.  3.  1.  “I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen.” 


SECTION  VI  241 

consequence;  for,  when  in  the  stable,  the  heaviest  and  most  ill-formed  does  not 
give  up  his  oats  to  another,  as  men  would  have  others  do  to  them.  Their  virtue  is 
satisfied  with  itself. 

402.  The  greatness  of  man  even  in  his  lust,  to  have  known  how  to  extract  from 
it  a  wonderful  code,  and  to  have  drawn  from  it  a  picture  of  benevolence. 

403.  Greatness . — The  reasons  of  effects  indicate  the  greatness  of  man,  in  having 
extracted  so  fair  an  order  from  lust. 

404.  The  greatest  baseness  of  man  is  the  pursuit  of  glory.  But  is  is  also  the  great¬ 
est  mark  of  his  excellence;  for  whatever  possessions  he  may  have  on  earth,  what¬ 
ever  health  and  essential  comfort,  he  is  not  satisfied  if  he  has  not  the  esteem  of 
men.  He  values  human  reason  so  highly  that,  whatever  advantages  he  may  have 
on  earth,  he  is  not  content  if  he  is  not  also  ranked  highly  in  the  judgement  of  man. 
This  is  the  finest  position  in  the  world.  Nothing  can  turn  him  from  that  desire, 
which  is  the  most  indelible  quality  of  man’s  heart. 

And  those  who  must  despise  men,  and  put  them  on  a  level  with  the  brutes,  yet 
wish  to  be  admired  and  believed  by  men,  and  contradict  themselves  by  their  own 
feelings;  their  nature,  which  is  stronger  than  all,  convincing  them  of  the  greatness 
of  man  more  forcibly  than  reason  convinces  them  of  their  baseness. 

405.  Contradiction . — Pride  counterbalancing  all  miseries.  Man  either  hides  his 
miseries,  or,  if  he  disclose  them,  glories  in  knowing  them. 

406.  Pride  counterbalances  and  takes  away  all  miseries.  Here  is  a  strange  mon¬ 
ster  and  a  very  plain  aberration.  He  is  fallen  from  his  place  and  is  anxiously  seek¬ 
ing  it.  This  is  what  all  men  do.  Let  us  see  who  will  have  found  it. 

407.  When  malice  has  reason  on  its  side,  it  becomes  proud  and  parades  reason 
in  all  its  splendour.  When  austerity  or  stern  choice  has  not  arrived  at  the  true  good 
and  must  needs  return  to  follow  nature,  it  becomes  proud  by  reason  of  this  return. 

408.  Evil  is  easy,  and  has  infinite  forms;  good  is  almost  unique.  But  a  certain 
kind  of  evil  is  as  difficult  to  find  as  what  we  call  good;  and  often  on  this  account 
such  particular  evil  gets  passed  off  as  good.  An  extraordinary  greatness  of  soul  is 
needed  in  order  to  attain  to  it  as  well  as  to  good. 

409.  The  greatness  of  man. — The  greatness  of  man  is  so  evident  that  it  is  even 
proved  by  his  wretchedness.  For  what  in  animals  is  nature,  we  call  in  man  wretched¬ 
ness;  by  which  we  recognise  that,  his  nature  being  now  like  that  of  animals,  he  has 
fallen  from  a  better  nature  which  once  was  his. 

For  who  is  unhappy  at  not  being  a  king,  except  a  deposed  king?  Was  Paulus 
i^milius  unhappy  at  being  no  longer  consul?  On  the  contrary,  everybody  thought 
him  happy  in  having  been  consul,  because  the  office  could  only  be  held  for  a  time. 
But  men  thought  Perseus  so  unhappy  in  being  no  longer  king,  because  the  con¬ 
dition  of  kingship  implied  his  being  always  king,  that  they  thought  it  strange  that 
he  endured  life.  Who  is  unhappy  at  only  having  one  mouth?  And  who  is  not  un- 


242  PENSEES 

happy  at  having  only  one  eye?  Probably  no  man  ever  ventured  to  mourn  at  not 
having  three  eyes.  But  any  one  is  inconsolable  at  having  none. 

410.  Perseus ,  King  of  Macedon. — Pa  ulus  ^milius  reproached  Perseus  for  not 
killing  himself. 

41 1.  Notwithstanding  the  sight  of  all  our  miseries,  which  press  upon  us  and 
take  us  by  the  throat,  we  have  an  instinct  which  we  cannot  repress  and  which  lifts 
us  up. 

412.  There  is  internal  war  in  man  between  reason  and  the  passions. 

If  he  had  only  reason  without  passions  .  .  . 

If  he  had  only  passions  without  reason  .  .  . 

But  having  both,  he  cannot  be  without  strife,  being  unable  to  be  at  peace  with 
the  one  without  being  at  war  with  the  other.  Thus  he  is  always  divided  against 
and  opposed  to  himself. 

413.  This  internal  war  of  reason  against  the  passions  has  made  a  division  of 
those  who  would  have  peace  into  two  sects.  The  first  would  renounce  their  pas¬ 
sions  and  become  gods;  the  others  would  renounce  reason  and  become  brute 
beasts.  (Des  Barreaux.)  But  neither  can  do  so,  and  reason  still  remains,  to  con¬ 
demn  the  vileness  and  injustice  of  the  passions  and  to  trouble  the  repose  of  those 
who  abandon  themselves  to  them;  and  the  passions  keep  always  alive  in  those 
who  would  renounce  them. 

414.  Men  are  so  necessarily  mad  that  not  to  be  mad  would  amount  to  another 
form  of  madness. 

415.  The  nature  of  man  may  be  viewed  in  two  ways:  the  one  according  to  its  end, 
and  then  he  is  great  and  incomparable;  the  other  according  to  the  multitude,  just 
as  we  judge  of  the  nature  of  the  horse  and  the  dog,  popularly,  by  seeing  its  fleet¬ 
ness,  et  animum  arcendi;  and  then  man  is  abject  and  vile.  These  are  the  two  ways 
which  make  us  judge  of  him  differently  and  which  occasion  such  disputes  among 
philosophers.  For  one  denies  the  assumption  of  the  other.  One  says,  "He  is  not 
born  for  this  end,  for  all  his  actions  are  repugnant  to  it."  The  other  says,  "He  for¬ 
sakes  his  end,  when  he  does  these  base  actions." 

416.  For  Port-Royal .  Greatness  and  wretchedness . — Wretchedness  being  deduced 
from  greatness,  and  greatness  from  wretchedness,  some  have  inferred  man’s 
wretchedness  all  the  more  because  they  have  taken  his  greatness  as  a  proof  of  it, 
and  others  have  inferred  his  greatness  with  all  the  more  force,  because  they  have 
inferred  it  from  his  very  wretchedness.  All  that  the  one  party  has  been  able  to  say 
in  proof  of  his  greatness  has  only  served  as  an  argument  of  his  wretchedness  to  the 
others,  because  the  greater  our  fall,  the  more  wretched  we  are,  and  vice  versa.  The 
one  party  is  brought  back  to  the  other  in  an  endless  circle,  it  being  certain  that,  in 
proportion  as  men  possess  light,  they  discover  both  the  greatness  and  the 
wretchedness  of  man.  In  a  word,  man  knows  that  he  is  wretched.  He  is  therefore 
wretched,  because  he  is  so;  but  he  is  really  great  because  he  knows  it. 


SECTION  VII  243 

417.  This  twofold  nature  of  man  is  so  evident  that  some  have  thought  that  we 
had  two  souls.  A  single  subject  seemed  to  them  incapable  of  such  sudden  varia¬ 
tions  from  unmeasured  presumption  to  a  dreadful  dejection  of  heart. 

418.  It  is  dangerous  to  make  man  see  too  clearly  his  equality  with  the  brutes 
without  showing  him  his  greatness.  It  is  also  dangerous  to  make  his  see  his  great¬ 
ness  too  clearly,  apart  from  his  vileness.  It  is  still  more  dangerous  to  leave  him  in 
ignorance  of  both.  But  it  is  very  advantageous  to  show  him  both.  Man  must  not 
think  that  he  is  on  a  level  either  with  the  brutes  or  with  the  angels,  nor  must  he  be 
ignorant  of  both  sides  of  his  nature;  but  he  must  know  both. 

419.  I  will  not  allow  man  to  depend  upon  himself,  or  upon  another,  to  the  end 
that,  being  without  a  resting-place  and  without  repose  .  .  . 

420.  If  he  exalt  himself,  I  humble  him;  if  he  humble  himself,  I  exalt  him;  and  I 
always  contradict  him,  till  he  understands  that  he  is  an  incomprehensible  monster. 

421.  I  blame  equally  those  who  choose  to  praise  man,  those  who  choose  to 
blame  him,  and  those  who  choose  to  amuse  themselves;  and  I  can  only  approve  of 
those  who  seek  with  lamentation. 

422.  It  is  good  to  be  tired  and  wearied  by  the  vain  search  after  the  true  good, 
that  we  may  stretch  out  our  arms  to  the  Redeemer. 

423.  Contraries.  After  having  shown  the  vileness  and  the  greatness  of  man. — Let  man 
now  know  his  value.  Let  him  love  himself,  for  there  is  in  him  a  nature  capable  of 
good;  but  let  him  not  for  this  reason  love  the  vileness  which  is  in  him.  Let  him 
despise  himself,  for  this  capacity  is  barren;  but  let  him  not  therefore  despise  this 
natural  capacity.  Let  him  hate  himself,  let  him  love  himself;  he  has  within  him 
the  capacity  of  knowing  the  truth  and  of  being  happy,  but  he  possesses  no 
truth,  either  constant  or  satisfactory. 

I  would  then  lead  man  to  the  desire  of  finding  truth;  to  be  free  from  passions, 
and  ready  to  follow  it  where  he  may  find  it,  knowing  how  much  his  knowledge  is 
obscured  by  the  passions.  I  would,  indeed,  that  he  should  hate  in  himself  the  lust 
which  determined  his  will  by  itself  so  that  it  may  not  blind  him  in  making  his 
choice,  and  may  not  hinder  him  when  he  has  chosen. 

424.  All  these  contradictions,  which  seem  most  to  keep  me  from  the  knowledge 
of  religion,  have  led  me  most  quickly  to  the  true  one. 


SECTION  VII 
MORALITY  AND  DOCTRINE 

425.  Second  part. — That  man  without  faith  cannot  know  the  true  good ,  nor  justice. 

All  men  seek  happiness.  This  is  without  exception.  Whatever  different  means 


PENSEES 


244 

they  employ,  they  all  tend  to  this  end.  The  cause  of  some  going  to  war,  and  of 
others  avoiding  it,  is  the  same  desire  in  both,  attended  with  different  views.  The 
will  never  takes  the  least  step  but  to  this  object.  This  is  the  motive  of  every  action 
of  every  man,  even  of  those  who  hang  themselves. 

And  yet,  after  such  a  great  number  of  years,  no  one  without  faith  has  reached 
the  point  to  which  all  continually  look.  All  complain,  princes  and  subjects,  noble¬ 
men  and  commoners,  old  and  young,  strong  and  weak,  learned  and  ignorant, 
healthy  and  sick,  of  all  countries,  all  times,  all  ages,  and  all  conditions. 

A  trial  so  long,  so  continuous,  and  so  uniform,  should  certainly  convince  us  of 
our  inability  to  reach  the  good  by  our  own  efforts.  But  example  teaches  us  little. 
No  resemblance  is  ever  so  perfect  that  there  is  not  some  slight  difference;  and 
hence  we  expect  that  our  hope  will  not  be  deceived  on  this  occasion  as  before.  And 
thus,  while  the  present  never  satisfies  us,  experience  dupes  us  and,  from  misfor¬ 
tune  to  misfortune,  leads  us  to  death,  their  eternal  crown. 

What  is  it,  then,  that  this  desire  and  this  inability  proclaim  to  us,  but  that  there 
was  once  in  man  a  true  happiness  of  which  there  now  remain  to  him  only  the 
mark  and  empty  trace,  which  he  in  vain  tries  to  fill  from  all  his  surroundings, 
seeking  from  things  absent  the  help  he  does  not  obtain  in  things  present?  But 
these  are  all  inadequate,  because  the  infinite  abyss  can  only  be  filled  by  an  infinite 
and  immutable  object,  that  is  to  say,  only  by  God  Himself. 

He  only  is  our  true  good,  and  since  we  have  forsaken  him,  it  is  a  strange  thing 
that  there  is  nothing  in  nature  which  has  not  been  serviceable  in  taking  His  place; 
the  stars,  the  heavens,  earth,  the  elements,  plants,  cabbages,  leeks,  animals,  insects, 
calves,  serpents,  fever,  pestilence,  war,  famine,  vices,  adultery,  incest.  And  since 
man  has  lost  the  true  good,  everything  can  appear  equally  good  to  him,  even  his 
own  destruction,  though  so  opposed  to  God,  to  reason,  and  to  the  whole  course 
of  nature. 

Some  seek  good  in  authority,  others  in  scientific  research,  others  in  pleasure. 
Others,  who  are  in  fact  nearer  the  truth,  have  considered  it  necessary  that  the 
universal  good,  which  all  men  desire,  should  not  consist  in  any  of  the  particular 
things  which  can  only  be  possessed  by  one  man,  and  which,  when  shared,  afflict 
their  possessors  more  by  the  want  of  the  part  he  has  not  than  they  please  him  by 
the  possession  of  what  he  has.  They  have  learned  that  the  true  good  should  be 
such  as  all  can  possess  at  once,  without  diminution  and  without  envy,  and  which 
no  one  can  lose  against  his  will.  And  their  reason  is  that  this  desire,  being  natural 
to  man,  since  it  is  necessarily  in  all,  and  that  it  is  impossible  not  to  have  it,  they 
infer  from  it  .  .  . 

426.  True  nature  being  lost,  everything  becomes  its  own  nature;  as  the  true 
good  being  lost,  everything  becomes  its  own  true  good. 

427.  Man  does  not  know  in  what  rank  to  place  himself.  He  has  plainly  gone 
astray  and  fallen  from  his  true  place  without  being  able  to  find  it  again.  He  seeks 
it  anxiously  and  unsuccessfully  everywhere  in  impenetrable  darkness. 

428.  If  it  is  a  sign  of  weakness  to  prove  God  by  nature,  do  not  despise 
Scripture;  if  it  is  a  sign  of  strength  to  have  known  these  contradictions,  esteem 
Scripture. 


SECTION  VII  245 

429.  The  vileness  of  man  in  submitting  himself  to  the  brutes  and  in  even  wor¬ 
shipping  them. 

430.  For  Port-Royal.  The  beginning ,  after  having  explained  the  incomprehensibility. — 
The  greatness  and  the  wretchedness  of  man  are  so  evident  that  the  true  religion 
must  necessarily  teach  us  both  that  there  is  in  man  some  great  source  of  greatness 
and  a  great  source  of  wretchedness.  It  must  then  give  us  a  reason  for  these  as¬ 
tonishing  contradictions. 

In  order  to  make  man  happy,  it  must  prove  to  him  that  there  is  a  God;  that  we 
ought  to  love  Him;  that  our  true  happiness  is  to  be  in  Him,  and  our  sole  evil  to  be 
separated  from  Him;  it  must  recognise  that  we  are  full  of  darkness  which  hinders 
us  from  knowing  and  loving  Him;  and  that  thus,  as  our  duties  compel  us  to  love 
God,  and  our  lusts  turn  us  away  from  Him,  we  are  full  of  unrighteousness.  It  must 
give  us  an  explanation  of  our  opposition  to  God  and  to  our  own  good.  It  must 
teach  us  the  remedies  for  these  infirmities  and  the  means  of  obtaining  these 
remedies.  Let  us,  therefore,  examine  all  the  religions  of  the  world  and  see  if  there 
be  any  other  than  the  Christian  which  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose. 

Shall  it  be  that  of  the  philosophers,  who  put  forward,  as  the  chief  good,  the 
good  which  is  in  ourselves?  Is  this  the  true  good?  Have  they  found  the  remedy  for 
our  ills?  Is  man’s  pride  cured  by  placing  him  on  an  equality  with  God?  Have  those 
who  have  made  us  equal  to  the  brutes,  or  the  Mohammedans  who  have  offered 
us  earthly  pleasures  as  the  chief  good  even  in  eternity,  produced  the  remedy  for 
our  lusts?  What  religion,  then,  will  teach  us  to  cure  pride  and  lust?  What  religion 
will,  in  fact,  teach  us  our  good,  our  duties,  the  weakness  which  turns  us  from 
them,  the  cause  of  this  weakness,  the  remedies  which  can  cure  it,  and  the  means  of 
obtaining  these  remedies? 

All  other  religions  have  not  been  able  to  do  so.  Let  us  see  what  the  wisdom  of 
God  will  do. 

"Expect  neither  truth,"  she  says,  "nor  consolation  from  men.  I  am  she  who 
formed  you,  and  who  alone  can  teach  you  what  you  are.  But  you  are  now  no 
longer  in  the  state  in  which  I  formed  you.  I  created  man  holy,  innocent,  perfect.  I 
filled  him  with  light  and  intelligence.  I  communicated  to  him  my  glory  and  my 
wonders.  The  eye  of  man  saw  then  the  majesty  of  God.  He  was  not  then  in  the 
darkness  which  blinds  him,  nor  subject  to  mortality  and  the  woes  which  afflict  him. 
But  he  has  not  been  able  to  sustain  so  great  glory  without  falling  into  pride.  He 
wanted  to  make  himself  his  own  centre  and  independent  of  my  help.  He  withdrew 
himself  from  my  rule;  and,  on  his  making  himself  equal  to  me  by  the  desire  of 
finding  his  happiness  in  himself,  I  abandoned  him  to  himself.  And  setting  in 
revolt  the  creatures  that  were  subject  to  him,  I  made  them  his  enemies;  so  that 
man  is  now  become  like  the  brutes  and  so  estranged  from  me  that  there  scarce  re¬ 
mains  to  him  a  dim  vision  of  his  Author.  So  far  has  all  his  knowledge  been  extin¬ 
guished  or  disturbed!  The  senses,  independent  of  reason,  and  often  the  masters  of 
reason,  have  led  him  into  pursuit  of  pleasure.  All  creatures  either  torment  or  tempt 
him,  and  domineer  over  him,  either  subduing  him  by  their  strength,  or  fascinating 
him  by  their  charms,  a  tyranny  more  awful  and  more  imperious. 

"Such  is  the  state  in  which  men  now  are.  There  remains  to  them  some  feeble 
instinct  of  the  happiness  of  their  former  state;  and  they  are  plunged  in  the  evils  of 
their  blindness  and  their  lust,  which  have  become  their  second  nature. 


2  46  PENSEES 

''From  this  principle  which  I  disclose  to  you,  you  can  recognize  the  cause  of 
those  contradictions  which  have  astonished  all  men  and  have  divided  them  into 
parties  holding  so  different  views.  Observe,  now,  all  the  feelings  of  greatness  and 
glory  which  the  experience  of  so  many  woes  cannot  stifle,  and  see  if  the  cause  of 
them  must  not  be  in  another  nature.’ ’ 

For  Port-Royal  to-morrow  (Prosopopaa) . — "It  is  in  vain,  O  men,  that  you  seek 
within  yourselves  the  remedy  for  your  ills.  All  your  light  can  only  reach  the  knowl¬ 
edge  that  not  in  yourselves  will  you  find  truth  or  good.  The  philosophers  have 
promised  you  that,  and  you  have  been  unable  to  do  it.  They  neither  know  what  is 
your  true  good,  nor  what  is  your  true  state.  How  could  they  have  given  remedies 
for  your  ills,  when  they  did  not  even  know  them?  Your  chief  maladies  are  pride, 
which  takes  you  away  from  God,  and  lust,  which  binds  you  to  earth;  and  they 
have  done  nothing  else  but  cherish  one  or  other  of  these  diseases.  If  they  gave  you 
God  as  an  end,  it  was  only  to  administer  to  your  pride;  they  made  you  think  that 
you  are  by  nature  like  Him  and  conformed  to  Him.  And  those  who  saw  the  ab¬ 
surdity  of  this  claim  put  you  on  another  precipice,  by  making  you  understand  that 
your  nature  was  like  that  of  the  brutes,  and  led  you  to  seek  your  good  in  the  lusts 
which  are  shared  by  the  animals.  This  is  not  the  way  to  cure  you  of  your  unright¬ 
eousness,  which  these  wise  men  never  knew.  I  alone  can  make  you  understand 
who  you  are.  ..." 

Adam,  Jesus  Christ. 

If  you  are  united  to  God,  it  is  by  grace,  not  by  nature.  If  you  are  humbled,  it  is 
by  penitence,  not  by  nature. 

Thus  this  double  capacity  .  .  . 

You  are  not  in  the  state  of  your  creation. 

As  these  two  states  are  open,  it  is  impossible  for  you  not  to  recognise  them.  Fol¬ 
low  your  own  feelings,  observe  yourselves,  and  see  if  you  do  not  find  the  lively 
characteristics  of  these  two  natures.  Could  so  many  contradictions  be  found  in  a 
simple  subject? 

Incomprehensible.  Not  all  that  is  incomprehensible  ceases  to  exist.  Infinite 
number.  An  infinite  space  equal  to  a  finite. 

Incredible  that  God  should  unite  Himself  to  us.  This  consideration  is  drawn 
only  from  the  sight  of  our  vileness.  But  if  you  are  quite  sincere  over  it,  follow  it  as 
far  as  I  have  done  and  recognise  that  we  are  indeed  so  vile  that  we  are  incapable 
in  ourselves  of  knowing  if  His  mercy  cannot  make  us  capable  of  Him.  For  I 
would  know  how  this  animal,  who  knows  himself  to  be  so  weak,  has  the  right  to 
measure  the  mercy  of  God  and  set  limits  to  it,  suggested  by  his  own  fancy.  He 
has  so  little  knowledge  of  what  God  is  that  he  does  not  know  what  he  himself  is, 
and,  completely  disturbed  at  the  sight  of  his  own  state,  dares  to  say  that  God 
cannot  make  him  capable  of  communion  with  Him. 

But  I  would  ask  him  if  God  demands  anything  else  from  him  than  the  knowl¬ 
edge  and  love  of  Him,  and  why,  since  his  nature  is  capable  of  love  and  knowl¬ 
edge,  he  believes  that  God  cannot  make  Himself  known  and  loved  by  him. 
Doubtless  he  knows  at  least  that  he  exists,  and  that  he  loves  something.  There¬ 
fore,  if  he  sees  anything  in  the  darkness  wherein  he  is,  and  if  he  finds  some  object 
of  his  love  among  the  things  on  earth,  why,  if  God  impart  to  him  some  ray  of  His 
essence,  will  he  not  be  capable  of  knowing  and  of  loving  Him  in  the  manner  in 
which  it  shall  please  Him  to  communicate  Himself  to  us?  There  must,  then,  be 


SECTION  VII  247 

certainly  an  intolerable  presumption  in  arguments  of  this  sort,  although  they 
seem  founded  on  an  apparent  humility,  which  is  neither  sincere  nor  reasonable,  if 
it  does  not  make  us  admit  that,  not  knowing  of  ourselves  what  we  are,  we  can 
only  learn  it  from  God. 

"I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  submit  your  belief  to  me  without  reason,  and  I 
do  not  aspire  to  overcome  you  by  tyranny.  In  fact,  I  do  not  claim  to  give  you  a 
reason  for  everything.  And  to  reconcile  these  contradictions,  I  intend  to  make 
you  see  clearly,  by  convincing  proofs,  those  divine  signs  in  me,  which  may  con¬ 
vince  you  of  what  I  am,  and  may  gain  authority  for  me  by  wonders  and  proofs 
which  you  cannot  reject;  so  that  you  may  then  believe  without  .  .  .  the  things 
which  I  teach  you,  since  you  will  find  no  other  ground  for  rejecting  them,  except 
that  you  cannot  know  of  yourselves  if  they  are  true  or  not. 

"God  has  willed  to  redeem  men  and  to  open  salvation  to  those  who  seek  it.  But 
men  render  themselves  so  unworthy  of  it  that  it  is  right  that  God  should  refuse  to 
some,  because  of  their  obduracy,  what  He  grants  others  from  a  compassion  which 
is  not  due  to  them.  If  He  had  willed  to  overcome  the  obstinacy  of  the  most  hard¬ 
ened,  He  could  have  done  so  by  revealing  Himself  so  manifestly  to  them  that  they 
could  not  have  doubted  of  the  truth  of  His  essence;  as  it  will  appear  at  the  last  day, 
with  such  thunders  and  such  a  convulsion  of  nature  that  the  dead  will  rise  again, 
and  the  blindest  will  see  Him. 

"It  is  not  in  this  manner  that  He  has  willed  to  appear  in  His  advent  of  mercy, 
because,  as  so  many  make  themselves  unworthy  of  His  mercy,  He  has  willed  to 
leave  them  in  the  loss  of  the  good  which  they  do  not  want.  It  was  not,  then,  right 
that  He  should  appear  in  a  manner  manifestly  divine,  and  completely  capable  of 
convincing  all  men;  but  it  was  also  not  right  that  He  should  come  in  so  hidden  a 
manner  that  He  could  not  be  known  by  those  who  should  sincerely  seek  Him. 
He  has  willed  to  make  Himself  quite  recognisable  by  those;  and  thus,  willing  to 
appear  openly  to  those  who  seek  Him  with  all  their  heart,  and  to  be  hidden  from 
those  who  flee  from  Him  with  all  their  heart,  He  so  regulates  the  knowledge  of 
Himself  that  He  has  given  signs  of  Himself,  visible  to  those  who  seek  Him,  and 
not  to  those  who  seek  Him  not.  There  is  enough  light  for  those  who  only  desire 
to  see,  and  enough  obscurity  for  those  who  have  a  contrary  disposition." 

431.  No  other  religion  has  recognised  that  man  is  the  most  excellent  creature. 
Some,  which  have  quite  recognised  the  reality  of  his  excellence,  have  considered 
as  mean  and  ungrateful  the  low  opinions  which  men  naturally  have  of  themselves; 
and  others,  which  have  thoroughly  recognised  how  real  is  this  vileness,  have  treated 
with  proud  ridicule  those  feelings  of  greatness,  which  are  equally  natural  to  man. 

"Lift  your  eyes  to  God,"  say  the  first;  "see  Him  whom  you  resemble  and  who 
has  created  you  to  worship  Him.  You  can  make  yourselves  like  unto  Him;  wis¬ 
dom  will  make  you  equal  to  Him,  if  you  will  follow  it."  "Raise  your  heads,  free 
men,"  says  Epictetus.  And  others  say,  "Bend  your  eyes  to  the  earth,  wretched 
worm  that  you  are,  and  consider  the  brutes  whose  companion  you  are." 

What,  then,  will  man  become?  Will  he  be  equal  to  God  or  the  brutes?  What  a 
frightful  difference!  What,  then,  shall  we  be?  Who  does  not  see  from  all  this  that 
man  has  gone  astray,  that  he  has  fallen  from  his  place,  that  he  anxiously  seeks  it, 
that  he  cannot  find  it  again?  And  who  shall  then  direct  him  to  it?  The  greatest  men 
have  failed. 


PENSEES 


248 

432.  Scepticism  is  true;  for,  after  all,  men  before  Jesus  Christ  did  not  know 
where  they  were,  nor  whether  they  were  great  or  small.  And  those  who  have  said 
the  one  or  the  other  knew  nothing  about  it  and  guessed  without  reason  and  by 
chance.  They  also  erred  always  in  excluding  the  one  or  the  other. 

Quod  ergo  ignor antes,  queer itis,  religio  annuntiat  vobis.1 

433.  After  having  understood  the  whole  nature  of  man. — That  a  religion  may  be 
true,  it  must  have  knowledge  of  our  nature.  It  ought  to  know  its  greatness  and 
littleness,  and  the  reason  of  both.  What  religion  but  the  Christian  has  known 
this? 

434.  The  chief  arguments  of  the  sceptics — I  pass  over  the  lesser  ones — are  that 
we  have  no  certainty  of  the  truth  of  these  principles  apart  from  faith  and  revela¬ 
tion,  except  in  so  far  as  we  naturally  perceive  them  in  ourselves.  Now  this  natural 
intuition  is  not  a  convincing  proof  of  their  truth;  since,  having  no  certainty,  apart 
from  faith,  whether  man  was  created  by  a  good  God,  or  by  a  wicked  demon,  or  by 
chance,  it  is  doubtful  whether  these  principles  given  to  us  are  true,  or  false,  or  un¬ 
certain,  according  to  our  origin.  Again,  no  person  is  certain,  apart  from  faith, 
whether  he  is  awake  or  sleeps,  seeing  that  during  sleep  we  believe  that  we  are 
awake  as  firmly  as  we  do  wfien  we  are  awake;  we  believe  that  we  see  space,  figure, 
and  motion;  we  are  aware  of  the  passage  of  time,  we  measure  it;  and  in  fact  we  act 
as  if  wre  were  awake.  So  that  half  of  our  life  being  passed  in  sleep,  we  have  on  our 
own  admission  no  idea  of  truth,  whatever  we  may  imagine.  As  all  our  intuitions 
are,  then,  illusions,  who  knowrs  whether  the  other  half  of  our  life,  in  which  we 
think  we  are  awake,  is  not  another  sleep  a  little  different  from  the  former,  from 
which  we  awake  when  we  suppose  ourselves  asleep? 

[And  who  doubts  that,  if  we  dreamt  in  company,  and  the  dreams  chanced  to 
agree,  wffiich  is  common  enough,  and  if  we  were  always  alone  when  awake,  w^e 
should  believe  that  matters  were  reversed?  In  short,  as  we  often  dream  that  we 
dream,  heaping  dream  upon  dream,  may  it  not  be  that  this  half  of  our  life,  where¬ 
in  we  think  ourselves  awake,  is  itself  only  a  dream  on  which  the  others  are  grafted, 
from  wffiich  we  wake  at  death,  during  which  we  have  as  few  principles  of  truth  and 
good  as  during  natural  sleep,  these  different  thoughts  which  disturb  us  being  per¬ 
haps  only  illusions  like  the  flight  of  time  and  the  vain  fancies  of  our  dreams?] 

These  are  the  chief  arguments  on  one  side  and  the  other. 

I  omit  minor  ones,  such  as  the  sceptical  talk  against  the  impressions  of  custom, 
education,  manners,  country  and  the  like.  Though  these  influence  the  majority  of 
common  folk,  who  dogmatise  only  on  shallow  foundations,  they  are  upset  by  the 
least  breath  of  the  sceptics.  We  have  only  to  see  their  books  if  we  are  not  suffi¬ 
ciently  convinced  of  this,  and  we  shall  very  quickly  become  so,  perhaps  too  much. 

I  notice  the  only  strong  point  of  the  dogmatists,  namely,  that,  speaking  in  good 
faith  and  sincerely,  we  cannot  doubt  natural  principles.  Against  this  the  sceptics 
set  up  in  one  word  the  uncertainty  of  our  origin,  which  includes  that  of  our  na¬ 
ture.  The  dogmatists  have  been  trying  to  answer  this  objection  ever  since  the 
world  began. 

So  there  is  open  war  among  men,  in  which  each  must  take  a  part  and  side  either 

r'What  you  seek  without  knowing,  religion  will  announce  to  you.”  Pascal  misquotes  Acts 
17.23.  "Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto  you.” 


SECTION  VII  249 

with  dogmatism  or  scepticism.  For  he  who  thinks  to  remain  neutral  is  above  all  a 
sceptic.  This  neutrality  is  the  essence  of  the  sect;  he  who  is  not  against  them  is 
essentially  for  them.  [In  this  appears  their  advantage.]  They  are  not  for  themselves; 
they  are  neutral,  indifferent,  in  suspense  as  to  all  things,  even  themselves  being  no 
exception. 

What,  then,  shall  man  do  in  this  state?  Shall  he  doubt  everything?  Shall  he  doubt 
whether  he  is  awake,  whether  he  is  being  pinched,  or  whether  he  is  being  burned? 
Shall  he  doubt  whether  he  doubts?  Shall  he  doubt  whether  he  exists?  We  cannot 
go  so  far  as  that;  and  I  lay  it  down  as  a  fact  that  there  never  has  been  a  real 
complete  sceptic.  Nature  sustains  our  feeble  reason  and  prevents  it  raving  to  this 
extent. 

Shall  he,  then,  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  certainly  possesses  truth — he  who, 
when  pressed  ever  so  little,  can  show  no  title  to  it  and  is  forced  to  let  go  his  hold? 

What  a  chimera,  then,  is  man!  What  a  novelty!  What  a  monster,  what  a  chaos, 
what  a  contradiction,  what  a  prodigy!  Judge  of  all  things,  imbecile  worm  of  the 
earth;  depositary  of  truth,  a  sink  of  uncertainty  and  error;  the  pride  and  refuse  of 
the  universe! 

Who  will  unravel  this  tangle?  Nature  confutes  the  sceptics,  and  reason  confutes 
the  dogmatists.  What,  then,  will  you  become,  O  men!  who  try  to  find  out  by  your 
natural  reason  what  is  your  true  condition?  You  cannot  avoid  one  of  these  sects, 
nor  adhere  to  one  of  them. 

Know  then,  proud  man,  what  a  paradox  you  are  to  yourself.  Humble  yourself, 
weak  reason;  be  silent,  foolish  nature;  learn  that  man  infinitely  transcends  man, 
and  learn  from  your  Master  your  true  condition,  of  which  you  are  ignorant.  Hear 
God. 

For  in  fact,  if  man  had  never  been  corrupt,  he  would  enjoy  in  his  innocence 
both  truth  and  happiness  with  assurance;  and  if  man  had  always  been  corrupt,  he 
would  have  no  idea  of  truth  or  bliss.  But,  wretched  as  we  are,  and  more  so  than 
if  there  were  no  greatness  in  our  condition,  we  have  an  idea  of  happiness  and  can¬ 
not  reach  it.  We  perceive  an  image  of  truth  and  possess  only  a  lie.  Incapable  of 
absolute  ignorance  and  of  certain  knowledge,  we  have  thus  been  manifestly  in  a 
degree  of  perfection  from  which  we  have  unhappily  fallen. 

It  is,  however,  an  astonishing  thing  that  the  mystery  furthest  removed  from  our 
knowledge,  namely,  that  of  the  transmission  of  sin,  should  be  a  fact  without 
which  we  can  have  no  knowledge  of  ourselves.  For  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  there  is 
nothing  which  more  shocks  our  reason  than  to  say  that  the  sin  of  the  first  man  has 
rendered  guilty  those  who,  being  so  removed  from  this  source,  seem  incapable  of 
participation  in  it.  This  transmission  does  not  only  seem  to  us  impossible,  it  seems 
also  very  unjust.  For  what  is  more  contrary  to  the  rules  of  our  miserable  justice 
than  to  damn  eternally  an  infant  incapable  of  will,  for  a  sin  wherein  he  seems  to 
have  so  little  a  share  that  it  was  committed  six  thousand  years  before  he  was  in 
existence?  Certainly  nothing  offends  us  more  rudely  than  this  doctrine;  and  yet, 
without  this  mystery,  the  most  incomprehensible  of  all,  we  are  incomprehensible 
to  ourselves.  The  knot  of  our  condition  takes  its  twists  and  turns  in  this  abyss, 
so  that  man  is  more  inconceivable  without  this  mystery  than  this  mystery  is 
inconceivable  to  man. 

[Whence  it  seems  that  God,  willing  to  render  the  difficulty  of  our  existence 
unintelligible  to  ourselves,  has  concealed  the  knot  so  high,  or,  better  speaking,  so 


250  PENSEES 

low,  that  we  are  quite  incapable  of  reaching  it;  so  that  it  is  not  by  the  proud  exer¬ 
tions  of  our  reason,  but  by  the  simple  submissions  of  reason,  that  we  can  truly 
know  ourselves. 

These  foundations,  solidly  established  on  the  inviolable  authority  of  religion, 
make  us  know  that  there  are  two  truths  of  faith  equally  certain:  the  one,  that  man, 
in  the  state  of  creation,  or  in  that  of  grace,  is  raised  above  all  nature,  made  like 
unto  God  and  sharing  in  His  divinity;  the  other,  that  in  the  state  of  corruption 
and  sin,  he  is  fallen  from  this  state  and  made  like  unto  the  beasts. 

These  two  propositions  are  equally  sound  and  certain.  Scripture  manifestly  de¬ 
clares  this  to  us,  when  it  says  in  some  places:  Delicti  mere  esse  cum  jiliis  hominum} 
Effundam  spiritum  meum  super  omnem  carnem .2  D/7  estis ,3  etc.;  and  in  other  places, 
Omnis  caro  f cerium}  Homo  assimilatus  est  jumentis  insipientibus ,  et  similis  f actus  est  illis} 
Dixi  in  corde  meo  de  jiliis  hominum .6 

Whence  it  clearly  seems  that  man  by  grace  is  made  like  unto  God,  and  a  par¬ 
taker  in  His  divinity,  and  that  without  grace  he  is  like  unto  the  brute  beasts.] 

435.  Without  this  divine  knowledge  what  could  men  do  but  either  become 
elated  by  the  inner  feeling  of  their  past  greatness  which  still  remains  to  them,  or 
become  despondent  at  the  sight  of  their  present  weakness?  For,  not  seeing  the 
whole  truth,  they  could  not  attain  to  perfect  virtue.  Some  considering  nature  as  in¬ 
corrupt,  others  as  incurable,  they  could  not  escape  either  pride  or  sloth,  the  two 
sources  of  all  vice;  since  they  cannot  but  either  abandon  themselves  to  it  through 
cowardice,  or  escape  it  by  pride.  For  if  they  knew  the  excellence  of  man,  they 
were  ignorant  of  his  corruption;  so  that  they  easily  avoided  sloth,  but  fell  into 
pride.  And  if  they  recognized  the  infirmity  of  nature,  they  were  ignorant  of  its 
dignity;  so  that  they  could  easily  avoid  vanity,  but  it  was  to  fall  into  despair. 
Thence  arise  the  different  schools  of  the  Stoics  and  Epicureans,  the  Dogmatists, 
Academicians,  etc. 

The  Christian  religion  alone  has  been  able  to  cure  these  two  vices,  not  by  ex¬ 
pelling  the  one  through  means  of  the  other  according  to  the  wisdom  of  the  world, 
but  by  expelling  both  according  to  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel.  For  it  teaches  the 
righteous  that  it  raises  them  even  to  a  participation  in  divinity  itself;  that  in  this 
lofty  state  they  still  carry  the  source  of  all  corruption,  which  renders  them  during 
all  their  life  subject  to  error,  misery,  death,  and  sin;  and  it  proclaims  to  the  most 
ungodly  that  they  are  capable  of  the  grace  of  their  Redeemer.  So  making  those 
tremble  whom  it  justifies,  and  consoling  those  whom  it  condemns,  religion  so 
justly  tempers  fear  with  hope  through  that  double  capacity  of  grace  and  of  sin, 
common  to  all,  that  it  humbles  infinitely  more  than  reason  alone  can  do,  but  with¬ 
out  despair;  and  it  exalts  infinitely  more  than  natural  pride,  but  without  inflating; 
thus  making  it  evident  that  alone  being  exempt  from  error  and  vice,  it  alone  fulfils 
the  duty  of  instructing  and  correcting  men. 

Who,  then,  can  refuse  to  believe  and  adore  this  heavenly  light?  For  is  it  not 
clearer  than  day  that  we  perceive  within  ourselves  ineffaceable  marks  of  excel - 

^rov.  8.31.  "And  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men." 

2Joel  2.28.  "I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh." 

3Ps.  82.6.  "Ye  are  gods." 

4Is.  40.6.  "All  flesh  is  grass." 

6Ps.  49.12,13.  "He  is  like  the  beasts  that  perish;  this  their  way  is  their  folly." 

6Eccles.  3.18.  "I  said  in  mine  heart  concerning  the  estate  of  the  sons  of  men." 


SECTION  VII  251 

lence?  And  is  it  not  equally  true  that  we  experience  every  hour  the  results  of  our 
deplorable  condition?  What  does  this  chaos  and  monstrous  confusion  proclaim  to 
us  but  the  truth  of  these  two  states,  with  a  voice  so  powerful  that  it  is  impossible 
to  resist  it? 

436.  Weakness. — Every  pursuit  of  men  is  to  get  wealth;  and  they  cannot  have  a 
title  to  show  that  they  possess  it  justly,  for  they  have  only  that  of  human  caprice; 
nor  have  they  strength  to  hold  it  securely.  It  is  the  same  with  knowledge,  for  dis¬ 
ease  takes  it  away.  We  are  incapable  both  of  truth  and  goodness. 

437.  We  desire  truth,  and  find  within  ourselves  only  uncertainty. 

We  seek  happiness,  and  find  only  misery  and  death. 

We  cannot  but  desire  truth  and  happiness,  and  are  incapable  of  certainty  or 
happiness.  This  desire  is  left  to  us,  partly  to  punish  us,  partly  to  make  us  perceive 
wherefrom  we  are  fallen. 

438.  If  man  is  not  made  for  God,  why  is  he  only  happy  in  God?  If  man  is  made 
for  God,  why  is  he  so  opposed  to  God? 

439.  Nature  corrupted. — Man  does  not  act  by  reason,  which  constitutes  his 
being. 

440.  The  corruption  of  reason  is  shown  by  the  existence  of  so  many  different 
and  extravagant  customs.  It  was  necessary  that  truth  should  come,  in  order  that 
man  should  no  longer  dwell  within  himself. 

441.  For  myself,  I  confess  that,  so  soon  as  the  Christian  religion  reveals 
the  principle  that  human  nature  is  corrupt  and  fallen  from  God,  that  opens 
my  eyes  to  see  everywhere  the  mark  of  this  truth:  for  nature  is  such  that  she  testi¬ 
fies  everywhere,  both  within  man  and  without  him,  to  a  lost  God  and  a  corrupt 
nature. 

442.  Man’s  true  nature,  his  true  good,  true  virtue,  and  true  religion,  are  things 
of  which  the  knowledge  is  inseparable. 

443.  Greatness ,  wretchedness. — The  more  light  we  have,  the  more  greatness  and 
the  more  baseness  we  discover  in  man.  Ordinary  men — those  who  are  more  edu¬ 
cated:  philosophers,  they  astonish  ordinary  men — Christians,  they  astonish 
philosophers. 

Who  will  then  be  surprised  to  see  that  religion  only  makes  us  know  profoundly 
what  we  already  know  in  proportion  to  our  light? 

444.  This  religion  taught  to  her  children  what  men  have  only  been  able  to 
discover  by  their  greatest  knowledge. 

443.  Original  sin  is  foolishness  to  men,  but  it  is  admitted  to  be  such.  You  must 
not,  then,  reproach  me  for  the  want  of  reason  in  this  doctrine,  since  I  admit  it  to 
be  without  reason.  But  this  foolishness  is  wiser  than  all  the  wisdom  of  men, 


252  PENSEES 

sapientius  est  hominibus }  For  without  this,  what  can  we  say  that  man  is?  His  whole 
state  depends  on  this  imperceptible  point.  And  how  should  it  be  perceived  by  his 
reason,  since  it  is  a  thing  against  reason,  and  since  reason,  far  from  finding  it  out 
by  her  own  ways,  is  averse  to  it  when  it  is  presented  to  her? 

446.  Of  original  sin.  Ample  tradition  of  original  sin  according  to  the  Jews. 

On  the  saying  in  Genesis  8.21:  “The  imagination  of  man’s  heart  is  evil  from 
his  youth.’’ 

R.  Moses  Haddarschan :  This  evil  leaven  is  placed  in  man  from  the  time  that  he  is 
formed. 

Massechet  Succa:  This  evil  leaven  has  seven  names  in  Scritpure.  It  is  called  evil, 
the  foreskin ,  uncleanness ,  an  enemy ,  a  scandal ,  a  heart  of  stone ,  the  north  wind;  all  this 
signifies  the  malignity  which  is  concealed  and  impressed  in  the  heart  of  man. 

Midrasch  Tillim  says  the  same  thing  and  that  God  will  deliver  the  good  nature 
of  man  from  the  evil. 

This  malignity  is  renewed  every  day  against  man,  as  it  is  written,  Psalm  xxxvii. 
32:  “The  wicked  watcheth  the  righteous,  and  seeketh  to  slay  him’’;  but  God  will 
not  abandon  him.  This  malignity  tries  the  heart  of  man  in  this  life  and  will  accuse 
him  in  the  other.  All  this  is  found  in  the  Talmud. 

Midrasch  Tillim  on  Psalm  4.4:  “Stand  in  awe  and  sin  not.”  Stand  in  awe  and 
be  afraid  of  your  lust,  and  it  will  not  lead  you  into  sin.  And  on  Psalm  36.1: 
“The  wicked  has  said  within  his  own  heart:  Let  not  the  fear  of  God  be  before  me.” 
That  is  to  say  that  the  malignity  natural  to  man  has  said  that  to  the  wicked. 

Midrasch  el  Kohelet:  “Better  is  a  poor  and  wise  child  than  an  old  and  foolish 
king  who  cannot  foresee  the  future.”  The  child  is  virtue,  and  the  king  is  the  ma¬ 
lignity  of  man.  It  is  called  king  because  all  the  members  obey  it,  and  old  because  it  is 
in  the  human  heart  from  infancy  to  old  age,  and  foolish  because  it  leads  man  in  the 
way  of  [ perdition ],  which  he  does  not  foresee.  The  same  thing  is  in  Midrasch  Tillim. 

Bereschist  Rabba  on  Psalm  35.10:  “Lord,  all  my  bones  shall  bless  Thee, 
which  deliverest  the  poor  from  the  tyrant.”  And  is  there  a  greater  tyrant  than  the 
evil  leaven?  And  on  Proverbs  25.21:  “If  thine  enemy  be  hungry,  give  him  bread 
to  eat.”  That  is  to  say,  if  the  evil  leaven  hunger,  give  him  the  bread  of  wisdom  of 
which  it  is  spoken  in  Proverbs  9,  and  if  he  be  thirsty,  give  him  the  water  of  which 
it  is  spoken  in  Isaiah  55. 

Midrasch  Tillim  says  the  same  thing,  and  that  Scripture  in  that  passage,  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  enemy,  means  the  evil  leaven;  and  that,  in  [ giving ]  him  that  bread  and 
that  water,  we  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head. 

Midrasch  el  Kohelet  on  Ecclesiastes  9.14:  "A  great  king  besieged  a  little  city.” 
This  great  king  is  the  evil  leaven;  the  great  bulwarks  built  against  it  are  tempta¬ 
tions;  and  there  has  been  found  a  poor  wise  man  who  has  delivered  it — that  is  to 
say,  virtue. 

And  on  Psalm  41. 1 :  “Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor.” 

And  on  Psalm  78.39:  “The  spirit  passeth  away,  and  cometh  not  again”; 
whence  some  have  erroneously  argued  against  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  But 
the  sense  is  that  this  spirit  is  the  evil  leaven,  which  accompanies  man  till  death  and 
will  not  return  at  the  resurrection. 

JI  Cor.  1.25  “The  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men;  and  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger 
than  men.'’ 


SECTION  VII 


253 


And  on  Psalm  103  the  same  thing* 

And  on  Psalm  16. 

Principles  of  Rabbinism:  two  Messiahs. 

447.  Will  it  be  said  that,  as  men  have  declared  that  righteousness  has  de¬ 
parted  the  earth,  they  therefore  knew  of  original  sin? — Nemo  ante  obitum  beatus 
est 1 — that  is  to  say,  they  knew  death  to  be  the  beginning  of  eternal  and  essential 
happiness? 

448.  \Milton]  sees  well  that  nature  is  corrupt  and  that  men  are  averse  to  virtue; 
but  he  does  not  know  why  they  cannot  fly  higher. 

449.  Order. — After  Corruption  to  say:  "It  is  right  that  all  those  who  are  in  that 
state  should  know  it,  both  those  who  are  content  with  it,  and  those  who  are  not 
content  with  it;  but  it  is  not  right  that  all  should  see  Redemption." 

450.  If  we  do  not  know  ourselves  to  be  full  of  pride,  ambition,  lust,  weakness, 
misery,  and  injustice,  we  are  indeed  blind.  And  if,  knowing  this,  we  do  not  desire 
deliverance,  what  can  we  say  of  a  man  .  .  .? 

What,  then,  can  we  have  but  esteem  for  a  religion  which  knows  so  well  the 
defects  of  man,  and  desire  for  the  truth  of  a  religion  which  promises  remedies  so 
desirable? 

451.  All  men  naturally  hate  one  another.  They  employ  lust  as  far  as  possible  in 
the  service  of  the  public  weal.  But  this  is  only  a  [pretence]  and  a  false  image  of  love; 
for  at  bottom  it  is  only  hate. 

452.  To  pity  the  unfortunate  is  not  contrary  to  lust.  On  the  contrary,  we  can 
quite  well  give  such  evidence  of  friendship,  and  acquire  the  reputation  of  kindly 
feeling,  without  giving  anything. 

453.  From  lust  men  have  found  and  extracted  excellent  rules  of  policy,  morality, 
and  justice;  but  in  reality  this  vile  root  of  man,  this  figmentum  malum ,  is  only 
covered,  it  is  not  taken  away. 

454.  Injustice. — They  have  not  found  any  other  means  of  satisfying  lust  without 
doing  injury  to  others. 

455.  Self  is  hateful.  You,  Milton,  conceal  it;  you  do  not  for  that  reason  destroy 
it;  you  are,  then,  always  hateful. 

No;  for  in  acting  as  we  do  to  oblige  everybody,  we  give  no  more  occasion  for 
hatred  of  us.  That  is  true,  if  we  only  hated  in  Self  the  vexation  which  comes  to  us 
from  it.  But  if  I  hate  it  because  it  is  unjust  and  because  it  makes  itself  the  centre  of 
everything,  I  shall  always  hate  it. 

In  a  word,  the  Self  has  two  qualities:  it  is  unjust  in  itself  since  it  makes  itself  the 
centre  of  everything;  it  is  inconvenient  to  others  since  it  would  enslave  them;  for 

KDvid,  Metamorphoses ,  iii.  135.  "No  one  is  happy  before  death.” 


PENSEES 


254 

each  Self  is  the  enemy,  and  would  like  to  be  the  tyrant  of  all  others.  You  take 
away  its  inconvenience,  but  not  its  injustice,  and  so  you  do  not  render  it  lovable 
to  those  who  hate  injustice;  you  render  it  lovable  only  to  the  unjust,  who  do  not 
any  longer  find  in  it  an  enemy.  And  thus  you  remain  unjust  and  can  please  only 
the  unjust. 

456.  It  is  a  perverted  judgement  that  makes  every  one  place  himself  above  the 
rest  of  the  world,  and  prefer  his  own  good,  and  the  continuance  of  his  own  good 
fortune  and  life,  to  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world! 

457.  Each  one  is  all  in  all  to  himself;  for  he  being  dead,  all  is  dead  to  him.  Hence 
it  comes  that  each  believes  himself  to  be  all  in  all  to  everybody.  We  must  not  judge 
of  nature  by  ourselves,  but  by  it. 

458.  "All  that  is  in  the  world  is  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  or  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  or 
the  pride  of  life;  libido  sentiendi ,  libido  sciendi ,  libido  dominandi.’*1  Wretched  is  the 
cursed  land  which  these  three  rivers  of  fire  enflame  rather  than  water!  Happy  they 
who,  on  these  rivers,  are  not  overwhelmed  nor  carried  away,  but  are  immovably 
fixed,  not  standing  but  seated  on  a  low  and  secure  base,  whence  they  do  not  rise 
before  the  light,  but,  having  rested  in  peace,  stretch  out  their  hands  to  Him,  who 
must  lift  them  up,  and  make  them  stand  upright  and  firm  in  the  porches  of  the 
holy  Jerusalem!  There  pride  can  no  longer  assail  them  nor  cast  them  down;  and 
yet  they  weep,  not  to  see  all  those  perishable  things  swept  away  by  the  torrents, 
but  at  the  remembrance  of  their  loved  country,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  which 
they  remember  without  ceasing  during  their  prolonged  exile. 

459.  The  rivers  of  Babylon  rush  and  fall  and  sweep  away. 

O  holy  Zion,  where  all  is  firm  and  nothing  falls! 

We  must  sit  upon  the  waters,  not  under  them  or  in  them,  but  on  them;  and  not 
standing  but  seated;  being  seated  to  be  humble,  and  being  above  them  to  be 
secure.  But  we  shall  stand  in  the  porches  of  Jerusalem. 

Let  us  see  if  this  pleasure  is  stable  or  transitory;  if  it  pass  away,  it  is  a  river  of 
Babylon. 

460.  The  lust  of  the  flesh ,  the  lust  of  the  eyes ,  pride,  etc. — There  are  three  orders  of 
things:  the  flesh,  the  spirit,  and  the  will.  The  carnal  are  the  rich  and  kings;  they 
have  the  body  as  their  object.  Inquirers  and  scientists;  they  have  the  mind  as  their 
object.  The  wise;  they  have  righteousness  as  their  object. 

God  must  reign  over  all,  and  all  men  must  be  brought  back  to  Him.  In  things 
of  the  flesh  lust  reigns  specially;  in  intellectual  matters,  inquiry  specially;  in  wis¬ 
dom,  pride  specially.  Not  that  a  man  cannot  boast  of  wealth  or  knowledge,  but  it 
is  not  the  place  for  pride;  for  in  granting  to  a  man  that  he  is  learned,  it  is  easy  to 
convince  him  that  he  is  wrong  to  be  proud.  The  proper  place  for  pride  is  in  wis¬ 
dom,  for  it  cannot  be  granted  to  a  man  that  he  has  made  himself  wise,  and  that  he 
is  wrong  to  be  proud;  for  that  is  right.  Now  God  alone  gives  wisdom,  and  that  is 
why  Qui  glortatur ,  in  Domino  glorieturd 

*1  John  2. 16. 

2I  Cor.  1.3 1.  "He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord." 


SECTION  VII 


255 

461.  The  three  lusts  have  made  three  sects;  and  the  philosophers  have  done  no 
other  thing  than  follow  one  of  the  three  lusts. 

462.  Search  for  the  true  good \ — Ordinary  men  place  the  good  in  fortune  and  ex¬ 
ternal  goods,  or  at  least  in  amusement.  Philosophers  have  shown  the  vanity  of  all 
this  and  have  placed  it  where  they  could. 

463.  [Against  the  philosophers  who  believe  in  God  without  Jesus  Christ.] 

Philosophers. — They  believe  that  God  alone  is  worthy  to  be  loved  and  admired; 

and  they  have  desired  to  be  loved  and  admired  of  men  and  do  not  know  their  own 
corruption.  If  they  feel  full  of  feelings  of  love  and  admiration  and  find  therein 
their  chief  delight,  very  well,  let  them  think  themselves  good.  But  if  they  find 
themselves  averse  to  Him,  if  they  have  no  inclination  but  the  desire  to  establish 
themselves  in  the  esteem  of  men,  and  if  their  whole  perfection  consists  only  in 
making  men — but  without  constraint — find  their  happiness  in  loving  them,  I  de¬ 
clare  that  this  perfection  is  horrible.  What!  they  have  known  God  and  have  not 
desired  solely  that  men  should  love  Him,  but  that  men  should  stop  short  at  them! 
They  have  wanted  to  be  the  object  of  the  voluntary  delight  of  men. 

464.  Philosophers. — We  are  full  of  things  which  take  us  out  of  ourselves. 

Our  instinct  makes  us  feel  that  we  must  seek  our  happiness  outside  ourselves. 
Our  passions  impel  us  outside,  even  when  no  objects  present  themselves  to  excite 
them.  External  objects  tempt  us  of  themselves,  and  call  to  us,  even  when  we  are 
not  thinking  of  them.  And  thus  philosophers  have  said  in  vain:  "Retire  within 
yourselves,  you  will  find  your  good  there."  We  do  not  believe  them,  and  those  who 
believe  them  are  the  most  empty  and  the  most  foolish. 

465.  The  Stoics  say,  "Retire  within  yourselves;  it  is  there  you  will  find  your  rest." 
And  that  is  not  true. 

Others  say,  "Go  out  of  yourselves;  seek  happiness  in  amusement."  And  this  is 
not  true.  Illness  comes. 

Happiness  is  neither  without  us  nor  within  us.  It  is  in  God,  both  without  us  and 
within  us. 

466.  Had  Epictetus  seen  the  way  perfectly,  he  would  have  said  to  men,  "You 
follow  a  wrong  road";  he  shows  that  there  is  another,  but  he  does  not  lead  to  it. 
It  is  the  way  of  willing  what  God  wills.  Jesus  Christ  alone  leads  to  it:  Via ,  veritas.1 

The  vices  of  Zeno  himself. 

467.  The  reason  of  effects. — Epictetus.  Those  who  say,  "You  have  a  headache"; 
this  is  not  the  same  thing.  We  are  assured  of  health,  and  not  of  justice;  and  in  fact 
his  own  was  nonsense. 

And  yet  he  believed  it  demonstrable,  when  he  said,  "It  is  either  in  our  power  or 
it  is  not."  But  he  did  not  perceive  that  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  regulate  the  heart, 
and  he  was  wrong  to  infer  from  this  the  fact  that  there  were  some  Christians. 

468.  No  other  religion  has  proposed  to  men  to  hate  themselves.  No  other  reli- 

yohn  14.6.  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.” 


2  56  PENSEES 

gion,  then,  can  please  those  who  hate  themselves,  and  who  seek  a  Being  truly 
lovable.  And  these,  if  they  had  never  heard  of  the  religion  of  a  God  humiliated, 
would  embrace  it  at  once. 

469.  I  feel  that  I  might  not  have  been;  for  the  Ego  consists  in  my  thoughts. 
Therefore  I,  who  think,  would  not  have  been,  if  my  mother  had  been  killed  before 
I  had  life.  I  am  not,  then,  a  necessary  being.  In  the  same  way  I  am  not  eternal  or 
infinite;  but  I  see  plainly  that  there  exists  in  nature  a  necessary  Being,  eternal  and 
infinite. 

470.  "Had  I  seen  a  miracle,"  say  men,  "I  should  become  converted."  How  can 
they  be  sure  they  would  do  a  thing  of  the  nature  of  which  they  are  ignorant?  They 
imagine  that  this  conversion  consists  in  a  worship  of  God  which  is  like  commerce, 
and  in  a  communion  such  as  they  picture  to  themselves.  True  religion  consists  in 
annihilating  self  before  that  Universal  Being,  whom  we  have  so  often  provoked, 
and  who  can  justly  destroy  us  at  any  time;  in  recognising  that  we  can  do  nothing 
without  Him,  and  have  deserved  nothing  from  Him  but  His  displeasure.  It  con¬ 
sists  in  knowing  that  there  is  an  unconquerable  opposition  between  us  and  God, 
and  that  without  a  mediator  there  can  be  no  communion  with  Him. 

471.  It  is  unjust  that  men  should  attach  themselves  to  me,  even  though  they  do 
it  with  pleasure  and  voluntarily.  I  should  deceive  those  in  whom  I  had  created  this 
desire;  for  I  am  not  the  end  of  any,  and  I  have  not  the  wherewithal  to  satisfy  them. 
Am  I  not  about  to  die?  And  thus  the  object  of  their  attachment  will  die.  Therefore, 
as  I  would  be  blamable  in  causing  a  falsehood  to  be  believed,  though  I  should 
employ  gentle  persuasion,  though  it  should  be  believed  with  pleasure,  and  though 
it  should  give  me  pleasure;  even  so  I  am  blamable  in  making  myself  loved  and  if  I 
attract  persons  to  attach  themselves  to  me.  I  ought  to  warn  those  who  are  ready  to 
consent  to  a  lie  that  they  ought  not  to  believe  it,  whatever  advantage  comes  to  me 
from  it;  and  likewise  that  they  ought  not  to  attach  themselves  to  me;  for  they 
ought  to  spend  their  life  and  their  care  in  pleasing  God,  or  in  seeking  Him. 

472.  Self-will  will  never  be  satisfied,  though  it  should  have  command  of  all  it 
would;  but  we  are  satisfied  from  the  moment  we  renounce  it.  Without  it  we  can¬ 
not  be  discontented;  with  it  we  cannot  be  content. 

473.  Let  us  imagine  a  body  full  of  thinking  members. 

474.  Members.  To  commence  with  that. — To  regulate  the  love  which  we  owe  to 
ourselves,  we  must  imagine  a  body  full  of  thinking  members,  for  we  are  members 
of  the  whole,  and  must  see  how  each  member  should  love  itself,  etc. .  .  . 

475.  If  the  feet  and  the  hands  had  a  will  of  their  own,  they  could  only  be  in 
their  order  in  submitting  this  particular  will  to  the  primary  will  which  governs 
the  whole  body.  Apart  from  that,  they  are  in  disorder  and  mischief;  but  in  willing 
only  the  good  of  the  body,  they  accomplish  their  own  good. 

476.  We  must  love  God  only  and  hate  self  only. 


SECTION  VII  257 

If  the  foot  had  always  been  ignorant  that  it  belonged  to  the  body,  and  that 
there  was  a  body  on  which  it  depended,  if  it  had  only  had  the  knowledge  and  the 
love  of  self,  and  if  it  came  to  know  that  it  belonged  to  a  body  on  which  it  depended, 
what  regret,  what  shame  for  its  past  life,  for  having  been  useless  to  the  body 
which  inspired  its  life,  which  would  have  annihilated  it  if  it  had  rejected  it  and 
separated  it  from  itself,  as  it  kept  itself  apart  from  the  body!  What  prayers  for  its 
preservation  in  it!  And  with  what  submission  would  it  allow  itself  to  be  governed 
by  the  will  which  rules  the  body,  even  to  consenting,  if  necessary,  to  be  cut  off, 
or  it  would  lose  its  character  as  member!  For  every  member  must  be  quite  willing 
to  perish  for  the  body,  for  which  alone  the  whole  is. 

477.  It  is  false  that  we  are  worthy  of  the  love  of  others;  it  is  unfair  that  we 
should  desire  it.  If  we  were  born  reasonable  and  impartial,  knowing  ourselves  and 
others,  we  should  not  give  this  bias  to  our  will.  However,  we  are  born  with  it; 
therefore  born  unjust,  for  all  tends  to  self.  This  is  contrary  to  all  order.  We  must 
consider  the  general  good;  and  the  propensity  to  self  is  the  beginning  of  all  dis¬ 
order,  in  war,  in  politics,  in  economy,  and  in  the  particular  body  of  man.  The  will 
is  therefore  depraved. 

If  the  members  of  natural  and  civil  communities  tend  towards  the  weal  of  the 
body,  the  communities  themselves  ought  to  look  to  another  more  general  body 
of  which  they  are  members.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  look  to  the  whole.  We  are, 
therefore,  born  unjust  and  depraved. 

478.  When  we  want  to  think  of  God,  is  there  nothing  which  turns  us  away,  and 
tempts  us  to  think  of  something  else?  All  this  is  bad,  and  is  born  in  us. 

479.  If  there  is  a  God,  we  must  love  Him  only  and  not  the  creatures  of  a  day. 
The  reasoning  of  the  ungodly  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  is  only  based  upon  the 
nonexistence  of  God.  "On  that  supposition,"  say  they,  "let  us  take  delight  in 
the  creatures."  That  is  the  worst  that  can  happen.  But  if  there  were  a  God  to  love, 
they  would  not  have  come  to  this  conclusion,  but  to  quite  the  contrary.  And  this 
is  the  conclusion  of  the  wise:  "There  is  a  God;  let  us  therefore  not  take  delight 
in  the  creatures." 

Therefore  all  that  incites  us  to  attach  ourselves  to  the  creatures  is  bad;  since  it 
prevents  us  from  serving  God  if  we  know  Him,  or  from  seeking  Him  if  we  know 
Him  not.  Now  we  are  full  of  lust.  Therefore  we  are  full  of  evil;  therefore  we  ought 
to  hate  ourselves  and  all  that  excited  us  to  attach  ourselves  to  any  other  object 
than  God  only. 

480.  To  make  the  members  happy,  they  must  have  one  will  and  submit  it  to  the 
body. 

481.  The  examples  of  the  noble  deaths  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  others  scarce 
touch  us.  For  what  good  is  it  to  us?  But  the  example  of  the  death  of  the  martyrs 
touches  us;  for  they  are  "our  members."  We  have  a  common  tie  with  them.  Their 
resolution  can  form  ours,  not  only  by  example,  but  because  it  has  perhaps  de¬ 
served  ours.  There  is  nothing  of  this  in  the  examples  of  the  heathen.  We  have  no 
tie  with  them;  as  we  do  not  become  rich  by  seeing  a  stranger  who  is  so,  but  in  fact 
by  seeing  a  father  or  a  husband  who  is  so. 


258  PENSEES 

482.  Morality. — God  having  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  which  do  not  feel 
the  happiness  of  their  being,  He  has  willed  to  make  beings  who  should  know  it, 
and  who  should  compose  a  body  of  thinking  members.  For  our  members  do  not 
feel  the  happiness  of  their  union,  of  their  wonderful  intelligence,  of  the  care  which 
has  been  taken  to  infuse  into  them  minds,  and  to  make  them  grow  and  endure. 
How  happy  they  would  be  if  they  saw  and  felt  it!  But  for  this  they  would  need  to 
have  intelligence  to  know  it,  and  good-will  to  consent  to  that  of  the  universal 
soul.  But  if,  having  received  intelligence,  they  employed  it  to  retain  nourishment 
for  themselves  without  allowing  it  to  pass  to  the  other  members,  they  would  be 
not  only  unjust,  but  also  miserable,  and  would  hate  rather  than  love  themselves; 
their  blessedness,  as  well  as  their  duty,  consisting  in  their  consent  to  the  guidance 
of  the  whole  soul  to  which  they  belong,  which  loves  them  better  than  they  love 
themselves. 

483.  To  be  a  member  is  to  have  neither  life,  being,  nor  movement,  except 
through  the  spirit  of  the  body,  and  for  the  body. 

The  separate  member,  seeing  no  longer  the  body  to  which  it  belongs,  has  only 
a  perishing  and  dying  existence.  Yet  it  believes  it  is  a  whole,  and,  seeing  not  the 
body  on  which  it  depends,  it  believes  it  depends  only  on  self  and  desires  to  make 
itself  both  centre  and  body.  But  not  having  in  itself  a  principle  of  life,  it  only  goes 
astray  and  is  astonished  in  the  uncertainty  of  its  being;  perceiving  in  fact  that  it  is 
not  a  body,  and  still  not  seeing  that  it  is  a  member  of  a  body.  In  short,  when  it 
comes  to  know  itself,  it  has  returned,  as  it  were,  to  its  own  home,  and  loves  itself 
only  for  the  body.  It  deplores  its  past  wanderings. 

It  cannot  by  its  nature  love  any  other  thing,  except  for  itself  and  to  subject  it  to 
self,  because  each  thing  loves  itself  more  than  all.  But,  in  loving  the  body,  it  loves 
itself,  because  it  only  exists  in  it,  by  it,  and  for  it.  Qui  adhceret  Deo  unusspiritus  est } 

The  body  loves  the  hand;  and  the  hand,  if  it  had  a  will,  should  love  itself  in  the 
same  way  as  it  is  loved  by  the  soul.  All  love  which  goes  beyond  this  is  unfair. 

Adharens  Deo  unus  spiritus  est.  We  love  ourselves,  because  we  are  members  of 
Jesus  Christ.  We  love  Jesus  Christ,  because  He  is  the  body  of  which  we  are  mem¬ 
bers.  All  is  one,  one  is  in  the  other,  like  the  Three  Persons. 

484.  Two  laws  suffice  to  rule  the  whole  Christian  Republic  better  than  all  the 
laws  of  statecraft. 

485.  The  true  and  only  virtue,  then,  is  to  hate  self  (for  we  are  hateful  on  account 
of  lust)  and  to  seek  a  truly  lovable  being  to  love.  But  as  we  cannot  love  what  is 
outside  ourselves,  we  must  love  a  being  who  is  in  us  and  is  not  ourselves;  and 
that  is  true  of  each  and  all  men.  Now,  only  the  Universal  Being  is  such.  The  king¬ 
dom  of  God  is  within  us;  the  universal  good  is  within  us,  is  ourselves — and  not 
ourselves. 

486.  The  dignity  of  man  in  his  innocence  consisted  in  using  and  having  domin¬ 
ion  over  the  creatures,  but  now  in  separating  himself  from  them  and  subjecting 
himself  to  them. 

487.  Every  religion  is  false  which,  as  to  its  faith,  does  not  worship  one  God  as 

XI  Cor.  6.17.  ’’But  he  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit.” 


SECTION  VII  259 

the  origin  of  everything  and  which,  as  to  its  morality,  does  not  love  one  only  God 
as  the  object  of  everything. 

488.  .  .  .  But  it  is  impossible  that  God  should  ever  be  the  end,  if  He  is  not  the 
beginning.  We  lift  our  eyes  on  high,  but  lean  upon  the  sand;  and  the  earth  will 
dissolve,  and  we  shall  fall  whilst  looking  at  the  heavens. 

489.  If  there  is  one  sole  source  of  everything,  there  is  one  sole  end  of  everything; 
everything  through  Him,  everything  for  Him.  The  true  religion,  then,  must  teach 
us  to  worship  Him  only,  and  to  love  Him  only.  But  as  we  find  ourselves  unable  to 
worship  what  we  know  not,  and  to  love  any  other  object  but  ourselves,  the  religion 
which  instructs  us  in  these  duties  must  instruct  us  also  of  this  inability,  and  teach 
us  also  the  remedies  for  it.  It  teaches  us  that  by  one  man  all  was  lost,  and  the  bond 
broken  between  God  and  us,  and  that  by  one  man  the  bond  is  renewed. 

We  are  born  so  averse  to  this  love  of  God,  and  it  is  so  necessary,  that  we  must  be 
born  guilty,  or  God  would  be  unjust. 

490.  Men,  not  being  accustomed  to  form  merit,  but  only  to  recompense  it  where 
they  find  it  formed,  judge  of  God  by  themselves. 

491.  The  true  religion  must  have  as  a  characteristic  the  obligation  to  love  God. 
This  is  very  just,  and  yet  no  other  religion  has  commanded  this;  ours  has  done  so. 
It  must  also  be  aware  of  human  lust  and  weakness;  ours  is  so.  It  must  have  ad¬ 
duced  remedies  for  this;  one  is  prayer.  No  other  religion  has  asked  of  God  to  love 
and  follow  Him. 

492.  He  who  hates  not  in  himself  his  self-love,  and  that  instinct  which  leads  him 
to  make  himself  God,  is  indeed  blinded.  Who  does  not  see  that  there  is  nothing 
so  opposed  to  justice  and  truth?  For  it  is  false  that  we  deserve  this,  and  it  is  unfair 
and  impossible  to  attain  it,  since  all  demand  the  same  thing.  It  is,  then,  a  manifest 
injustice  which  is  innate  in  us,  of  which  we  cannot  get  rid,  and  of  which  we  must 
get  rid. 

Yet  no  religion  has  indicated  that  this  was  a  sin;  or  that  we  were  born  in  it;  or 
that  we  were  obliged  to  resist  it;  or  has  thought  of  giving  us  remedies  for  it. 

493.  The  true  religion  teaches  our  duties;  our  weaknesses,  pride,  and  lust;  and 
the  remedies,  humility  and  mortification. 

494.  The  true  religion  must  teach  greatness  and  misery;  must  lead  to  the  esteem 
and  contempt  of  self,  to  love  and  to  hate. 

495.  If  it  is  an  extraordinary  blindness  to  live  without  investigating  what  we  are, 
it  is  a  terrible  one  to  live  an  evil  life,  while  believing  in  God. 

496.  Experience  makes  us  see  an  enormous  difference  between  piety  and  good¬ 
ness. 

497.  Against  those  who ,  trusting  to  the  mercy  of  God,  live  heedlessly ,  without  doing  good 
works. — As  the  two  sources  of  our  sins  are  pride  and  sloth,  God  has  revealed  to  us 


260  PENSEES 

two  of  His  attributes  to  cure  them,  mercy  and  justice.  The  property  of  justice  is  to 
humble  pride,  however  holy  may  be  our  works,  et  non  intres  in  judicium,  etc.;  and 
the  property  of  mercy  is  to  combat  sloth  by  exhorting  to  good  works,  according 
to  that  passage:  "The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  to  repentance,"  and  that  other  of 
the  Ninevites:  "Let  us  do  penance  to  see  if  peradventure  He  will  pity  us."  And 
thus  mercy  is  so  far  from  authorising  slackness  that  it  is  on  the  contrary  the  qual¬ 
ity  which  formally  attacks  it;  so  that  instead  of  saying,  "If  there  were  no  mercy 
in  God  we  should  have  to  make  every  kind  of  effort  after  virtue,"  we  must  say,  on 
the  contrary,  that  it  is  because  there  is  mercy  in  God  that  we  must  make  every  kind 
of  effort. 

498.  It  is  true  there  is  difficulty  in  entering  into  godliness.  But  this  difficulty  does 
not  arise  from  the  religion  which  begins  in  us,  but  from  the  irreligion  which  is  still 
there.  If  our  senses  were  not  opposed  to  penitence,  and  if  our  corruption  were  not 
opposed  to  the  purity  of  God,  there  would  be  nothing  in  this  painful  to  us.  We 
suffer  only  in  proportion  as  the  vice  which  is  natural  to  us  resists  supernatural 
grace.  Our  heart  feels  torn  asunder  between  these  opposed  efforts.  But  it  would  be 
very  unfair  to  impute  this  violence  to  God,  who  is  drawing  us  on,  instead  of  to 
the  world,  which  is  holding  us  back.  It  is  as  a  child,  which  a  mother  tears  from 
the  arms  of  robbers,  in  the  pain  it  suffers,  should  love  the  loving  and  legitimate 
violence  of  her  who  procures  its  liberty,  and  detest  only  the  impetuous  and  tyran¬ 
nical  violence  of  those  who  detain  it  unjustly.  The  most  cruel  war  which  God  can 
make  with  men  in  this  life  is  to  leave  them  without  that  war  which  He  came  to 
bring.  "I  came  to  send  war,"  He  says,  "and  to  teach  them  of  this  war.  I  came  to 
bring  fire  and  the  sword."  Before  Him  the  world  lived  in  this  false  peace. 

499.  External  works. — There  is  nothing  so  perilous  as  what  pleases  God  and  man. 
For  those  states,  which  please  God  and  man,  have  one  property  which  pleases 
God,  and  another  which  pleases  men;  as  the  greatness  of  Saint  Teresa.  What 
pleased  God  was  her  deep  humility  in  the  midst  of  her  revelations;  what  pleased 
men  was  her  light.  And  so  we  torment  ourselves  to  imitate  her  discourses,  think¬ 
ing  to  imitate  her  conditions,  and  not  so  much  to  love  what  God  loves  and  to  put 
ourselves  in  the  state  which  God  loves. 

It  is  better  not  to  fast,  and  be  thereby  humbled,  than  to  fast  and  be  self-satisfied 
therewith.  The  Pharisee  and  the  Publican. 

What  use  will  memory  be  to  me,  if  it  can  alike  hurt  and  help  me,  and  all  depends 
upon  the  blessing  of  God,  who  gives  only  to  things  done  for  Him,  according  to 
His  rules  and  in  His  ways,  the  manner  being  thus  as  important  as  the  thing  and 
perhaps  more;  since  God  can  bring  forth  good  out  of  evil,  and  without  God  we 
bring  forth  evil  out  of  good? 

500.  The  meaning  of  the  words,  good  and  evil. 

501.  First  step:  to  be  blamed  for  doing  evil,  and  praised  for  doing  good. 

Second  step:  to  be  neither  praised  nor  blamed. 

502.  Abraham  took  nothing  for  himself,  but  only  for  his  servants.  So  the  right¬ 
eous  man  takes  for  himself  nothing  of  the  world,  nor  of  the  applause  of  the  world, 


26i 


SECTION  VII 

but  only  for  his  passions,  which  he  uses  as  their  master,  saying  to  the  one,  "Go,” 
and  to  another,  ’‘Come/’  Sub  te  erit  appetitus  turn}  The  passions  thus  subdued  are 
virtues.  Even  God  attributes  to  Himself  avarice,  jealousy,  anger;  and  these  are 
virtues  as  well  as  kindness,  pity,  constancy,  which  are  also  passions.  We  must 
employ  them  as  slaves,  and,  leaving  to  them  their  food,  prevent  the  soul  from 
taking  any  of  it.  For,  when  the  passions  become  masters,  they  are  vices;  and 
they  give  their  nutriment  to  the  soul,  and  the  soul  nourishes  itself  upon  it  and 
is  poisoned. 

503.  Philosophers  have  consecrated  the  vices  by  placing  them  in  God  Himself. 
Christians  have  consecrated  the  virtues. 

504.  The  just  man  acts  by  faith  in  the  least  things;  when  he  reproves  his  serv¬ 
ants,  he  desires  their  conversion  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  prays  God  to  correct 
them;  and  he  expects  as  much  from  God  as  from  his  own  reproofs,  and  prays  God 
to  bless  his  corrections.  And  so  in  all  his  other  actions  he  proceeds  with  the  Spirit 
of  God;  and  his  actions  deceive  us  by  reason  of  the  ...  or  suspension  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  him;  and  he  repents  in  his  affliction. 

305.  All  things  can  be  deadly  to  us,  even  the  things  made  to  serve  us;  as  in  na¬ 
ture  walls  can  kill  us,  and  stairs  can  kill  us,  if  we  do  not  walk  circumspectly. 

The  least  movement  affects  all  nature;  the  entire  sea  changes  because  of  a  rock. 
Thus,  in  grace,  the  least  action  affects  everything  by  its  consequences;  therefore 
everything  is  important. 

In  each  action  we  must  look  beyond  the  action  at  our  past,  present,  and  future 
state,  and  at  others  whom  it  affects,  and  see  the  relations  of  all  those  things.  And 
then  we  shall  be  very  cautious. 

506.  Let  God  not  impute  to  us  our  sins,  that  is  to  say,  all  the  consequences  and 
results  of  our  sins,  which  are  dreadful,  even  those  of  the  smallest  faults,  if  we  wish 
to  follow  them  out  mercilessly! 

507.  The  spirit  of  grace;  the  hardness  of  the  heart;  external  circumstances. 

508.  Grace  is  indeed  needed  to  turn  a  man  into  a  saint;  and  he  who  doubts  it 
does  not  know  what  a  saint  or  a  man  is. 

309.  Philosophers. — A  fine  thing  to  cry  to  a  man  who  does  not  know  himself, 
that  he  should  come  of  himself  to  God !  And  a  fine  thing  to  say  so  to  a  man  who 
does  know  himself! 

510.  Man  is  not  worthy  of  God,  but  he  is  not  incapable  of  being  made  worthy. 

It  is  unworthy  of  God  to  unite  Himself  to  wretched  man;  but  it  is  not  unworthy 

of  God  to  pull  him  out  of  his  misery. 

51 1.  If  we  would  say  that  man  is  too  insignificant  to  deserve  communion  with 
God,  we  must  indeed  be  very  great  to  judge  of  it. 

^en.  4.7.  "Unto  thee  shall  be  his  desire.” 


262  PENSEES 

512.  It  is,  in  peculiar  phraseology,  wholly  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  can¬ 
not  be  said  to  be  the  whole  body  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  union  of  two  things  with¬ 
out  change  does  not  enable  us  to  say  that  one  becomes  the  other;  the  soul  thus 
being  united  to  the  body,  the  fire  to  the  timber,  without  change.  But  change  is 
necessary  to  make  the  form  of  the  one  become  the  form  of  the  other;  thus  the 
union  of  the  Word  to  man.  Because  my  body  without  my  soul  would  not  make 
the  body  of  a  man;  therefore  my  soul  united  to  any  matter  whatsoever  will 
make  my  body.  It  does  not  distinguish  the  necessary  condition  from  the  suffi¬ 
cient  condition;  the  union  is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient.  The  left  arm  is  not 
the  right. 

Impenetrability  is  a  property  of  matter. 

Identity  de  numero  in  regard  to  the  same  time  requires  the  identity  of  matter. 

Thus  if  God  united  my  soul  to  a  body  in  China,  the  same  body,  idem  numero 
would  be  in  China. 

The  same  river  which  runs  there  is  idem  numero  as  that  which  runs  at  the  same 
time  in  China. 

513.  Why  God  has  established  prayer. 

1.  To  communicate  to  His  creatures  the  dignity  of  causality. 

2.  To  teach  us  from  whom  our  virtue  comes. 

3.  To  make  us  deserve  other  virtues  by  work. 

(But  to  keep  His  own  pre-eminence,  He  grants  prayer  to  whom  He  pleases.) 

Objection:  But  we  believe  that  we  hold  prayer  of  ourselves. 

This  is  absurd;  for  since,  though  having  faith,  we  cannot  have  virtues,  how 
should  we  have  faith?  Is  there  a  greater  distance  between  infidelity  and  faith  than 
between  faith  and  virtue? 

Merit.  This  word  is  ambiguous. 

Meruit  habere  Redemptorem? 

Meruit  tarn  sacra  membra  t anger e? 

Digno  tarn  sacra  membra  tangere? 

Non  sum  dignus ? 

Qui  manducat  indignus ? 

Dignus  est  accipere? 

Dignare  me? 

God  is  only  bound  according  to  His  promises.  He  has  promised  to  grant  justice 
to  prayers;  He  has  never  promised  prayer  only  to  the  children  of  promise. 

Saint  Augustine  has  distinctly  said  that  strength  would  be  taken  away  from  the 
righteous.  But  it  is  by  chance  that  he  said  it;  for  it  might  have  happened  that  the 
occasion  of  saying  it  did  not  present  itself.  But  his  principles  make  us  see  that, 
when  the  occasion  for  it  presented  itself,  it  was  impossible  that  he  should  not  say 
it,  or  that  he  should  say  anything  to  the  contrary.  It  is  then  rather  that  he  was 
forced  to  say  it,  when  the  occasion  presented  itself,  than  that  he  said  it,  when  the 

Office  for  Holy  Saturday.  "Which  won  for  us  a  Saviour." 

2Office  for  Good  Friday.  "Which  won  for  us  God’s  hallowed  members  to  embrace." 

3Hymn  Vexilla  regis.  "Worthy  God’s  hallowed  members  to  embrace." 

4Luke  7.6  "I  am  not  worthy." 

6I  Cor.  11.29.  "Who  eateth  unworthily." 

6Rev.  4. 11.  "Thou  art  worthy  to  receive." 

7Office  of  the  Holy  Virgin.  "Make  me  worthy." 


SECTION  VII  263 

occasion  presented  itself,  the  one  being  of  necessity,  the  other  of  chance.  But  the 
two  are  all  that  we  can  ask. 

514.  "Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear.” 

Proofs  of  prayer.  Petenti  dabitur.1 

Therefore  it  is  in  our  power  to  ask.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  God.  So  it  is  not 
in  our  power,  since  the  obtaining  of  (the  grace)  to  pray  to  Him  is  not  in  our  power. 
For  since  salvation  is  not  in  us,  and  the  obtaining  of  such  grace  is  from  Him, 
prayer  is  not  in  our  power. 

The  righteous  man  should  then  hope  no  more  in  God,  for  he  ought  not  to 
hope,  but  to  strive  to  obtain  what  he  wants. 

Let  us  conclude  then  that,  since  man  is  now  unrighteous  since  the  first  sin,  and 
God  is  unwilling  that  he  should  thereby  not  be  estranged  from  Him,  it  is  only  by 
a  first  effect  that  he  is  not  estranged. 

Therefore,  those  who  depart  from  God  have  not  this  first  effect  without  which 
they  are  not  estranged  from  God,  and  those  who  do  not  depart  from  God  have 
this  first  effect.  Therefore,  those  whom  we  have  seen  possessed  for  some  time  of 
grace  by  this  first  effect,  cease  to  pray,  for  want  of  this  first  effect. 

Then  God  abandons  the  first  in  this  sense. 

515.  The  elect  will  be  ignorant  of  their  virtues,  and  the  outcast  of  the  great¬ 
ness  of  their  sins:  "Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an  hungered,  thirsty”?  etc. 

516.  Romans  3.27 .  Boasting  is  excluded.  By  what  law?  Of  works?  Nay,  but  by 
faith.  Then  faith  is  not  within  our  power  like  the  deeds  of  the  law,  and  it  is  given 
to  us  in  another  way. 

517.  Comfort  yourselves.  It  is  not  from  yourselves  that  you  should  expect 
grace;  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  in  expecting  nothing  from  yourselves  that  you 
must  hope  for  it. 

518.  Every  condition,  and  even  the  martyrs,  have  to  fear,  according  to  Scripture. 

The  greatest  pain  of  purgatory  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  judgement.  Deus  ab- 

sconditus .2 

519.  John  8.  Multi  crediderunt  in  eum.  Dicebat  ergo  Jesus :  "Si  manseritis  .  .  .  Vere 
mei  discipuli  eritis ,  et  Veritas  Liberabit  Vos.”  Responderunt:  " Semen  Abrahce  sumus, 
et  nemini  servimus  unquam .  ’  ’3 

There  is  a  great  difference  between  disciples  and  true  disciples.  We  recognise 
them  by  telling  them  that  the  truth  will  make  them  free;  for  if  they  answer  that 
they  are  free  and  that  it  is  in  their  power  to  come  out  of  slavery  to  the  devil,  they 
are  indeed  disciples,  but  not  true  disciples. 

520.  The  law  has  not  destroyed  nature,  but  has  instructed  it;  grace  has  not  de- 

'Matthew,  7.7,  “Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you.” 

2Is-  45-15. 

33°-33-  "Many  believed  on  him.  Then  Jesus  said:  Tf  ye  continue  .  . .  then  ye  are  my  dis¬ 
ciples  indeed,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free.’  They  answered  him:  'We  be  Abraham’s 
seed,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man.’” 


PENSEES 


264 

stroyed  the  law,  but  has  made  it  act.  Faith  received  at  baptism  is  the  source  of  the 
whole  life  of  Christians  and  of  the  converted. 

521.  Grace  will  always  be  in  the  world,  and  nature  also;  so  that  the  former  is  in 
some  sort  natural.  And  thus  there  will  always  be  Pelagians,  and  always  Catholics, 
and  always  strife;  because  the  first  birth  makes  the  one,  and  the  grace  of  the  second 
birth  the  other. 

522.  The  law  imposed  what  it  did  not  give.  Grace  gives  what  it  imposes. 

523.  All  faith  consists  in  Jesus  Christ  and  in  Adam,  and  all  morality  in  lust  and 
in  grace. 

524.  There  is  no  doctrine  more  appropriate  to  man  than  this,  which  teaches  him 
his  double  capacity  of  receiving  and  of  losing  grace,  because  of  the  double  peril 
to  which  he  is  exposed,  of  despair  or  of  pride. 

525.  The  philosophers  did  not  prescribe  feelings  suitable  to  the  two  states. 

They  inspired  feelings  of  pure  greatness,  and  that  is  not  man’s  state. 

They  inspired  feelings  of  pure  littleness,  and  that  is  not  man’s  state. 

There  must  be  feelings  of  humility,  not  from  nature,  but  from  penitence,  not  to 
rest  in  them,  but  to  go  on  to  greatness.  There  must  be  feelings  of  greatness,  not 
from  merit,  but  from  grace,  and  after  having  passed  through  humiliation. 

326.  Misery  induces  despair,  pride  induces  presumption.  The  Incarnation 
shows  man  the  greatness  of  his  misery  by  the  greatness  of  the  remedy  which  he 
required. 

527.  The  knowledge  of  God  without  that  of  man’s  misery  causes  pride.  The 
knowledge  of  man’s  misery  without  that  of  God  causes  despair.  The  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ  constitutes  the  middle  course,  because  in  Him  we  find  both  God 
and  our  misery. 

528.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  God  whom  we  approach  without  pride  and  before  whom 
we  humble  ourselves  without  despair. 

529.  .  .  .  Not  a  degradation  which  renders  us  incapable  of  good,  nor  a  holiness 
exempt  from  evil. 

530.  A  person  told  me  one  day  that  on  coming  from  confession  he  felt  great  joy 
and  confidence.  Another  told  me  that  he  remained  in  fear.  Whereupon  I  thought 
that  these  two  together  would  make  one  good  man,  and  that  each  was  wanting  in 
that  he  had  not  the  feeling  of  the  other.  The  same  often  happens  in  other  things. 

531.  He  who  knows  the  will  of  his  master  will  be  beaten  with  more  blows,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  power  he  has  by  his  knowledge.  Qui  just  us  est ,  justificetur  adhucj  be¬ 
cause  of  the  power  he  has  by  justice.  From  him  who  has  received  most,  will  the 
greatest  reckoning  be  demanded,  because  of  the  power  he  has  by  this  help. 

^ev.  22.11.  "He  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous  still." 


SECTION  VII  265 

532.  Scripture  has  provided  passages  of  consolation  and  of  warning  for  all  con¬ 
ditions. 

Nature  seems  to  have  done  the  same  thing  by  her  two  infinities,  natural  and 
moral;  for  we  shall  always  have  the  higher  and  the  lower,  the  more  clever  and  the 
less  clever,  the  most  exalted  and  the  meanest,  in  order  to  humble  our  pride  and 
exalt  our  humility. 

533.  Comminutum  cor  (Saint  Paul).1  This  is  the  Christian  character.  Alba  has 
named  you,  I  know  you  no  more  (Corneille).  That  is  the  inhuman  character.  The  hu¬ 
man  character  is  the  opposite. 

534.  There  are  only  two  kinds  of  men:  the  righteous  who  believe  themselves 
sinners;  the  rest,  sinners,  who  believe  themselves  righteous. 

535.  We  owe  a  great  debt  to  those  who  point  out  faults.  For  they  mortify  us. 
They  teach  us  that  we  have  been  despised.  They  do  not  prevent  our  being  so  in 
the  future;  for  we  have  many  other  faults  for  which  we  may  be  despised.  They  pre¬ 
pare  for  us  the  exercise  of  correction  and  freedom  from  fault. 

536.  Man  is  so  made  that  by  continually  telling  him  he  is  a  fool  he  believes  it, 
and  by  continually  telling  it  to  himself  he  makes  himself  believe  it.  For  man  holds 
an  inward  talk  with  his  self  alone,  which  it  behoves  him  to  regulate  well:  Corrum- 
punt  bonos  mores  colloquia prava.2lWe  must  keep  silent  as  much  as  possible  and  talk 
with  ourselves  only  of  God,  whom  we  know  to  be  true;  and  thus  we  convince  our¬ 
selves  of  the  truth. 

537.  Christianity  is  strange.  It  bids  man  recognise  that  he  is  vile,  even  abomi¬ 
nable,  and  bids  him  desire  to  be  like  God.  Without  such  a  counterpoise,  this  dig¬ 
nity  would  make  him  horribly  vain,  or  this  humiliation  would  make  him  terribly 
abject. 

538.  With  how  little  pride  does  a  Christian  believe  himself  united  to  God!  With 
how  little  humiliation  does  he  place  himself  on  a  level  with  the  worms  of  earth! 

A  glorious  manner  to  welcome  life  and  death,  good  and  evil! 

539.  What  difference  in  point  of  obedience  is  there  between  a  soldier  and  a 
Carthusian  monk?  For  both  are  equally  under  obedience  and  dependent,  both  en¬ 
gaged  in  equally  painful  exercises.  But  the  soldier  always  hopes  to  command  and 
never  attains  this,  for  even  captains  and  princes  are  ever  slaves  and  dependants;  still 
he  ever  hopes  and  ever  works  to  attain  this.  Whereas  the  Carthusian  monk  makes 
a  vow  to  be  always  dependent.  So  they  do  not  differ  in  their  perpetual  thraldom, 
in  which  both  of  them  always  exist,  but  in  the  hope,  which  one  always  has,  and 
the  other  never. 

540.  The  hope  which  Christians  have  of  possessing  an  infinite  good  is  mingled 
with  real  enjoyment  as  well  as  with  fear;  for  it  is  not  as  with  those  who  should 

lCircumcidentes  cor.  Rom.  2.  "Circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart." 

2I  Cor.  15.33.  "Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners." 


266 


PENSEES 


hope  for  a  kingdom,  of  which  they,  being  subjects,  would  have  nothing;  but  they 
hope  for  holiness,  for  freedom  from  injustice,  and  they  have  something  of  this. 

541.  None  is  so  happy  as  a  true  Christian,  nor  so  reasonable,  virtuous,  or  ami¬ 
able. 

542.  The  Christian  religion  alone  makes  man  altogether  lovable  and  happy.  In 
honesty,  we  cannot  perhaps  be  altogether  lovable  and  happy. 

543.  Preface. — The  metaphysical  proofs  of  God  are  so  remote  from  the  reason¬ 
ing  of  men,  and  so  complicated,  that  they  make  little  impression;  and  if  they 
should  be  of  service  to  some,  it  would  be  only  during  the  moment  that  they  see 
such  demonstration;  but  an  hour  afterwards  they  fear  they  have  been  mistaken. 

Quod  curiositate  cognoverunt  superbia  amiserunt } 

This  is  the  result  of  the  knowledge  of  God  obtained  without  Jesus  Christ;  it  is 
communion  without  a  mediator  with  the  God  whom  they  have  known  without  a 
mediator.  Whereas  those  who  have  known  God  by  a  mediator  know  their  own 
wretchedness. 

544.  The  God  of  the  Christians  is  a  God  who  makes  the  soul  feel  that  He  is  her 
only  good,  that  her  only  rest  is  in  Him,  that  her  only  delight  is  in  loving  Him;  and 
who  makes  her  at  the  same  time  abhor  the  obstacles  which  keep  her  back  and  pre¬ 
vent  her  from  loving  God  with  all  her  strength.  Self-love  and  lust,  which  hinder 
us,  are  unbearable  to  her.  Thus  God  makes  her  feel  that  she  has  this  root  of  self- 
love  which  destroys  her,  and  which  He  alone  can  cure. 

545.  Jesus  Christ  did  nothing  but  teach  men  that  they  loved  themselves,  that 
they  were  slaves,  blind,  sick,  wretched,  and  sinners;  that  He  must  deliver  them, 
enlighten,  bless,  and  heal  them;  that  this  would  be  effected  by  hating  self,  and  by 
following  Him  through  suffering  and  the  death  on  the  cross. 

546.  Without  Jesus  Christ  man  must  be  in  vice  and  misery;  with  Jesus  Christ 
man  is  free  from  vice  and  misery;  in  Him  is  all  our  virtue  and  all  our  happiness. 
Apart  from  Him  there  is  but  vice,  misery,  darkness,  death,  despair. 

547.  We  know  God  only  by  Jesus  Christ.  Without  this  mediator,  all  communion 
with  God  is  taken  away;  through  Jesus  Christ  we  know  God.  All  those  who  have 
claimed  to  know  God,  and  to  prove  Him  without  Jesus  Christ,  have  had  only 
weak  proofs.  But  in  proof  of  Jesus  Christ  we  have  the  prophecies,  which  are  solid 
and  palpable  proofs.  And  these  prophecies,  being  accomplished  and  proved  true 
by  the  event,  mark  the  certainty  of  these  truths  and,  therefore,  the  divinity  of 
Christ.  In  Him,  then,  and  through  Him,  we  know  God.  Apart  from  Him,  and 
without  the  Scripture,  without  original  sin,  without  a  necessary  mediator  promised 
and  come,  we  cannot  absolutely  prove  God,  nor  teach  right  doctrine  and  right 
morality.  But  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  Jesus  Christ,  we  prove  God,  and  teach 
morality  and  doctrine.  Jesus  Christ  is,  then,  the  true  God  of  men. 

r<What  they  have  found  by  their  curiosity,  they  have  lost  by  their  pride.”  Quod  curiositate 
invenerunty  superbia  perdiderunt.  St.  Augustine,  Sermon  cxli. 


SECTION  VII  267 

But  we  know  at  the  same  time  our  wretchedness;  for  this  God  is  none  other 
than  the  Saviour  of  our  wretchedness.  So  we  can  only  know  God  well  by  knowing 
our  iniquities.  Therefore  those  who  have  known  God,  without  knowing  their 
wretchedness,  have  not  glorified  Him,  but  have  glorified  themselves.  Quia  .  .  .  non 
cognovit per  sapientiam  .  .  . placuit  Deo per  stultitiam prcedicationis  salvos  facere} 

548.  Not  only  do  we  know  God  by  Jesus  Christ  alone,  but  we  know  ourselves 
only  by  Jesus  Christ.  We  know  life  and  death  only  through  Jesus  Christ.  Apart 
from  Jesus  Christ,  we  do  not  know  what  is  our  life,  nor  our  death,  nor  God,  nor 
ourselves. 

Thus  without  the  Scripture,  which  has  Jesus  Christ  alone  for  its  object,  we 
know  nothing,  and  see  only  darkness  and  confusion  in  the  nature  of  God  and  in 
our  own  nature. 

549.  It  is  not  only  impossible  but  useless  to  know  God  without  Jesus  Christ. 
They  have  not  departed  from  Him,  but  approached;  they  have  not  humbled  them¬ 
selves,  but . . . 

Quo  quisque  optimus  est ,  pessimus ,  si  hoc  ip  sum,  quod  optimus  est ,  adscrihat  sihi.2 

550.  I  love  poverty  because  He  loved  it.  I  love  riches  because  they  afford  me  the 
means  of  helping  the  very  poor.  I  keep  faith  with  everybody;  I  do  not  render  evil 
to  those  who  wrong  me,  but  I  wish  them  a  lot  like  mine,  in  which  I  receive  neither 
evil  nor  good  from  men.  I  try  to  be  just,  true,  sincere,  and  faithful  to  all  men;  I 
have  a  tender  heart  for  those  to  whom  God  has  more  closely  united  me;  and  wheth¬ 
er  I  am  alone,  or  seen  of  men,  I  do  all  my  actions  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  must 
judge  of  them,  and  to  whom  I  have  consecrated  them  all. 

These  are  my  sentiments;  and  every  day  of  my  life  I  bless  my  Redeemer,  who 
has  implanted  them  in  me,  and  who,  of  a  man  full  of  weakness,  of  miseries,  of  lust, 
of  pride,  and  of  ambition,  has  made  a  man  free  from  all  these  evils  by  the  power  of 
His  grace,  to  which  all  the  glory  of  it  is  due,  as  of  myself  I  have  only  misery  and 
error. 

551.  Dignior plagis  quam  osculis  non  timeo  quia  amo.z 

552.  The  Sepulchre  of  Jesus  Christ. — Jesus  Christ  was  dead,  but  seen  on  the  Cross. 
He  was  dead,  and  hidden  in  the  Sepulchre. 

Jesus  Christ  was  buried  by  the  saints  alone. 

Jesus  Christ  wrought  no  miracle  at  the  Sepulchre. 

Only  the  saints  entered  it. 

It  is  there,  not  on  the  Cross,  that  Jesus  Christ  takes  a  new  life. 

It  is  the  last  mystery  of  the  Passion  and  the  Redemption. 

Jesus  Christ  had  nowhere  to  rest  on  earth  but  in  the  Sepulchre.  His  enemies  only 
ceased  to  persecute  Him  at  the  Sepulchre. 

*1  Cor.  1.2 1.  " Which  ...  by  wisdom  knew  not  ...  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe/’ 

2St.  Bernard,  Sermones  in  Cantica  Canticorum ,  lxxxiv.  "The  better  one  is,  the  worse  one  be¬ 
comes,  if  one  attributes  the  cause  of  this  goodness  to  one’s  self." 

Hbid.  "Meriting  blows  more  than  kisses,  I  fear  not,  because  I  love." 


268 


PENSEES 

553.  The  Mystery  of  Jesus. — Jesus  suffers  in  His  passions  the  torments  which  men 
inflict  upon  Him;  but  in  His  agony  He  suffers  the  torments  which  He  inflicts  on 
Himself;  turbare  semetipsum }  This  is  a  suffering  from  no  human,  but  an  almighty 
hand,  for  He  must  be  almighty  to  bear  it. 

Jesus  seeks  some  comfort  at  least  in  His  three  dearest  friends,  and  they  are 
asleep.  He  prays  them  to  bear  with  Him  for  a  little,  and  they  leave  Him  with  entire 
indifference,  having  so  little  compassion  that  it  could  not  prevent  their  sleeping 
even  for  a  moment.  And  thus  Jesus  was  left  alone  to  the  wrath  of  God. 

Jesus  is  alone  on  the  earth,  without  any  one  not  only  to  feel  and  share  His  suf¬ 
fering,  but  even  to  know  of  it;  He  and  Heaven  were  alone  in  that  knowledge. 

Jesus  is  in  a  garden,  not  of  delight  as  the  first  Adam,  where  he  lost  himself  and 
the  whole  human  race,  but  in  one  of  agony,  where  He  saved  Himself  and  the 
whole  human  race. 

He  suffers  this  affliction  and  this  desertion  in  the  horror  of  night. 

I  believe  that  Jesus  never  complained  but  on  this  single  occasion;  but  then  He 
complained  as  if  he  could  no  longer  bear  His  extreme  suffering.  "My  soul  is  sor¬ 
rowful,  even  unto  death." 

Jesus  seeks  companionship  and  comfort  from  men.  This  is  the  sole  occasion  in 
all  His  life,  as  it  seems  to  me.  But  He  receives  it  not,  for  His  disciples  are  asleep. 

Jesus  will  be  in  agony  even  to  the  end  of  the  world.  We  must  not  sleep  during 
that  time. 

Jesus,  in  the  midst  of  this  universal  desertion,  including  that  of  His  own  friends 
chosen  to  watch  with  Him,  finding  them  asleep,  is  vexed  because  of  the  danger  to 
which  they  expose,  not  Him,  but  themselves;  He  cautions  them  for  their  own 
safety  and  their  own  good,  with  a  sincere  tenderness  for  them  during  their  in¬ 
gratitude,  and  warns  them  that  the  spirit  is  willing  and  the  flesh  weak. 

Jesus,  finding  them  still  asleep,  without  being  restrained  by  any  consideration 
for  themselves  or  for  Him,  has  the  kindness  not  to  waken  them  and  leaves  them 
in  repose. 

Jesus  prays,  uncertain  of  the  will  of  His  Father,  and  fears  death;  but,  when  He 
knows  it,  He  goes  forward  to  offer  Himself  to  death.  Eamus }  Processit  (John).3 

Jesus  asked  of  men  and  was  not  heard. 

Jesus,  while  His  disciples  slept,  wrought  their  salvation.  He  has  wrought  that  of 
each  of  the  righteous  while  they  slept,  both  in  their  nothingness  before  their  birth, 
and  in  their  sins  after  their  birth. 

He  prays  only  once  that  the  cup  pass  away,  and  then  with  submission;  and  twice 
that  it  come  if  necessary. 

Jesus  is  weary. 

Jesus,  seeing  all  His  friends  asleep  and  all  His  enemies  wakeful,  commits  Him¬ 
self  entirely  to  His  Father. 

Jesus  does  not  regard  in  Judas  his  enmity,  but  the  order  of  God,  which  He 
loves  and  admits,  since  He  calls  him  friend. 

Jesus  tears  Himself  away  from  His  disciples  to  enter  into  His  agony;  we  must 
tear  ourselves  away  from  our  nearest  and  dearest  to  imitate  Him. 

Jesus  being  in  agony  and  in  the  greatest  affliction,  let  us  pray  longer. 

yohn  11.33.  Et  turbarit  seipsum.  "And  he  troubled  himself." 

2Matt.  26.46.  "Let  us  be  going." 

3i8.2.  "Jesus  went  forth." 


SECTION  VII  269 

We  implore  the  mercy  of  God,  not  that  He  may  leave  us  at  peace  in  our  vices, 
but  that  He  may  deliver  us  from  them. 

If  God  gave  us  masters  by  His  own  hand,  oh!  how  necessary  for  us  to  obey 
them  with  a  good  heart!  Necessity  and  events  follow  infallibly. 

"Console  thyself,  thou  wouldst  not  seek  Me,  if  thou  hadst  not  found  Me. 

"I  thought  of  thee  in  Mine  agony,  I  have  sweated  such  drops  of  blood  for  thee. 

"It  is  tempting  Me  rather  than  proving  thyself,  to  think  if  thou  wouldst  do  such 
and  such  a  thing  on  an  occasion  which  has  not  happened;  I  shall  act  in  thee  if  it 
occur. 

"Let  thyself  be  guided  by  My  rules;  see  how  well  I  have  led  the  Virgin  and  the 
saints  who  have  let  Me  act  in  them. 

"The  Father  loves  all  that  I  do. 

"Dost  thou  wish  that  it  always  cost  Me  the  blood  of  My  humanity,  without  thy 
shedding  tears? 

"Thy  conversion  is  My  affair;  fear  not,  and  pray  with  confidence  as  for  Me. 

"I  am  present  with  thee  by  My  Word  in  Scripture,  by  My  Spirit  in  the  Church 
and  by  inspiration,  by  My  power  in  the  priests,  by  My  prayer  in  the  faithful. 

"Physicians  will  not  heal  thee,  for  thou  wilt  die  at  last.  But  it  is  I  who  heal  thee 
and  make  the  body  immortal. 

"Suffer  bodily  chains  and  servitude,  I  deliver  thee  at  present  only  from  spiritual 
servitude. 

"I  am  more  a  friend  to  thee  than  such  and  such  an  one,  for  I  have  done  for  thee 
more  then  they;  they  would  not  have  suffered  what  I  have  suffered  from  thee,  and 
they  would  not  have  died  for  thee  as  I  have  done  in  the  time  of  thine  infidelities 
and  cruelties,  and  as  I  am  ready  to  do,  and  do,  among  My  elect  and  at  the  Holy 
Sacrament." 

"If  thou  knewest  thy  sins,  thou  wouldst  lose  heart." 

I  shall  lose  it  then,  Lord,  for  on  Thy  assurance  I  believe  their  malice. 

"No,  for  I,  by  whom  thou  learnest,  can  heal  thee  of  them,  and  what  I  say  to  thee 
is  a  sign  that  I  will  heal  thee.  In  proportion  to  thy  expiation  of  them,  thou  wilt 
know  them,  and  it  will  be  said  to  thee:  ’Behold,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee/  Re¬ 
pent,  then,  for  thy  hidden  sins,  and  for  the  secret  malice  of  those  which  thou 
knowest." 

Lord,  I  give  Thee  all. 

"I  love  thee  more  ardently  than  thou  hast  loved  thine  abominations,  ut  im- 
mundus pro  luto. 

"To  Me  be  the  glory,  not  to  thee,  worm  of  the  earth. 

"Ask  thy  confessor,  when  My  own  words  are  to  thee  occasion  of  evil,  vanity,  or 
curiosity." 

I  see  in  me  depths  of  pride,  curiosity,  and  lust.  There  is  no  relation  between  me 
and  God,  nor  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous.  But  He  has  been  made  sin  for  me;  all 
Thy  scourges  are  fallen  upon  Him.  He  is  more  abominable  than  I,  and,  far  from 
abhorring  me,  He  holds  Himself  honoured  that  I  go  to  Him  and  succour  Him. 

But  He  has  healed  Himself,  and  still  more  so  will  He  heal  me. 

I  must  add  my  wounds  to  His,  and  join  myself  to  Him;  and  He  will  save  me  in 
saving  Himself.  But  this  must  not  be  postponed  to  the  future. 

Eritis  sicut  dii  sdentes  bonum  et  malum.1  Each  one  creates  his  god,  when  judging, 

^en.  3.5.  "Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil." 


270  PENSEES 

‘‘This  is  good  or  bad”;  and  men  mourn  or  rejoice  too  much  at  events. 

Do  little  things  as  though  they  were  great,  because  of  the  majesty  of  Jesus 
Christ  who  does  them  in  us  and  who  lives  our  life;  and  do  the  greatest  things  as 
though  they  were  little  and  easy,  because  of  His  omnipotence. 

554.  It  seems  to  me  that  Jesus  Christ  only  allowed  His  wounds  to  be  touched 
after  His  resurrection:  Noli  me  tangere.1  We  must  unite  ourselves  only  to  His  suf¬ 
ferings. 

At  the  Last  Supper  He  gave  Himself  in  communion  as  about  to  die;  to  the  dis¬ 
ciples  at  Emmaus  as  risen  from  the  dead;  to  the  whole  Church  as  ascended  into 
heaven. 

555.  "Compare  not  thyself  with  others,  but  with  Me.  If  thou  dost  not  find  Me 
in  those  with  whom  thou  comparest  thyself,  thou  comparest  thyself  to  one  who 
is  abominable.  If  thou  findest  Me  in  them,  compare  thyself  to  Me.  But  whom 
wilt  thou  compare?  Thyself,  or  Me  in  thee?  If  it  is  thyself,  it  is  one  who  is  abomi¬ 
nable.  If  it  is  I,  thou  comparest  Me  to  Myself.  Now  I  am  God  in  all. 

"I  speak  to  thee,  and  often  counsel  thee,  because  thy  director  cannot  speak  to 
thee,  for  I  do  not  want  thee  to  lack  a  guide. 

"And  perhaps  I  do  so  at  his  prayers,  and  thus  he  leads  thee  without  thy  seeing 
it.  Thou  wouldst  not  seek  Me,  if  thou  didst  not  possess  Me. 

"Be  not  therefore  troubled.” 


SECTION  VIII 

THE  FUNDAMENTALS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION 

556.  ..  .  Men  blaspheme  what  they  do  not  know.  The  Christian  religion  con¬ 
sists  in  two  points.  It  is  of  equal  concern  to  men  to  know  them,  and  it  is  equally 
dangerous  to  be  ignorant  of  them.  And  it  is  equally  of  God’s  mercy  that  He  has 
given  indications  of  both. 

And  yet  they  take  occasion  to  conclude  that  one  of  these  points  does  not  exist, 
from  that  which  should  have  caused  them  to  infer  the  other.  The  sages  who  have 
said  there  is  only  one  God  have  been  persecuted,  the  Jews  were  hated,  and  still 
more  the  Christians.  They  have  seen  by  the  light  of  nature  that  if  there  be  a  true 
religion  on  earth,  the  course  of  all  things  must  tend  to  it  as  to  a  centre. 

The  whole  course  of  things  must  have  for  its  object  the  establishment  and  the 
greatness  of  religion.  Men  must  have  within  them  feelings  suited  to  what  religion 
teaches  us.  And,  finally,  religion  must  so  be  the  object  and  the  centre  to  which  all 
things  tend  that  whoever  knows  the  principles  of  religion  can  give  an  explanation 
both  of  the  whole  nature  of  man  in  particular  and  of  the  whole  course  of  the  world 
in  general. 

And  on  this  ground  they  take  occasion  to  revile  the  Christian  religion,  because 
they  misunderstand  it.  They  imagine  that  it  consists  simply  in  the  worship  of  a 
God  considered  as  great,  powerful,  and  eternal;  which  is  strictly  deism,  almost  as 

^ohn  20.17.  "Touch  me  not.” 


SECTION  VIII  271 

far  removed  from  the  Christian  religion  as  atheism,  which  is  its  exact  opposite. 
And  thence  they  conclude  that  this  religion  is  not  true,  because  they  do  not  see 
that  all  things  concur  to  the  establishment  of  this  point,  that  God  does  not  mani¬ 
fest  Himself  to  men  with  all  the  evidence  which  He  could  show. 

But  let  them  conclude  what  they  will  against  deism,  they  will  conclude  nothing 
against  the  Christian  religion,  which  properly  consists  in  the  mystery  of  the  Re¬ 
deemer,  who,  uniting  in  Himself  the  two  natures,  human  and  divine,  has  redeemed 
men  from  the  corruption  of  sin  in  order  to  reconcile  them  in  His  divine  person  to 
God. 

The  Christian  religion,  then,  teaches  men  these  two  truths;  that  there  is  a  God 
whom  men  can  know,  and  that  there  is  a  corruption  in  their  nature  which  renders 
them  unworthy  of  Him.  It  is  equally  important  to  men  to  know  both  these  points; 
and  it  is  equally  dangerous  for  man  to  know  God  without  knowing  his  own  wretch¬ 
edness,  and  to  know  his  own  wretchedness  without  knowing  the  Redeemer  who 
can  free  him  from  it.  The  knowledge  of  only  one  of  these  points  gives  rise  either 
to  the  pride  of  philosophers,  who  have  known  God,  and  not  their  own  wretched¬ 
ness,  or  to  the  despair  of  atheists,  who  know  their  own  wretchedness,  but  not  the 
Redeemer. 

And,  as  it  is  alike  necessary  to  man  to  know  these  two  points,  so  is  it  alike 
merciful  of  God  to  have  made  us  know  them.  The  Christian  religion  does  this;  it 
is  in  this  that  it  consists. 

Let  us  herein  examine  the  order  of  the  world  and  see  if  all  things  do  not  tend  to 
establish  these  two  chief  points  of  this  religion :  Jesus  Christ  is  the  end  of  all,  and  the 
centre  to  which  all  tends.  Whoever  knows  Him  knows  the  reason  of  everything. 

Those  who  fall  into  error  err  only  through  failure  to  see  one  of  these  two  things. 
We  can,  then,  have  an  excellent  knowledge  of  God  without  that  of  our  own  wretched¬ 
ness  and  of  our  own  wretchedness  without  that  of  God.  But  we  cannot  know  Jesus 
Christ  without  knowing  at  the  same  time  both  God  and  our  own  wretchedness. 

Therefore  I  shall  not  undertake  here  to  prove  by  natural  reasons  either  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  God,  or  the  Trinity,  or  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  or  anything  of  that 
nature;  not  only  because  I  should  not  feel  myself  sufficiently  able  to  find  in  na¬ 
ture  arguments  to  convince  hardened  atheists,  but  also  because  such  knowledge 
without  Jesus  Christ  is  useless  and  barren.  Though  a  man  should  be  convinced 
that  numerical  proportions  are  immaterial  truths,  eternal  and  dependent  on  a  first 
truth,  in  which  they  subsist  and  which  is  called  God,  I  should  not  think  him  far 
advanced  towards  his  own  salvation. 

The  God  of  Christians  is  not  a  God  who  is  simply  the  author  of  mathematical 
truths,  or  of  the  order  of  the  elements;  that  is  the  view  of  heathens  and  Epicureans. 
He  is  not  merely  a  God  who  exercises  His  providence  over  the  life  and  fortunes  of 
men,  to  bestow  on  those  who  worship  Him  a  long  and  happy  life.  That  was  the 
portion  of  the  Jews.  But  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  the  God  of  Jacob, 
the  God  of  Christians,  is  a  God  of  love  and  of  comfort,  a  God  who  fills  the  soul 
and  heart  of  those  whom  He  possesses,  a  God  who  makes  them  conscious  of  their 
inward  wretchedness,  and  His  infinite  mercy,  who  unites  Himself  to  their  inmost 
soul,  who  fills  it  with  humility  and  joy,  with  confidence  and  love,  who  renders 
them  incapable  of  any  other  end  than  Himself. 

All  who  seek  God  without  Jesus  Christ,  and  who  rest  in  nature,  either  find  no 
light  to  satisfy  them,  or  come  to  form  for  themselves  a  means  of  knowing  God 


272  PENSEES 

and  serving  Him  without  a  mediator.  Thereby  they  fall  either  into  atheism,  or  into 
deism,  two  things  which  the  Christian  religion  abhors  almost  equally. 

Without  Jesus  Christ  the  world  would  not  exist;  for  it  should  needs  be  either 
that  it  would  be  destroyed  or  be  a  hell. 

If  the  world  existed  to  instruct  man  of  God,  His  divinity  would  shine  through 
every  part  in  it  in  an  indisputable  manner;  but  as  it  exists  only  by  Jesus  Christ,  and 
for  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  teach  men  both  their  corruption  and  their  redemption,  all 
displays  the  proofs  of  these  two  truths. 

All  appearance  indicates  neither  a  total  exclusion  nor  a  manifest  presence  of 
divinity,  but  the  presence  of  a  God  who  hides  Himself.  Everything  bears  this 
character. 

.  .  .  Shall  he  alone  who  knows  his  nature  know  it  only  to  be  miserable?  Shall  he 
alone  who  knows  it  be  alone  unhappy? 

...  He  must  not  see  nothing  at  all,  nor  must  he  see  sufficient  for  him  to  be¬ 
lieve  he  possesses  it;  but  he  must  see  enough  to  know  that  he  has  lost  it.  For  to 
know  of  his  loss,  he  must  see  and  not  see;  and  that  is  exactly  the  state  in  which  he 
naturally  is. 

.  .  .  Whatever  part  he  takes,  I  shall  not  leave  him  at  rest .  .  . 

557.  ...  It  is,  then,  true  that  everything  teaches  man  his  condition,  but  he  must 
understand  this  well.  For  it  is  not  true  that  all  reveals  God,  and  it  is  not  true  that  all 
conceals  God.  But  it  is  at  the  same  time  true  that  He  hides  Himself  from  those 
who  tempt  Him,  and  that  He  reveals  Himself  to  those  who  seek  Him,  because 
men  are  both  unworthy  and  capable  of  God;  unworthy  by  their  corruption,  cap¬ 
able  by  their  original  nature. 

558.  What  shall  we  conclude  from  all  our  darkness,  but  our  unworthiness? 

559.  If  there  never  had  been  any  appearance  of  God,  this  eternal  deprivation 
would  have  been  equivocal,  and  might  have  as  well  corresponded  with  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  all  divinity,  as  with  the  unworthiness  of  men  to  know  Him;  but  His  oc¬ 
casional,  though  not  continual,  appearances  remove  the  ambiguity.  If  He  appeared 
once,  He  exists  always;  and  thus  we  cannot  but  conclude  both  that  there  is  a  God 
and  that  men  are  unworthy  of  Him. 

560.  We  do  not  understand  the  glorious  state  of  Adam,  nor  the  nature  of  his 
sin,  nor  the  transmission  of  it  to  us.  These  are  matters  which  took  place  under 
conditions  of  a  nature  altogether  different  from  our  own  and  wffiich  transcend 
our  present  understanding. 

The  knowledge  of  all  this  is  useless  to  us  as  a  means  of  escape  from  it;  and  all 
that  we  are  concerned  to  know  is  that  we  are  miserable,  corrupt,  separated  from 
God,  but  ransomed  by  Jesus  Christ,  whereof  we  have  wonderful  proofs  on  earth. 

So  the  two  proofs  of  corruption  and  redemption  are  drawn  from  the  ungodly, 
who  live  in  indifference  to  religion,  and  from  the  Jews  who  are  irreconcilable 
enemies. 

561.  There  are  two  w^ays  of  proving  the  truths  of  our  religion;  one  by  the  power 
of  reason,  the  other  by  the  authority  of  him  who  speaks. 


SECTION  VIII  273 

We  do  not  make  use  of  the  latter,  but  of  the  former.  We  do  not  say,  "This  must 
be  believed,  for  Scripture,  which  says  it,  is  divine."  But  we  say  that  it  must  be 
believed  for  such  and  such  a  reason,  which  are  feeble  arguments,  as  reason  may 
be  bent  to  everything. 

562.  There  is  nothing  on  earth  that  does  not  show  either  the  wretchedness  of 
man,  or  the  mercy  of  God;  either  the  weakness  of  man  without  God,  or  the 
strength  of  man  with  God. 

363.  It  will  be  one  of  the  confusions  of  the  damned  to  see  that  they  are  con¬ 
demned  by  their  own  reason,  by  which  they  claimed  to  condemn  the  Christian 
religion. 

564.  The  prophecies,  the  very  miracles  and  proofs  of  our  religion,  are  not  of 
such  a  nature  that  they  can  be  said  to  be  absolutely  convincing.  But  they  are  also 
of  such  a  kind  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  believe  them.  Thus 
there  is  both  evidence  and  obscurity  to  enlighten  some  and  confuse  others. 
But  the  evidence  is  such  that  it  surpasses,  or  at  least  equals,  the  evidence  to 
the  contrary;  so  that  it  is  not  reason  which  can  determine  men  not  to  follow 
it,  and  thus  it  can  only  be  lust  or  malice  of  heart.  And  by  this  means  there  is 
sufficient  evidence  to  condemn,  and  insufficient  to  convince;  so  that  it  appears 
in  those  who  follow  it  that  it  is  grace,  and  not  reason,  which  makes  them 
follow  it;  and  in  those  who  shun  it,  that  it  is  lust,  not  reason,  which  makes  them 
shun  it. 

V ere  discipuli,  vere  Israelita,  vere  liberi,  vere  cibus.1 

565.  Recognise,  then,  the  truth  of  religion  in  the  very  obscurity  of  religion,  in 
the  little  light  we  have  of  it,  and  in  the  indifference  which  we  have  to  knowing  it. 

566.  We  understand  nothing  of  the  works  of  God,  if  we  do  not  take  as  a  princi¬ 
ple  that  He  has  willed  to  blind  some  and  enlighten  others. 

567.  The  two  contrary  reasons.  We  must  begin  with  that;  without  that  we  under¬ 
stand  nothing,  and  all  is  heretical;  and  we  must  even  add  at  the  end  of  each  truth 
that  the  opposite  truth  is  to  be  remembered. 

568.  Objection.  The  Scripture  is  plainly  full  of  matters  not  dictated  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Answer.  Then  they  do  not  harm  faith.  Objection.  But  the  Church  has  decided 
that  all  is  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Answer.  I  answer  two  things:  first,  the  Church  has  not 
so  decided;  secondly,  if  she  should  so  decide,  it  could  be  maintained. 

Do  you  think  that  the  prophecies  cited  in  the  Gospel  are  related  to  make  you 
believe?  No,  it  is  to  keep  you  from  believing. 

569.  Canonical. — The  heretical  books  in  the  beginning  of  the  Church  serve  to 
prove  the  canonical. 

570.  To  the  chapter  on  the  Fundamentals  must  be  added  that  on  Typology  touch- 

illusion  to  John  6.56;  1.47;  8.36;  6.32.  "True  disciple;  an  Israelite  indeed;  free  indeed; 
true  bread." 


PENSEES 


274 

mg  the  reason  of  types:  why  Jesus  Christ  was  prophesied  as  to  His  first  coming; 
why  prophesied  obscurely  as  to  the  manner. 

571.  The  reason  why.  Types . — [They  had  to  deal  with  a  carnal  people  and  to 
render  them  the  depositary  of  the  spiritual  covenant.]  To  give  faith  to  the  Messiah, 
it  was  necessary  there  should  have  been  precedent  prophesies,  and  that  these 
should  be  conveyed  by  persons  above  suspicion,  diligent,  faithful,  unusually 
zealous,  and  known  to  all  the  world. 

To  accomplish  all  this,  God  chose  this  carnal  people,  to  whom  He  entrusted 
the  prophecies  which  foretell  the  Messiah  as  a  deliverer  and  as  a  dispenser  of  those 
carnal  goods  which  this  people  loved.  And  thus  they  have  had  an  extraordinary 
passion  for  their  prophets  and,  in  sight  of  the  whole  world,  have  had  charge  of 
these  books  which  foretell  their  Messiah,  assuring  all  nations  that  He  should  come 
and  in  the  way  foretold  in  the  books,  which  they  held  open  to  the  whole  world. 
Yet  this  people,  deceived  by  the  poor  and  ignominious  advent  of  the  Messiah,  have 
been  His  most  cruel  enemies.  So  that  they,  the  people  least  open  to  suspicion 
in  the  world  of  favouring  us,  the  most  strict  and  most  zealous  that  can  be  named 
for  their  law  and  their  prophets,  have  kept  the  books  incorrupt.  Hence  those 
who  have  rejected  and  crucified  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  been  to  them  an  offence, 
are  those  who  have  charge  of  the  books  which  testify  of  Him,  and  state  that  He 
will  be  an  offence  and  rejected.  Therefore  they  have  shown  it  was  He  by  rejecting 
Him,  and  He  has  been  alike  proved  both  by  the  righteous  Jews  who  received  Him 
and  by  the  unrighteous  who  rejected  Him,  both  facts  having  been  foretold. 

Wherefore  the  prophecies  have  a  hidden  and  spiritual  meaning  to  which  this 
people  were  hostile,  under  the  carnal  meaning  which  they  loved.  If  the  spiritual 
meaning  had  been  revealed,  they  would  not  have  loved  it,  and,  unable  to  bear  it, 
they  would  not  have  been  zealous  of  the  preservation  of  their  books  and  their 
ceremonies;  and  if  they  had  loved  these  spiritual  promises,  and  had  preserved 
them  incorrupt  till  the  time  of  the  Messiah,  their  testimony  would  have  had  no 
force,  because  they  had  been  his  friends. 

Therefore  it  was  well  that  the  spiritual  meaning  should  be  concealed;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  if  this  meaning  had  been  so  hidden  as  not  to  appear  at  all,  it  could 
not  have  served  as  a  proof  of  the  Messiah.  What  then  was  done?  In  a  crowd  of  pas¬ 
sages  it  has  been  hidden  under  the  temporal  meaning,  and  in  a  few  has  been  clearly 
revealed;  besides  that,  the  time  and  the  state  of  the  world  have  been  so  clearly  fore¬ 
told  that  it  is  clearer  than  the  sun.  And  in  some  places  this  spiritual  meaning  is  so 
clearly  expressed  that  it  would  require  a  blindness,  like  that  which  the  flesh  im¬ 
poses  on  the  spirit  when  it  is  subdued  by  it,  not  to  recognise  it. 

See,  then,  what  has  been  the  prudence  of  God.  This  meaning  is  concealed  under 
another  in  an  infinite  number  of  passages,  and  in  some,  though  rarely,  it  is  re¬ 
vealed;  but  yet  so  that  the  passages  in  which  it  is  concealed  are  equivocal  and  can 
suit  both  meanings;  whereas  the  passages  where  it  is  disclosed  are  unequivocal 
and  can  only  suit  the  spiritual  meaning. 

So  that  this  cannot  lead  us  into  error  and  could  only  be  misunderstood  by  so 
carnal  a  people. 

For  when  blessings  are  promised  in  abundance,  what  was  to  prevent  them  from 
understanding  the  true  blessings,  but  their  covetousness,  which  limited  the  mean¬ 
ing  to  worldly  goods?  But  those  whose  only  good  was  in  God  referred  them  to 


SECTION  VIII  275 

God  alone.  For  there  are  two  principles,  which  divide  the  wills  of  men,  covetous¬ 
ness  and  charity.  Not  that  covetousness  cannot  exist  along  with  faith  in  God,  nor 
charity  with  worldly  riches;  but  covetousness  uses  God  and  enjoys  the  world,  and 
charity  is  the  opposite. 

Now  the  ultimate  end  gives  names  to  things.  All  which  prevents  us  from  at¬ 
taining  it  is  called  an  enemy  to  us.  Thus  the  creatures,  however  good,  are  the  en¬ 
emies  of  the  righteous,  when  they  turn  them  away  from  God,  and  God  Himself  is 
the  enemy  of  those  whose  covetousness  He  confounds. 

Thus  as  the  significance  of  the  word  enemy  is  dependent  on  the  ultimate  end,  the 
righteous  understood  by  it  their  passions,  and  the  carnal  the  Babylonians;  and  so 
these  terms  were  obscure  only  for  the  unrighteous.  And  this  is  what  Isaiah  says: 
Signa  legem  in  electis  meis,1  and  that  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  a  stone  of  stumbling. 
But,  "Blessed  are  they  who  shall  not  be  offended  in  him."  Hosea,  14.9,  says 
excellently,  "Where  is  the  wise?  and  he  shall  understand  what  I  say.  The  right¬ 
eous  shall  know  them,  for  the  ways  of  God  are  right;  but  the  transgressors  shall 
fall  therein." 

572.  Hypothesis  that  the  apostles  were  impostors.  The  time  clearly,  the  manner 
obscurely.  Five  typical  proofs. 

f 1600  prophets. 

2000<  r  r  , 

[  400  scattered. 

573.  Blindness  of  Scripture. — "The  Scripture,"  said  the  Jews,  "says  that  we  shall 
not  know  whence  Christ  will  come  (John  7.27,  and  12.34).  The  Scripture  says 
that  Christ  abideth  for  ever,  and  He  said  that  He  should  die."  Therefore,  says 
Saint  John,  they  believed  not,  though  He  had  done  so  many  miracles,  that  the 
word  of  Isaiah  might  be  fulfilled:  "He  hath  blinded  them,"  etc. 

574.  Greatness. — Religion  is  so  great  a  thing  that  it  is  right  that  those  who  will 
not  take  the  trouble  to  seek  it,  if  it  be  obscure,  should  be  deprived  of  it.  Why, 
then,  do  any  complain,  if  it  be  such  as  can  be  found  by  seeking? 

575.  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  the  elect,  even  the  obscurities  of  Scrip¬ 
ture;  for  they  honour  them  because  of  what  is  divinely  clear.  And  all  things  work 
together  for  evil  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  even  what  is  clear;  for  they  revile  such, 
because  of  the  obscurities  which  they  do  not  understand. 

576.  The  general  conduct  of  the  world  towards  the  Church:  God  willing  to  blind  and  to 
enlighten. — The  event  having  proved  the  divinity  of  these  prophecies,  the  rest 
ought  to  be  believed.  And  thereby  we  see  the  order  of  the  world  to  be  of  this  kind. 
The  miracles  of  the  Creation  and  the  Deluge  being  forgotten,  God  sends  the  law 
and  the  miracles  of  Moses,  the  prophets  who  prophesied  particular  things;  and  to 
prepare  a  lasting  miracle,  He  prepares  prophecies  and  their  fulfilment;  but,  as  the 
prophecies  could  be  suspected,  He  desires  to  make  them  above  suspicion,  etc. 

577.  God  has  made  the  blindness  of  this  people  subservient  to  the  good  of  the 
elect. 

lIn  discipulis  meis.  Isaiah  8.16.  "Seal  the  law  among  my  disciples." 


2  76  PENSEES 

578.  There  is  sufficient  clearness  to  enlighten  the  elect,  and  sufficient  obscurity 
to  humble  them.  There  is  sufficient  obscurity  to  blind  the  reprobate,  and  sufficient 
clearness  to  condemn  them  and  make  them  inexcusable.  Saint  Augustine,  Mon¬ 
taigne,  Sebond. 

The  genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament  is  intermingled  with  so 
many  others  that  are  useless  that  it  cannot  be  distinguished.  If  Moses  had  kept 
only  the  record  of  the  ancestors  of  Christ,  that  might  have  been  too  plain.  If  he 
had  not  noted  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  might  not  have  been  sufficiently  plain.  But, 
after  all,  whoever  looks  closely  sees  that  of  Jesus  Christ  expressly  traced  through 
Tamar,  Ruth,  etc. 

Those  who  ordained  these  sacrifices  knew  their  uselessness;  those  who  have 
declared  their  uselessness,  have  not  ceased  to  practise  them. 

If  God  had  permitted  only  one  religion,  it  has  been  too  easily  known;  but  when 
we  look  at  it  closely,  we  clearly  discern  the  truth  amidst  this  confusion. 

The  premiss. — Moses  was  a  clever  man.  If,  then,  he  ruled  himself  by  his  reason, 
he  would  say  nothing  clearly  which  was  directly  against  reason. 

Thus  all  the  very  apparent  weaknesses  are  strength.  Example;  the  two  genealo¬ 
gies  in  Saint  Matthew  and  Saint  Luke.  What  can  be  clearer  than  that  this  was  not 
concerted? 

579.  God  (and  the  Apostles),  foreseeing  that  the  seeds  of  pride  would  make 
heresies  spring  up,  and  being  unwilling  to  give  them  occasion  to  arise  from  correct 
expressions,  has  put  in  Scripture  and  the  prayers  of  the  Church  contrary  words  and 
sentences  to  produce  their  fruit  in  time. 

So  in  morals  He  gives  charity,  which  produces  fruits  contrary  to  lust. 

580.  Nature  has  some  perfections  to  show  that  she  is  the  image  of  God,  and 
some  defects  to  show  that  she  is  only  His  image. 

581.  God  prefers  rather  to  incline  the  will  than  the  intellect.  Perfect  clearness 
would  be  of  use  to  the  intellect  and  would  harm  the  will.  To  humble  pride. 

582.  We  make  an  idol  of  truth  itself;  for  truth  apart  from  charity  is  not  God, 
but  His  image  and  idol,  which  we  must  neither  love  nor  worship;  and  still  less 
must  we  love  or  worship  its  opposite,  namely,  falsehood. 

I  can  easily  love  total  darkness;  but  if  God  keeps  me  in  a  state  of  semi-darkness, 
such  partial  darkness  displeases  me,  and,  because  I  do  not  see  therein  the  advantage 
of  total  darkness,  it  is  unpleasant  to  me.  This  is  a  fault  and  a  sign  that  I  make  for 
myself  an  idol  of  darkness,  apart  from  the  order  of  God.  Now  only  His  order 
must  be  worshipped. 

583.  The  feeble-minded  are  people  who  know  the  truth,  but  only  affirm 
it  so  far  as  consistent  with  their  own  interest.  But,  apart  from  that,  they  renounce 
it. 


584.  The  world  exists  for  the  exercise  of  mercy  and  judgement,  not  as  if  men 
were  placed  in  it  out  of  the  hands  of  God,  but  as  hostile  to  God;  and  to  them  He 
grants  by  grace  sufficient  light,  that  they  may  return  to  Him,  if  they  desire  to  seek 


SECTION  IX  277 

and  follow  Him;  and  also  that  they  may  be  punished,  if  they  refuse  to  seek  or  fol¬ 
low  Him. 

585.  That  God  has  willed  to  hide  Himself. — If  there  were  only  one  religion,  God 
would  indeed  be  manifest.  The  same  would  be  the  case  if  there  were  no  martyrs 
but  in  our  religion. 

God  being  thus  hidden,  every  religion  which  does  not  affirm  that  God  is  hidden 
is  not  true;  and  every  religion  which  does  not  give  the  reason  of  it  is  not  instruc¬ 
tive.  Our  religion  does  all  this:  Vere  tu  es  Deus  absconditus.1 

586.  If  there  were  no  obscurity,  man  would  not  be  sensible  of  his  corruption;  if 
there  were  no  light,  man  would  not  hope  for  a  remedy.  Thus,  it  is  not  only  fair, 
but  advantageous  to  us,  that  God  be  partly  hidden  and  partly  revealed;  since  it  is 
equally  dangerous  to  man  to  know  God  without  knowing  his  own  wretchedness, 
and  to  know  his  own  wretchedness  without  knowing  God. 

587.  This  religion,  so  great  in  miracles,  saints,  blameless  Fathers,  learned  and 
great  witnesses,  martyrs,  established  kings  as  David,  and  Isaiah,  a  prince  of  the 
blood,  and  so  great  in  science,  after  having  displayed  all  her  miracles  and  all  her 
wisdom,  rejects  all  this,  and  declares  that  she  has  neither  wisdom  nor  signs,  but 
only  the  cross  and  foolishness. 

For  those,  who,  by  these  signs  and  that  wisdom,  have  deserved  your  belief,  and 
who  have  proved  to  you  their  character,  declare  to  you  that  nothing  of  all  this  can 
change  you,  and  render  you  capable  of  knowing  and  loving  God,  but  the  power 
of  the  foolishness  of  the  cross  without  wisdom  and  signs,  and  not  the  signs  with¬ 
out  this  power.  Thus  our  religion  is  foolish  in  respect  to  the  effective  cause  and 
wise  in  respect  to  the  wisdom  which  prepares  it. 

588.  Our  religion  is  wise  and  foolish.  Wise,  because  it  is  the  most  learned  and 
the  most  founded  on  miracles,  prophecies,  etc.  Foolish,  because  it  is  not  all  this 
which  makes  us  belong  to  it.  This  makes  us,  indeed,  condemn  those  who  do  not 
belong  to  it;  but  it  does  not  cause  belief  in  those  who  do  belong  to  it.  It  is  the 
cross  that  makes  them  believe,  ne  evacuata  sit  crux?  And  so  Saint  Paul,  who  came 
with  wisdom  and  signs,  says  that  he  has  come  neither  with  wisdom  nor  with  signs; 
for  he  came  to  convert.  But  those  who  come  only  to  convince  can  say  that  they 
come  with  wisdom  and  with  signs. 


SECTION  IX 
PERPETUITY 

589.  On  the  fact  that  the  Christian  religion  is  not  the  only  religion. — So  far  is  this  from 
being  a  reason  for  believing  that  it  is  not  the  true  one  that,  on  the  contrary,  it 
makes  us  see  that  it  is  so. 

'Is.  45-15- 

2I  Cor.  1. 17.  "Lest  the  cross  of  Christ  should  be  made  of  none  effect." 


278  PENSEES 

590.  Men  must  be  sincere  in  all  religions;  true  heathens,  true  Jews,  true  Chris¬ 
tians. 

591.  J.  C. 

Heathens  |  Mahomet 

\  7 

Ignorance  of  God 

592.  The  falseness  of  other  religions. — They  have  no  witnesses.  Jews  have.  God 
defies  other  religions  to  produce  such  signs:  Isaiah  43.  9;  44.  8. 

593.  History  of  China. — I  believe  only  the  histories,  whose  witnesses  got  them¬ 
selves  killed. 

[Which  is  the  more  credible  of  the  two,  Moses  or  China?] 

It  is  not  a  question  of  seeing  this  summarily.  I  tell  you  there  is  in  it  something 
to  blind,  and  something  to  enlighten. 

By  this  one  word  I  destroy  all  your  reasoning.  "But  China  obscures,"  say  you; 
and  I  answer,  "China  obscures,  but  there  is  clearness  to  be  found;  seek  it." 

Thus  all  that  you  say  makes  for  one  of  the  views  and  not  at  all  against  the  other. 
So  this  serves,  and  does  no  harm. 

We  must,  then,  see  this  in  detail;  we  must  put  the  papers  on  the  table. 

594.  Against  the  history  of  China. — The  historians  of  Mexico,  the  five  suns,  of 
which  the  last  is  only  eight  hundred  years  old. 

The  difference  between  a  book  accepted  by  a  nation  and  one  which  makes  a 
nation. 

395.  Mahomet  was  without  authority.  His  reasons,  then,  should  have  been  very 
strong,  having  only  their  own  force.  What  does  he  say,  then,  that  we  must  believe 
him? 

596.  The  Psalms  are  chanted  throughout  the  whole  world. 

Who  renders  testimony  to  Mahomet?  Himself.  Jesus  Christ  desires  His  own 
testimony  to  be  as  nothing. 

The  quality  of  witnesses  necessitates  their  existence  always  and  everywhere;  and 
he,  miserable  creature,  is  alone. 

597.  Against  Mahomet. — The  Koran  is  not  more  of  Mahomet  than  the  Gospel  is 
of  Saint  Matthew,  for  it  is  cited  by  many  authors  from  age  to  age.  Even  its  very 
enemies,  Celsus  and  Porphyry,  never  denied  it. 

The  Koran  says  Saint  Matthew  was  an  honest  man.  Therefore  Mahomet  was  a 
false  prophet  for  calling  honest  men  wicked,  or  for  not  agreeing  with  what  they 
have  said  of  Jesus  Christ. 

598.  It  is  not  by  that  which  is  obscure  in  Mahomet,  and  which  may  be  inter¬ 
preted  in  a  mysterious  sense,  that  I  would  have  him  judged,  but  by  what  is  clear, 
as  his  paradise  and  the  rest.  In  that  he  is  ridiculous.  And  since  what  is  clear  is 
ridiculous,  it  is  not  right  to  take  his  obscurities  for  mysteries. 


SECTION  IX  279 

It  is  not  the  same  with  the  Scripture.  I  agree  that  there  are  in  it  obscurities  as 
strange  as  those  of  Mahomet;  but  there  are  admirably  clear  passages,  and  the 
prophecies  are  manifestly  fulfilled.  The  cases  are,  therefore,  not  on  a  par.  We  must 
not  confound  and  put  on  one  level  things  which  only  resemble  each  other  in  their 
obscurity,  and  not  in  the  clearness,  which  requires  us  to  reverence  the  obscurities. 

599.  The  difference  between  Jesus  Christ  and  Mahomet. — Mahomet  was  not  foretold; 
Jesus  Christ  was  foretold. 

Mahomet  slew;  Jesus  Christ  caused  His  own  to  be  slain. 

Mahomet  forbade  reading;  the  Apostles  ordered  reading. 

In  fact,  the  two  are  so  opposed  that,  if  Mahomet  took  the  way  to  succeed  from 
a  worldly  point  of  view,  Jesus  Christ,  from  the  same  point  of  view,  took  the  way 
to  perish.  And  instead  of  concluding  that,  since  Mahomet  succeeded,  Jesus  Christ 
might  well  have  succeeded,  we  ought  to  say  that,  since  Mahomet  succeeded, 
Jesus  Christ  should  have  failed. 

600.  Any  man  can  do  what  Mahomet  has  done;  for  he  performed  no  miracles, 
he  was  not  foretold.  No  man  can  do  what  Christ  has  done. 

601.  The  heathen  religion  has  no  foundation  [at  the  present  day.  It  is  said  once 
to  have  had  a  foundation  by  the  oracles  which  spoke.  But  what  are  the  books 
which  assure  us  of  this?  Are  they  so  worthy  of  belief  on  account  of  the  virtue  of 
their  authors?  Have  they  been  preserved  with  such  care  that  we  can  be  sure  that 
they  have  not  been  meddled  with?] 

The  Mahometan  religion  has  for  a  foundation  the  Koran  and  Mahomet.  But 
has  this  prophet,  who  was  to  be  the  last  hope  of  the  world,  been  foretold?  What 
sign  has  he  that  every  other  man  has  not  who  chooses  to  call  himself  a  prophet? 
What  miracles  does  he  himself  say  that  he  has  done?  What  mysteries  has  he 
taught,  even  according  to  his  own  tradition?  What  was  the  morality,  what  the  hap¬ 
piness  held  out  by  him? 

The  Jewish  religion  must  be  differently  regarded  in  the  tradition  of  the  Holy 
Bible  and  in  the  tradition  of  the  people.  Its  morality  and  happiness  are  absurd  in 
the  tradition  of  the  people,  but  are  admirable  in  that  of  the  Holy  Bible.  (And  all 
religion  is  the  same;  for  the  Christian  religion  is  very  different  in  the  Holy  Bible 
and  in  the  casuists.)  The  foundation  is  admirable;  it  is  the  most  ancient  book  in 
the  world,  and  the  most  authentic;  and  whereas  Mahomet,  in  order  to  make  his 
own  book  continue  in  existence,  forbade  men  to  read  it,  Moses,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  ordered  every  one  to  read  his. 

Our  religion  is  so  divine  that  another  divine  religion  has  only  been  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  it. 

602.  Order. — To  see  what  is  clear  and  indisputable  in  the  whole  state  of  the  Jews. 

603.  The  Jewish  religion  is  wholly  divine  in  its  authority,  its  duration,  its  per¬ 
petuity,  its  morality,  its  doctrine,  and  its  effects. 

604.  The  only  science  contrary  to  common  sense  and  human  nature  is  that 
alone  which  has  always  existed  among  men. 


28o 


PENSEES 


605.  The  only  religion  contrary  to  nature,  to  common  sense,  and  to  our  pleas¬ 
ure,  is  that  alone  which  has  always  existed. 

606.  No  religion  but  our  own  has  taught  that  man  is  born  in  sin.  No  sect  of 
philosophers  has  said  this.  Therefore  none  have  declared  the  truth. 

No  sect  or  religion  has  always  existed  on  earth,  but  the  Christian  religion. 

607.  Whoever  judges  of  the  Jewish  religion  by  its  coarser  forms  will  misunder¬ 
stand  it.  It  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Holy  Bible,  and  in  the  tradition  of  the  prophets, 
who  have  made  it  plain  enough  that  they  did  not  interpret  the  law  according  to 
the  letter.  So  our  religion  is  divine  in  the  Gospel,  in  the  Apostles,  and  in  tradition; 
but  it  is  absurd  in  those  who  tamper  with  it. 

The  Messiah,  according  to  the  carnal  Jews,  was  to  be  a  great  temporal  prince. 
Jesus  Christ,  according  to  carnal  Christians,  has  come  to  dispense  us  from  the  love 
of  God  and  to  give  us  sacraments  which  shall  do  everything  without  our  help. 
Such  is  not  the  Christian  religion,  nor  the  Jewish.  True  Jews  and  true  Christians 
have  always  expected  a  Messiah  who  should  make  them  love  God  and  by  that 
love  triumph  over  their  enemies. 

608.  The  carnal  Jews  hold  a  midway  place  between  Christians  and  heathens.  The 
heathens  know  not  God,  and  love  the  world  only.  The  Jews  know  the  true  God, 
and  love  the  world  only.  The  Christians  know  the  true  God,  and  love  not  the 
world.  Jews  and  heathens  love  the  same  good.  Jews  and  Christians  know  the  same 
God. 

The  Jews  were  of  two  kinds;  the  first  had  only  heathen  affections,  the  other  had 
Christian  affections. 

609.  There  are  two  kinds  of  men  in  each  religion:  among  the  heathen,  worship¬ 
pers  of  beasts  and  the  worshippers  of  the  one  only  God  of  natural  religion;  among 
the  Jews,  the  carnal,  and  the  spiritual,  who  were  the  Christians  of  the  old  law; 
among  Christians,  the  coarser-minded,  who  are  the  Jews  of  the  new  law.  The  car¬ 
nal  Jews  looked  for  a  carnal  Messiah;  the  coarser  Christians  believe  that  the  Mes¬ 
siah  has  dispensed  them  from  the  love  of  God;  true  Jews  and  true  Christians  wor¬ 
ship  a  Messiah  who  makes  them  love  God. 

610.  To  show  that  the  true  Jews  and  the  true  Christians  have  hut  the  same  religion. — 
The  religion  of  the  Jews  seemed  to  consist  essentially  in  the  fatherhood  of  Abra¬ 
ham,  in  circumcision,  in  sacrifices,  in  ceremonies,  in  the  Ark,  in  the  temple,  in 
Jerusalem,  and,  finally,  in  the  law,  and  in  the  covenant  with  Moses. 

I  say  that  it  consisted  in  none  of  those  things,  but  only  in  the  love  of  God,  and 
that  God  disregarded  all  the  other  things. 

That  God  did  not  accept  the  posterity  of  Abraham. 

That  the  Jews  were  to  be  punished  like  strangers,  if  they  transgressed.  Deut. 
8.  19:  "If  thou  do  at  all  forget  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  walk  after  other  gods,  I 
testify  against  you  this  day  that  ye  shall  surely  perish,  as  the  nations  which  the 
Lord  destroyeth  before  your  face." 

That  strangers,  if  they  loved  God,  were  to  be  received  by  Him  as  the  Jews. 
Isaiah  56.3:  "Let  not  the  stranger  say,  The  Lord  will  not  receive  me.’  The  strangers 


28i 


SECTION  IX 

who  join  themselves  unto  the  Lord  to  serve  Him  and  love  Him,  will  I  bring  unto 
my  holy  mountain,  and  accept  therein  sacrifices,  for  mine  house  is  a  house  of 
prayer." 

That  the  true  Jews  considered  their  merit  to  be  from  God  only,  and  not  from 
Abraham.  Isaiah  63.16:  "Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father,  though  Abraham  be 
ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not.  Thou  art  our  Father  and  our  Re¬ 
deemer." 

Moses  himself  told  them  that  God  would  not  accept  persons.  Deut.  10.17: 
"God,"  said  he,  "regardeth  neither  persons  nor  sacrifices." 

The  Sabbath  was  only  a  sign,  Exod.  31.13;  and  in  memory  of  the  escape  from 
Egypt,  Deut.  5.15.  Therefore  it  is  no  longer  necessary,  since  Egypt  must  be  for¬ 
gotten. 

Circumcision  was  only  a  sign,  Gen.  17. n.  And  thence  it  came  to  pass  that, 
being  in  the  desert,  they  were  not  circumcised,  because  they  could  not  be  con¬ 
founded  with  other  peoples;  and  after  Jesus  Christ  came,  it  was  no  longer  neces¬ 
sary. 

That  the  circumcision  of  the  heart  is  commanded.  Deut.  10.16;  Jeremiah  4.4: 
"Be  ye  circumcised  in  heart;  take  away  the  superfluities  of  your  heart,  and  harden 
yourselves  not.  For  your  God  is  a  mighty  God,  strong  and  terrible,  who  accepteth 
not  persons." 

That  God  said  He  would  one  day  do  it.  Deut.  30.6:  "God  will  circumcise 
thine  heart,  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  that  thou  mayest  love  Him  with  all  thine 
heart." 

That  the  uncircumcised  in  heart  shall  be  judged.  Jeremiah  9.26:  For  God  will 
judge  the  uncircumcised  peoples,  and  all  the  people  of  Israel,  because  he  is  "un¬ 
circumcised  in  heart." 

That  the  external  is  of  no  avail  apart  from  the  internal.  Joel  2.13:  Scindite  corda 
vestra,1  etc. ;  Isaiah  58.3,  4,  etc. 

The  love  of  God  is  enjoined  in  the  whole  of  Deuteronomy.  Deut.  30.19:  "I 
call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  that  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,  that  you 
should  choose  life,  and  love  God,  and  obey  Him,  for  God  is  your  life." 

That  the  Jews,  for  lack  of  that  love,  should  be  rejected  for  their  offences,  and 
the  heathen  chosen  in  their  stead.  Hosea  1.10;  Deut.  32.20.  "I  will  hide  my  face 
from  them,  I  will  see  what  their  end  shall  be,  for  they  are  a  very  froward  genera¬ 
tion,  children  in  whom  is  no  faith.  They  have  moved  me  to  jealousy  with  that  which 
is  not  God  .  .  .  and  I  will  move  them  to  jealousy  with  those  which  are  not  a  peo¬ 
ple  ..  .  and  with  a  foolish  nation."  Isaiah  65.1. 

That  temporal  goods  are  false,  and  that  the  true  good  is  to  be  united  to  God. 
Psalm  143.15. 

That  their  feasts  are  displeasing  to  God.  Amos  5.21. 

That  the  sacrifices  of  the  Jews  displeased  God.  Isaiah  66.1-3;  1.11;  Jer.  6. 
20;  David,  Miserere.2  Even  on  the  part  of  the  good,  Expectavi .3  Psalm  49.8,  9,  10, 
11,  12,  13  and  14. 

That  He  has  established  them  only  for  their  hardness.  Micah,  admirably,  6; 
I  Kings  15.22;  Hosea  6.6. 

r’Rend  your  heart.” 

2Ps.  9.14.  "Have  mercy.” 

3Is.  5.7.  ”He  has  looked  for.” 


282  PENSEES 

That  the  sacrifices  of  the  Gentiles  will  be  accepted  of  God,  and  that  God  will 
take  no  pleasure  in  the  sacrifices  of  the  Jews.  Malachi  i.ii. 

That  God  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  Messiah,  and  the  old  will  be  an¬ 
nulled.  Jer.  31.31.  Mandata  non  bona.  Ezek.1 

That  the  old  things  will  be  forgotten.  Isaiah  43.18,  19;  65.17,  10. 

That  the  Ark  will  no  longer  be  remembered.  Jer.  3.15,  16. 

That  the  temple  should  be  rejected.  Jer  7.12,  13,  14. 

That  the  sacrifices  should  be  rejected,  and  other  pure  sacrifices  established. 
Malachi  1.11. 

That  the  order  of  Aaron’s  priesthood  should  be  rejected,  and  that  of  Melchize- 
dek  introduced  by  the  Messiah.  Ps.  Dixit  Dominus. 

That  this  priesthood  should  be  eternal.  Ibid. 

That  Jerusalem  should  be  rejected,  and  Rome  admitted,  Ibid. 

That  the  name  of  the  Jews  should  be  rejected,  and  a  new  name  given.  Isaiah 
65.15. 

That  this  last  name  should  be  more  excellent  than  that  of  the  Jews,  and  eternal. 
Isaiah  56.5. 

That  the  Jews  should  be  without  prophets  (Amos),  without  a  king,  without 
princes,  without  sacrifice,  without  an  idol. 

That  the  Jews  should,  nevertheless,  always  remain  a  people.  Jer.  31.36. 

61 1.  Republic. — The  Christian  republic — and  even  the  Jewish — has  only  had  God 
for  ruler,  as  Philo  the  Jew  notices,  On  Monarchy. 

When  they  fought,  it  was  for  God  only;  their  chief  hope  was  in  God  only;  they 
considered  their  towns  as  belonging  to  God  only,  and  kept  them  for  God.  I  Chron. 
i9-I3* 

612.  Gen.  17.7 .  Statuam  pactum  meum  inter  me  et  te  fcedere  sempiterno  .  .  .  ut  sim 
Deustuus .  .  .2 3 

Et  tu  ergo  custodies  pactum  meum? 

613.  Perpetuity. — That  religion  has  always  existed  on  earth  which  consists  in  be¬ 
lieving  that  man  has  fallen  from  a  state  of  glory  and  of  communion  with  God  into 
a  state  of  sorrow,  penitence,  and  estrangement  from  God,  but  that  after  this  life 
we  shall  be  restored  by  a  Messiah  who  should  have  come.  All  things  have  passed 
away,  and  this  has  endured,  for  which  all  things  are. 

Men  have  in  the  first  age  of  the  world  been  carried  away  into  every  kind  of 
debauchery,  and  yet  there  were  saints,  as  Enoch,  Lamech,  and  others,  who  waited 
patiently  for  the  Christ  promised  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  Noah  saw  the 
wickedness  of  men  at  its  height;  and  he  was  held  worthy  to  save  the  world  in  his 
person,  by  the  hope  of  the  Messiah  of  whom  he  was  the  type.  Abraham  was  sur¬ 
rounded  by  idolaters,  when  God  made  known  to  him  the  mystery  of  the  Messiah, 
whom  he  welcomed  from  afar.  In  the  time  of  Isaac  and  Jacob,  abomination  was 
spread  over  all  the  earth;  but  these  saints  lived  in  faith;  and  Jacob,  dying  and  bless- 

12o.25.  Pracepta  non  bona.  “Statutes  that  were  not  good." 

2“I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me  and  Thee  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a 
God  unto  Thee.” 

3Gen.  17.9.  “Thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant  therefore.” 


SECTION  IX  283 

ing  his  children,  cried  in  a  transport  which  made  him  break  off  his  discourse,  "I 
await,  O  my  God,  the  Saviour  whom  Thou  hast  promised.  Salutare  tuum  expectabo , 
Domine."1  The  Egyptians  were  infected  both  with  idolatry  and  magic;  the  very  peo¬ 
ple  of  God  were  led  astray  by  their  example.  Yet  Moses  and  others  believed  Him 
whom  they  saw  not,  and  worshipped  Him,  looking  to  the  eternal  gifts  which  He 
was  preparing  for  them. 

The  Greeks  and  Latins  then  set  up  false  deities;  the  poets  made  a  hundred  dif¬ 
ferent  theologies,  while  the  philosophers  separated  into  a  thousand  different  sects; 
and  yet  in  the  heart  of  Judaea  there  were  always  chosen  men  who  foretold  the  com¬ 
ing  of  this  Messiah,  which  was  known  to  them  alone. 

He  came  at  length  in  the  fullness  of  time,  and  time  has  since  witnessed  the 
birth  of  so  many  schisms  and  heresies,  so  many  political  revolutions,  so  many 
changes  in  all  things;  yet  this  Church,  which  worships  Him  who  has  always  been 
worshipped,  has  endured  uninterruptedly.  It  is  a  wonderful,  incomparable,  and 
altogether  divine  fact  that  this  religion,  which  has  always  endured,  has  always 
been  attacked.  It  has  been  a  thousand  times  on  the  eve  of  universal  destruction, 
and  every  time  it  has  been  in  that  state,  God  has  restored  it  by  extraordinary  acts 
of  His  power.  This  is  astonishing,  as  also  that  it  has  preserved  itself  without  yield¬ 
ing  to  the  will  of  tyrants.  For  it  is  not  strange  that  a  State  endures,  when  its  laws 
are  sometimes  made  to  give  way  to  necessity,  but  that  .  .  .  (See  the  passage  indi¬ 
cated  in  Montaigne.)2 

614.  States  would  perish  if  they  did  not  often  make  their  laws  give  way  to  neces¬ 
sity.  But  religion  has  never  suffered  this,  or  practised  it.  Indeed,  there  must  be 
these  compromises  or  miracles.  It  is  not  strange  to  be  saved  by  yieldings,  and  this 
is  not  strictly  self-preservation;  besides,  in  the  end  they  perish  entirely.  None  has 
endured  a  thousand  years.  But  the  fact  that  this  religion  has  always  maintained  it¬ 
self,  inflexible  as  it  is,  proves  its  divinity. 

615.  Whatever  may  be  said,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Christian  religion  has 
something  astonishing  in  it.  Some  will  say,  "This  is  because  you  were  born  in  it." 
Far  from  it;  I  stiffen  myself  against  it  for  this  very  reason,  for  fear  this  prejudice 
bias  me.  But,  although  I  am  born  in  it,  I  cannot  help  finding  it  so. 

616.  Perpetuity. — The  Messiah  has  always  been  believed  in.  The  tradition  from 
Adam  was  fresh  in  Noah  and  in  Moses.  Since  then  the  prophets  have  foretold 
him,  while  at  the  same  time  foretelling  other  things,  which,  being  from  time  to 
time  fulfilled  in  the  sight  of  men,  showed  the  truth  of  their  mission,  and  conse¬ 
quently  that  of  their  promises  touching  the  Messiah.  Jesus  Christ  performed  mira¬ 
cles,  and  the  Apostles  also,  who  converted  all  the  heathen;  and  all  the  prophecies 
being  thereby  fulfilled,  the  Messiah  is  for  ever  proved. 

617.  Perpetuity. — Let  us  consider  that  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  the  ex¬ 
pectation  of  worship  of  the  Messiah  has  existed  uninterruptedly;  that  there  have 
been  found  men  who  said  that  God  had  revealed  to  them  that  a  Redeemer  was  to 
be  born,  who  should  save  His  people;  that  Abraham  came  afterwards,  saying  that 

!Gen.  49.18.  "I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  O  Lord." 

2 Essays ,  1.22. 


PENSEES 


284 

he  had  had  a  revelation  that  the  Messiah  was  to  spring  from  him  by  a  son,  whom 
he  should  have;  that  Jacob  declared  that,  of  his  twelve  sons,  the  Messiah  would 
spring  from  Judah;  that  Moses  and  the  prophets  then  came  to  declare  the  time 
and  the  manner  of  His  coming;  that  they  said  their  law"  was  only  temporary  till 
that  of  the  Messiah,  that  it  should  endure  till  then,  but  that  the  other  should  last 
for  ever;  that  thus  either  their  law,  or  that  of  the  Messiah,  of  which  it  was  the 
promise,  would  be  always  upon  the  earth;  that,  in  fact,  it  has  always  endured;  that 
at  last  Jesus  Christ  came  with  all  the  circumstances  foretold.  This  is  wonderful. 

618.  This  is  positive  fact.  While  all  philosophers  separate  into  different  sects, 
there  is  found  in  one  corner  of  the  world  the  most  ancient  people  in  it,  declaring 
that  all  the  world  is  in  error,  that  God  has  revealed  to  them  the  truth,  that  they 
will  always  exist  on  the  earth.  In  fact,  all  other  sects  come  to  an  end,  this  one  still 
endures,  and  has  done  so  for  four  thousand  years. 

They  declare  that  they  hold  from  their  ancestors  that  man  has  fallen  from  com¬ 
munion  with  God,  and  is  entirely  estranged  from  God,  but  that  He  has  promised 
to  redeem  them ;  that  this  doctrine  shall  always  exist  on  the  earth ;  that  their  law 
has  a  double  signification;  that  during  sixteen  hundred  years  they  have  had  peo¬ 
ple,  whom  they  believed  prophets,  foretelling  both  the  time  and  the  manner;  that 
four  hundred  years  after  they  were  scattered  everywhere,  because  Jesus  Christ  was 
to  be  everywhere  announced;  that  Jesus  Christ  came  in  the  manner,  and  at  the 
time  foretold;  that  the  Jews  have  since  been  scattered  abroad  under  a  curse  and, 
nevertheless,  still  exist. 

619.  I  see  the  Christian  religion  founded  upon  a  preceding  religion,  and  this 
is  what  I  find  as  a  fact. 

I  do  not  here  speak  of  the  miracles  of  Moses,  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Apos¬ 
tles,  because  they  do  not  at  first  seem  convincing,  and  because  I  only  wish  here  to 
put  in  evidence  all  those  foundations  of  the  Christian  religion  which  are  beyond 
doubt  and  which  cannot  be  called  in  question  by  any  person  whatsoever.  It  is  cer¬ 
tain  that  we  see  in  many  places  of  the  world  a  peculiar  people,  separated  from  all 
other  peoples  of  the  world  and  called  the  Jewish  people. 

I  see  then  a  crowd  of  religions  in  many  parts  of  the  world  and  in  all  times;  but 
their  morality  cannot  please  me,  nor  can  their  proofs  convince  me.  Thus  I  should 
equally  have  rejected  the  religion  of  Mahomet  and  of  China,  of  the  ancient  Rom¬ 
ans  and  of  the  Egyptians,  for  the  sole  reason  that  none  having  more  marks  of 
truth  than  another,  nor  anything  which  should  necessarily  persuade  me,  reason 
cannot  incline  to  one  rather  than  the  other. 

But,  in  thus  considering  this  changeable  and  singular  variety  of  morals  and  be¬ 
liefs  at  different  times,  I  find  in  one  corner  of  the  world  a  peculiar  people,  separated 
from  all  other  peoples  on  earth,  the  most  ancient  of  all,  and  whose  histories  are 
earlier  by  many  generations  than  the  most  ancient  which  we  possess. 

I  find,  then,  this  great  and  numerous  people,  sprung  from  a  single  man,  who 
worship  one  God  and  guide  themselves  by  a  law  which  they  say  that  they  obtained 
from  His  own  hand.  They  maintain  that  they  are  the  only  people  in  the  world  to 
whom  God  has  revealed  His  mysteries;  that  all  men  are  corrupt  and  in  disgrace 
with  God;  that  they  are  all  abandoned  to  their  senses  and  their  own  imagination, 
whence  come  the  strange  errors  and  continual  changes  which  happen  among 


SECTION  IX  285 

them,  both  of  religions  and  of  morals,  whereas  they  themselves  remain  firm  in 
their  conduct;  but  that  God  will  not  leave  other  nations  in  this  darkness  for  ever; 
that  there  will  come  a  Saviour  for  all;  that  they  are  in  the  world  to  announce  Him 
to  men;  that  they  are  expressly  formed  to  be  forerunners  and  heralds  of  this  great 
event  and  to  summon  all  nations  to  join  with  them  in  the  expectation  of  this 
Saviour. 

To  meet  with  this  people  is  astonishing  to  me,  and  seems  to  me  worthy  of  at¬ 
tention.  I  look  at  the  law  which  they  boast  of  having  obtained  from  God,  and  I 
find  it  admirable.  It  is  the  first  law  of  all  and  is  of  such  a  kind  that,  even  before  the 
term  law  was  in  currency  among  the  Greeks,  it  had,  for  nearly  a  thousand  years 
earlier,  been  uninterruptedly  accepted  and  observed  by  the  Jews.  I  likewise  think 
it  strange  that  the  first  law  of  the  world  happens  to  be  the  most  perfect ;  so  that  the 
greatest  legislators  have  borrowed  their  laws  from  it,  as  is  apparent  from  the  law  of 
the  Twelve  Tables  at  Athens,  afterwards  taken  by  the  Romans,  and  as  it  would  be 
easy  to  prove,  if  Josephus  and  others  had  not  sufficiently  dealt  with  this  subject. 

620.  Advantages  of  the  Jewish  people. — In  this  search  the  Jewish  people  at  once 
attracts  my  attention  by  the  number  of  wonderful  and  singular  facts  which  appear 
about  them. 

I  first  see  that  they  are  a  people  wholly  composed  of  brethren,  and  whereas  all 
others  are  formed  by  the  assemblage  of  an  infinity  of  families,  this,  though  so 
wonderfully  fruitful,  has  all  sprung  from  one  man  alone,  and,  being  thus  all  one 
flesh,  and  members  one  of  another,  they  constitute  a  powerful  state  of  one  family. 
This  is  unique. 

This  family,  or  people,  is  the  most  ancient  within  human  knowledge,  a  fact 
which  seems  to  me  to  inspire  a  peculiar  veneration  for  it,  especially  in  view  of  our 
present  inquiry;  since  if  God  had  from  all  time  revealed  Himself  to  men,  it  is  to 
these  we  must  turn  for  knowledge  of  the  tradition. 

This  people  are  not  eminent  solely  by  their  antiquity,  but  are  also  singular  by 
their  duration,  which  has  always  continued  from  their  origin  till  now.  For,  where¬ 
as  the  nations  of  Greece  and  of  Italy,  of  Lacedaemon,  of  Athens  and  of  Rome,  and 
others  who  came  long  after,  have  long  since  perished,  these  ever  remain,  and  in 
spite  of  the  endeavours  of  many  powerful  kings  who  have  a  hundred  times  tried 
to  destroy  them,  as  their  historians  testify,  and  as  it  is  easy  to  conjecture  from  the 
natural  order  of  things  during  so  long  a  space  of  years,  they  have  nevertheless 
been  preserved  (and  this  preservation  has  been  foretold);  and  extending  from  the 
earliest  times  to  the  latest,  their  history  comprehends  in  its  duration  all  our  histories 
[which  it  preceded  by  a  long  time]. 

The  law  by  which  this  people  is  governed  is  at  once  the  most  ancient  law  in  the 
world,  the  most  perfect,  and  the  only  one  which  has  been  always  observed  without 
a  break  in  a  state.  This  is  what  Josephus  admirably  proves,  Against  Apion,  and  also 
Philo  the  Jew,  in  different  places,  where  they  point  out  that  it  is  so  ancient  that  the 
very  name  of  law  was  only  known  by  the  oldest  nation  more  than  a  thousand 
years  afterwards;  so  that  Homer,  who  has  written  the  history  of  so  many  states, 
has  never  used  the  term.  And  it  is  easy  to  judge  of  its  perfection  by  simply  reading 
it;  for  we  see  that  it  has  provided  for  all  things  with  so  great  wisdom,  equity,  and 
judgement,  that  the  most  ancient  legislators,  Greek  and  Roman,  having  had  some 
knowledge  of  it,  have  borrowed  from  it  their  principal  laws;  this  is  evident  from 


286  PENSEES 

what  are  called  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  from  the  other  proofs  which  Josephus  gives. 

But  this  law  is  at  the  same  time  the  severest  and  strictest  of  all  in  respect  to  their 
religious  worship,  imposing  on  this  people,  in  order  to  keep  them  to  their  duty,  a 
thousand  peculiar  and  painful  observances,  on  pain  of  death.  Whence  it  is  very 
astonishing  that  it  has  been  constantly  preserved  during  many  centuries  by  a  peo¬ 
ple,  rebellious  and  impatient  as  this  one  was;  while  all  other  states  have  changed 
their  laws  from  time  to  time,  although  these  were  far  more  lenient. 

The  book  which  contains  this  law,  the  first  of  all,  is  itself  the  most  ancient  book 
in  the  world,  those  of  Homer,  Hesiod,  and  others,  being  six  or  seven  hundred 
years  later. 

621.  The  creation  of  the  deluge  being  past,  and  God  no  longer  requiring  to 
destroy  the  world,  nor  to  create  it  anew,  nor  to  give  such  great  signs  of  Himself, 
He  began  to  establish  a  people  on  the  earth,  purposely  formed,  who  were  to  last 
until  the  coming  of  the  people  whom  the  Messiah  should  fashion  by  His  spirit. 

622.  The  creation  of  the  world  beginning  to  be  distant,  God  provided  a  single 
contemporary  historian,  and  appointed  a  whole  people  as  guardians  of  this  book, 
in  order  that  this  history  might  be  the  most  authentic  in  the  world,  and  that  all 
men  might  thereby  learn  a  fact  so  necessary  to  know,  and  which  could  only  be 
known  through  that  means. 

623.  [Japhet  begins  the  genealogy.] 

Joseph  folds  his  arms,  and  prefers  the  younger. 

624.  Why  should  Moses  make  the  lives  of  men  so  long,  and  their  generations 
so  few? 

Because  it  is  not  the  length  of  years,  but  the  multitude  of  generations,  which 
renders  things  obscure.  For  truth  is  perverted  only  by  the  change  of  men.  And 
yet  he  puts  two  things,  the  most  memorable  that  were  ever  imagined,  namely,  the 
creation  and  the  deluge,  so  near  that  we  reach  from  one  to  the  other. 

625.  Shem,  who  saw  Lamech,  who  saw  Adam,  saw  also  Jacob,  who  saw  those 
who  saw  Moses;  therefore  the  deluge  and  the  creation  are  true.  This  is  conclusive 
among  certain  people  who  understand  it  rightly. 

626.  The  longevity  of  the  patriarchs,  instead  of  causing  the  loss  of  past  history, 
conduced,  on  the  contrary,  to  its  preservation.  For  the  reason  why  we  are  some¬ 
times  insufficiently  instructed  in  the  history  of  our  ancestors  is  that  we  have  never 
lived  long  with  them,  and  that  they  are  often  dead  before  we  have  attained  the  age 
of  reason.  Now,  when  men  lived  so  long,  children  lived  long  with  their  parents. 
They  conversed  long  with  them.  But  what  else  could  be  the  subject  of  their  talk 
save  the  history  of  their  ancestors,  since  to  that  all  history  was  reduced,  and  men 
did  not  study  science  or  art,  which  now  form  a  large  part  of  daily  conversation?  We 
see  also  that  in  these  days  tribes  took  particular  care  to  preserve  their  genealogies. 

627.  I  believe  that  Joshua  was  the  first  of  God's  people  to  have  this  name,  as 
Jesus  Christ  was  the  last  of  God's  people. 


SECTION  IX  287 

628.  Antiquity  of  the  Jem. — What  a  difference  there  is  between  one  book  and 
another!  I  am  not  astonished  that  the  Greeks  made  the  Iliad,  nor  the  Egyptians 
and  the  Chinese  their  histories. 

We  have  only  to  see  how  this  originates.  These  fabulous  historians  are  not 
contemporaneous  with  the  facts  about  which  they  write.  Homer  composes  a 
romance,  which  he  gives  out  as  such,  and  which  is  received  as  such;  for  nobody 
doubted  that  Troy  and  Agamemnon  no  more  existed  than  did  the  golden  apple. 
Accordingly,  he  did  not  think  of  making  a  history,  but  solely  a  book  to  amuse;  he 
is  the  only  writer  of  his  time;  the  beauty  of  the  work  has  made  it  last,  every  one 
learns  it  and  talks  of  it,  it  is  necessary  to  know  it,  and  each  one  knows  it  by  heart. 
Four  hundred  years  afterwards  the  witnesses  of  these  facts  are  no  longer  alive,  no 
one  knows  of  his  own  knowledge  if  it  be  a  fable  or  a  history;  one  has  only  learnt  it 
from  his  ancestors,  and  this  can  pass  for  truth. 

Every  history  which  is  not  contemporaneous,  as  the  books  of  the  Sibyls  and  Tris- 
megistus,  and  so  many  others  which  have  been  believed  by  the  world,  are  false,  and 
found  to  be  false  in  the  course  of  time.  It  is  not  so  with  contemporaneous  writers. 

There  is  a  great  difference  between  a  book  which  an  individual  writes  and  pub¬ 
lishes  to  a  nation,  and  a  book  which  itself  creates  a  nation.  We  cannot  doubt  that 
the  book  is  as  old  as  the  people. 

629.  Josephus  hides  the  shame  of  his  nation. 

Moses  does  not  hide  his  own  shame. 

Quis  mihi  det  ut  omnes prophetent ?l 

He  was  weary  of  the  multitude. 

630.  The  sincerity  of  the  Jews. — Maccabees,  after  they  had  no  more  prophets;  the 
Masorah,  since  Jesus  Christ. 

This  book  will  be  a  testimony  for  you. 

Defective  and  final  letters. 

Sincere  against  their  honour,  and  dying  for  it;  this  has  no  example  in  the  world, 
and  no  root  in  nature. 

631.  Sincerity  of  the  Jews. — They  preserve  lovingly  and  carefully  the  book  in 
which  Moses  declares  that  they  have  been  all  their  life  ungrateful  to  God,  and  that 
he  knows  they  will  be  still  more  so  after  his  death;  but  that  he  calls  heaven  and 
earth  to  witness  against  them  and  that  he  has  [taught]  them  enough. 

He  declares  that  God,  being  angry  with  them,  shall  at  last  scatter  them  among 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth;  that  as  they  have  offended  Him  by  worshipping  gods 
who  were  not  their  God,  so  He  will  provoke  them  by  calling  a  people  who  are  not 
His  people;  that  He  desires  that  all  His  words  be  preserved  for  ever,  and  that  His 
book  be  placed  in  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  to  serve  for  ever  as  a  witness  against 
them. 

Isaiah  says  the  same  thing,  30. 

632.  On  Esdras. — The  story  that  the  books  were  burnt  with  the  temple  proved 
false  by  Maccabees:  "Jeremiah  gave  them  the  law." 

^um.  11.29  Quis  tribuat  ut  omnis  populus  prophetet.  "Would  God  that  all  the  Lord’s  people 
were  prophets." 


288  PENSEES 

The  story  that  he  recited  the  whole  by  heart.  Josephus  and  Esdras  point  out  that 
he  read  the  book.  Baronius,  Annales  Ecclesiastici  a  Christo  Nato  ad  Annum  1198,  180: 
Nullus penitus  Hebreorum  antiquorum  reperitur  qui  tradiderit  libros periisse  et per  Esdram 
esse  restitutos,  nisi  in  IV  Esdre. 

The  story  that  he  changed  the  letters. 

Philo,  in  Vita  Mosis:  Ilia  lingua  ac  character  quo  antiquitus  scripta  est  lex  sic perman- 
sit  usque  ad  LXX. 

Josephus  says  that  the  Law  was  in  Hebrew  when  it  was  translated  by  the  Seventy. 

Under  Antiochus  and  Vespasian,  when  they  wanted  to  abolish  the  books,  and 
when  there  was  no  prophet,  they  could  not  do  so.  And  under  the  Babylonians, 
when  no  persecution  had  been  made,  and  when  there  were  so  many  prophets, 
would  they  have  let  them  be  burnt? 

Josephus  laughs  at  the  Greeks  who  would  not  hear  .  .  . 

Tertullian:  Perinde potuit  abolefactam  earn  violentia  cataclysmi  in  spiritu  rursus  refor¬ 
mat ,  quemadmodum  et  Hierosolymis  Babylonia  expugnatione  deletis ,  omne  instrumentum 
Judaic e  literature  per  Esdram  constat  restaur atum} 

He  says  that  Noah  could  as  easily  have  restored  in  spirit  the  book  of  Enoch, 
destroyed  by  the  Deluge,  as  Esdras  could  have  restored  the  Scriptures  lost  during 
the  Captivity. 

(Geos)  ev  ry  eirl  'Na^ovxodovoaop  alxnaXcoaia  tov  Xaou,  bicupdapeLG&v  rtbv 
Tpcup&v  .  .  .  heir vevae  ’E abpa  rep  iepe t,  e/c  ttjs  (pv\ys  A evi  rovs  ro)V  irpoyeyovorcov 
TrpO(p7jTcbv  ttclvtcls  avara^aadai  \6yovs,  /cat  cnroKaTaaTyaaL  rep  Xacp  ryv  6lcl 
Mawcreajs  vopodeaiav.  He  alleges  this  to  prove  that  it  is  not  incredible  that  the 
Seventy  may  have  explained  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  that  uniformity  which  we 
admire  in  them.  And  he  took  that  from  Saint  Irenaeus. 

Saint  Hilary,  in  his  preface  to  the  Psalms,  says  that  Esdras  arranged  the  Psalms 
in  order. 

The  origin  of  this  tradition  comes  from  the  14th  chapter  of  the  fourth  book  of 
Esdras.  Deus  glorificatus  est ,  et  Scripture  vere  divine  credite  sunt ,  omnibus  eandem  et 
eisdem  verbis  et  eisdem  nominibus  recitantibus  ab  initio  usque  ad finem ,  uti  et  presentes gentes 
cognoscerent  quoniam  per  inspirationem  Dei  interpretate  sunt  Scripture ,  et  non  esset  mir- 
abile  Deum  hoc  in  eis  operatum:  quando  in  ea  captivitate  populi  que  facta  est  a  Nabucho- 
donosor ,  corruptis scripturis  et  post  70  annos  Judeis  descendentibus  in  regionemsuam ,  et  post 
deinde  tempo ribus  Artaxerxis  Persarum  regis ,  inspiravit  Esdre  sacerdoti  tribus  Levi 
preteritorum  prophetarum  omnes  rememorare  sermones ,  et  restituere populo  earn  legem  que 
data  est  per  Moysen  .2 

cultu  feminarum ,  i-3.  "He  could  equally  have  renewed  it,  under  the  Spirit's  inspiration, 
after  it  had  been  destroyed  by  the  violence  of  the  deluge,  as,  after  the  destruction  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  by  the  Babylonian  storming  of  it,  every  document  of  the  Jewish  literature  is  generally 
agreed  to  have  been  restored  through  Ezra.” 

2Eusebius,  Ecdesiastical  History ,  V.  viii.  14.  "God  was  glorified,  and  the  Scriptures  were 
recognized  as  truly  divine,  for  they  all  rendered  the  same  things  in  the  same  words  and  the 
same  names,  from  beginning  to  end,  so  that  even  the  heathen  who  were  present  knew  that 
the  Scriptures  had  been  translated  by  the  inspiration  of  God.  And  it  is  no  marvel  that  God  did 
this,  for  when  the  Scriptures  had  been  destroyed  in  the  captivity  of  the  people  in  the  days  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  Jews  had  gone  back  to  their  country  after  seventy  years,  then  in  the 
times  of  Artaxerxes,  the  king  of  the  Persians,  he  inspired  Ezra,  the  priest  of  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
to  restore  all  the  sayings  of  the  prophets  who  had  gone  before,  and  to  restore  to  the  people 
the  law  given  by  Moses.”  This  is  Pascal's  rendering  into  Latin  of  the  passage  from  Eusebius 
of  which  the  last  lines  are  in  Greek,  above. 


SECTION  IX 


289 

633.  Against  the  story  in  Esdras,  II  Maccab.  2.;  Josephus,  Antiquities ,  II,  i. — Cyrus 
took  occasion  from  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  to  release  the  people.  The  Jews  held 
their  property  in  peace  under  Cyrus  in  Babylon;  hence  they  could  well  have  the 
Law. 

Josephus,  in  the  whole  history  of  Esdras,  does  not  say  one  word  about  this 
restoration.  II  Kings  17.27. 


634.  If  the  story  in  Esdras  is  credible,  then  it  must  be  believed  that  the  Scripture 
is  Holy  Scripture;  for  this  story  is  based  only  on  the  authority  of  those  who  assert 
that  of  the  Seventy,  which  shows  that  the  Scripture  is  holy. 

Therefore,  if  this  account  be  true,  we  have  what  we  want  therein;  if  not,  we 
have  it  elsewhere.  And  thus  those  who  would  ruin  the  truth  of  our  religion, 
founded  on  Moses,  establish  it  by  the  same  authority  by  which  they  attack  it.  So 
by  this  providence  it  still  exists. 


635.  Chronology  of  Rabbinism.  (The  citations  of  pages  are  from  the  book  Pugio.) 
Page  27.  R.  Hakadosch  (anno  200),  author  of  the  Mischna ,  or  vocal  law,  or  sec¬ 
ond  law. 


Commentaries  on  the  Mischna  (anno  340 ): 


The  one  Siphra. 
Barajetot. 
Talmud  Hierosol. 

Tosiphtot. 

Bereschit  Rabah,  by  R.  Osaiah  Rabah,  commentary  on  the  Mischna . 

Bereschit  Rabah ,  Bar  Naconi ,  are  subtle  and  pleasant  discourses,  historical  and 
theological.  This  same  author  wrote  the  books  called  Robot. 

A  hundred  years  after  the  Talmud  Hierosol  was  composed  the  Babylonian  Tal¬ 
mud ,  by  R.  Ase,  a.d.  440,  by  the  universal  consent  of  all  the  Jews,  who  are  neces¬ 
sarily  obliged  to  observe  all  that  is  contained  therein. 

The  addition  of  R.  Ase  is  called  the  Gemara,  that  is  to  say,  the  commentary  on  the 
Mischna. 

And  the  Talmud  includes  together  the  Mischna  and  the  Gemara. 


636.  7/does  not  indicate  indifference:  Malachi,  Isaiah. 
Isaiah,  Si  volumus ,  etc. 

In  quacumque  die.1 


637.  Prophecies . — The  sceptre  was  not  interrupted  by  the  captivity  in  Babylon, 
because  the  return  was  promised  and  foretold. 


638.  Proofs  of  Jesus  Christ. — Captivity,  with  the  assurance  of  deliverance  within 
seventy  years,  was  not  real  captivity.  But  now  they  are  captives  without  any  hope. 

God  has  promised  them  that,  even  though  He  should  scatter  them  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth,  nevertheless,  if  they  were  faithful  to  His  law,  He  would  assemble 
them  together  again.  They  are  very  faithful  to  it  and  remain  oppressed. 

639.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  away  the  people,  for  fear  they  should  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judah,  they  were  told  beforehand  that 

r'Each  time  that.” 


290  PENSEES 

they  would  be  there  for  a  short  time,  and  that  they  would  be  restored.  They  were 
always  consoled  by  the  prophets;  and  their  kings  continued.  But  the  second  de¬ 
struction  is  without  promise  of  restoration,  without  prophets,  without  kings,  with¬ 
out  consolation,  without  hope,  because  the  sceptre  is  taken  away  for  ever. 

640.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing,  and  worthy  of  particular  attention,  to  see  this  Jew¬ 
ish  people  existing  so  many  years  in  perpetual  misery,  it  being  necessary  as  a  proof 
of  Jesus  Christ  both  that  they  should  exist  to  prove  Him  and  that  they  should  be 
miserable  because  they  crucified  Him;  and  though  to  be  miserable  and  to  exist 
are  contradictory,  they  nevertheless  still  exist  in  spite  of  their  misery. 

641.  They  are  visibly  a  people  expressly  created  to  serve  as  a  witness  to  the 
Messiah  (Isaiah  43.9;  44.8).  They  keep  the  books,  and  love  them,  and  do  not 
understand  them.  And  all  this  was  foretold;  that  God’s  judgments  are  entrusted 
to  them,  but  as  a  sealed  book. 


SECTION  X 
TYPOLOGY 

642.  Proof  of  the  two  Testaments  at  once. — To  prove  the  two  at  one  stroke,  we  need 
only  see  if  the  prophecies  in  one  are  fulfilled  in  the  other.  To  examine  the  proph¬ 
ecies,  we  must  understand  them.  For  if  we  believe  they  have  only  one  meaning, 
it  is  certain  that  the  Messiah  has  not  come;  but  if  they  have  two  meanings,  it  is 
certain  that  He  has  come  in  Jesus  Christ. 

The  whole  problem  then  is  to  know  if  they  have  two  meanings. 

That  the  Scripture  has  two  meanings,  which  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles  have 
given,  is  shown  by  the  following  proofs: 

1.  Proof  by  Scripture  itself. 

2.  Proof  by  the  Rabbis.  Moses  Maimonides  says  that  it  has  two  aspects  and  that 
the  prophets  have  prophesied  Jesus  Christ  only. 

3.  Proof  by  the  Kabbala. 

4.  Proof  by  the  mystical  interpretation  which  the  Rabbis  themselves  give  to 
Scripture. 

5.  Proof  by  the  principles  of  the  Rabbis,  that  there  are  two  meanings;  that  there 
are  two  advents  of  the  Messiah,  a  glorious  and  an  humiliating  one,  according  to 
their  desert;  that  the  prophets  have  prophesied  of  the  Messiah  only — the  Law  is 
not  eternal,  but  must  change  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah — that  then  they  shall 
no  more  remember  the  Red  Sea;  that  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles  shall  be  mingled. 

[6.  Proof  by  the  key  which  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles  give  us.] 

643.  Isaiah  51.  The  Red  Sea  an  image  of  the  Redemption.  Ut  sciatis  quod  filius 
hominis  habet potestatem  remittendi peccata  .  .  .  tibi  dico:  Surge.1  God,  wishing  to  show 
that  He  could  form  a  people  holy  with  an  invisible  holiness,  and  fill  them  with  an 

*Mark  2.10,1 1.  "But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive 
sins  ...  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise.” 


SECTION  X  291 

eternal  glory,  made  visible  things.  As  nature  is  an  image  of  grace,  He  has  done  in 
the  bounties  of  nature  what  He  would  do  in  those  of  grace,  in  order  that  we  might 
judge  that  He  could  make  the  invisible,  since  He  made  the  visible  excellently. 

Therefore  He  saved  this  people  from  the  deluge;  He  has  raised  them  up  from 
Abraham,  redeemed  them  from  their  enemies,  and  set  them  at  rest. 

The  object  of  God  was  not  to  save  them  from  the  deluge,  and  raise  up  a  whole 
people  from  Abraham,  only  in  order  to  bring  them  into  a  rich  land. 

Axid  even  grace  is  only  the  type  of  glory,  for  it  is  not  the  ultimate  end.  It  has 
been  symbolised  by  the  law,  and  itself  symbolises  [glory].  But  it  is  the  type  of  it, 
and  the  origin  or  cause. 

The  ordinary  life  of  men  is  like  that  of  the  saints.  They  all  seek  their  satisfaction 
and  differ  only  in  the  object  in  which  they  place  it;  they  call  those  their  enemies 
who  hinder  them,  etc.  God  has  then  shown  the  power  which  He  has  of  giving  in¬ 
visible  blessings,  by  that  which  He  has  shown  Himself  to  have  over  things  visible. 

644.  Types. — God,  wishing  to  form  for  Himself  an  holy  people,  whom  He  should 
separate  from  all  other  nations,  whom  He  should  deliver  from  their  enemies  and 
should  put  into  a  place  of  rest,  has  promised  to  do  so  and  has  foretold  by  His 
prophets  the  time  and  the  manner  of  His  coming.  And  yet,  to  confirm  the  hope  of 
His  elect,  He  has  made  them  see  in  it  an  image  through  all  time,  without  leaving 
them  devoid  of  assurances  of  His  power  and  of  His  will  to  save  them.  For,  at  the 
creation  of  man,  Adam  was  the  witness,  and  guardian  of  the  promise  of  a  Saviour, 
who  should  be  born  of  woman,  when  men  were  still  so  near  the  creation  that  they 
could  not  have  forgotten  their  creation  and  their  fall.  When  those  who  had  seen 
Adam  were  no  longer  in  the  world,  God  sent  Noah  whom  He  saved,  and  drowned 
the  whole  earth  by  a  miracle  which  sufficiently  indicated  the  power  which  He  had 
to  save  the  world,  and  the  will  which  He  had  to  do  so,  and  to  raise  up  from  the 
seed  of  woman  Him  whom  He  had  promised.  This  miracle  was  enough  to  con¬ 
firm  the  hope  of  men. 

The  memory  of  the  Deluge  being  so  fresh  among  men,  while  Noah  was  still 
alive,  God  made  promises  to  Abraham,  and,  while  Shem  was  still  living,  sent 
Moses,  etc.  .  .  . 

645.  Types. — God,  willing  to  deprive  His  own  of  perishable  blessings,  created 
the  Jewish  people  in  order  to  show  that  this  was  not  owing  to  lack  of  power. 

646.  The  Synagogue  did  not  perish,  because  it  was  a  type.  But,  because  it  was 
only  a  type,  it  fell  into  servitude.  The  type  existed  till  the  truth  came,  in  order  that 
the  Church  should  be  always  visible,  either  in  the  sign  which  promised  it,  or  in 
substance. 

647.  That  the  law  was  figurative. 

648.  Two  errors:  1.  To  take  everything  literally.  2.  To  take  everything  spiritually. 

649.  To  speak  against  too  greatly  figurative  language. 

650.  There  are  some  types  clear  and  demonstrative,  but  others  which  seem  some- 


292  PENSEES 

what  far-fetched,  and  which  convince  only  those  who  are  already  persuaded. 
These  are  like  the  Apocalyptics.  But  the  difference  is  that  they  have  none  which 
are  certain,  so  that  nothing  is  so  unjust  as  to  claim  that  theirs  are  as  well  founded 
as  some  of  ours;  for  they  have  none  so  demonstrative  as  some  of  ours.  The  com¬ 
parison  is  unfair.  We  must  not  put  on  the  same  level  and  confound  things,  be¬ 
cause  they  seem  to  agree  in  one  point,  while  they  are  so  different  in  another. 
The  clearness  in  divine  things  requires  us  to  revere  the  obscurities  in  them. 

[It  is  like  men,  who  employ  a  certain  obscure  language  among  themselves. 
Those  who  should  not  understand  it  would  understand  only  a  foolish  meaning.] 

651.  Extravagances  of  the  Apocalyptics ,  Preadamites ,  Millenarians ,  etc . — He  who 
would  base  extravagant  opinions  on  Scripture  will,  for  example,  base  them  on 
this.  It  is  said  that  "this  generation  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled." 
Upon  that  I  will  say  that  after  that  generation  will  come  another  generation,  and 
so  on  ever  in  succession. 

Solomon  and  the  King  are  spoken  of  in  the  second  book  of  Chronicles  as  if 
they  were  two  different  persons.  I  will  say  that  they  were  two. 

652.  Particular  Types . — A  double  law,  double  tables  of  the  law,  a  double  temple, 
a  double  captivity. 

653.  Types. — The  prophets  prophesied  by  symbols  of  a  girdle,  a  beard,  and 
burnt  hair,  etc. 

654.  Difference  between  dinner  and  supper. 

In  God  the  word  does  not  differ  from  the  intention,  for  He  is  true;  nor  the 
word  from  the  effect,  for  He  is  powerful;  nor  the  means  from  the  effect,  for  He  is 
wise.  St.  Bernard,  Ultimo  Sermo  in  Missam. 

St.  Augustine,  City  of  God ,  v.  10.  This  rule  is  general.  God  can  do  every¬ 
thing,  except  those  things  which,  if  He  could  do,  He  would  not  be  almighty,  as 
dying,  being  deceived,  lying,  etc. 

Several  Evangelists  for  the  confirmation  of  the  truth;  their  difference  useful. 

The  Eucharist  after  Lord’s  Supper.  Truth  after  the  type. 

The  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  a  type  of  the  ruin  of  the  world,  forty  years  after  the  death 
of  Jesus.  "I  know  not,"  as  a  man,  or  as  an  ambassador  (Mark  13.32;  Matthew 
24.36.) 

Jesus  condemned  by  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles. 

The  Jews  and  the  Gentiles  typified  by  the  two  sons.  St.  Augustine  City  of  God , 
xx.  29. 

655.  The  six  ages,  the  six  Fathers  of  the  six  ages,  the  six  wonders  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  six  ages,  the  six  mornings  at  the  beginning  of  the  six  ages. 

656.  Adam  forma  futuri }  The  six  days  to  form  the  one,  the  six  ages  to  form  the 
other.  The  six  days,  which  Moses  represents  for  the  formation  of  Adam,  are  only 
the  picture  of  the  six  ages  to  form  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Church.  If  Adam  had  not 
sinned,  and  Jesus  Christ  had  not  come,  there  had  been  only  one  covenant,  only 

^om.  5.14.  "The  figure  of  him  that  was  to  come." 


SECTION  X  293 

one  age  of  men,  and  the  creation  would  have  been  represented  as  accomplished 
at  one  single  time. 

657.  Types. — The  Jewish  and  Egyptian  peoples  were  plainly  foretold  by  the  two 
individuals  whom  Moses  met;  the  Egyptian  beating  the  Jew,  Moses  avenging 
him  and  killing  the  Egyptian,  and  the  Jew  being  ungrateful. 

658.  The  symbols  of  the  Gospel  for  the  state  of  the  sick  soul  are  sick  bodies; 
but,  because  one  body  cannot  be  sick  enough  to  express  it  well,  several  have  been 
needed.  Thus  there  are  the  deaf,  the  dumb,  the  blind,  the  paralytic,  the  dead 
Lazarus,  the  possessed.  All  this  crowd  is  in  the  sick  soul. 

659.  Types. — To  show  that  the  Old  Testament  is  only  figurative  and  that  the 
prophets  understood  by  temporal  blessings  other  blessings,  this  is  the  proof: 

First,  that  this  would  be  unworthy  of  God. 

Secondly,  that  their  discourses  express  very  clearly  the  promise  of  temporal 
blessings,  and  that  they  say  nevertheless  that  their  discourses  are  obscure,  and 
that  their  meaning  will  not  be  understood.  Whence  it  appears  that  this  secret 
meaning  was  not  that  which  they  openly  expressed,  and  that  consequently  they 
meant  to  speak  of  other  sacrifices,  of  another  deliverer,  etc.  They  say  that  they 
will  be  understood  only  in  the  fullness  of  time  (Jer.  30.24). 

The  third  proof  is  that  their  discourses  are  contradictory,  and  neutralise  each 
other;  so  that,  if  we  think  that  they  did  not  mean  by  the  words  law  and  sacrifice 
anything  else  than  that  of  Moses,  there  is  a  plain  and  gross  contradiction.  There¬ 
fore  they  meant  something  else,  sometimes  contradicting  themselves  in  the  same 
chapter.  Now,  to  understand  the  meaning  of  an  author  .  .  . 

660.  Lust  has  become  natural  to  us  and  has  made  our  second  nature.  Thus  there 
are  two  natures  in  us — the  one  good,  the  other  bad.  Where  is  God?  Where  you 
are  not,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you.  The  Rabbis. 

661.  Penitence,  alone  of  all  these  mysteries,  has  been  manifestly  declared  to  the 
Jews,  and  by  Saint  John,  the  Forerunner;  and  then  the  other  mysteries;  to  indicate 
that  in  each  man,  as  in  the  entire  world,  this  order  must  be  observed. 

662.  The  carnal  Jews  understood  neither  the  greatness  nor  the  humiliation  of 
the  Messiah  foretold  in  their  prophecies.  They  misunderstood  Him  in  His  fore¬ 
told  greatness,  as  when  He  said  that  the  Messiah  should  be  lord  of  David,  though 
his  son,  and  that  He  was  before  Abraham,  who  had  seen  Him.  They  did  not  be¬ 
lieve  Him  so  great  as  to  be  eternal,  and  they  likewise  misunderstood  Him  in  His 
humiliation  and  in  His  death.  "The  Messiah,"  said  they,  "abideth  for  ever,  and 
this  man  says  that  he  shall  die."  Therefore  they  believed  Him  neither  mortal  nor 
eternal;  they  only  sought  in  Him  fora  carnal  greatness. 

663.  Typical. — Nothing  is  so  like  charity  as  covetousness,  and  nothing  is  so 
opposed  to  it.  Thus  the  Jews,  full  of  possessions  which  flattered  their  covetous¬ 
ness,  were  very  like  Christians,  and  very  contrary.  And  by  this  means  they  had 
the  two  qualities  which  it  was  necessary  they  should  have,  to  be  very  like 


PENSEES 


294 

the  Messiah  to  typify  Him,  and  very  contrary  not  to  be  suspected  witnesses. 

664.  Typical. — God  made  use  of  the  lust  of  the  Jews  to  make  them  minister  to 
Jesus  Christ,  [who  brought  the  remedy  for  their  lust]. 

665.  Charity  is  not  a  figurative  precept.  It  is  dreadful  to  say  that  Jesus  Christ, 
who  came  to  take  away  types  in  order  to  establish  the  truth,  came  only  to  establish 
the  type  of  charity,  in  order  to  take  away  the  existing  reality  which  was  there  be¬ 
fore. 

"If  the  light  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness!" 

666.  Fascination.  Somnum  suum }  Figura  hujus  mundi .2 

The  Eucharist.  Comedes pattern  tuum?  Partem  nostrum } 

Inimici  Dei  terram  lingent}  Sinners  lick  the  dust,  that  is  to  say,  love  earthly 
pleasures. 

The  Old  Testament  contains  the  types  of  future  joy,  and  the  New  contains  the 
means  of  arriving  at  it.  The  types  were  of  joy;  the  means  of  penitence;  and  never¬ 
theless  the  Paschal  Lamb  was  eaten  with  bitter  herbs,  cum  amaritudinibus .6 

Singularis  sum  ego  donee  tr anseam. 7  Jesus  Christ  before  His  death  was  almost  the 
only  martyr. 

667.  Typical . — The  expressions  sword ,  shield.  Potentissime? 

668.  We  are  estranged  only  by  departing  from  charity.  Our  prayers  and  our 
virtues  are  abominable  before  God,  if  they  are  not  the  prayers  and  the  virtues  of 
Jesus  Christ.  And  our  sins  will  never  be  the  object  of  [mercy],  but  of  the  justice  of 
God,  if  they  are  not  [those  of]  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  adopted  our  sins,  and  has  [ad¬ 
mitted]  us  into  union  [with  Him],  for  virtues  are  [His  own,  and]  sins  are  foreign  to 
Him;  while  virtues  [are]  foreign  to  us,  and  our  sins  are  our  own. 

Let  us  change  the  rule  which  we  have  hitherto  chosen  for  judging  what  is  good. 
We  had  our  own  will  as  our  rule.  Let  us  now  take  the  will  of  [God]\  all  that  He 
wills  is  good  and  right  to  us,  all  that  He  does  not  will  is  [bad]. 

All  that  God  does  not  permit  is  forbidden.  Sins  are  forbidden  by  the  general 
declaration  that  God  has  made,  that  He  did  not  allow  them.  Other  things  which 
He  has  left  without  general  prohibition,  and  which  for  that  reason  are  said  to  be 
permitted,  are  nevertheless  not  always  permitted.  For  when  God  removed  some 
one  of  them  from  us,  and  when,  by  the  event,  which  is  a  manifestation  of  the  will 
of  God,  it  appears  that  God  does  not  will  that  we  should  have  a  thing,  that  is  then 
forbidden  to  us  as  sin;  since  the  will  of  God  is  that  we  should  not  have  one  more 
than  another.  There  is  this  sole  difference  between  these  two  things,  that  it  is  cer¬ 
tain  that  God  will  never  allow  sin,  while  it  is  not  certain  that  He  will  never  allow 

JPs.  75.5.  "They  have  slept  their  sleep." 

2I  Cor.  7.31.  "The  fashion  of  this  world." 

3Deut.  8.9.  "Bread  without  scarceness." 

4Luke  1 1.3.  "Our  daily  bread." 

BPs.  71.9.  "The  enemies  of  the  Lord  shall  lick  the  dust." 

6Exod.  12.8.  Cum  lacticibus  agrestibus.  "With  bitter  herbs." 

7Ps.  140.10.  "Whilst  that  I  withal  escape." 

8Ps.  44.4  "O  most  mighty." 


SECTION  X  295 

the  other.  But  so  long  as  God  does  not  permit  it,  we  ought  to  regard  it  as  sin;  so 
long  as  the  absence  of  God’s  will,  which  alone  is  all  goodness  and  all  justice, 
renders  it  unjust  and  wrong. 

669.  To  change  the  type,  because  of  our  weakness. 

670.  Types. — The  Jews  had  grown  old  in  these  earthly  thoughts,  that  God  loved 
their  father  Abraham,  his  flesh  and  what  sprung  from  it;  that  on  account  of  this 
He  had  multiplied  them  and  distinguished  them  from  all  other  nations,  without 
allowing  them  to  intermingle;  that,  when  they  were  languishing  in  Egypt,  He 
brought  them  out  with  all  these  great  signs  in  their  favour;  that  He  fed  them  with 
manna  in  the  desert,  and  led  them  into  a  very  rich  land;  that  He  gave  them  kings 
and  a  well-built  temple,  in  order  to  offer  up  beasts  before  Him,  by  the  shedding  of 
whose  blood  they  should  be  purified;  and  that,  at  last,  He  was  to  send  them  the 
Messiah  to  make  them  masters  of  all  the  world,  and  foretold  the  time  of  His  com¬ 
ing. 

The  world  having  grown  old  in  these  carnal  errors,  Jesus  Christ  came  at  the 
time  foretold,  but  not  with  the  expected  glory;  and  thus  men  did  not  think  it  was 
He.  After  His  death,  Saint  Paul  came  to  teach  men  that  all  these  things  had  hap¬ 
pened  in  allegory ;  that  the  kingdom  of  God  did  not  consist  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the 
spirit;  that  the  enemies  of  men  were  not  the  Babylonians,  but  the  passions;  that 
God  delighted  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  but  in  a  pure  and  contrite  heart; 
that  the  circumcision  of  the  body  was  unprofitable,  but  that  of  the  heart  was  need¬ 
ed;  that  Moses  had  not  given  them  the  bread  from  heaven,  etc. 

But  God,  not  having  desired  to  reveal  these  things  to  this  people  who  were  un¬ 
worthy  of  them  and  having,  nevertheless,  desired  to  foretell  them,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  believed,  foretold  the  time  clearly,  and  expressed  the  things  some¬ 
times  clearly,  but  very  often  in  figures,  in  order  that  those  who  loved  symbols 
might  consider  them  and  those  who  loved  what  was  symbolised  might  see  it 
therein. 

All  that  tends  not  to  charity  is  figurative. 

The  sole  aim  of  the  Scripture  is  charity. 

All  which  tends  not  to  the  sole  end  is  the  type  of  it.  For  since  there  is  only  one 
end,  all  which  does  not  lead  to  it  in  express  terms  is  figurative. 

God  thus  varies  that  sole  precept  of  charity  to  satisfy  our  curiosity  which  seeks 
for  variety,  by  that  variety  which  still  leads  us  to  the  one  thing  needful.  For  one 
thing  alone  is  needful,  and  we  love  variety;  and  God  satisfies  both  by  these 
varieties,  which  lead  to  the  one  thing  needful. 

The  Jews  have  so  much  loved  the  shadows  and  have  so  strictly  expected  them 
that  they  have  misunderstood  the  reality,  when  it  came  in  the  time  and  manner 
foretold. 

The  Rabbis  take  the  breasts  of  the  Spouse  for  types,  and  all  that  does  not  ex¬ 
press  the  only  end  they  have,  namely,  temporal  good. 

And  Christians  take  even  the  Eucharist  as  a  type  of  the  glory  at  which  they  aim. 

671.  The  Jews,  who  have  been  called  to  subdue  nations  and  kings,  have  been 
the  slaves  of  sin;  and  the  Christians,  whose  calling  has  been  to  be  servants  and  sub¬ 
jects,  are  free  children. 


296  PENSEES 

672.  A  formal  point . — When  Saint  Peter  and  the  Apostles  deliberated  about 
abolishing  circumcision,  where  it  was  a  question  of  acting  against  the  law  of 
God,  they  did  not  heed  the  prophets,  but  simply  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  persons  uncircumcised. 

They  thought  it  more  certain  that  God  approved  of  those  whom  He  filled  with 
His  Spirit  than  it  was  that  the  law  must  be  obeyed.  They  knew  that  the  end  of  the 
law  was  only  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  that  thus,  as  men  certainly  had  this  without 
circumcision,  it  was  not  necessary. 

673.  Fac  secundum  exemplar  quod  tibi  ostensum  est  in  monte } — The  Jewish  religion 
then  has  been  formed  on  its  likeness  to  the  truth  of  the  Messiah;  and  the  truth  of 
the  Messiah  has  been  recognised  by  the  Jewish  religion,  which  was  the  type  of  it. 

Among  the  Jews  the  truth  was  only  typified;  in  heaven  it  is  revealed. 

In  the  Church  it  is  hidden  and  recognised  by  its  resemblance  to  the  type. 

The  type  has  been  made  according  to  the  truth,  and  the  truth  has  been  recog¬ 
nised  according  to  the  type. 

Saint  Paul  says  himself  that  people  will  forbid  to  marry,  and  he  himself  speaks 
of  it  to  the  Corinthians  in  a  way  which  is  a  snare.  For  if  a  prophet  had  said  the  one, 
and  Saint  Paul  had  then  said  the  other,  he  would  have  been  accused. 

674.  Typical . — "Do  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  which  has  been  shown 
thee  on  the  mount."  On  which  Saint  Paul  says  that  the  Jews  have  shadowed  forth 
heavenly  things. 

675.  ..  .  And  yet  this  Covenant,  made  to  blind  some  and  enlighten  others,  indi¬ 
cated  in  those  very  persons,  whom  it  blinded,  the  truth  which  should  be  recog¬ 
nised  by  others.  For  the  visible  blessings  which  they  received  from  God  were  so 
great  and  so  divine  that  He  indeed  appeared  able  to  give  them  those  that  are 
invisible  and  a  Messiah. 

For  nature  is  an  image  of  Grace,  and  visible  miracles  are  images  of  the  invisible. 
Utsciatis  .  .  .  tibi  dico:  Surge.'1 

Isaiah  says  that  Redemption  will  be  as  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea. 

God  has,  then,  shown  by  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  from  the  sea,  by  the 
defeat  of  kings,  by  the  manna,  by  the  whole  genealogy  of  Abraham,  that  He  was 
able  to  save,  to  send  down  bread  from  heaven,  etc.;  so  that  the  people  hostile  to 
Him  are  the  type  and  the  representation  of  the  very  Messiah  whom  they  know 
not,  etc. 

He  has,  then,  taught  us  at  last  that  all  these  things  were  only  types  and  what  is 
"true  freedom,"  a  "true  Israelite,"  "true  circumcision,"  "true  bread  from  heaven," 
etc. 

In  these  promises  each  one  finds  what  he  has  most  at  heart,  temporal  benefits 
or  spiritual,  God  or  the  creatures;  but  with  this  difference,  that  those  who  therein 
seek  the  creatures  find  them,  but  with  many  contradictions,  with  a  prohibition 
against  loving  them,  with  the  command  to  worship  God  only,  and  to  love  Him 
only,  which  is  the  same  thing,  and,  finally,  that  the  Messiah  came  not  for  them; 
whereas  those  who  therein  seek  God  find  Him,  without  any  contradiction,  with 

Txod.  25.40.  "Make  them  after  their  pattern,  which  was  showed  thee  on  the  mount." 

2Mark  2.10,11.  "That  ye  may  know  ...  I  say  unto  thee:  Arise." 


SECTION  X  297 

the  command  to  love  Him  only,  and  that  the  Messiah  came  in  the  time  foretold, 
to  give  them  the  blessings  which  they  ask. 

Thus  the  Jews  had  miracles  and  prophecies,  which  they  saw  fulfilled,  and  the 
teaching  of  their  law  was  to  worship  and  love  God  only;  it  was  also  perpetual. 
Thus  it  had  all  the  marks  of  the  true  religion;  and  so  it  was.  But  the  Jewish  teach¬ 
ing  must  be  distinguished  from  the  teaching  of  the  Jewish  law.  Now  the  Jewish 
teaching  was  not  true,  although  it  had  miracles  and  prophecy  and  perpetuity,  be¬ 
cause  it  had  not  this  other  point  of  worshipping  and  loving  God  only. 

676.  The  veil,  which  is  upon  these  books  for  the  Jews,  is  there  also  for  evil 
Christians  and  for  all  who  do  not  hate  themselves. 

But  how  well  disposed  men  are  to  understand  them  and  to  know  Jesus  Christ, 
when  they  truly  hate  themselves! 

677.  A  type  conveys  absence  and  presence,  pleasure  and  pain. 

A  cipher  has  a  double  meaning,  one  clear  and  one  in  which  it  is  said  that  the 
meaning  is  hidden. 

678.  Types. — A  portrait  conveys  absence  and  presence,  pleasure  and  pain.  The 
reality  excludes  absence  and  pain. 

To  know  if  the  law  and  the  sacrifices  are  a  reality  or  a  type,  we  must  see  if  the 
prophets,  in  speaking  of  these  things,  confined  their  view  and  their  thought  to 
them,  so  that  they  saw  only  the  old  covenant;  or  if  they  saw  therein  something 
else  of  which  they  were  the  representation,  for  in  a  portrait  we  see  the  thing 
figured.  For  this  we  need  only  examine  what  they  say  of  them. 

When  they  say  that  it  will  be  eternal,  do  they  mean  to  speak  of  that  covenant 
which  they  say  will  be  changed;  and  so  of  the  sacrifices,  etc.? 

A  cipher  has  two  meanings.  When  we  find  out  an  important  letter  in  which  we 
discover  a  clear  meaning,  and  in  which  it  is  nevertheless  said  that  the  meaning  is 
veiled  and  obscure,  that  it  is  hidden,  so  that  we  might  read  the  letter  without  see¬ 
ing  it,  and  interpret  it  without  understanding  it,  what  must  we  think  but  that  here 
is  a  cipher  with  a  double  meaning,  and  the  more  so  if  we  find  obvious  contradic¬ 
tions  in  the  literal  meaning?  The  prophets  have  clearly  said  that  Israel  would  be 
always  loved  by  God  and  that  the  law  would  be  eternal;  and  they  have  said  that 
their  meaning  would  not  be  understood  and  that  it  was  veiled. 

How  greatly,  then,  ought  we  to  value  those  who  interpret  the  cipher  and  teach 
us  to  understand  the  hidden  meaning,  especially  if  the  principles  which  they 
educe  are  perfectly  clear  and  natural!  This  is  what  Jesus  Christ  did,  and  the  Apos¬ 
tles.  They  broke  the  seal;  He  rent  the  veil,  and  revealed  the  spirit.  They  have 
taught  us  through  this  that  the  enemies  of  man  are  his  passions  ;  that  the  Redeemer 
would  be  spiritual,  and  His  reign  spiritual;  that  there  would  be  two  advents,  one 
in  lowliness  to  humble  the  proud,  the  other  in  glory  to  exalt  the  humble;  that 
Jesus  Christ  would  be  both  God  and  man. 

679.  Types. — Jesus  Christ  opened  their  mind  to  understand  the  Scriptures. 

Two  great  revelations  are  these.  (1)  All  things  happened  to  them  in  types:  vere 

Israelites,  vere  liberi \l  true  bread  from  Heaven.  (2)  A  God  humbled  to  the  Cross.  It 

^ee  note  to  564. 


298  PENSEES 

was  necessary  that  Christ  should  suffer  in  order  to  enter  into  glory,  "that  He 
should  destroy  death  through  death."  Two  advents. 

680.  Types. — When  once  this  secret  is  disclosed,  it  is  impossible  not  to  see  it. 
Let  us  read  the  Old  Testament  in  this  light,  and  let  us  see  if  the  sacrifices  were 
real;  if  the  fatherhood  of  Abraham  was  the  true  cause  of  the  friendship  of  God; 
and  if  the  promised  land  was  the  true  place  of  rest.  No.  They  are  therefore  types. 
Let  us  in  the  same  way  examine  all  those  ordained  ceremonies,  all  those  command¬ 
ments  which  are  not  of  charity,  and  we  shall  see  that  they  are  types. 

All  these  sacrifices  and  ceremonies  were  then  either  types  or  nonsense.  Now 
these  are  things  too  clear  and  too  lofty  to  be  thought  nonsense. 

To  know  if  the  prophets  confined  their  view  in  the  Old  Testament,  or  saw 
therein  other  things. 

681.  Typical. — The  key  of  the  cipher.  Veri  adoratores.1  Ecce  agnus  Dei  qui  tollit 
peccata  mundi .2 

682.  Is.  1.  21.  Change  of  good  into  evil,  and  the  vengeance  of  God.  Is.  10.  1; 
26.  20;  28.  1.  Miracles:  Is.  33.  9;  40.  17;  41.  26;  43.  13. 

Jer.  11.  21;  15.  12;  17.  9.  Pravum  est  cor  omnium  et  incrustabile;  quis  cognoscet  illud?z 
that  is  to  say,  Who  can  know  all  its  evil?  For  it  is  already  known  to  be  wicked.  Ego 
dominus?  etc. — vii.  14,  Faciam  domui  huic ,5  etc.  Trust  in  external  sacrifices — 7.  22, 
Quia  non  sum  locutus ,6  etc.  Outward  sacrifice  is  not  the  essential  point — 11.  13, 
Secundum  numerum ,7  etc.  A  multitude  of  doctrines. 

Is.  44.  20-24;  54.  8;  63.  12-17;  66.  17.  Jer.  2.  35;  4.  22-24;  5-  4>  29-31;  6.  16; 
22.  15-17. 


683.  Types. — The  letter  kills.  All  happened  in  types.  Here  is  the  cipher  which 
Saint  Paul  gives  us.  Christ  must  suffer.  An  humiliated  God.  Circumcision  of  the 
heart,  true  fasting,  true  sacrifice,  a  true  temple.  The  prophets  have  shown  that  all 
these  must  be  spiritual. 

Not  the  meat  which  perishes,  but  that  which  does  not  perish. 

"Ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  Then  the  other  freedom  was  only  a  type  of  free¬ 
dom. 

"I  am  the  true  bread  from  Heaven." 

684.  Contradiction. — We  can  only  describe  a  good  character  by  reconciling  all 
contrary  qualities,  and  it  is  not  enough  to  keep  up  a  series  of  harmonious  quali¬ 
ties,  without  reconciling  contradictory  ones.  To  understand  the  meaning  of  an 
author,  we  must  make  all  the  contrary  passages  agree. 

Thus,  to  understand  Scripture,  we  must  have  a  meaning  in  which  all  the  con¬ 
trary  passages  are  reconciled.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  one  which  suits  many  con- 

yohn  4.23.  "True  worshippers." 

2John  1.29.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

3"The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked:  who  can  know  it?" 

4Is.  44.24.  "I  am  the  Lord." 

6"I  will  do  unto  this  house." 

6"For  I  spoke  not  unto  your  fathers." 

^’According  to  the  number." 


SECTION  X  299 

curring  passages;  but  it  is  necessary  to  have  one  which  reconciles  even  contradic¬ 
tory  passages. 

Every  author  has  a  meaning  in  which  all  the  contradictory  passages  agree,  or  he 
has  no  meaning  at  all.  We  cannot  affirm  the  latter  of  Scripture  and  the  prophets; 
they  undoubtedly  are  full  of  good  sense.  We  must,  then,  seek  for  a  meaning  which 
reconciles  all  discrepancies. 

The  true  meaning,  then,  is  not  that  of  the  Jews;  but  in  Jesus  Christ  all  the  con¬ 
tradictions  are  reconciled. 

The  Jews  could  not  reconcile  the  cessation  of  the  royalty  and  principality,  fore¬ 
told  by  Hosea,  with  the  prophecy  of  Jacob. 

If  we  take  the  law,  the  sacrifices,  and  the  kingdom  as  realities,  we  cannot  recon¬ 
cile  all  the  passages.  They  must  then  necessarily  be  only  types.  We  cannot  even 
reconcile  the  passages  of  the  same  author,  nor  of  the  same  book,  nor  sometimes 
of  the  same  chapter,  which  indicates  copiously  what  was  the  meaning  of  the 
author.  As  when  Ezekiel,  chap.  20.,  says  that  man  will  not  live  by  the  command¬ 
ments  of  God  and  will  live  by  them. 

685.  Types. — If  the  law  and  the  sacrifices  are  the  truth,  it  must  please  God,  and 
must  not  displease  Him.  If  they  are  types,  they  must  be  both  pleasing  and  dis¬ 
pleasing. 

Now  in  all  the  Scripture  they  are  both  pleasing  and  displeasing.  It  is  said  that 
the  law  shall  be  changed;  that  the  sacrifice  shall  be  changed;  that  they  shall  be 
without  law,  without  a  prince,  and  without  a  sacrifice;  that  a  new  covenant  shall 
be  made;  that  the  law  shall  be  renewed;  that  the  precepts  which  they  have  received 
are  not  good;  that  their  sacrifices  are  abominable;  that  God  has  demanded  none 
of  them. 

It  is  said,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  law  shall  abide  for  ever;  that  this  covenant 
shall  be  for  ever;  that  sacrifice  shall  be  eternal;  that  the  sceptre  shall  never  depart 
from  among  them,  because  it  shall  not  depart  from  them  till  the  eternal  King 
comes. 

Do  all  these  passages  indicate  what  is  real?  No.  Do  they  then  indicate  what  is 
typical?  No,  but  what  is  either  real  or  typical.  But  the  first  passages,  excluding  as 
they  do  reality,  indicate  that  all  this  is  only  typical. 

All  these  passages  together  cannot  be  applied  to  reality;  all  can  be  said  to  be 
typical;  therefore  they  are  not  spoken  of  reality,  but  of  the  type. 

Agnus  occisus  est  ab  origine  mundi }  A  sacrificing  judge. 

686.  Contradictions. — The  sceptre  till  the  Messiah — without  king  or  prince. 

The  eternal  law — changed. 

The  eternal  covenant — a  new  covenant. 

Good  laws — bad  precepts.  Ezekiel. 

687.  Types. — When  the  word  of  God,  which  is  really  true,  is  false  literally,  it  is  true 
spiritually.  Sede  a  dextris  meis:2  this  is  false  literally,  therefore  it  is  true  spiritually. 

In  these  expressions,  God  is  spoken  of  after  the  manner  of  men;  and  this  means 
nothing  else  but  that  the  intention  which  men  have  in  giving  a  seat  at  their  right 

^ev.  13.8.  “The  Lambs  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.” 

2Ps.  109. 1.  ”Sit  then  at  my  right  hand.” 


300  PENSEES 

hand,  God  will  have  also.  It  is  then  an  indication  of  the  intention  of  God,  not  of 
His  manner  of  carrying  it  out. 

Thus  when  it  is  said,  ‘'God  has  received  the  odour  of  your  incense,  and  will  in 
recompense  give  you  a  rich  land,”  that  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  same  in¬ 
tention  which  a  man  would  have,  who,  pleased  with  your  perfumes,  should  in  re¬ 
compense  give  you  a  rich  land,  God  will  have  towards  you,  because  you  have  had 
the  same  intention  as  a  man  has  towards  him  to  whom  he  presents  perfumes.  So 
iratus  est ,  a  “jealous  God,”  etc.  For,  the  things  of  God  being  inexpressible,  they 
cannot  be  spoken  of  otherwise,  and  the  Church  makes  use  of  them  even  to-day: 
Quia  confortavit  seras, 1  etc. 

It  is  not  allowable  to  attribute  to  Scripture  the  meaning  which  is  not  revealed  to 
us  that  it  has.  Thus,  to  say  that  the  closed  mem  of  Isaiah  signifies  six  hundred,  has 
not  been  revealed.  It  might  be  said  that  the  final  tsade  and  he  deficientes  may  signify 
mysteries.  But  it  is  not  allowable  to  say  so,  and  still  less  to  say  this  is  the  way  of 
the  philosopher’s  stone.  But  we  say  that  the  literal  meaning  is  not  the  true  mean¬ 
ing,  because  the  prophets  have  themselves  said  so. 

688.  I  do  not  say  that  the  mem  is  mystical. 

689.  Moses  (Deut.  30)  promises  that  God  will  circumcise  their  heart  to  render 
them  capable  of  loving  Him. 

690.  One  saying  of  David,  or  of  Moses,  as  for  instance  that  “God  will  circum¬ 
cise  the  heart,”  enables  us  to  judge  of  their  spirit.  If  all  their  other  expressions 
were  ambiguous  and  left  us  in  doubt  whether  they  were  philosophers  or  Christians, 
one  saying  of  this  kind  would  in  fact  determine  all  the  rest,  as  one  sentence  of 
Epictetus  decides  the  meaning  of  all  the  rest  to  be  the  opposite.  So  far  ambiguity 
exists,  but  not  afterwards. 

691.  If  one  of  two  persons,  who  are  telling  silly  stories,  uses  language  with  a 
double  meaning,  understood  in  his  own  circle,  while  the  other  uses  it  with  only 
one  meaning,  any  one  not  in  the  secret,  who  hears  them  both  talk  in  this  manner, 
will  pass  upon  them  the  same  judgment.  But,  if,  afterwards,  in  the  rest  of  their 
conversation  one  says  angelic  things,  and  the  other  always  dull  commonplaces, 
he  will  judge  that  the  one  spoke  in  mysteries,  and  not  the  other;  the  one  having 
sufficiently  shown  that  he  is  incapable  of  such  foolishness  and  capable  of  being 
mysterious;  and  the  other  that  he  is  incapable  of  mystery  and  capable  of  foolish¬ 
ness. 

The  Old  Testament  is  a  cipher. 

692.  There  are  some  that  see  clearly  that  man  has  no  other  enemy  than  lust, 
which  turns  him  from  God,  and  not  God;  and  that  he  has  no  other  good  than 
God,  and  not  a  rich  land.  Let  those  who  believe  that  the  good\of  man  is  in  the 
flesh,  and  evil  in  what  turns  him  away  from  sensual  pleasures,  [satiate]  themselves 
with  them,  and  [die]  in  them.  But  let  those  who  seek  God  with  all  their  heart,  who 
are  only  troubled  at  not  seeing  Him,  who  desire  only  to  possess  Him  and  have  as 
enemies  only  those  who  turn  them  away  from  Him,  who  are  grieved  at  seeing 
themselves  surrounded  and  overwhelmed  with  such  enemies,  take  comfort.  I  pro- 

Ts.  147.13.  Quoniam  not  quia.  "For  he  hath  strengthened  the  bars.” 


SECTION  XI  301 

claim  to  them  happy  news.  There  exists  a  Redeemer  for  them.  I  shall  show  Him 
to  them.  I  shall  show  that  there  is  a  God  for  them.  I  shall  not  show  Him  to  others. 
I  shall  make  them  see  that  a  Messiah  has  been  promised,  who  should  deliver  them 
from  their  enemies,  and  that  One  has  come  to  free  them  from  their  iniquities,  but 
not  from  their  enemies. 

When  David  foretold  that  the  Messiah  would  deliver  His  people  from  their 
enemies,  one  can  believe  that  in  the  flesh  these  would  be  the  Egyptians;  and  then 
I  cannot  show  that  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  But  one  can  well  believe  also  that 
the  enemies  would  be  their  sins;  for  indeed  the  Egyptians  were  not  their  enemies, 
but  their  sins  were  so.  This  word  enemies  is,  therefore,  ambiguous.  But  if  he  says 
elsewhere,  as  he  does,  that  He  will  deliver  His  people  from  their  sins,  as  indeed  do 
Isaiah  and  others,  the  ambiguity  is  removed,  and  the  double  meaning  of  enemies 
is  reduced  to  the  simple  meaning  of  iniquities.  For  if  he  had  sins  in  his  mind,  he 
could  well  denote  them  as  enemies;  but  if  he  thought  of  enemies ,  he  could  not  desig¬ 
nate  them  as  iniquities. 

Now  Moses,  David,  and  Isaiah  used  the  same  terms.  Who  will  say,  then,  that 
they  have  not  the  same  meaning  and  that  David's  meaning,  which  is  plainly  ini¬ 
quities  when  he  spoke  of  enemies ,  was  not  the  same  as  [that  of]  Moses  when  speak¬ 
ing  of  enemies? 

Daniel  (ix)  prays  for  the  deliverance  of  the  people  from  the  captivity  of  their 
enemies.  But  he  was  thinking  of  sins ,  and,  to  show  this,  he  says  that  Gabriel  came  to 
tell  him  that  his  prayer  was  heard,  and  that  there  were  only  seventy  weeks  to  wait, 
after  which  the  people  would  be  freed  from  iniquity,  sin  would  have  an  end,  and  the 
Redeemer,  the  Holy  of  Holies,  would  bring  eternal  justice,  not  legal,  but  eternal 


SECTION  XI 
THE  PROPHECIES 

693.  When  I  see  the  blindness  and  the  wretchedness  of  man,  when  I  regard  the 
whole  silent  universe  and  man  without  light,  left  to  himself  and,  as  it  were,  lost  in 
this  corner  of  the  universe,  without  knowing  who  has  put  him  there,  what  he  has 
come  to  do,  what  will  become  of  him  at  death,  and  incapable  of  all  knowledge,  I 
become  terrified,  like  a  man  who  should  be  carried  in  his  sleep  to  a  dreadful  desert 
island  and  should  awake  without  knowing  where  he  is  and  without  means  of 
escape.  And  thereupon  I  wonder  how  people  in  a  condition  so  wretched  do  not 
fall  into  despair.  I  see  other  persons  around  me  of  a  like  nature.  I  ask  them  if  they 
are  better  informed  than  I  am.  They  tell  me  that  they  are  not.  And  thereupon  these 
wretched  and  lost  beings,  having  looked  around  them  and  seen  some  pleasing 
objects,  have  given  and  attached  themselves  to  them.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  not 
been  able  to  attach  myself  to  them,  and,  considering  how  strongly  it  appears  that 
there  is  something  else  than  what  I  see,  I  have  examined  whether  this  God  has  not 
left  some  sign  of  Himself. 

I  see  many  contradictory  religions,  and  consequently  all  false  save  one.  Each 
wants  to  be  believed  on  its  own  authority,  and  threatens  unbelievers.  I  do  not 
therefore  believe  them.  Every  one  can  say  this;  every  one  can  call  himself  a  prophet. 


302  PENSEES 

But  I  see  that  Christian  religion  wherein  prophecies  are  fulfilled;  and  that  is  what 
every  one  cannot  do. 

694.  And  what  crowns  all  this  is  prediction,  so  that  it  should  not  be  said  that 
it  is  chance  which  has  done  it? 

Whosoever,  having  only  a  week  to  live,  will  not  find  out  that  it  is  expedient  to 
believe  that  all  this  is  not  a  stroke  of  chance  .  .  . 

Now,  if  the  passions  had  no  hold  on  us,  a  week  and  a  hundred  years  would 
amount  to  the  same  thing. 

695.  Prophecies. — Great  Pan  is  dead. 

696.  Susceperunt  verbum  cum  omni  aviditate ,  scrutantes  Script ur as,  si  ita  se 
haberent} 

6<yj.  Prodita  lege.  Impleta  cerne.  Implenda  colli ge. 2 

698.  We  understand  the  prophecies  only  when  we  see  the  events  happen.  Thus 
the  proofs  of  retreat,  discretion,  silence,  etc.,  are  proofs  only  to  those  who  know 
and  believe  them. 

Joseph  so  internal  in  a  law  so  external. 

Outward  penances  dispose  to  inward,  as  humiliations  to  humility.  Thus  the  .  .  . 

699.  The  synagogue  has  preceded  the  church;  the  Jews,  the  Christians.  The 
prophets  have  foretold  the  Christians;  Saint  John,  Jesus  Christ. 

700.  It  is  glorious  to  see  with  the  eyes  of  faith  the  history  of  Herod  and  of 
Caesar. 

701.  The  zeal  of  the  Jews  for  their  law  and  their  temple  (Josephus,  and  Philo 
the  Jew,  Ad  Caium).  What  other  people  had  such  a  zeal?  It  was  necessary  they 
should  have  it. 

Jesus  Christ  foretold  as  to  the  time  and  the  state  of  the  world.  The  ruler  taken 
from  the  thigh,  and  the  fourth  monarchy.  How  lucky  we  are  to  see  this  light 
amidst  this  darkness! 

How  fine  it  is  to  see,  with  the  eyes  of  faith,  Darius  and  Cyrus,  Alexander,  the 
Romans,  Pompey  and  Herod  working,  without  knowing  it,  for  the  glory  of  the 
Gospel ! 

702.  Zeal  of  the  Jewish  people  for  the  law,  especially  after  there  were  no  more 
prophets. 

703.  While  the  prophets  were  for  maintaining  the  law,  the  people  were  indif¬ 
ferent.  But,  since  there  have  been  no  more  prophets,  zeal  has  succeeded  them. 

^cts  17. 1 1.  "They  received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  and  searched  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  daily,  whether  those  things  were  so." 

2"Read  what  has  been  announced.  See  what  has  been  accomplished.  Meditate  on  what  is  to 
be  done." 


SECTION  XI  303 

704.  The  devil  troubled  the  zeal  of  the  Jews  before  Jesus  Christ,  because  he 
would  have  been  their  salvation,  but  not  since. 

The  Jewish  people  scorned  by  the  Gentiles;  the  Christian  people  persecuted. 

705.  Proof. — Prophecies  with  their  fulfilment;  what  has  preceded  and  what  has 
followed  Jesus  Christ. 

706.  The  prophecies  are  the  strongest  proof  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  for  them  also 
that  God  has  made  most  provision;  for  the  event  which  has  fulfilled  them  is  a  mir¬ 
acle  existing  since  the  birth  of  the  Church  to  the  end.  So  God  has  raised  up  proph¬ 
ets  during  sixteen  hundred  years,  and,  during  four  hundred  years  afterwards, 
He  has  scattered  all  these  prophecies  among  all  the  Jews,  who  carried  them  into  all 
parts  of  the  world.  Such  was  the  preparation  for  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ,  and,  as 
His  Gospel  was  to  be  believed  by  all  the  world,  it  was  not  only  necessary  that  there 
should  be  prophecies  to  make  it  believed,  but  that  these  prophecies  should  exist 
throughout  the  whole  world,  in  order  to  make  it  embraced  by  the  whole  world. 

707.  But  it  was  not  enough  that  the  prophecies  should  exist.  It  was  necessary 
that  they  should  be  distributed  throughout  all  places  and  preserved  throughout  all 
times.  And,  in  order  that  this  agreement  might  not  be  taken  for  an  effect  of  chance, 
it  was  necessary  that  this  should  be  foretold. 

It  is  far  more  glorious  for  the  Messiah  that  the  Jews  should  be  the  spectators 
and  even  the  instruments  of  His  glory,  besides  that  God  had  reserved  them. 

708.  Prophecies. — The  time  foretold  by  the  state  of  the  Jewish  people,  by  the 
state  of  the  heathen,  by  the  state  of  the  temple,  by  the  number  of  years. 

709.  One  must  be  bold  to  predict  the  same  thing  in  so  many  ways.  It  was  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  four  idolatrous  or  pagan  monarchies,  the  end  of  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  and  the  seventy  weeks,  should  happen  at  the  same  time,  and  all  this  before 
the  second  temple  was  destroyed. 

710.  Prophecies. — If  one  man  alone  had  made  a  book  of  predictions  about  Jesus 
Christ,  as  to  the  time  and  the  manner,  and  Jesus  Christ  had  come  in  conformity 
to  these  prophecies,  this  fact  would  have  infinite  weight. 

But  there  is  much  more  here.  Here  is  a  succession  of  men  during  four  thousand 
years,  who,  consequently  and  without  variation,  come,  one  after  another,  to  fore¬ 
tell  this  same  event.  Here  is  a  whole  people  who  announce  it  and  who  have  existed 
for  four  thousand  years,  in  order  to  give  corporate  testimony  of  the  assurances 
which  they  have  and  from  which  they  cannot  be  diverted  by  whatever  threats  and 
persecutions  people  may  make  against  them.  This  is  far  more  important. 

71 1.  Predictions  of  particular  things. — They  were  strangers  in  Egypt,  without  any 
private  property,  either  in  that  country  or  elsewhere.  [There  was  not  the  least  ap¬ 
pearance,  either  of  the  royalty  which  had  previously  existed  so  long,  or  of  that 
supreme  council  of  seventy  judges  which  they  called  the  Sanhedrin  and  which,  hav¬ 
ing  been  instituted  by  Moses,  lasted  to  the  time  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  these  things 
were  as  far  removed  from  their  state  at  that  time  as  they  could  be],  when  Jacob, 


PENSEES 


3°4 

dying,  and  blessing  his  twelve  children,  declared  to  them,  that  they  would  be 
proprietors  of  a  great  land,  and  foretold  in  particular  to  the  family  of  Judah,  that 
the  kings,  who  would  one  day  rule  them,  should  be  of  his  race;  and  that  all  his 
brethren  should  be  their  subjects;  [and  that  even  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  be  the 
expectation  of  nations,  should  spring  from  him;  and  that  the  kingship  should  not 
be  taken  away  from  Judah,  nor  the  ruler  and  law-giver  of  his  descendants,  till  the 
expected  Messiah  should  arrive  in  his  family]. 

This  same  Jacob,  disposing  of  this  future  land  as  though  he  had  been  its  ruler, 
gave  a  portion  to  Joseph  more  than  to  the  others.  “I  give  you,”  said  he,  "one  part 
more  than  to  your  brothers.”  And  blessing  his  two  children,  Ephraim  and  Man- 
asseh,  whom  Joseph  had  presented  to  him,  the  elder,  Manasseh,  on  his  right,  and 
the  young  Ephraim  on  his  left,  he  put  his  arms  crosswise,  and  placing  his  right 
hand  on  the  head  of  Ephraim,  and  his  left  on  Manasseh,  he  blessed  them  in  this 
manner.  And,  upon  Joseph’s  representing  to  him  that  he  was  preferring  the 
younger,  he  replied  to  him  with  admirable  resolution:  "I  know  it  well,  my  son; 
but  Ephraim  will  increase  more  than  Manasseh.”  This  has  been  indeed  so  true  in 
the  result  that,  being  alone  almost  as  fruitful  as  the  two  entire  lines  which  com¬ 
posed  a  whole  kingdom,  they  have  been  usually  called  by  the  name  of  Ephraim 
alone. 

This  same  Joseph,  when  dying,  bade  his  children  carry  his  bones  with  them 
when  they  should  go  into  that  land  to  which  they  only  came  two  hundred  years 
afterwards. 

Moses,  who  wrote  all  these  things  so  long  before  they  happened,  himself  as¬ 
signed  to  each  family  portions  of  that  land  before  they  entered  it,  as  though  he 
had  been  its  ruler.  [In  fact  he  declared  that  God  was  to  raise  up  from  their  nation 
and  their  race  a  prophet,  of  whom  he  was  the  type;  and  he  foretold  them  exactly 
all  that  was  to  happen  to  them  in  the  land  which  they  were  to  enter  after  his  death, 
the  victories  which  God  would  give  them,  their  ingratitude  towards  God,  the 
punishments  which  they  would  receive  for  it,  and  the  rest  of  their  adventures.]  He 
gave  them  judges  who  should  make  the  division.  He  prescribed  the  entire  form  of 
political  government  which  they  should  observe,  the  cities  of  refuge  which  they 
should  build,  and  .  .  . 

712.  The  prophecies  about  particular  things  are  mingled  with  those  about  the 
Messiah,  so  that  the  prophecies  of  the  Messiah  should  not  be  without  proofs, 
nor  the  special  prophecies  without  fruit. 

713.  Perpetual  captivity  of  the  Jews . — Jer.  n.  n:  "I  will  bring  evil  upon  Judah 
from  which  they  shall  not  be  able  to  escape.” 

Types. — Is.  5:  "The  Lord  had  a  vineyard,  from  which  He  looked  for  grapes;  and 
it  brought  forth  only  wild  grapes.  I  will  therefore  lay  it  waste,  and  destroy  it;  the 
earth  shall  only  bring  forth  thorns,  and  I  will  forbid  the  clouds  from  [ raining ]  upon 
it.  The  vineyard  of  the  Lord  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of  Judah  His 
pleasant  plant.  I  looked  that  they  should  do  justice,  and  they  bring  forth  only 
iniquities.” 

Is.  8:  "Sanctify  the  Lord  with  fear  and  trembling;  let  Him  be  your  only 
dread,  and  He  shall  be  to  you  for  a  sanctuary,  but  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a 
rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,  for  a  gin  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabi- 


SECTION  XI  305 

tants  of  Jerusalem;  and  many  among  them  shall  stumble  against  that  stone,  and 
fall,  and  be  broken,  and  be  snared,  and  perish.  Hide  my  words,  and  cover  my  law 
for  my  disciples. 

"I  will  then  wait  in  patience  upon  the  Lord  that  hideth  and  concealeth  Him¬ 
self  from  the  house  of  Jacob." 

Is.  29:  "Be  amazed  and  wonder,  people  of  Israel;  stagger  and  stumble,  and  be 
drunken,  but  not  with  wine;  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink.  For  the  Lord  hath 
poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep.  He  will  close  your  eyes;  He  will 
cover  your  princes  and  your  prophets  that  have  visions."  (Daniel  xii:  "The  wicked 
shall  not  understand,  but  the  wise  shall  understand."  Hosea,  the  last  chapter,  the 
last  verse,  after  many  temporal  blessings,  says:  "Who  is  wise,  and  he  shall  under¬ 
stand  these  things?"  etc.)  "And  the  visions  of  all  the  prophets  are  become  unto 
you  as  a  sealed  book,  which  men  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  and  who  can  read; 
and  he  saith,  I  cannot  read  it,  for  it  is  sealed.  And  when  the  book  is  delivered  to 
them  that  are  not  learned,  they  say,  I  am  not  learned. 

"Wherefore  the  Lord  said,  Forasmuch  as  this  people  with  their  lips  do  honour 
me,  but  have  removed  their  heart  far  from  me," — there  is  the  reason  and  the  cause 
of  it;  for  if  they  adored  God  in  their  hearts,  they  would  understand  the  prophecies, 
— "and  their  fear  towards  me  is  taught  by  the  precept  of  man.  Therefore,  behold, 
I  will  proceed  to  do  a  marvellous  work  among  this  people,  even  a  marvellous 
work  and  a  wonder;  for  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish,  and  their 
understanding  shall  be  \hid\." 

Prophecies.  Proofs  of  Divinity. — Is.  41:  "Shew  the  things  that  are  to  come  here¬ 
after,  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  gods:  we  will  incline  our  heart  unto  your 
words.  Teach  us  the  things  that  have  been  at  the  beginning,  and  declare  us  things 
for  to  come. 

"By  this  we  shall  know  that  ye  are  gods.  Yea,  do  good  or  do  evil,  if  you  can. 
Let  us  then  behold  it  and  reason  together.  Behold,  ye  are  of  nothing,  and  only  an 
abomination,  etc.  Who,"  (among  contemporary  writers),  "hath  declared  from 
the  beginning  that  we  may  know  of  the  things  done  from  the  beginning  and  ori¬ 
gin?  that  we  may  say,  You  are  righteous.  There  is  none  that  teacheth  us,  yea,  there 
is  none  that  declareth  the  future." 

Is.  42:  "I  am  the  Lord,  and  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another.  I  have  foretold 
the  things  which  have  come  to  pass,  and  things  that  are  to  come  do  I  declare.  Sing 
unto  God  a  new  song  in  all  the  earth. 

"Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  eyes  and  see  not,  and  the  deaf  that  have 
ears  and  hear  not.  Let  all  the  nations  be  gathered  together.  Who  among  them  can 
declare  this,  and  shew  us  former  things,  and  things  to  come?  Let  them  bring 
forth  their  witnesses,  that  they  may  be  justified;  or  let  them  hear,  and  say,  It  is 
truth. 

"Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord,  and  my  servant  whom  I  have  chosen; 
that  ye  may  know  and  believe  me,  and  understand  that  I  am  He. 

"I  have  declared,  and  have  saved,  and  I  alone  have  done  wonders  before  your 
eyes:  ye  are  my  witnesses,  said  the  Lord,  that  I  am  God. 

"For  your  sake  I  have  brought  down  the  forces  of  the  Babylonians.  I  am  the 
Lord,  your  Holy  One  and  Creator. 

"I  have  made  a  way  in  the  sea,  and  a  path  in  the  mighty  waters.  I  am  He  that 
drowned  and  destroyed  for  ever  the  mighty  enemies  that  have  resisted  you. 


30  6  PENSEES 

"Remember  ye  not  the  former  things,  neither  consider  the  things  of  old. 

"Behold,  I  will  do  a  new  thing;  now  it  shall  spring  forth;  shall  ye  not  know  it? 
I  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness,  and  rivers  in  the  desert. 

"This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself;  I  have  established  them  to  shew  forth 
my  praise,  etc. 

"I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  mine  own  sake,  and 
will  not  remember  thy  sins.  Put  in  remembrance  your  ingratitude:  see  thou,  if 
thou  mayest  be  justified.  Thy  first  father  hath  sinned,  and  thy  teachers  have  trans¬ 
gressed  against  me." 

Is.  44.:  "I  am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last,  saith  the  Lord.  Let  him  who  will  equal 
himself  to  me,  declare  the  order  of  things  since  I  appointed  the  ancient  people, 
and  the  things  that  are  coming.  Fear  ye  not:  have  I  not  told  you  all  these  things? 
Ye  are  my  witnesses." 

Prophecy  of  Cyrus. — Is.  45.  4:  "For  Jacob’s  sake,  mine  elect,  I  have  called  thee  by 
thy  name." 

Is.  45.  21:  "Come  and  let  us  reason  together.  Who  hath  declared  this  from 
ancient  time?  Who  hath  told  it  from  that  time?  Have  not  I,  the  Lord"? 

Is.  46:  "Remember  the  former  things  of  old,  and  know  there  is  none  like  me, 
declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  from  ancient  times  the  things  that  are 
not  yet  done,  saying,  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure." 

Is.  42:  "Behold,  the  former  things  are  come  to  pass,  and  new  things  do  I  de¬ 
clare;  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  you  of  them." 

Is.  48.  3:  "I  have  declared  the  former  things  from  the  beginning;  I  did  them 
suddenly;  and  they  came  to  pass.  Because  I  know  that  thou  art  obstinate,  that  thy 
spirit  is  rebellious,  and  thy  brow  brass;  I  have  even  declared  it  to  thee  before  it 
came  to  pass:  lest  thou  shouldst  say  that  it  was  the  work  of  thy  gods,  and  the 
effect  of  their  commands. 

"Thou  hast  seen  all  this;  and  will  not  ye  declare  it?  I  have  shewed  thee  new 
things  from  this  time,  even  hidden  things,  and  thou  didst  not  know  them.  They 
are  created  now,  and  not  from  the  beginning;  I  have  kept  them  hidden  from  thee; 
lest  thou  shouldst  say,  Behold,  I  knew  them. 

"Yea,  thou  knewest  not;  yea,  thou  heardest  not;  yea,  from  that  time  that  thine 
ear  was  not  opened:  for  I  knew  that  thou  couldst  deal  very  treacherously,  and 
wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  womb." 

Reprobation  of  the  Jews  and  conversion  of  the  Gentiles. — Is.  65:  "I  am  sought  of 
them  that  asked  not  for  me;  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not;  I  said,  Be¬ 
hold  me,  behold  me,  behold  me,  unto  a  nation  that  did  not  call  upon  my  name. 

"I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day  unto  an  unbelieving  people,  which 
walketh  in  a  way  that  was  not  good,  after  their  own  thoughts;  a  people  that  pro- 
voketh  me  to  anger  continually  by  the  sins  they  commit  in  my  face;  that  sacri- 
ficeth  to  idols,  etc. 

"These  shall  be  scattered  like  smoke  in  the  day  of  my  wrath,  etc. 

"Your  iniquities,  and  the  iniquities  of  your  fathers,  will  I  assemble  together,  and 
will  recompense  you  for  all  according  to  your  works. 

"Thus  saith  the  Lord,  As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster,  and  one  saith, 
Destroy  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it  [and  the  promise  of  fruit]:  for  my  servants’ 
sake  I  will  not  destroy  all  Israel. 

"Thus  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  Jacob  and  out  of  Judah,  an  inheritor  of 


SECTION  XI  307 

my  mountains,  and  mine  elect  and  my  servants  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  fertile  and 
abundant  plains;  but  I  will  destroy  all  others,  because  you  have  forgotten  your 
God  to  serve  strange  gods.  I  called,  and  ye  did  not  answer;  I  spake,  and  ye  did  not 
hear;  and  ye  did  choose  the  thing  which  I  forbade. 

"Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  my  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be 
hungry;  my  servants  shall  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be  ashamed;  my  servants  shall  sing 
for  joy  of  heart,  but  ye  shall  cry  and  howl  for  vexation  of  spirit. 

"And  ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  unto  my  chosen:  for  the  Lord  shall 
slay  thee,  and  call  His  servants  by  another  name,  that  he  who  blesseth  himself  in 
the  earth  shall  bless  himself  in  God,  etc.,  because  the  former  troubles  are  forgotten. 

"For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth;  and  the  former  things  shall 
not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind. 

"But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that  which  I  create;  for,  behold,  I  create 
Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy. 

"And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem  and  joy  in  my  people;  and  the  voice  of  weep¬ 
ing  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of  crying. 

"Before  they  call,  I  will  answer;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear.  The 
wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock; 
and  dust  shall  be  the  serpent’s  meat.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my 
holy  mountain." 

Is.  56.  3:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice:  for  my  sal¬ 
vation  is  near  to  come,  and  my  righteousness  to  be  revealed. 

"Blessed  is  the  man  that  doeth  this,  that  keepeth  the  Sabbath,  and  keepeth  his 
hand  from  doing  any  evil. 

"Neither  let  the  strangers  that  have  joined  themselves  to  me,  say,  God  will 
separate  me  from  His  people.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord:  Whoever  will  keep  my 
Sabbath,  and  choose  the  things  that  please  me,  and  take  hold  of  my  covenant; 
even  unto  them  will  I  give  in  mine  house  a  place  and  a  name  better  than  that  of 
sons  and  of  daughters:  I  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name,  that  shall  not  be  cut 
off." 

Is.  59.  9:  "Therefore  for  our  iniquities  is  justice  far  from  us:  we  wait  for  light, 
but  behold  obscurity;  for  brightness,  but  we  walk  in  darkness.  We  grope  for  the 
wall  like  the  blind;  we  stumble  at  noonday  as  in  the  night:  we  are  in  desolate 
places  as  dead  men. 

"We  roar  all  like  bears,  and  mourn  sore  like  doves;  we  look  for  judgment,  but 
there  is  none;  for  salvation,  but  it  is  far  from  us." 

Is.  66.  18:  "But  I  know  their  works  and  their  thoughts;  it  shall  come  that  I 
will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues,  and  they  shall  see  my  glory. 

"And  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them,  and  I  will  send  those  that  escape  of  them 
unto  the  nations,  to  Africa,  to  Lydia,  to  Italy,  to  Greece,  and  to  the  people  that 
have  not  heard  my  fame,  neither  have  seen  my  glory.  And  they  shall  bring  your 
brethren." 

Jer.  7.  Reprobation  of  the  Temple:  "Go  ye  unto  Shiloth,  where  I  set  my  name  at 
the  first,  and  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of  my  people.  And  now,  be¬ 
cause  ye  have  done  all  these  works,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  do  unto  this  house, 
wherein  my  name  is  called  upon,  wherein  ye  trust,  and  unto  the  place  which  I 
gave  to  your  priests,  as  I  have  done  to  Shiloth."  (For  I  have  rejected  it,  and  made 
myself  a  temple  elsewhere.) 


PENSEES 


308 

“And  I  will  cast  you  cut  of  my  sight,  as  I  have  cast  out  all  your  brethren, 
even  the  seed  of  Ephraim.”  (Rejected  for  ever.)  “Therefore  pray  not  for  this 
people.” 

Jer.  7.  22:  “What  avails  it  you  to  add  sacrifice  to  sacrifice?  For  I  spake  not  unto 
your  fathers,  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  concerning  burnt 
offerings  or  sacrifices.  But  this  thing  commanded  I  them,  saying,  Obey  and  be 
faithful  to  my  commandments, and  I  will  be  your  God, and  ye  shall  be  my  people.” 
(It  was  only  after  they  had  sacrificed  to  the  golden  calf  that  I  gave  myself  sacri¬ 
fices  to  turn  into  good  an  evil  custom.) 

Jer.  7.  4:  “Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying,  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  are  these.” 

714.  The  Jews  witnesses  for  God.  Is.  43.  9;  44.  8. 

Prophecies  fulfilled. — I  Kings  13.  2.  I  Kings  22.  16.  Joshua  6.  26.  I  Kings  16.  34. 
Deut.  23. 

Malachi  i.  1 1.  The  sacrifice  of  the  Jews  rejected,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  heathen, 
(even  out  of  Jerusalem,)  and  in  all  places. 

Moses,  before  dying,  foretold  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  Deut.  32.  21  and 
the  reprobation  of  the  Jews. 

Moses  foretold  what  would  happen  to  each  tribe. 

Prophecy. — “Your  name  shall  be  a  curse  unto  mine  elect,  and  I  will  give  them 
another  name.” 

“Make  their  heart  fat,”  and  how?  by  flattering  their  lust  and  making  them  hope 
to  satisfy  it. 

715.  Prophecy. — Amos  and  Zechariah.  They  have  sold  the  just  one,  and  there¬ 
fore  will  not  be  recalled.  Jesus  Christ  betrayed. 

They  shall  no  more  remember  Egypt.  See  Is.  43.  16,  17,  18,  19.  Jer.  23.  6,  7. 

Prophecy. — The  Jews  shall  be  scattered  abroad.  Is.  27.  6.  A  new  law,  Jerem. 

3i.32. 

Malachi.  Grotius.  The  second  temple  glorious.  Jesus  Christ  will  come.  Haggai  2. 
7,  8,  9,  10. 

The  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  Joel  2.  28.  Hosea  2.  24.  Deut.  32.  21.  Mal¬ 
achi  1.  11. 

716.  Hosea  3. — Is.  42.  48.  44.  60.  61.  last  verse.  “I  foretold  it  long  since  that 
they  might  know  that  it  is  I.”  Jaddus  to  Alexander. 

717.  [Prophecies. — The  promise  that  David  will  always  have  descendants.  Jer. 
13. 13.] 

718.  The  eternal  reign  of  the  race  of  David,  II  Chron.,  by  all  the  prophecies,  and 
with  an  oath.  And  it  was  not  temporally  fulfilled.  Jer.  23.  20. 

719.  We  might  perhaps  think  that,  when  the  prophets  foretold  that  the  sceptre 
should  not  depart  from  Judah  until  the  eternal  King  came,  they  spoke  to  flatter 
the  people  and  that  their  prophecy  was  proved  false  by  Herod.  But  to  show  that 
this  was  not  their  meaning  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  they  knew  well  that  this 


SECTION  XI  309 

temporal  kingdom  should  cease,  they  said  that  they  would  be  without  a  king  and 
without  a  prince,  and  for  a  long  time.  Hosea  3.  4. 

720.  Non  habemus  regem  nisi  Ccesarem }  Therefore  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Messiah, 
since  they  had  no  longer  any  king  but  a  stranger,  and  would  have  no  other. 

72 1 .  We  have  no  king  but  Csesar. 

722.  Daniel  2:  "All  thy  soothsayers  and  wise  men  cannot  shew  unto  thee  the 
secret  which  thou  hast  demanded.  But  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  who  can  do  so, 
and  that  hath  revealed  to  thee  in  thy  dream  what  shall  be  in  the  latter  days."  (This 
dream  must  have  caused  him  much  misgiving.) 

"And  it  is  not  by  my  own  wisdom  that  I  have  knowledge  of  this  secret,  but  by 
the  revelation  of  this  same  God,  that  hath  revealed  it  to  me,  to  make  it  manifest  in 
thy  presence. 

"Thy  dream  was  then  of  this  kind.  Thou  sawest  a  great  image,  high  and  terrible, 
which  stood  before  thee.  His  head  was  of  gold,  his  breast  and  arms  of  silver,  his 
belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass,  his  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay. 
Thus  thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  hands,  which  smote  the 
image  upon  his  feet,  that  were  of  iron  and  of  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces. 

"Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the  gold  broken  to  pieces 
together,  and  the  wind  carried  them  away;  but  this  stone  that  smote  the  image 
became  a  great  mountain,  and  filled  the  whole  earth.  This  is  the  dream,  and  now  I 
will  give  thee  the  interpretation  thereof. 

"Thou  who  art  the  greatest  of  kings,  and  to  whom  God  hath  given  a  power  so 
vast  that  thou  art  renowned  among  all  peoples,  art  the  head  of  gold  which  thou 
hast  seen.  But  after  thee  shall  arise  another  kingdom  inferior  to  thee,  and  another 
third  kingdom  of  brass,  which  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth. 

"But  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron,  and  even  as  iron  breaketh  in 
pieces  and  subdueth  all  things,  so  shall  this  empire  break  in  pieces  and  bruise  all. 

"And  whereas  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part  of  clay  and  part  of  iron,  the 
kingdom  shall  be  divided;  but  there  shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of  iron  and  of  the 
weakness  of  clay. 

"But  as  iron  cannot  be  firmly  mixed  with  clay,  so  they  who  are  represented  by  the 
iron  and  by  the  clay,  shall  not  cleave  one  to  another  though  united  by  marriage. 

"Now  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  God  set  up  a  kingdom,  which  shall  never 
be  destroyed,  nor  ever  be  delivered  up  to  other  people.  It  shall  break  in  pieces  and 
consume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for  ever,  according  as  thou  sawest 
that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,  and  that  it  fell  from 
the  mountain,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  gold.  God 
hath  made  known  to  thee  what  shall  come  to  pass  hereafter.  This  dream  is  certain, 
and  the  interpretation  thereof  sure. 

"Then  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  upon  his  face  towards  the  earth,"  etc. 

Daniel  8.  8.  "Daniel  having  seen  the  combat  of  the  ram  and  of  the  he-goat, 
who  vanquished  him  and  ruled  over  the  earth,  whereof  the  principal  horn  being 
broken  four  others  came  up  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  out  of  one  of 
them  came  forth  a  little  horn,  which  waxed  exceedingly  great  toward  the  south, 

^John  19.15.  "We  have  no  king  but  Caesar.” 


PENSEES 


310 

and  toward  the  east,  and  toward  the  land  of  Israel,  and  it  waxed  great  even  to  the 
host  of  heaven;  and  it  cast  down  some  of  the  stars,  and  stamped  upon  them,  and 
at  last  overthrew  the  prince,  and  by  him  the  daily  sacrifice  was  taken  away,  and  the 
place  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down. 

"This  is  what  Daniel  saw.  He  sought  the  meaning  of  it,  and  a  voice  cried  in  this 
manner,  'Gabriel,  make  this  man  to  understand  the  vision.’  And  Gabriel  said: 

"The  ram  which  thou  sawest  is  the  king  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  and  the  he- 
goat  is  the  king  of  Greece,  and  the  great  horn  that  is  between  his  eyes  is  the  first 
king  of  this  monarchy. 

"Now  that  being  broken,  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it,  four  kingdoms  shall 
stand  up  out  of  the  nation,  but  not  in  his  power. 

"And  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,  when  iniquities  are  come  to  the  full, 
there  shall  arise  a  king,  insolent  and  strong,  but  not  by  his  own  power,  to  whom 
all  things  shall  succeed  after  his  own  will;  and  he  shall  destroy  the  holy  people, 
and  through  his  policy  also  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand,  and  he  shall 
destroy  many.  He  shall  also  stand  up  against  the  Prince  of  princes,  but  he  shall 
perish  miserably,  and  nevertheless  by  a  violent  hand." 

Daniel  9.  20.  "Whilst  I  was  praying  with  all  my  heart,  and  confessing  my  sin 
and  the  sin  of  all  my  people,  and  prostrating  myself  before  my  God,  even  Gabriel, 
whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beginning,  came  to  me  and  touched  me  about 
the  time  of  the  evening  oblation,  and  he  informed  me  and  said,  O  Daniel,  I  am 
now  come  forth  to  give  thee  the  knowledge  of  things.  At  the  beginning  of  thy 
supplications  I  came  to  shew  that  which  thou  didst  desire,  for  thou  are  greatly 
beloved:  therefore  understand  the  matter,  and  consider  the  vision.  Seventy  weeks 
are  determined  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgres¬ 
sion,  and  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  abolish  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlast¬ 
ing  righteousness;  to  accomplish  the  vision  and  the  prophecies,  and  to  anoint  the 
Most  Holy.  (After  which  this  people  shall  be  no  more  thy  people,  nor  this  city  the 
holy  city.  The  times  of  wrath  shall  be  passed,  and  the  years  of  grace  shall  come  for 
ever.) 

"Know  therefore,  and  understand,  that,  from  the  going  forth  of  the  command¬ 
ment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem  unto  the  Messiah  the  Prince,  shall  be  seven 
weeks,  and  three  score  and  two  weeks.”  (The  Hebrews  were  accustomed  to  divide 
numbers,  and  to  place  the  small  first.  Thus,  7  and  62  make  69.  Of  this  70  there  will 
then  remain  the  70th,  that  is  to  say,  the  7  last  years  of  which  he  will  speak  next.) 

"The  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the  wall,  even  in  troublous  times.  And  after 
three  score  and  two  weeks,"  (which  have  followed  the  first  seven.  Christ  will  then 
be  killed  after  the  sixty-nine  weeks,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  last  week),  "the  Christ 
shall  be  cut  off,  and  a  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall  destroy  the  city 
and  the  sanctuary,  and  overwhelm  all,  and  the  end  of  that  war  shall  accomplish 
the  desolation." 

"Now  one  week,"  (which  is  the  seventieth,  which  remains),  "shall  confirm  the 
covenant  with  many,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  week,"  (that  is  to  say,  the  last  three 
and  a  half  years),  "he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease,  and  for 
the  overspreading  of  abominations  he  shall  make  it  desolate,  even  until  the  con¬ 
summation,  and  that  determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate." 

Daniel  11.  "The  angel  said  to  Daniel:  There  shall  stand  up  yet,"  (after  Cyrus, 
under  whom  this  still  is),  "three  kings  in  Persia,"  (Cambyses,  Smerdis,  Darius); 


SECTION  XI  31 1 

"and  the  fourth  who  shall  then  come,”  (Xerxes)  "shall  be  far  richer  than  they  all, 
and  far  stronger,  and  shall  stir  up  all  his  people  against  the  Greeks. 

"But  a  mighty  king  shall  stand  up,”  (Alexander),  "that  shall  rule  with  great 
dominion,  and  do  according  to  his  will.  And  when  he  shall  stand  up,  his  kingdom 
shall  be  broken,  and  shall  be  divided  in  four  parts  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven,” 
(as  he  had  said  above,  7.  6;  8.  8),  "but  not  his  posterity;  and  his  successors 
shall  not  equal  his  power,  for  his  kingdom  shall  be  plucked  up,  even  for  others 
besides  these,”  (his  four  chief  successors). 

"And  the  king  of  the  south,”  (Ptolemy,  son  of  Lagos,  Egypt),  "shall  be  strong; 
but  one  of  his  princes  shall  be  strong  above  him,  and  his  dominion  shall  be  a 
great  dominion,”  (Seleucus,  King  of  Syria.  Appian  says  that  he  was  the  most 
powerful  of  Alexander’s  successors). 

"And  in  the  end  of  years  they  shall  join  themselves  together,  and  the  king’s 
daughter  of  the  south,”  (Berenice,  daughter  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  son  of  the 
other  Ptolemy),  "shall  come  to  the  king  of  the  north,”  (to  Antiochus  Deus,  King 
of  Syria  and  of  Asia,  son  of  Seleucus  Lagidas),  "to  make  peace  between  these 
princes. 

"But  neither  she  nor  her  seed  shall  have  a  long  authority;  for  she  and  they  that 
brought  her,  and  her  children,  and  her  friends,  shall  be  delivered  to  death.”  (Bere¬ 
nice  and  her  son  were  killed  by  Seleucus  Callinicus.) 

"But  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  one  stand  up,”  (Ptolemy  Euergetes  was 
the  issue  of  the  same  father  as  Berenice),  "which  shall  come  with  a  mighty  army 
into  the  land  of  the  king  of  the  north,  where  he  shall  put  all  under  subjection,  and 
he  shall  also  carry  captive  into  Egypt  their  gods,  their  princes,  their  gold,  their 
silver,  and  all  their  precious  spoils,”  (if  he  had  not  been  called  into  Egypt  by 
domestic  reasons,  says  Justin,  he  would  have  entirely  stripped  Seleucus);  "and  he 
shall  continue  several  years  when  the  king  of  the  north  can  do  nought  against 
him. 

"And  so  he  shall  return  into  his  kingdom.  But  his  sons  shall  be  stirred  up,  and 
shall  assemble  a  multitude  of  great  forces,”  (Seleucus  Ceraunus,  Antiochus  the 
Great).  "And  their  army  shall  come  and  overthrow  all;  wherefore  the  king  of  the 
south  shall  be  moved  with  choler,  and  shall  also  form  a  great  army,  and  fight  him,” 
(Ptolemy  Philopator  against  Antiochus  the  Great  at  Raphia),  "and  conquer;  and 
his  troops  shall  become  insolent,  and  his  heart  shall  be  lifted  up,”  (this  Ptolemy 
desecrated  the  temple;  Josephus):  "he  shall  cast  down  many  ten  thousands,  but 
he  shall  not  be  strengthened  by  it.  For  the  king  of  the  north,”  (Antiochus  the 
Great),  "shall  return  with  a  greater  multitude  than  before,  and  in  those  times  also 
a  great  number  of  enemies  shall  stand  up  against  the  king  of  the  south,”  (during 
the  reign  of  the  young  Ptolemy  Epiphanes);  "also  the  apostates  and  robbers  of 
thy  people  shall  exalt  themselves  to  establish  the  vision;  but  they  shall  fall.” 
(Those  who  abandon  their  religion  to  please  Euergetes,  when  he  will  send  his 
troops  to  Scopas;  for  Antiochus  will  again  take  Scopas,  and  conquer  them.)  "And 
the  king  of  the  north  shall  destroy  the  fenced  cities,  and  the  arms  of  the  south 
shall  not  withstand,  and  all  shall  yield  to  his  will;  he  shall  stand  in  the  land  of 
Israel,  and  it  shall  yield  to  him.  And  thus  he  shall  think  to  make  himself  master 
of  all  the  empire  of  Egypt,”  (despising  the  youth  of  Epiphanes,  says  Justin). 
"And  for  that  he  shall  make  alliance  with  him,  and  give  his  daughter”  (Cleopatra, 
in  order  that  she  may  betray  her  husband.  On  which  Appian  says  that,  doubting 


PENSEES 


312 

his  ability  to  make  himself  master  of  Egypt  by  force,  because  of  the  protection 
of  the  Romans,  he  wished  to  attempt  it  by  cunning).  "He  shall  wish  to  corrupt 
her,  but  she  shall  not  stand  on  his  side,  neither  be  for  him.  Then  he  shall  turn  his 
face  to  other  designs,  and  shall  think  to  make  himself  master  of  some  isles,”  (that 
is  to  say,  seaports),  "and  shall  take  many,”  (as  Appian  says). 

"But  a  prince  shall  oppose  his  conquests,”  (Scipio  Africanus,  who  stopped 
the  progress  of  Antiochus  the  Great,  because  he  offended  the  Romans  in  the  per¬ 
son  of  their  allies),  "and  shall  cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  to  cease.  He  shall 
then  return  into  his  kingdom  and  there  perish,  and  be  no  more.”  (He  was  slain  by 
his  soldiers.) 

"And  he  who  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate,”  (Seleucus  Philopator  or  Soter,  the 
son  of  Antiochus  the  Great),  "shall  be  a  tyrant,  a  raiser  of  taxes  in  the  glory  of 
the  kingdom,”  (which  means  the  people),  "but  within  a  few  days  he  shall  be  de¬ 
stroyed,  neither  in  anger  nor  in  battle.  And  in  his  place  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person, 
unworthy  of  the  honour  of  the  kingdom,  but  he  shall  come  in  cleverly  by  flat¬ 
teries.  All  armies  shall  bend  before  him;  he  shall  conquer  them,  and  even  the  prince 
with  whom  he  has  made  a  covenant.  For  having  renewed  the  league  with  him,  he 
shall  work  deceitfully,  and  enter  with  a  small  people  into  his  province,  peaceably 
and  without  fear.  He  shall  take  the  fattest  places,  and  shall  do  that  which  his 
fathers  have  not  done,  and  ravage  on  all  sides.  He  shall  forecast  great  devices  dur¬ 
ing  his  time.” 

723.  Prophecies. — The  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel  are  ambiguous  as  regards  the 
term  of  commencement,  because  of  the  terms  of  the  prophecy;  and  as  regards  the 
term  of  conclusion,  because  of  the  differences  among  chronologists.  But  all  this 
difference  extends  only  to  two  hundred  years. 

724.  Predictions. — That  in  the  fourth  monarchy,  before  the  destruction  of  the 
second  temple,  before  the  dominion  of  the  Jews  was  taken  away,  in  the  seventieth 
week  of  Daniel,  during  the  continuance  of  the  second  temple,  the  heathen  should 
be  instructed,  and  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  God  worshipped  by  the  Jews; 
that  those  who  loved  Him  should  be  delivered  from  their  enemies,  and  filled  with 
His  fear  and  love. 

And  it  happened  that  in  the  fourth  monarchy,  before  the  destruction  of  the 
second  temple,  etc.,  the  heathen  in  great  number  worshipped  God,  and  led  an 
angelic  life.  Maidens  dedicated  their  virginity  and  their  life  to  God.  Men  re¬ 
nounced  their  pleasures.  What  Plato  could  only  make  acceptable  to  a  few  men, 
specially  chosen  and  instructed,  a  secret  influence  imparted  by  the  power  of  a  few 
words,  to  a  hundred  million  ignorant  men. 

The  rich  left  their  wealth.  Children  left  the  dainty  homes  of  their  parents  to  go 
into  the  rough  desert.  (See  Philo  the  Jew.)  All  this  was  foretold  a  great  while  ago. 
For  two  thousand  years  no  heathen  had  worshipped  the  God  of  the  Jews;  and  at 
the  time  foretold,  a  great  number  of  the  heathen  worshipped  this  only  God.  The 
temples  were  destroyed.  The  very  kings  made  submission  to  the  cross.  All  this 
was  due  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  was  spread  abroad  upon  the  earth. 

No  heathen,  since  Moses  until  Jesus  Christ,  believed  according  to  the  very 
Rabbis.  A  great  number  of  the  heathen,  after  Jesus  Christ,  believed  in  the  books 
of  Moses,  kept  them  in  substance  and  spirit,  and  only  rejected  what  was  useless. 


SECTION  XI 


3r3 

725.  Prophecies. — The  conversion  of  the  Egyptians  (Isaiah  19.  19);  an  altar  in 
Egypt  to  the  true  God. 

726.  Prophecies. — In  Egypt.  Pugio  Fidei ,  p.  659.  Talmud 

"It  is  a  tradition  among  us,  that,  when  the  Messiah  shall  come,  the  house  of  God, 
destined  for  the  dispensation  of  His  Word,  shall  be  full  of  filth  and  impurity;  and 
that  the  wisdom  of  the  scribes  shall  be  corrupt  and  rotten.  Those  who  shall  be 
afraid  to  sin,  shall  be  rejected  by  the  people,  and  treated  as  senseless  fools/’ 

Is.  xlix:  ' ’Listen,  O  isles,  unto  me,  and  hearken,  ye  people,  from  afar:  The  Lord 
hath  called  me  by  my  name  from  the  womb  of  my  mother;  in  the  shadow  of  His 
hand  hath  He  hid  me,  and  hath  made  my  words  like  a  sharp  sword,  and  said  unto 
me,  Thou  art  my  servant  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified.  Then  I  said,  Lord,  have  I 
laboured  in  vain?  have  I  spent  my  strength  for  nought?  yet  surely  my  judgment  is 
with  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  my  work  with  Thee.  And  now,  saith  the  Lord,  that  formed 
me  from  the  womb  to  be  His  servant,  to  bring  Jacob  and  Israel  again  to  Him, 
Thou  shalt  be  glorious  in  my  sight,  and  I  will  be  thy  strength.  It  is  a  light  thing 
that  thou  shouldst  convert  the  tribes  of  Jacob;  I  have  raised  thee  up  for  a  light  to 
the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  to  him  whom  man  despiseth,  to  him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth, 
to  a  servant  of  rulers,  Princes  and  kings  shall  worship  thee,  because  the  Lord  is 
faithful  that  hath  chosen  thee. 

“Again  saith  the  Lord  unto  me,  I  have  heard  thee  in  the  days  of  salvation  and  of 
mercy,  and  I  will  preserve  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  to  cause  to  inherit  the 
desolate  nations,  that  thou  mayest  say  to  the  prisoners:  Go  forth;  to  them  that  are 
in  darkness  show  yourselves,  and  possess  these  abundant  and  fertile  lands.  They 
shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst,  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them;  for  he  that 
hath  mercy  upon  them  shall  lead  them,  even  by  the  springs  of  waters  shall  he 
guide  them,  and  make  the  mountains  a  way  before  them.  Behold,  the  peoples 
shall  come  from  all  parts,  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  from  the  north  and  from 
the  south.  Let  the  heavens  give  glory  to  God;  let  the  earth  be  joyful;  for  it  hath 
pleased  the  Lord  to  comfort  His  people,  and  He  will  have  mercy  upon  the  poor 
who  hope  in  Him. 

“Yet  Zion  dared  to  say:  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  and  hath  forgotten  me. 
Can  a  woman  forget  her  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of 
her  womb?  but  if  she  forget,  yet  will  not  I  forget  thee,  O  Sion.  I  will  bear  thee 
always  between  my  hands,  and  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me.  They  that  shall 
build  thee  are  come,  and  thy  destroyers  shall  go  forth  of  thee.  Lift  up  thine  eyes 
round  about,  and  behold;  all  these  gather  themselves  together,  and  come  to  thee. 
As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  surely  clothe  thee  with  them  all,  as  with  an 
ornament.  Thy  waste  and  thy  desolate  places,  and  the  land  of  thy  destruction 
shall  even  now  be  too  narrow  by  reason  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the  children  thou 
shalt  have  after  thy  barrenness  shall  say  again  in  thy  ears:  The  place  is  too  strait 
for  me:  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell.  Then  shalt  thou  say  in  thy  heart:  Who 
hath  begotten  me  these,  seeing  I  have  lost  my  children,  and  am  desolate,  a  cap¬ 
tive,  and  removing  to  and  fro?  and  who  brought  up  these?  Behold,  I  was  left 
alone;  these,  where  had  they  been?  And  the  Lord  shall  say  to  thee:  Behold,  I  will 
lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  Gentiles,  and  set  up  my  standard  to  the  people;  and  they 
shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their  arms  and  in  their  bosoms.  And  kings  shall  be  their 


314  PENSEES 

nursing  fathers,  and  queens  their  nursing  mothers;  they  shall  bow  down  to  thee 
with  their  face  toward  the  earth,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet;  and  thou  shalt 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord;  for  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for  me.  Shall  the 
prey  be  taken  from  the  mighty?  But  even  if  the  captives  be  taken  away  from  the 
strong,  nothing  shall  hinder  me  from  saving  thy  children,  and  from  destroying 
thy  enemies;  and  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Re¬ 
deemer,  the  mighty  One  of  Jacob. 

‘Thus  saith  the  Lord:  What  is  the  bill  of  this  divorcement,  w'herewith  I  have 
put  away  the  synagogue?  and  w'hy  have  I  delivered  it  into  the  hand  of  your  ene¬ 
mies?  Is  it  not  for  your  iniquities  and  for  your  transgressions  that  I  have  put  it 
aw'ay? 

“For  I  came,  and  no  man  received  me;  I  called  and  there  was  none  to  hear.  Is 
my  arm  shortened,  that  I  cannot  redeem? 

“Therefore  I  will  show'  the  tokens  of  mine  anger;  I  will  clothe  the  heavens  with 
darkness,  and  make  sackcloth  their  covering. 

“The  Lord  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned  that  I  should  know'  how  to 
speak  a  w'ord  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary.  He  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  I  have 
listened  to  Him  as  a  master. 

“The  Lord  hath  revealed  His  will,  and  I  was  not  rebellious. 

“I  gave  my  body  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  outrage;  I  hid  not  my  face 
from  shame  and  spitting.  But  the  Lord  hath  helped  me;  therefore  I  have  not  been 
confounded. 

“He  is  near  that  justifieth  me;  w'ho  will  contend  with  me?  who  will  be  mine 
adversary,  and  accuse  me  of  sin,  God  himself  being  my  protector? 

“All  men  shall  pass  away,  and  be  consumed  by  time;  let  those  that  fear  God 
hearken  to  the  voice  of  His  servant;  let  him  that  languisheth  in  darkness  put  his 
trust  in  the  Lord.  But  as  for  you,  ye  do  but  kindle  the  wrath  of  God  upon  you; 
ye  walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire  and  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have  kindled.  This  shall 
ye  have  of  mine  hand;  ye  shall  lie  dow'n  in  sorrow. 

“Hearken  to  me,  ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye  that  seek  the  Lord:  look 
unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  are  digged. 
Look  unto  Abraham,  your  father,  and  unto  Sarah  that  bare  you :  for  I  called  him 
alone,  when  childless,  and  increased  him.  Behold,  I  have  comforted  Zion,  and 
heaped  upon  her  blessings  and  consolations. 

“Hearken  unto  me,  my  people,  and  give  ear  unto  me;  for  a  law  shall  proceed 
from  me,  and  I  will  make  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles.” 

Amos  viii.  The  prophet,  having  enumerated  the  sins  of  Israel,  said  that  God 
had  sworn  to  take  vengeance  on  them. 

He  says  this:  “And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will 
cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon,  and  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day;  and 
I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning,  and  all  your  songs  into  lamentation. 

“You  all  shall  have  sorrow  and  suffering,  and  I  will  make  this  nation  mourn  as 
for  an  only  son,  and  the  end  therefore  as  a  bitter  day.  Behold,  the  days  come, 
saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a 
thirst  for  water,  but  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord.  And  they  shall  winder  from 
sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  north  even  to  the  east;  they  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek 
the  w7ord  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  not  find  it. 

“In  that  day  shall  the  fair  virgins  and  young  men  faint  for  thirst.  They  that  have 


SECTION  XI 


3X5 

followed  the  idols  of  Samaria,  and  sworn  by  the  god  of  Dan,  and  followed  the 
manner  of  Beersheba,  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  again.” 

Amos  3.  2:  "Ye  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  for  my 
people.” 

Daniel  12.  7.  Having  described  all  the  extent  of  the  reign  of  the  Messiah,  he 
says:  "All  these  things  shall  be  finished,  when  the  scattering  of  the  people  of 
Israel  shall  be  accomplished.” 

Haggai  2.  4:  "Ye  who,  comparing  this  second  house  with  the  glory  of  the  first, 
despise  it,  be  strong,  saith  the  Lord,  be  strong,  O  Zerubbabel,  and  O  Jesus,  the 
high  priest,  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  and  work.  For  I  am  with  you,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts;  according  to  the  word  that  I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye 
came  out  of  Egypt,  so  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you.  Fear  ye  not.  For  thus  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts:  Yet  one  little  while,  and  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth, 
and  the  sea,  and  the  dry  land,”  (a  way  of  speaking  to  indicate  a  great  and  an 
extraordinary  change);  "and  I  will  shake  all  nations,  and  the  desire  of  all  the 
Gentiles  shall  come;  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord. 

"The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord,”  (that  is  to  say,  it  is 
not  by  that  that  I  wish  to  be  honoured;  as  it  is  said  elsewhere:  All  the  beasts  of  the 
field  are  mine,  what  advantages  me  that  they  are  offered  me  in  sacrifice?).  "The 
glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts;  and  in  this  place  will  I  establish  my  house,  saith  the  Lord. 

"According  to  all  that  thou  desiredst  in  Horeb  in  the  day  of  the  assembly,  say¬ 
ing,  Let  us  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  neither  let  us  see  this  fire  any 
more,  that  we  die  not.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Their  prayer  is  just.  I  will  raise 
them  up  a  prophet  from  among  their  brethren,  like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my 
words  in  his  mouth;  and  he  shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall  command  him. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  will  not  hearken  unto  my  words  which 
he  will  speak  in  my  name,  I  will  require  it  of  him.” 

Genesis  49:  "Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise,  and  thou 
shalt  conquer  thine  enemies;  thy  father’s  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee. 
Judah  is  a  lion’s  whelp:  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up,  and  art  couched 
as  a  lion,  and  as  a  lioness  that  shall  be  roused  up. 

"The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet, 
until  Shiloh  come;  and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.” 

727.  During  the  life  of  the  Messiah.  ALnigmatis.  Ezek.  17. 

His  forerunner.  Malachi  3. 

He  will  be  born  an  infant.  Is.  9. 

He  will  be  born  in  the  village  of  Bethlehem.  Micah  5.  He  will  appear  chiefly  in 
Jerusalem  and  will  be  a  descendant  of  the  family  of  Judah  and  of  David. 

He  is  to  blind  the  learned  and  the  wise,  Is.  6.  8.  29.  etc.;  and  to  preach  the 
Gospel  to  the  lowly,  Is.  29;  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  give  health  to  the  sick, 
and  bring  light  to  those  that  languish  in  darkness.  Is.  61. 

He  is  to  show  the  perfect  way, and  be  the  teacher  of  the  Gentiles.  Is.  55;  43.1 — 7. 

The  prophecies  are  to  be  unintelligible  to  the  wicked,  Dan.  12;  Hosea  14.  10; 
but  they  are  to  be  intelligible  to  those  who  are  well  informed. 

The  prophecies,  which  represent  Him  as  poor,  represent  Him  as  master  of  the 
nations.  Is.  52.  14,  etc.;  53;  Zech.  9.  9. 


PENSEES 


316 

The  prophecies,  which  foretell  the  time,  foretell  Him  only  as  master  of  the  na¬ 
tions  and  suffering,  and  not  as  in  the  clouds  nor  as  judge.  And  those,  which 
represent  Him  thus  as  judge  and  in  glory,  do  not  mention  the  time.  When  the 
Messiah  is  spoken  of  as  great  and  glorious,  it  is  as  the  judge  of  the  world,  and  not 
its  Redeemer. 

He  is  to  be  the  victim  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  Is.  39.  53.  etc. 

He  is  to  be  the  precious  corner-stone.  Is.  28.  16. 

He  is  to  be  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  offence.  Is.  viii.  Jerusalem  is  to  dash  against 
this  stone. 

The  builders  are  to  reject  this  stone.  Ps.  1 17.  22. 

God  is  to  make  this  stone  the  chief  corner-stone. 

And  this  stone  is  to  grow  into  a  huge  mountain  and  fill  the  whole  earth.  Dan.  2. 

So  He  is  to  be  rejected,  despised,  betrayed  (Ps.  108.  8),  sold  (Zech.  1 1.  12),  spit 
upon,  buffeted,  mocked,  afflicted  in  innumerable  ways,  given  gall  to  drink  (Ps. 
68),  pierced  (Zech.  12),  His  feet  and  His  hands  pierced,  slain,  and  lots  cast  for 
His  raiment. 

He  will  rise  again  (Ps.  15)  the  third  day  (Hosea  6.  3). 

He  will  ascend  to  heaven  to  sit  on  the  right  hand.  Ps.  no. 

The  kings  will  arm  themselves  against  Him.  Ps.  2. 

Being  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  He  will  be  victorious  over  His  enemies. 

The  kings  of  the  earth  and  all  nations  will  worship  Him.  Is.  lx. 

The  Jews  will  continue  as  a  nation.  Jeremiah. 

They  will  wander,  without  kings,  etc.  (Hosea  3),  without  prophets  (Amos), 
looking  for  salvation  and  finding  it  not  (Isaiah). 

Calling  of  the  Gentiles  by  Jesus  Christ.  Is.  52.  15;  55.  5;  60.  etc.  Ps.  81. 

Hosea  1.  9:  ’'Ye  are  not  my  people,  and  I  will  not  be  your  God,  when  ye  are 
multiplied  after  the  dispersion.  In  the  places  where  it  was  said,  Ye  are  not  my 
people,  I  will  call  them  my  people/ ’ 

728.  It  was  not  lawful  to  sacrifice  outside  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  the  place  that 
the  Lord  had  chosen,  nor  even  to  eat  the  tithes  elsewhere.  Deut.  12.  5,  etc.;  Deut. 
14.  23,  etc.;  15.  20;  1 6.  2,  7,  11,  15. 

Hosea  foretold  that  they  should  be  without  a  king,  without  a  prince,  without  a 
sacrifice,  and  without  an  idol;  and  this  prophecy  is  now  fulfilled,  as  they  cannot 
make  a  lawful  sacrifice  out  of  Jerusalem. 

729.  Predictions. — It  was  foretold  that,  in  the  time  of  the  Messiah,  He  should 
come  to  establish  a  new  covenant,  which  should  make  them  forget  the  escape  from 
Egypt  (Jer.  23.  5;  Is.  43.  10);  that  He  should  place  His  law  not  in  externals, 
but  in  the  heart;  that  He  should  put  His  fear,  which  had  only  been  from  without, 
in  the  midst  of  the  heart.  Who  does  not  see  the  Christian  law  in  all  this? 

730.  .  .  .  That  then  idolatry  would  be  overthrown;  that  this  Messiah  would  cast 
down  all  idols  and  bring  men  into  the  worship  of  the  true  God. 

That  the  temples  of  the  idols  would  be  cast  down,  and  that  among  all  nations 
and  in  all  places  of  the  earth.  He  would  be  offered  a  pure  sacrifice,  not  of  beasts. 

That  He  would  be  king  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  And  we  see  this  king  of  the 
Jews  and  Gentiles  oppressed  by  both,  who  conspire  His  death;  and  ruler  of  both, 


SECTION  XI 


3J7 

destroying  the  worship  of  Moses  in  Jerusalem,  which  was  its  centre,  where  He 
made  His  first  Church;  and  also  the  worship  of  idols  in  Rome,  the  centre  of  it, 
where  He  made  His  chief  Church. 

731.  Prophecies. — That  Jesus  Christ  will  sit  on  the  right  hand,  till  God  has  sub¬ 
dued  His  enemies. 

Therefore  He  will  not  subdue  them  Himself. 

732.  *\  .  .  Then  they  shall  teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbour,  saying, 
Here  is  the  Lord,  for  God  shall  make  Himself  known  to  all." 

.  .  Your  sons  shall  prophesy.”  "I  will  put  my  spirit  and  my  fear  in  your  heart.” 

All  that  is  the  same  thing.  To  prophesy  is  to  speak  of  God,  not  from  outward 
proofs,  but  from  an  inward  and  immediate  feeling. 

733.  That  He  would  teach  men  the  perfect  way. 

And  there  has  never  come,  before  Him  nor  after  Him,  any  man  who  has  taught 
anything  divine  approaching  to  this. 

734.  .  .  .  That  Jesus  Christ  would  be  small  in  His  beginning,  and  would  then 
increase.  The  little  stone  of  Daniel. 

If  I  had  in  no  wise  heard  of  the  Messiah,  nevertheless,  after  such  wonderful 
predictions  of  the  course  of  the  world  which  I  see  fulfilled,  I  see  that  He  is  divine. 
And,  if  I  knew  that  these  same  books  foretold  a  Messiah,  I  should  be  sure  that  He 
would  come;  and  seeing  that  they  place  His  time  before  the  destruction  of  the 
second  temple,  I  should  say  that  He  had  come. 

735.  Prophecies. — That  the  Jews  would  reject  Jesus  Christ,  and  would  be  rejected 
of  God,  for  this  reason,  that  the  chosen  vine  brought  forth  only  wild  grapes.  That 
the  chosen  people  would  be  fruitless,  ungrateful,  and  unbelieving,  populum  non  ere - 
dentem  et  contradicentem.1  That  God  would  strike  them  with  blindness,  and  in  full 
noon  they  would  grope  like  the  blind;  and  that  a  forerunner  would  go  before 
Him. 

736.  Transfixerunt.2  Zech.  12.  10. 

That  a  deliverer  should  come,  who  would  crush  the  demon’s  head,  and  free  His 
people  from  their  sins,  ex  omnibus  ini quit atibusf  that  there  should  be  a  New  Cov¬ 
enant,  which  would  be  eternal;  that  there  should  be  another  priesthood  after  the 
order  of  Melchisedek,  and  it  should  be  eternal;  that  the  Christ  should  be  glorious, 
mighty,  strong,  and  yet  so  poor  that  He  would  not  be  recognised,  nor  taken  for 
what  He  is,  but  rejected  and  slain;  that  His  people  who  denied  Him  should  no 
longer  be  His  people;  that  the  idolaters  should  receive  Him,  and  take  refuge  in 
Him;  that  He  should  leave  Zion  to  reign  in  the  centre  of  idolatry;  that  neverthe¬ 
less  the  Jews  should  continue  for  ever;  that  He  should  be  of  Judah,  and  when 
there  should  be  no  longer  a  king. 

'Is.  65.  2.  "Arebellious  people,  which  walketh  in  a  way  that  was  not  good." 

2"They  have  pierced." 

3Ps.  130.  8.  "from  all  his  iniquities." 


3*8 


PENSEES 


SECTION  XII 
PROOFS  OF  JESUS  CHRIST 

737.  Therefore  I  reject  all  other  religions.  In  that  way  I  find  an  answer  to  all 
objections.  It  is  right  that  a  God  so  pure  should  only  reveal  Himself  to  those 
whose  hearts  are  purified.  Hence  this  religion  is  lovable  to  me,  and  I  find  it  now 
sufficiently  justified  by  so  divine  a  morality.  But  I  find  more  in  it. 

I  find  it  convincing  that,  since  the  memory  of  man  has  lasted,  it  was  constantly 
announced  to  men  that  they  were  universally  corrupt,  but  that  a  Redeemer  should 
come;  that  it  is  not  one  man  who  said  it,  but  innumerable  men,  and  a  whole  na¬ 
tion  expressly  made  for  the  purpose  and  prophesying  for  four  thousand  years. 
This  is  a  nation  which  is  more  ancient  than  every  other  nation.  Their  books,  scat¬ 
tered  abroad,  are  four  thousand  years  old. 

The  more  I  examine  them,  the  more  truths  I  find  in  them:  an  entire  nation  fore¬ 
tell  Him  before  His  advent,  and  an  entire  nation  worship  Him  after  His  advent; 
what  has  preceded  and  what  has  followed;  in  short,  people  without  idols  and 
kings,  this  synagogue  which  was  foretold,  and  these  wretches  who  frequent  it  and 
who,  being  our  enemies,  are  admirable  witnesses  of  the  truth  of  these  prophecies, 
wherein  their  wretchedness  and  even  their  blindness  are  foretold. 

I  find  this  succession,  this  religion,  wholly  divine  in  its  authority,  in  its  dura¬ 
tion,  in  its  perpetuity,  in  its  morality,  in  its  conduct,  in  its  doctrine,  in  its  effects. 
The  frightful  darkness  of  the  Jews  was  foretold.  Eris  palpans  in  meridie }  Dabitur 
liber  scienti  literas  .  .  .  et  dicet:  Non  possum  legere ?  While  the  sceptre  was  still  in  the 
hands  of  the  first  foreign  usurper,  there  is  the  report  of  the  coming  of  Jesus  Christ. 

So  I  hold  out  my  arms  to  my  Redeemer ,  who,  having  been  foretold  for  four 
thousand  years,  has  come  to  suffer  and  to  die  for  me  on  earth,  at  the  time  and 
under  all  the  circumstances  foretold.  By  His  grace,  I  await  death  in  peace,  in  the 
hope  of  being  eternally  united  to  Him.  Yet  I  live  with  joy,  whether  in  the  pros¬ 
perity  which  it  pleases  Him  to  bestow  upon  me,  or  in  the  adversity  which  He 
sends  for  my  good,  and  which  He  has  taught  me  to  bear  by  His  example. 

738.  The  prophecies  having  given  different  signs  which  should  all  happen  at 
the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  it  was  necessary  that  all  these  signs  should  occur  at  the 
same  time.  So  it  was  necessary  that  the  fourth  monarchy  should  have  come,  when 
the  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel  were  ended;  and  that  the  sceptre  should  have  then 
departed  from  Judah.  And  all  this  happened  without  any  difficulty.  Then  it  was 
necessary  that  the  Messiah  should  come;  and  Jesus  Christ  then  came,  who  was 
called  the  Messiah.  And  all  this  again  was  without  difficulty.  This  indeed  shows 
the  truth  of  the  prophecies. 

739.  The  prophets  foretold,  and  were  not  foretold.  The  saints  again  were  fore¬ 
told,  but  did  not  foretell.  Jesus  Christ  both  foretold  and  was  foretold. 

^eut^S.  29.  Et  palpes  in  meridie.  ’’And  thou  shalt  grope  at  noonday.” 

2Is.  29.  11.  Quern  ( librum )  cum  dederint  scienti  litteras  et  respondebit:  Non  possum.  "  Which  men 
deliver  to  one  that  is  learned  .  .  .  and  he  saith,  I  cannot.” 


SECTION  XII  319 

740.  Jesus  Christ,  whom  the  two  Testaments  regard,  the  Old  as  its  hope,  the 
New  as  its  model,  and  both  as  their  centre. 

741.  The  two  oldest  books  in  the  world  are  those  of  Moses  and  Job,  the  one  a 
Jew  and  the  other  a  Gentile.  Both  of  them  look  upon  Jesus  Christ  as  their  com¬ 
mon  centre  and  object:  Moses  in  relating  the  promises  of  God  to  Abraham,  Jacob, 
etc.,  and  his  prophecies;  and  Job,  Quis  mihi  det  ut ,  etc.  Scio  enim  quod  redemptor 
meus  vivit ,  etc.1 

742.  The  Gospel  only  speaks  of  the  virginity  of  the  Virgin  up  to  the  time  of  the 
birth  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  with  reference  to  Jesus  Christ. 

743.  Proofs  of  Jesus  Christ . 

Why  was  the  book  of  Ruth  preserved? 

Why  the  story  of  Tamar? 

744.  "Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation."  It  is  dangerous  to  be  tempted; 
and  people  are  tempted  because  they  do  not  pray. 

Et  tu  conversus  confirma fratres  tuos.  But  before,  conversus  Jesus  respexit  Pet  rum. 2 

Saint  Peter  asks  permission  to  strike  Malchus  and  strikes  before  hearing  the 
answer.  Jesus  Christ  replies  afterwards. 

The  word,  Galilee ,  which  the  Jewish  mob  pronounced  as  if  by  chance,  in  accus¬ 
ing  Jesus  Christ  before  Pilate,  afforded  Pilate  a  reason  for  sending  Jesus  Christ  to 
Herod.  And  thereby  the  mystery  was  accomplished,  that  He  should  be  judged  by 
Jews  and  Gentiles.  Chance  was  apparently  the  cause  of  the  accomplishment  of  the 
mystery. 

745.  Those  who  have  a  difficulty  in  believing  seek  a  reason  in  the  fact  that  the 
Jews  do  not  believe.  "Were  this  so  clear,"  say  they,  "why  did  the  Jews  not  believe"? 
And  they  almost  wish  that  they  had  believed,  so  as  not  to  be  kept  back  by  the 
example  of  their  refusal.  But  it  is  their  very  refusal  that  is  the  foundation  of 
our  faith.  We  should  be  much  less  disposed  to  the  faith,  if  they  were  on  our 
side.  We  should  then  have  a  more  ample  pretext.  The  wonderful  thing  is  to 
have  made  the  Jews  great  lovers  of  the  things  foretold,  and  great  enemies  of  their 
fulfilment. 

746.  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  great  and  striking  miracles,  and  so,  having 
had  the  great  miracles  of  the  Red  Sea  and  of  the  land  of  Canaan  as  an  epitome  of 
the  great  deeds  of  their  Messiah,  they  therefore  looked  for  more  striking  miracles, 
of  which  those  of  Moses  were  only  the  patterns. 

747.  The  carnal  Jews  and  the  heathen  have  their  calamities,  and  Christians  also. 
There  is  no  Redeemer  for  the  heathen,  for  they  do  not  so  much  as  hope  for  one. 
There  is  no  Redeemer  for  the  Jews;  they  hope  for  Him  in  vain.  There  is  a  Re¬ 
deemer  only  for  Christians.  (See  Perpetuity .) 

JJob  19.  23-25.  "for  I  know  that  my  redeemer  liveth." 

2Luke  22.  32,61.  "And  when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brother."  "And  the  Lord 
turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter." 


PENSEES 


320 

748.  In  the  time  of  the  Messiah  the  people  divided  themselves.  The  spiritual  em¬ 
braced  the  Messiah,  and  the  coarser-minded  remained  to  serve  as  witnesses  of  Him. 

749.  "If  this  was  clearly  foretold  to  the  Jews,  how  did  they  not  believe  it,  or  why 
were  they  not  destroyed  for  resisting  a  fact  so  clear?" 

I  reply:  in  the  first  place,  it  was  foretold  both  that  they  would  not  believe  a 
thing  so  clear  and  that  they  would  not  be  destroyed.  And  nothing  is  more  to  the 
glory  of  the  Messiah;  for  it  was  not  enough  that  there  should  be  prophets;  their 
prophets  must  be  kept  above  suspicion.  Now,  etc. 

750.  If  the  Jews  had  all  been  converted  by  Jesus  Christ,  we  should  have  none 
but  questionable  witnesses.  And  if  they  had  been  entirely  destroyed,  we  should 
have  no  witnesses  at  all. 

751.  What  do  the  prophets  say  of  Jesus  Christ?  That  He  will  be  clearly  God? 
No;  but  that  He  is  a  God  truly  hidden;  that  He  will  be  slighted;  that  none  will 
think  that  it  is  He;  that  He  will  be  a  stone  of  stumbling,  upon  which  many  will 
stumble,  etc.  Let  people  then  reproach  us  no  longer  for  want  of  clearness,  since 
we  make  profession  of  it. 

But,  it  is  said,  there  are  obscurities.  And  without  that,  no  one  would  have 
stumbled  over  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  is  one  of  the  formal  pronouncements  of  the 
prophets:  Excaeca  .  .  } 

752.  Moses  first  teaches  the  Trinity,  original  sin,  the  Messiah. 

David:  a  great  witness;  a  king,  good,  merciful,  a  beautiful  soul,  a  sound  mind, 
powerful.  He  prophesies,  and  his  wonder  comes  to  pass.  This  is  infinite. 

He  had  only  to  say  that  he  was  the  Messiah,  if  he  had  been  vain;  for  the  pro¬ 
phecies  are  clearer  about  him  than  about  Jesus  Christ.  And  the  same  with  Saint 
John. 

753.  Herod  was  believed  to  be  the  Messiah.  He  had  taken  away  the  sceptre  from 
Judah  but  he  was  not  of  Judah.  This  gave  rise  to  a  considerable  sect. 

Curse  of  the  Greeks  upon  those  who  count  three  periods  of  time. 

In  what  way  should  the  Messiah  come,  seeing  that  through  Him  the  sceptre 
was  to  be  eternally  in  Judah  and  at  His  coming  the  sceptre  was  to  be  taken  away 
from  Judah? 

In  order  to  effect  that  seeing  they  should  not  see,  and  hearing  they  should  not 
understand,  nothing  could  be  better  done. 

754.  Homo  existens  te  Deum  facit? 

Scriptum  est ,  Dii  estis ,  et  non  potest  solvi  Scriptural 

Haec  infirmitas  non  est  ad  vitam  et  est  ad  mortem .4 

Lazarus  dormit ,  et  deinde  dixit:  Lazarus  mortuus  est .5 

'Is.  6.10.  “Shut  their  eyes/’ 

2"The  man  who  exists  makes  you  God.” 

3“It  is  written:  ‘You  are  Gods’  (Ps.  80.6),  and  the  Scripture  cannot  be  made  naught  of.” 

4“This  weakness  is  not  for  life;  it  is  for  death.” 

6John  1 1. 1 1  and  14.  ‘‘‘Lazarus  sleeps,’  and  later  it  says:  'Lazarus  is  dead.’” 


SECTION  XII 

755.  The  apparent  discrepancy  of  the  Gospels. 


321 


756.  What  can  we  have  but  reverence  for  a  man  who  foretells  plainly  things 
which  come  to  pass,  and  who  declares  his  intention  both  to  blind  and  to  enlighten, 
and  who  intersperses  obscurities  among  the  clear  things  which  come  to  pass? 

757.  The  time  of  the  first  advent  was  foretold;  the  time  of  the  second  is  not  so; 
because  the  first  was  to  be  obscure,  and  the  second  is  to  be  brilliant  and  so  mani¬ 
fest  that  even  His  enemies  will  recognise  it.  But,  as  He  was  first  to  come  only  in 
obscurity  and  to  be  known  only  of  those  who  searched  the  Scriptures  .  .  . 

758.  God,  in  order  to  cause  the  Messiah  to  be  known  by  the  good  and  not  to 
be  known  by  the  wicked,  made  Him  to  be  foretold  in  this  manner.  If  the  manner 
of  the  Messiah  had  been  clearly  foretold,  there  would  have  been  no  obscurity, 
even  for  the  wicked.  If  the  time  had  been  obscurely  foretold,  there  would  have 
been  obscurity,  even  for  the  good.  For  their  [goodness  of  heart]  would  not  have 
made  them  understand,  for  instance,  that  the  closed  mem  signifies  six  hundred 
years.  But  that  time  has  been  clearly  foretold,  and  the  manner  in  types. 

By  this  means,  the  wicked,  taking  the  promised  blessings  for  material  blessings, 
have  fallen  into  error,  in  spite  of  the  clear  prediction  of  the  time;  and  the  good 
have  not  fallen  in  error.  For  the  understanding  of  the  promised  blessings  de¬ 
pends  on  the  heart,  which  calls  good  that  which  it  loves;  but  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  promised  time  does  not  depend  on  the  heart.  And  thus  the  clear  pre¬ 
diction  of  the  time,  and  the  obscure  prediction  of  the  blessings,  deceive  the 
wicked  alone. 

759.  [Either  the  Jews  or  the  Christians  must  be  wicked.] 

760.  The  Jews  reject  Him,  but  not  all.  The  saints  receive  Him,  and  not  the 
carnal-minded.  And  so  far  is  this  from  being  against  His  glory,  that  it  is  the  last 
touch  which  crowns  it.  For  their  argument,  the  only  one  found  in  all  their  writ¬ 
ings,  in  the  Talmud  and  in  the  Rabbinical  writings,  amounts  only  to  this,  that 
Jesus  Christ  has  not  subdued  the  nations  with  sword  in  hand,  gladium  tuum , 
potentissime }  (Is  this  all  they  have  to  say?  Jesus  Christ  has  been  slain,  say  they.  He 
has  failed.  He  has  not  subdued  the  heathen  with  His  might.  He  has  not  bestowed 
upon  us  their  spoil.  He  does  not  give  riches.  Is  this  all  they  have  to  say?  It  is  in 
this  respect  that  He  is  lovable  to  me.  I  would  not  desire  Him  whom  they  fancy.) 
It  is  evident  that  it  is  only  His  life  which  has  prevented  them  from  accepting  Him; 
and  through  this  rejection  they  are  irreproachable  witnesses,  and,  what  is  more, 
they  thereby  accomplish  the  prophecies. 

[By  means  of  the  fact  that  this  people  have  not  accepted  Him,  this  miracle  here 
has  happened.  The  prophecies  were  the  only  lasting  miracles  which  could  be 
wrought,  but  they  were  liable  to  be  denied.] 

761.  The  Jews,  in  slaying  Him  in  order  not  to  receive  Him  as  the  Messiah,  have 
given  Him  the  final  proof  of  being  the  Messiah. 

And  in  continuing  not  to  recognise  Him,  they  made  themselves  irreproachable 

^s.  44.4.  Gladio  tuo— "Thy  sword,  O  most  mighty.’' 


322  PENSEES 

witnesses.  Both  in  slaying  Him  and  in  continuing  to  deny  Him,  they  have  fulfilled 
the  prophecies  (Is.  60;  Ps.  71). 

762.  What  could  the  Jews,  His  enemies,  do?  If  they  receive  Him,  they  give 
proof  of  Him  by  their  reception;  for  then  the  guardians  of  the  expectation  of  the 
Messiah  receive  Him.  If  they  reject  Him,  they  give  proof  of  Him  by  their  rejection. 

763.  The  Jews,  in  testing  if  He  were  God,  have  shown  that  He  was  man. 

764.  The  Church  has  had  as  much  difficulty  in  showing  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
man,  against  those  who  denied  it,  as  in  showing  that  He  was  God;  and  the  prob¬ 
abilities  were  equally  great. 

765.  Source  of  contradictions. — A  God  humiliated,  even  to  the  death  on  the  cross; 
a  Messiah  triumphing  over  death  by  his  own  death.  Two  natures  in  Jesus  Christ, 
two  advents,  two  states  of  man's  nature. 

7 66.  Types. — Saviour,  father,  sacrifices  offering,  food,  king,  wise,  law-giver, 
afflicted,  poor,  having  to  creat  a  people  whom  He  must  lead  and  nourish  and 
bring  into  His  land  .  .  . 

Jesus  Christ.  Offices. — He  alone  had  to  create  a  great  people,  elect,  holy,  and 
chosen;  to  lead,  nourish,  and  bring  it  into  the  place  of  rest  and  holiness;  to  make 
it  holy  to  God;  to  make  it  the  temple  of  God;  to  reconcile  it  to,  and  save  it  from, 
the  wrath  of  God;  to  free  it  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  which  visibly  reigns  in  man; 
to  give  laws  to  this  people,  and  engrave  these  laws  on  their  heart;  to  offer  Himself 
to  God  for  them,  and  sacrifice  Himself  for  them;  to  be  a  victim  without  blemish, 
and  Himself  the  sacrificer,  having  to  offer  Himself,  His  body,  and  His  blood,  and 
yet  to  offer  bread  and  wine  to  God  .  .  . 

Ingrediens  mundum } 

"Stone  upon  stone." 

What  preceded  and  what  followed.  All  the  Jews  exist  still  and  are  wanderers. 

767.  Of  all  that  is  on  earth,  He  partakes  only  of  the  sorrows,  not  of  the  joys.  He 
loves  His  neighbours,  but  His  love  does  not  confine  itself  within  these  bounds, 
and  overflows  to  His  own  enemies,  and  then  to  those  of  God. 

768.  Jesus  Christ  typified  by  Joseph,  the  beloved  of  his  father,  sent  by  his  father 
to  see  his  brethren,  etc.,  innocent,  sold  by  his  brethren  for  twenty  pieces  of  silver, 
and  thereby  becoming  their  lord,  their  saviour,  the  saviour  of  strangers  and  the 
saviour  of  the  world;  which  had  not  been  but  for  their  plot  to  destroy  him,  their 
sale  and  their  rejection  of  him. 

In  prison,  Joseph  innocent  between  two  criminals;  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  be¬ 
tween  two  thieves.  Joseph  foretells  freedom  to  the  one,  and  death  to  the  other,  from 
the  same  omens.  Jesus  Christ  saves  the  elect,  and  condemns  the  outcast  for  the 
same  sins.  Joseph  foretells  only;  Jesus  Christ  acts.  Joseph  asks  him  who  will  be 
saved  to  remember  him,  when  he  comes  into  his  glory;  and  he  whom  Jesus  Christ 
saves  asks  that  He  will  remember  him,  when  He  comes  into  His  kingdom. 

'Heb.  10.5.  "When  he  cometh  into  the  world." 


SECTION  XII  323 

769.  The  conversion  of  the  heathen  was  only  reserved  for  the  grace  of  the  Mes¬ 
siah.  The  Jews  have  been  so  long  in  opposition  to  them  without  success;  all  that 
Solomon  and  the  prophets  said  has  been  useless.  Sages,  like  Plato  and  Socrates, 
have  not  been  able  to  persuade  them. 

770.  After  many  persons  had  gone  before,  Jesus  Christ  at  last  came  to  say:  "Here 
am  I,  and  this  is  the  time.  That  which  the  prophets  have  said  was  to  come 
in  the  fullness  of  time,  I  tell  you  my  apostles  will  do.  The  Jews  shall  be  cast 
out.  Jerusalem  shall  be  soon  destroyed.  And  the  heathen  shall  enter  into  the 
knowledge  of  God.  My  apostles  shall  do  this  after  you  have  slain  the  heir  of  the 
vineyard." 

Then  the  apostles  said  to  the  Jews:  "You  shall  be  accursed,"  ( Celsus  laughed  at 
it);  and  to  the  heathen,  "You  shall  enter  into  the  knowledge  of  God."  And  this 
then  came  to  pass. 

771.  Jesus  Christ  came  to  blind  those  who  saw  clearly,  and  to  give  sight  to  the 
blind;  to  heal  the  sick,  and  leave  the  healthy  to  die;  to  call  to  repentance,  and  to 
justify  sinners,  and  to  leave  the  righteous  in  their  sins;  to  fill  the  needy,  and 
leave  the  rich  empty. 

772.  Holiness. — Effundam  spiritum  meum}  All  nations  were  in  unbelief  and  lust. 
The  whole  world  now  became  fervent  with  love.  Princes  abandoned  their  pomp; 
maidens  suffered  martyrdom.  Whence  came  this  influence?  The  Messiah  was 
come.  These  were  the  effect  and  sign  of  His  coming. 

773.  Destruction  of  the  Jews  and  heathen  by  Jesus  Christ:  Omnes  gentes  venient  et 
adorabunt  eum?  Parum  est  ut?  etc.  Postula  a  me ?  Adorabunt  eum  omnes  reges?  Testes 
iniqui?  Dabit  maxillam  percutienti?  Dederunt  fel  in  escam ? 

774.  Jesus  Christ  for  all,  Moses  for  a  nation. 

The  Jews  blessed  in  Abraham:  "I  will  bless  those  that  bless  thee."  But:  "All 
nations  blessed  in  his  seed."  Parum  est  ut ?  etc. 

Lumen  ad  revelationem  gentium? 

Non  fecit  taliter  omni  nationi,  said  David,  in  speaking  of  the  Law.  But,  in  speak¬ 
ing  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  must  say:  Fecit  taliter  omni  nationi.™  Parum  est  ut?  etc.,  Isaiah. 
So  it  belongs  to  Jesus  Christ  to  be  universal.  Even  the  Church  offers  sacrifice  only 
for  the  faithful.  Jesus  Christ  offered  that  of  the  cross  for  all. 

775.  There  is  heresy  in  always  explaining  omnes  by  all,  and  heresy  is  not  explain¬ 
ed.  2.28.  "I  will  pour  out  my  spirit.” 

2Ps.  21.28.  “All  peoples  shall  come  and  worship  him.” 

3Is.  49.6.  “It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou  shouldst  be  my  servant,”  etc. 

4Ps.  2.8.  “Ask  of  me.” 

5Ps.  7 1. 1 1.  “All  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him.” 

6Ps.  34.11.  “Witnesses  rise  up.” 

Tam.  3.30.  “He  giveth  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him.” 

8Ps.  68.22.  Dederunt  in  escam  meam  fel.  “They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  meat.” 

9Luke  2.32.  “A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles.” 

10  Ps.  167.20.  “He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation.” 


324  PENSEES 

ing  it  sometimes  by  all.  Bibite  ex  hoc  omnes ;l  The  Huguenots  are  heretics  in 
explaining  it  by  all.  In  quo  omnes  peccaverunt ;2  the  Huguenots  are  heretics  in  ex¬ 
cepting  the  children  of  true  believers.  We  must,  then,  follow  the  Fathers  and 
tradition  in  order  to  know  when  to  do  so,  since  there  is  heresy  to  be  feared  on 
both  sides. 

776.  Ne  timeas  pusillus  grex .3  Timore  et  tremore .4 — Quid  ergo ?  Ne  timeas  [ modo \ 
timeas.  Fear  not,  provided  you  fear;  but  if  you  fear  not,  then  fear. 

Qui  me  recipit ,  non  me  recipit ,  sed  eum  qui  me  mi  sit  p 

Nemo  scit ,  neque  Films* 

Nubes  lucida  obumbravitd 

Saint  John  was  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  Jesus  Christ 
to  plant  division.  There  is  not  contradiction. 

777.  The  effects  in  communi and  in particulari.  The  semi-Pelagians  err  in  saying  of 
in  communi  what  is  true  only  in  particulari;  and  the  Calvinists  in  saying  in  particulari 
what  is  true  in  communi.  (Such  is  my  opinion.) 

778.  Omnis  Judcea  regio ,  et  Jerosolmymi  universi ,  et  baptizabantur .8  Because  of  all 
the  conditions  of  men  who  came  there. 

From  these  stones  there  can  come  children  unto  Abraham. 

779.  If  men  knew  themselves,  God  would  heal  and  pardon  them.  Ne  convertan- 
tur  etsanem  eos ,  et  dimittantur  eis  pec  cat  a? 

780.  Jesus  Christ  never  condemned  without  hearing.  To  Judas:  Amice ,  ad  quid 
venisti?10  To  him  that  had  not  on  the  wedding  garment,  the  same. 

781.  The  types  of  the  completeness  of  the  Redemption,  as  that  the  sun  gives 
light  to  all,  indicate  only  completeness;  but  [the  types]  of  exclusions,  as  of  the  Jews 
elected  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Gentiles,  indicate  exclusion. 

"Jesus  Christ  the  Redeemer  of  all.”  Yes,  for  He  has  offered,  like  a  man  who  has 
ransomed  all  those  who  were  willing  to  come  to  Him.  If  any  die  on  the  way,  it  is 
their  misfortune;  but,  so  far  as  He  was  concerned,  He  offered  them  redemption. 
That  holds  good  in  this  example,  where  he  who  ransoms  and  he  who  prevents 
death  are  two  persons,  but  not  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  does  both  these  things.  No, 
for  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  quality  of  Redeemer,  is  not  perhaps  Master  of  all;  and 
thus,  in  so  far  as  it  is  in  Him,  He  is  the  Redeemer  of  all. 

When  it  is  said  that  Jesus  Christ  did  not  die  for  all,  you  take  undue  advantage 

xMatt.  26.27.  "Drink  ye  all  of  it." 

2Rom.  5.12.  "for  that  all  have  sinned." 

3Luke  12.32.  "Fear  not  little  flock." 

4Phil.  2.12.  "With  fear  and  trembling." 

5Mark  9.  37.  "Whosoever  receiveth  me,  receiveth  not  me,  but  him  that  sent  me." 

6Mark  13.32.  "No  one  knows,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father." 

7"Clouds  shadowed  over  the  light.” 

8Mark  1.5.  "All  the  land  of  Judaea,  and  they  of  Jerusalem,  and  were  all  baptized  of  him." 

9Mark  4.12.  "Lest  they  should  be  converted,  and  their  sins  should  be  forgiven  them." 

10Matt.  26.50.  "Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come?" 


SECTION  XII  325 

of  a  fault  in  men  who  at  once  apply  this  exception  to  themselves;  and  this  is  to 
favour  despair,  instead  of  turning  them  from  it  to  favour  hope.  For  men  thus 
accustom  themselves  in  inward  virtues  by  outward  customs. 

782.  The  victory  over  death.  "What  is  a  man  advantaged  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  his  own  soul?  Whosoever  will  save  his  soul,  shall  lose  it." 

"I  am  not  come  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil." 

"Lambs  took  not  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  but  I  am  the  lamb  which  taketh 
away  the  sins." 

"Moses  hath  not  led  you  out  of  captivity,  and  made  you  truly  free." 

783.  .  .  .  Then  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  tell  men  that  they  have  no  other  enemies 
but  themselves;  that  it  is  their  passions  which  keep  them  apart  from  God ;  that  He 
comes  to  destroy  these,  and  give  them  His  grace,  so  as  to  make  of  them  all  one 
Holy  Church;  that  He  comes  to  bring  back  into  this  Church  the  heathen  and 
Jews;  that  He  comes  to  destroy  the  idols  of  the  former  and  the  superstition  of  the 
latter.  To  this  all  men  are  opposed,  not  only  from  the  natural  opposition  of  lust; 
but,  above  all,  the  kings  of  the  earth,  as  had  been  foretold,  join  together  to  des¬ 
troy  this  religion  at  its  birth.  (Proph.:  Quare  fremuerunt  gentes  .  .  .  reges  terra  .  .  .  ad - 
versus  Christum . ) 1 

All  that  is  great  on  earth  is  united  together;  the  learned,  the  wise,  the  kings. 
The  first  write;  the  second  condemn;  the  last  kill.  And  notwithstanding  all  these 
oppositions,  these  men,  simple  and  weak,  resist  all  these  powers,  subdue  even 
these  kings,  these  learned  men  and  these  sages,  and  remove  idolatry  from  all  the 
earth.  And  all  this  is  done  by  the  power  which  had  foretold  it. 

784.  Jesus  Christ  would  not  have  the  testimony  of  devils,  nor  of  those  who 
were  not  called,  but  of  God  and  John  the  Baptist. 

785.  I  consider  Jesus  Christ  in  all  persons  and  in  ourselves:  Jesus  Christ  as  a 
Father  in  His  Father,  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Brother  in  His  Brethren,  Jesus  Christ  as 
poor  in  the  poor,  Jesus  Christ  as  rich  in  the  rich,  Jesus  Christ  as  Doctor  and 
Priest  in  priests,  Jesus  Christ  as  Sovereign  in  princes,  etc.  For  by  His  glory  He  is 
all  that  is  great,  being  God;  and  by  His  mortal  life  He  is  all  that  is  poor  and  ab¬ 
ject.  Therefore  He  has  taken  this  unhappy  condition,  so  that  He  could  be  in  all 
persons  and  the  model  of  all  conditions. 

786.  Jesus  Christ  is  an  obscurity  (according  to  what  the  world  calls  obscurity), 
such  that  historians,  writing  only  of  important  matters  of  states,  have  hardly 
noticed  Him. 

787.  On  the  fact  that  neither  Josephus ,  nor  Tacitus,  nor  other  historians  have  spoken  of 
Jesus  Christ. — So  far  is  this  from  telling  against  Christianity  that,  on  the  contrary,  it 
tells  for  it.  For  it  is  certain  that  Jesus  Christ  has  existed;  that  His  religion  has  made 
a  great  talk;  and  that  these  persons  were  not  ignorant  of  it.  Thus  it  is  plain  that 
they  purposely  concealed  it,  or  that,  if  they  did  speak  of  it,  their  account  has  been 
suppressed  or  changed. 

!Ps.  2.1,2.  "Why  do  the  heathen  rage  .  .  .  and  the  rulers  of  the  earth  .  .  .  against  the  Lord." 


326  PENSEES 

788.  “I  have  reserved  me  seven  thousand."  I  love  the  worshippers  unknown  to 
the  world  and  to  the  very  prophets. 

789.  As  Jesus  Christ  remained  unknown  among  men,  so  His  truth  remains 
among  common  opinions  without  external  difference.  Thus  the  Eucharist  among 
ordinary  bread. 

790.  Jesus  would  not  be  slain  without  the  forms  of  justice;  for  it  is  far  more 
ignominious  to  die  by  justice  than  by  an  unjust  sedition. 

791.  The  false  justice  of  Pilate  only  serves  to  make  Jesus  Christ  suffer;  for  he 
causes  Him  to  be  scourged  by  his  false  justice,  and  afterwards  puts  Him  to  death. 
It  would  have  been  better  to  have  put  Him  to  death  at  once.  Thus  it  is  with  the 
falsely  just.  They  do  good  and  evil  works  to  please  the  world,  and  to  show  that 
they  are  not  altogether  of  Jesus  Christ;  for  they  are  ashamed  of  Him.  And  at 
last,  under  great  temptation  and  on  great  occasions,  they  kill  Him. 

792.  What  man  ever  had  more  renown?  The  whole  Jewish  people  foretell  Him 
before  His  coming.  The  Gentile  people  worship  Him  after  His  coming.  The  two 
peoples,  Gentile  and  Jewish,  regard  Him  as  their  centre. 

And  yet  what  man  enjoys  this  renown  less?  Of  thirty-three  years,  He  lives 
thirty  without  appearing.  For  three  years  He  passes  as  an  impostor;  the  priests 
and  the  chief  people  reject  Him;  His  friends  and  His  nearest  relatives  despise 
Him.  Finally,  He  dies,  betrayed  by  one  of  His  own  disciples,  denied  by  another, 
and  abandoned  by  all. 

What  part,  then,  has  He  in  this  renown?  Never  had  man  so  much  renown;  never 
had  man  more  ignominy.  All  that  renown  has  served  only  for  us,  to  render  us 
capable  of  recognising  Him ;  and  He  had  none  of  it  for  Himself. 

793.  The  infinite  distance  between  body  and  mind  is  a  symbol  of  the  infinitely 
more  infinite  distance  between  mind  and  charity;  for  charity  is  supernatural. 

All  the  glory  of  greatness  has  no  lustre  for  people  who  are  in  search  of  under¬ 
standing. 

The  greatness  of  clever  men  is  invisible  to  kings,  to  the  rich,  to  chiefs,  and  to 
all  the  worldly  great. 

The  greatness  of  wisdom,  which  is  nothing  if  not  of  God,  is  invisible  to  the 
carnal-minded  and  to  the  clever.  These  are  three  orders  differing  in  kind. 

Great  geniuses  have  their  power,  their  glory,  their  greatness,  their  victory,  their 
lustre,  and  have  no  need  of  worldly  greatness,  with  which  they  are  not  in  keeping. 
They  are  seen,  not  by  the  eye,  but  by  the  mind;  this  is  sufficient. 

The  saints  have  their  power,  their  glory,  their  victory,  their  lustre,  and  need  no 
worldly  or  intellectual  greatness,  with  which  they  have  no  affinity;  for  these 
neither  add  anything  to  them,  nor  take  away  anything  from  them.  They  are  seen 
of  God  and  the  angels,  and  not  of  the  body,  nor  of  the  curious  mind.  God  is 
enough  for  them. 

Archimedes,  apart  from  his  rank,  would  have  the  same  veneration.  He  fought 
no  battles  for  the  eyes  to  feast  upon;  but  he  has  given  his  discoveries  to  all  men. 
Oh !  how  brilliant  he  was  to  the  mind ! 


SECTION  XII  327 

Jesus  Christ,  without  riches  and  without  any  external  exhibition  of  knowledge, 
is  in  His  own  order  of  holiness.  He  did  not  invent;  He  did  not  reign.  But  He  was 
humble,  patient,  holy,  holy  to  God,  terrible  to  devils,  without  any  sin.  Oh!  in 
what  great  pomp  and  in  what  wonderful  splendour  He  is  come  to  the  eyes  of  the 
heart,  which  perceive  wisdom! 

It  would  have  been  useless  for  Archimedes  to  have  acted  the  prince  in  his 
books  on  geometry,  although  he  was  a  prince. 

It  would  have  been  useless  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  come  like  a  king,  in 
order  to  shine  forth  in  His  kingdom  of  holiness.  But  He  came  there  appropriately 
in  the  glory  of  His  own  order. 

It  is  most  absurd  to  take  offence  at  the  lowliness  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  if  His  low¬ 
liness  were  in  the  same  order  as  the  greatness  which  He  came  to  manifest.  If  we 
consider  this  greatness  in  His  life,  in  His  passion,  in  His  obscurity,  in  His  death, 
in  the  choice  of  His  disciples,  in  their  desertion,  in  His  secret  resurrection,  and 
the  rest,  we  shall  see  it  to  be  so  immense  that  we  shall  have  no  reason  for  being 
offended  at  a  lowliness  which  is  not  of  that  order. 

But  there  are  some  who  can  only  admire  worldly  greatness,  as  though  there 
were  no  intellectual  greatness;  and  others  who  only  admire  intellectual  greatness, 
as  though  there  were  not  infinitely  higher  things  in  wisdom. 

All  bodies,  the  firmament,  the  stars,  the  earth  and  its  kingdoms,  are  not  equal 
to  the  lowest  mind;  for  mind  knows  all  these  and  itself;  and  these  bodies  nothing. 

All  bodies  together,  and  all  minds  together,  and  all  their  products,  are  not 
equal  to  the  least  feeling  of  charity.  This  is  of  an  order  infinitely  more  exalted. 

From  all  bodies  together,  we  cannot  obtain  one  little  thought;  this  is  impossible 
and  of  another  order.  From  all  bodies  and  minds,  we  cannot  produce  a  feeling  of 
true  charity;  this  is  impossible  and  of  another  and  supernatural  order. 

794.  Why  did  Jesus  Christ  not  come  in  a  visible  manner,  instead  of  obtaining 
testimony  of  Himself  from  preceding  prophecies?  Why  did  He  cause  Himself  to 
be  foretold  in  types? 

795.  If  Jesus  Christ  had  only  come  to  sanctify,  all  Scripture  and  all  things  would 
tend  to  that  end;  and  it  would  be  quite  easy  to  convince  unbelievers.  If  Jesus 
Christ  had  only  come  to  blind,  all  His  conduct  would  be  confused;  and  we  would 
have  no  means  of  convincing  unbelievers.  But  as  He  came  in  sanctificationem  et  in 
scandalum J  as  Isaiah  says,  we  cannot  convince  unbelievers,  and  they  cannot  con¬ 
vince  us.  But  by  this  very  fact  we  convince  them;  since  we  say  that  in  His  whole 
conduct  there  is  no  convincing  proof  on  one  side  or  the  other. 

796.  Jesus  Christ  does  not  say  that  He  is  not  of  Nazareth,  in  order  to  leave  the 
wicked  in  their  blindness;  nor  that  He  is  not  Joseph’s  son. 

797.  Proofs  of  Jesus  Christ . — Jesus  Christ  said  great  things  so  simply  that  it  seems 
as  though  He  had  not  thought  them  great;  and  yet  so  clearly  that  we  easily  see 
what  He  thought  of  them.  This  clearness,  joined  to  this  simplicity,  is  wonderful. 

798.  The  style  of  the  gospel  is  admirable  in  so  many  ways,  and  among  the  rest 

^s.  8.14.  "For  a  sanctuary  and  for  a  rock  of  offence.” 


328  PENSEES 

in  hurling  no  invectives  against  the  persecutors  and  enemies  of  Jesus  Christ.  For 
there  is  no  such  invective  in  any  of  the  historians  against  Judas,  Pilate,  or  any  of 
the  Jews. 

If  this  moderation  of  the  writers  of  the  Gospels  had  been  assumed,  as  well  as 
many  other  traits  of  so  beautiful  a  character,  and  they  had  only  assumed  it  to 
attract  notice,  even  if  they  had  not  dared  to  draw  attention  to  it  themselves,  they 
would  not  have  failed  to  secure  friends  who  would  have  made  such  remarks  to 
their  advantage.  But  as  they  acted  thus  without  pretence  and  from  wholly  dis¬ 
interested  motives,  they  did  not  point  it  out  to  any  one;  and  I  believe  that  many 
such  facts  have  not  been  noticed  till  now,  which  is  evidence  of  the  natural  dis¬ 
interestedness  with  which  the  thing  has  been  done. 

799.  An  artisan  who  speaks  of  wealth,  a  lawyer  who  speaks  of  war,  of  royalty, 
etc.;  but  the  rich  man  rightly  speaks  of  wealth,  a  king  speaks  indifferently  of  a 
great  gift  he  has  just  made,  and  God  rightly  speaks  of  God. 

800.  Who  has  taught  the  evangelists  the  qualities  of  a  perfectly  heroic  soul, 
that  they  paint  it  so  perfectly  in  Jesus  Christ?  Why  do  they  make  Him  weak  in 
His  agony?  Do  they  not  know  how  to  paint  a  resolute  death?  Yes,  for  the  same 
Saint  Luke  paints  the  death  of  Saint  Stephen  as  braver  than  that  of  Jesus  Christ. 

They  make  Him,  therefore,  capable  of  fear,  before  the  necessity  of  dying  has 
come,  and  then  altogether  brave. 

But  when  they  make  Him  so  troubled,  it  is  when  He  afflicts  Himself;  and  when 
men  afflict  Him,  He  is  altogether  strong. 

801.  Proof  of  Jesus  Christ. — The  supposition  that  the  apostles  were  impostors  is 
very  absurd.  Let  us  think  it  out.  Let  us  imagine  those  twelve  men,  assembled  after 
the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  plotting  to  say  that  He  was  risen.  By  this  they  attack  all 
the  powers.  The  heart  of  man  is  strangely  inclined  to  fickleness,  to  change,  to 
promises,  to  gain.  However  little  any  of  them  might  have  been  led  astray  by  all 
these  attractions,  nay  more,  by  the  fear  of  prisons,  tortures,  and  death,  they  were 
lost.  Let  us  follow  up  this  thought. 

802.  The  apostles  were  either  deceived  or  deceivers.  Either  supposition  has  dif¬ 
ficulties;  for  it  is  not  possible  to  mistake  a  man  raised  from  the  dead  .  .  . 

While  Jesus  Christ  was  with  them,  He  could  sustain  them.  But,  after  that,  if  He 
did  not  appear  to  them,  who  inspired  them  to  act? 


SECTION  XIII 

THE  MIRACLES 

803.  The  beginning. — Miracles  enable  us  to  judge  of  doctrine,  and  doctrine  en¬ 
ables  us  to  judge  of  miracles. 

There  are  false  miracles  and  true.  There  must  be  a  distinction,  in  order  to  know 
them;  otherwise  they  would  be  useless.  Now  they  are  not  useless;  on  the  contrary, 


SECTION  XIII  329 

they  are  fundamental.  Now  the  rule  which  is  given  to  us  must  be  such  that  it  does 
not  destroy  the  proof  which  the  true  miracles  give  of  the  truth,  which  is  the  chief 
end  of  the  miracles. 

Moses  has  given  two  rules:  that  the  prediction  does  not  come  to  pass  (Deut. 
18.),  and  that  they  do  not  lead  to  idolatry  (Deut.  13.);  and  Jesus  Christ  one. 

If  doctrine  regulates  miracles,  miracles  are  useless  for  doctrine. 

If  miracles  regulate  .  .  . 

Objection  to  the  rule. — The  distinction  of  the  times.  One  rule  during  the  time  of 
Moses,  another  at  present. 

804.  Miracle. — It  is  an  effect,  which  exceeds  the  natural  power  of  the  means 
which  are  employed  for  it;  and  what  is  not  a  miracle  is  an  effect,  which  does  not 
exceed  the  natural  power  of  the  means  which  are  employed  for  it.  Thus,  those  who 
heal  by  invocation  of  the  devil  do  not  work  a  miracle;  for  that  does  not  exceed 
the  natural  power  of  the  devil.  But  .  .  . 

805.  The  two  fundamentals;  one  inward,  the  other  outward;  grace  and  miracles; 
both  supernatural. 

806.  Miracles  and  truth  are  necessary,  because  it  is  necessary  to  convince  the 
entire  man,  in  body  and  soul. 

807.  In  all  times,  either  men  have  spoken  of  the  true  God,  or  the  true  God  has 
spoken  to  men. 

808.  Jesus  Christ  has  verified  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  never  in  verifying  His 
doctrine  by  Scripture  and  the  prophecies,  but  always  by  His  miracles. 

He  proves  by  a  miracle  that  He  remits  sins. 

Rejoice  not  in  your  miracles,  said  Jesus  Christ,  but  because  your  names  are 
written  in  heaven. 

If  they  believe  not  Moses,  neither  will  they  believe  one  risen  from  the  dead. 

Nicodemus  recognises  by  His  miracles  that  His  teaching  is  of  God.  Scimus  quia 
venisti  a  Deo  magister ;  nemo  enim  potest  ha c  signa  facer e  quae  tu  facis  nisi  Deus  fuerit  cum 
eo.1  He  does  not  judge  of  the  miracles  by  the  teaching,  but  of  the  teaching  by  the 
miracles. 

The  Jews  had  a  doctrine  of  God  as  we  have  one  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  confirmed 
by  miracles.  They  were  forbidden  to  believe  every  worker  of  miracles;  and  they 
were  further  commanded  to  have  recourse  to  the  chief  priests  and  to  rely  on  them. 

And  thus,  in  regard  to  their  prophets,  they  had  all  those  reasons  which  we  have 
for  refusing  to  believe  the  workers  of  miracles. 

And  yet  they  were  very  sinful  in  rejecting  the  prophets  and  Jesus  Christ  because 
of  their  miracles;  and  they  would  not  have  been  culpable,  if  they  had  not  seen  the 
miracles.  Nisi  fecissem  .  .  .  peccatum  non  haberent?  Therefore  all  belief  rests  upon 
miracles. 

Prophecy  is  not  called  miracle;  as  Saint  John  speaks  of  the  first  miracle  in  Cana 

^John  3.2.  "We  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God;  for  no  man  can  do  these 
miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him." 

2John.  15.24.  "If  I  had  not  done  .  .  .  they  had  not  had  sin." 


PENSEES 


330 

and  then  of  what  Jesus  Christ  says  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  when  He  reveals  to 
her  all  her  hidden  life.  Then  He  heals  the  centurion's  son;  and  Saint  John  calls 
this  "the  second  miracle." 

809.  The  combinations  of  miracles. 

810.  The  second  miracle  can  suppose  the  first,  but  the  first  cannot  suppose  the 
second. 

81 1.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  miracles,  there  would  have  been  no  sin  in  not  be¬ 
lieving  in  Jesus  Christ. 

812.  "I  should  not  be  a  Christian,  but  for  the  miracles,"  said  Saint  Augustine. 

813.  Miracles. — How  I  hate  those  who  make  men  doubt  of  miracles!  Mon¬ 
taigne  speaks  of  them  as  he  should  in  two  places.  In  one,  we  see  how  careful  he 
is;  and  yet,  in  the  other,  he  believes  and  makes  sport  of  unbelievers. 

However  it  may  be,  the  Church  is  without  proofs  if  they  are  right. 

814.  Montaigne  against  miracles. 

Montaigne  for  miracles. 

81 5.  It  is  not  possible  to  have  a  reasonable  belief  against  miracles. 

816.  Unbelievers  the  most  credulous.  They  believe  the  miracles  of  Vespasian, 
in  order  not  to  believe  those  of  Moses. 

817.  Title:  How  it  happens  that  men  believe  so  many  liars ,  who  say  that  they  have  seen 
miracles ,  and  do  not  believe  any  of  those  who  say  that  they  have  secrets  to  make  men  im¬ 
mortal ,  or  restore  youth  to  them. — Having  considered  how  it  happens  that  so  great 
credence  is  given  to  so  many  impostors,  who  say  they  have  remedies,  often  to  the 
length  of  men  putting  their  lives  into  their  hands,  it  has  appeared  to  me  that  the 
true  cause  is  that  there  are  true  remedies.  For  it  would  not  be  possible  that  there 
should  be  so  many  false  remedies  and  that  so  much  faith  should  be  placed  in  them, 
if  there  were  none  true.  If  there  had  never  been  any  remedy  for  any  ill,  and  all  ills 
had  been  incurable,  it  is  impossible  that  men  should  have  imagined  that  they 
could  give  remedies,  and  still  more  impossible  that  so  many  others  should  have 
believed  those  who  boasted  of  having  remedies;  in  the  same  way  as  did  a  man 
boast  of  preventing  death,  no  one  would  believe  him,  because  there  is  no  ex¬ 
ample  of  this.  But  as  there  were  a  number  of  remedies  found  to  be  true  by  the  very 
knowledge  of  the  greatest  men,  the  belief  of  men  is  thereby  induced;  and,  this 
being  known  to  be  possible,  it  has  been  therefore  concluded  that  it  was.  For 
people  commonly  reason  thus:  "A  thing  is  possible,  therefore  it  is";  because  the 
thing  cannot  be  denied  generally,  since  there  are  particular  effects  which  are  true, 
the  people,  who  cannot  distinguish  which  among  these  particular  effects  are  true, 
believe  them  all.  In  the  same  way,  the  reason  why  so  many  false  effects  are  credited 
to  the  moon  is  that  there  are  some  true,  as  the  tide. 

It  is  the  same  with  prophecies,  miracles,  divination  by  dreams,  sorceries,  etc. 


SECTION  XIII  331 

For  if  there  had  been  nothing  true  in  all  this,  men  would  have  believed  nothing 
of  them;  and  thus,  instead  of  concluding  that  there  are  no  true  miracles  because 
there  are  so  many  false,  we  must,  on  the  contrary,  say  that  there  certainly  are 
true  miracles,  since  there  are  false,  and  that  there  are  false  miracles  only  because 
some  are  true.  We  must  reason  in  the  same  way  about  religion;  for  it  would  not  be 
possible  that  men  should  have  imagined  so  many  false  religions,  if  there  had  not 
been  a  true  one.  The  objection  to  this  is  that  savages  have  a  religion;  but  the 
answer  is  that  they  have  heard  the  true  spoken  of,  as  appears  by  the  Deluge,  cir¬ 
cumcision,  the  cross  of  Saint  Andrew,  etc. 

818.  Having  considered  how  it  comes  that  there  are  so  many  false  miracles, 
false  revelations,  sorceries,  etc.,  it  has  seemed  to  me  that  the  true  cause  is  that 
there  are  some  true;  for  it  would  not  be  possible  that  there  should  be  so  many 
false  miracles,  if  there  were  none  true,  nor  so  many  false  revelations,  if  there  were 
none  true,  nor  so  many  false  religions,  if  there  were  not  one  true.  For  if  there  had 
never  been  all  this,  it  is  almost  impossible  that  men  should  have  imagined  it,  and 
still  more  impossible  that  so  many  others  should  have  believed  it.  But  as  there  have 
been  very  great  things  true,  and  as  they  have  been  believed  by  great  men,  this  im¬ 
pression  has  been  the  cause  that  nearly  everybody  is  rendered  capable  of  believing 
also  the  false.  And  thus,  instead  of  concluding  that  there  are  no  true  miracles, 
since  there  are  so  many  false,  it  must  be  said,  on  the  contrary,  that  there  are  true 
miracles,  since  there  are  so  many  false;  and  that  there  are  false  ones  only  because 
there  are  true;  and  that  in  the  same  way  there  are  false  religions  because  there  is 
one  true. — Objection  to  this:  savages  have  a  religion.  But  this  is  because  they  have 
heard  the  true  spoken  of,  as  appears  by  the  cross  of  Saint  Andrew,  the  Deluge, 
circumcision,  etc.  This  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  human  mind,  finding  itself 
inclined  to  that  side  by  the  truth,  becomes  thereby  susceptible  of  all  the  false¬ 
hoods  of  this  .  .  . 

819.  Jeremiah  23.  32.  The  miracles  of  the  false  prophets.  In  the  Hebrew  and 
Vatable  they  are  the  tricks. 

Miracle  does  not  always  signify  miracle.  I  Sam.  14.  15;  miracle  signifies  fear ,  and 
is  so  in  the  Hebrew.  The  same  evidently  in  Job  33.  7;  and  also  Isaiah  21.  4; 
Jeremiah  44.  12.  Portentum  signifies  simulacrum,  Jeremiah  50.  38;  and  it  is  so  in  the 
Hebrew  and  Vatable.  Isaiah  8.  18.  Jesus  Christ  says  that  He  and  His  will  be  in 

miracles. 

820.  If  the  devil  favoured  the  doctrine  which  destroys  him,  he  would  be  divided 
against  himself,  as  Jesus  Christ  said.  If  God  favoured  the  doctrine  which  de¬ 
stroys  the  Church,  He  would  be  divided  against  Himself.  Omne  regnum  divisum.1 
For  Jesus  Christ  wrought  against  the  devil,  and  destroyed  his  power  over  the 
heart,  of  which  exorcism  is  the  symbolisation,  in  order  to  establish  the  kingdom 
of  God.  And  thus  He  adds,  Si  in  digito  Dei  .  .  .  regnum  Dei  ad  vos.2 

821.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  tempting  and  leading  into  error.  God 
tempts,  but  He  does  not  lead  into  error.  To  tempt  is  to  afford  opportunities, 

*Matt.  12.25;  Luke  11.17.  "Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself." 

2Luke  11.20.  "If  with  the  finger  of  God  .  .  .  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  you." 


332  PENSEES 

which  impose  no  necessity;  if  men  do  not  love  God,  they  will  do  a  certain  thing. 
To  lead  into  error  is  to  place  a  man  under  the  necessity  of  inferring  and  following 
out  what  is  untrue. 

822.  Abraham  and  Gideon  are  above  revelation.  The  Jews  blinded  themselves 
in  judging  of  miracles  by  the  Scripture.  God  has  never  abandoned  His  true  wor¬ 
shippers. 

I  prefer  to  follow  Jesus  Christ  than  any  other,  because  He  has  miracle,  prophecy, 
doctrine,  perpetuity,  etc. 

The  Donatists.  No  miracle  which  obliges  them  to  say  it  is  the  devil. 

The  more  we  particularise  God,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Church  .  .  . 

823.  If  there  were  no  false  miracles,  there  would  be  certainty.  If  there  were  no 
rule  to  judge  of  them,  miracles  would  be  useless  and  there  would  be  no  reason  for 
believing. 

Now  there  is,  humanly  speaking,  no  human  certainty,  but  we  have  reason. 

824.  Either  God  has  confounded  the  false  miracles,  or  He  has  foretold  them; 
and  in  both  ways  He  has  raised  Himself  above  what  is  supernatural  with  respect 
to  us,  and  has  raised  us  to  it. 

825.  Miracles  serve  not  to  convert,  but  to  condemn.  Part  I-II  (Q.  113,  A.  10, 
Ad.  2.)1 

826.  Reasons  why  we  do  not  believe. 

John  xii.  37.  Cum  autem  tanta  signa  fecisset ,  non  credebant  in  eum,  ut  sermo  Isay  a 
impleretur  .  .  .  Excacavit ,2  etc. 

Hac  dixit  Isaias ,  quando  vidit  gloriam  ejus  et  locutus  est  de  eo.z 

Judai  signa  petunt  et  Graci  sapientiam  qua  runt,  nos  autem  Jesum  crucifixum .4  {Sed 
plenum  signis ,  sed  plenum  sapientia;  vos  autem  Christum  non  crucifixum  et  religionem  sine 
miraculis  et  sine  sapientia.  )5 

What  makes  us  not  believe  in  the  true  miracles  is  want  of  love.  John :  Sed  vos  non 
creditis ,  quia  non  estis  ex  ovibus .6  What  makes  us  believe  the  false  is  want  of  love.  II 
Thess.  2. 

The  foundation  of  religion.  It  is  the  miracles.  What  then?  Does  God  speak 
against  miracles,  against  the  foundations  of  the  faith  which  we  have  in  Him? 

If  there  is  a  God,  faith  in  God  must  exist  on  earth.  Now  the  miracles  of  Jesus 
Christ  are  not  foretold  by  Antichrist,  but  the  miracles  of  Antichrist  are  foretold  by 
Jesus  Christ.  And  so,  if  Jesus  Christ  were  not  the  Messiah,  He  would  have  indeed 
led  into  error.  When  Jesus  Christ  foretold  the  miracles  of  Antichrist,  did  He  think 
of  destroying  faith  in  His  own  miracles? 

!St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica. 

2"But  though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before  them,  yet  they  believed  not  on  him: 
that  the  saying  of  Esaias  the  prophet  might  be  fulfilled  .  .  .  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes.” 

3John  12.41.  "These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him.” 

4I  Cor.  1.22,23.  "For  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom:  but  we 
preach  Christ  crucified.” 

6"But  full  of  signs,  full  of  wisdom;  you  [the  Jesuits],  what  you  wish  is  a  Christ  not  crucified, 
a  religion  without  miracles  and  without  wisdom.” 

6. 10.26  "But  ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep.” 


SECTION  XIII  333 

Moses  foretold  Jesus  Christ  and  bade  to  follow  Him.  Jesus  Christ  foretold 
Antichrist  and  forbade  to  follow  him. 

It  was  impossible  that  in  the  time  of  Moses  men  should  keep  their  faith  for 
Antichrist,  who  was  unknown  to  them.  But  it  is  quite  easy,  in  the  time  of  Anti¬ 
christ,  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  already  known. 

There  is  no  reason  for  believing  in  Antichrist,  which  there  is  not  for  believing 
in  Jesus  Christ.  But  there  are  reasons  for  believing  in  Jesus  Christ,  which  there  are 
not  for  believing  in  the  other. 

827.  Judges  13.  23:  "If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  He  would  not  have 
shewed  us  all  these  things." 

Hezekiah,  Sennacherib. 

Jeremiah.  Hananiah,  the  false  prophet,  dies  in  seven  months. 

II  Macc.  3.  The  temple,  ready  for  pillage,  miraculously  succoured. — II  Macc. 

I  Kings  17.  The  widow  to  Elijah,  who  had  restored  her  son,  "By  this  I  know 
that  thy  words  are  true." 

I  Kings  18.  Elijah  with  the  prophets  of  Baal. 

In  the  dispute  concerning  the  true  God  and  the  truth  of  religion,  there  has 
never  happened  any  miracle  on  the  side  of  error,  and  not  of  truth. 

828.  Opposition. — Abel,  Cain;  Moses,  the  Magicians;  Elijah,  the  false  prophets: 
Jeremiah,  Hananiah;  Micaiah,  the  false  prophets;  Jesus  Christ,  the  Pharisees; 
Saint  Paul,  Bar-jesus;  the  Apostles,  the  Exorcists;  Christians,  unbelievers;  Catho¬ 
lics,  heretics;  Elijah,  Enoch,  Antichrist. 

829.  Jesus  Christ  says  that  the  Scriptures  testify  of  Him.  But  He  does  not  point 
out  in  what  respect. 

Even  the  prophecies  could  not  prove  Jesus  Christ  during  His  life;  and  so  men 
would  not  have  been  culpable  for  not  believing  in  Him  before  His  death  had  the 
miracles  not  sufficed  without  doctrine.  Now  those  who  did  not  believe  in  Him, 
when  He  was  still  alive,  were  sinners,  as  He  said  Himself,  and  without  excuse. 
Therefore  they  must  have  had  proof  beyond  doubt,  which  they  resisted.  Now, 
they  had  not  the  prophecies,  but  only  the  miracles.  Therefore  the  latter  suffice, 
when  the  doctrine  is  not  inconsistent  with  them;  and  they  ought  to  be  believed. 

John  7.  40.  Dispute  among  the  Jews  as  among  the  Christians  of  to-day.  Some  be¬ 
lieved  in  Jesus  Christ;  others  believed  Him  not,  because  of  the  prophecies  which 
said  that  He  should  be  born  in  Bethlehem.  They  should  have  considered  more 
carefully  whether  He  was  not.  For  His  miracles  being  convincing,  they  should 
have  been  quite  sure  of  these  supposed  contradictions  of  His  teaching  to  Scrip¬ 
ture;  and  this  obscurity  did  not  excuse,  but  blinded  them.  Thus  those  who  refuse 
to  believe  in  the  miracles  in  the  present  day  on  account  of  a  supposed  contradic¬ 
tion,  which  is  unreal,  are  not  excused. 

The  Pharisees  said  to  the  people,  who  believed  in  Him,  because  of  His  miracles: 
"This  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law  are  cursed.  But  have  any  of  the  rulers  or 
of  the  Pharisees  believed  in  him?  For  we  know  that  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no 
prophet."  Nicodemus  answered:  "Doth  our  law  judge  any  man  before  it  hear 
him,  [and  specially  such  a  man  who  works  such  miracles]"? 


PENSEES 


334 

830.  The  prophecies  were  ambiguous;  they  are  no  longer  so. 

831.  The  five  propositions  were  ambiguous;  they  are  no  longer  so. 

832.  Miracles  are  no  longer  necessary,  because  we  have  had  them  already.  But 
when  tradition  is  no  longer  minded;  when  the  Pope  alone  is  offered  to  us;  when 
he  has  been  imposed  upon;  and  when  the  true  source  of  truth,  which  is  tradition, 
is  thus  excluded;  and  the  Pope,  who  is  its  guardian,  is  biased;  the  truth  is  no 
longer  free  to  appear.  Then,  as  men  speak  no  longer  of  truth,  truth  itself  must 
speak  to  men.  This  is  what  happened  in  the  time  of  Arius.  (Miracles  under  Dio¬ 
cletian  and  under  Arius.) 

833.  Miracle. — The  people  concluded  this  of  themselves;  but  if  the  reason  of  it 
must  be  given  to  you  .  .  . 

It  is  unfortunate  to  be  in  exception  to  the  rule.  The  same  must  be  strict,  and 
opposed  to  exception.  But  yet,  as  it  is  certain  that  there  are  exceptions  to  a  rule, 
our  judgment  must  though  strict,  be  just. 

834.  John  6.  26:  Non  quia  vidisti  signum,  sed quia  saturati  estis.1 

Those  who  follow  Jesus  Christ  because  of  His  miracles  honour  His  power  in  all 
the  miracles  which  it  produces.  But  those  who,  making  profession  to  follow  Him 
because  of  His  miracles,  follow  Him  in  fact  only  because  He  comforts  them  and 
satisfies  them  with  worldly  blessings,  discredit  His  miracles,  when  they  are  op¬ 
posed  to  their  own  comforts. 

John  9:  Non  est  hie  homo  a  Deo ,  quia  sahbatum  non  custodit.  Alii:  Quomodo  potest 
homo  peccator  hcec  signa  facer e ?2 

Which  is  the  most  clear? 

This  house  is  not  of  God;  for  they  do  not  there  believe  that  the  five  proposi¬ 
tions  are  in  Jansenius.  Others:  This  house  is  of  God;  for  in  it  there  are  wrought 
strange  miracles. 

Which  is  the  most  clear? 

Tu  quid  dicis ?  Dico  quia  prop  beta  est.  Nisi  esset  hie  a  Deo,  non  poterat  face  re  quidquam .3 

835.  In  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  will  turn  you  from  God.  In  the  New, 
when  they  will  turn  you  from  Jesus  Christ.  These  are  the  occasions  for  excluding 
particular  miracles  from  belief.  No  others  need  be  excluded. 

Does  it,  therefore,  follow  that  they  would  have  the  right  to  exclude  all  the 
prophets  who  came  to  them?  No;  they  would  have  sinned  in  not  excluding  those 
who  denied  God,  and  would  have  sinned  in  excluding  those  who  did  not  deny  God. 

So  soon,  then,  as  we  see  a  miracle,  we  must  either  assent  to  it  or  have  striking 
proofs  to  the  contrary.  We  must  see  if  it  denies  a  God,  or  Jesus  Christ,  or  the 
Church. 

836.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  not  being  for  Jesus  Christ  and  saying 

^'Not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,  but  because  ye  .  .  .  were  filled.” 

2i6.  'This  man  is  not  of  God,  because  he  keepeth  not  the  Sabbath  day.  Others  said:  How 
can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such  miracles?” 

3John  9.17,33.  "What  sayest  thou  of  him?  He  said,  He  is  a  prophet.  If  this  man  were  not 
of  God,  he  could  do  nothing.” 


SECTION  XIII  335 

so,  and  not  being  for  Jesus  Christ  and  pretending  to  be  so.  The  one  party  can  do 
miracles,  not  the  others.  For  it  is  clear  of  the  one  party  that  they  are  opposed  to 
the  truth,  but  not  of  the  others;  and  thus  miracles  are  clearer. 

837.  That  we  must  love  one  God  only  is  a  thing  so  evident  that  it  does  not  re¬ 
quire  miracles  to  prove  it. 

838.  Jesus  Christ  performed  miracles,  then  the  apostles,  and  the  first  saints  in 
great  number;  because  the  prophecies  not  being  yet  accomplished,  but  in  the 
process  of  being  accomplished  by  them,  the  miracles  alone  bore  witness  to  them. 
It  was  foretold  that  the  Messiah  should  convert  the  nations.  How  could  this 
prophecy  be  fulfilled  without  the  conversion  of  the  nations?  And  how  could  the 
nations  be  converted  to  the  Messiah,  if  they  did  not  see  this  final  effect  of  the 
prophecies  which  prove  Him?  Therefore,  till  He  had  died,  risen  again,  and  con¬ 
verted  the  nations,  all  was  not  accomplished;  and  so  miracles  were  needed  during 
all  this  time.  Now  they  are  no  longer  needed  against  the  Jews;  for  the  accomplished 
prophecies  constitute  a  lasting  miracle. 

839.  "Though  ye  believe  not  Me,  believe  at  least  the  works."  He  refers  them, 
as  it  were,  to  the  strongest  proof. 

It  had  been  told  to  the  Jews,  as  well  as  to  Christians,  that  they  should  not  al¬ 
ways  believe  the  prophets;  but  yet  the  Pharisees  and  Scribes  are  greatly  concerned 
about  His  miracles  and  try  to  show  that  they  are  false,  or  wrought  by  the  devil. 
For  they  must  needs  be  convinced,  if  they  acknowledge  that  they  are  of  God. 

At  the  present  day  we  are  not  troubled  to  make  this  distinction.  Still  it  is  very 
easy  to  do:  those  who  deny  neither  God  nor  Jesus  Christ  do  no  miracles  which  are 
not  certain.  Nemo  facit  virtutem  in  nomine  meo ,  et  cito possit  de  me  male  loqui.1 

But  we  have  not  to  draw  this  distinction.  Here  is  a  sacred  relic.  Here  is  a  thorn 
from  the  crown  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  over  whom  the  prince  of  this  world 
has  no  power,  which  works  miracles  by  the  peculiar  power  of  the  blood  shed  for 
us.  Now  God  Himself  chooses  this  house  in  order  to  display  conspicuously 
therein  His  power. 

These  are  not  men  who  do  miracles  by  an  unknown  and  doubtful  virtue,  which 
makes  a  decision  difficult  for  us.  It  is  God  Himself.  It  is  the  instrument  of  the 
Passion  of  His  only  Son,  who,  being  in  many  places,  chooses  this,  and  makes 
men  come  from  all  quarters  there  to  receive  these  miraculous  alleviations  in  their 
weaknesses. 

840.  The  Church  has  three  kinds  of  enemies:  the  Jews,  who  have  never  been 
of  her  body;  the  heretics,  who  have  withdrawn  from  it;  and  the  evil  Christians, 
who  rend  her  from  within. 

These  three  kinds  of  different  adversaries  usually  attack  her  in  different  ways. 
But  here  they  attack  her  in  one  and  the  same  way.  As  they  are  all  without  miracles, 
and  as  the  Church  has  always  had  miracles  against  them,  they  have  all  had  the 
same  interest  in  evading  them;  and  they  all  make  use  of  this  excuse,  that  doctrine 
must  not  be  judged  by  miracles,  but  miracles  by  doctrine.  There  were  two  parties 

xMark  9.39.  Nemo  est  enim  quifaciat.  ' ‘There  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my  name, 
that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me.” 


33  6  PENSEES 

among  those  who  heard  Jesus  Christ:  those  who  followed  His  teaching  on  ac¬ 
count  of  His  miracles;  others  who  said  .  .  .  There  were  two  parties  in  the  time  of 
Calvin  .  .  .  There  are  now  the  Jesuits,  etc. 

841.  Miracles  furnish  the  test  in  matters  of  doubt,  between  Jews  and  heathens, 
Jews  and  Christians,  Catholics  and  heretics,  the  slandered  and  slanderers,  be¬ 
tween  the  two  crosses. 

But  miracles  would  be  useless  to  heretics;  for  the  Church,  authorised  by  mir¬ 
acles  which  have  already  obtained  belief,  tells  us  that  they  have  not  the  true  faith. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  not  in  it,  since  the  first  miracles  of  the  Church 
exclude  belief  of  theirs.  Thus  there  is  miracle  against  miracle,  both  the  first  and 
greatest  being  on  the  side  of  the  Church. 

These  nuns,  astonished  at  what  is  said — that  they  are  in  the  way  of  perdition; 
that  their  confessors  are  leading  them  to  Geneva;  that  they  suggest  to  them  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  in  the  Eucharist,  nor  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father — know 
that  all  this  is  false  and,  therefore,  offer  themselves  to  God  in  this  state.  Vide  si  via 
iniquitatis  in  me  est }  What  happens  thereupon?  This  place,  which  is  said  to  be  the 
temple  of  the  devil,  God  makes  His  own  temple.  It  is  said  that  the  children  must 
be  taken  away  from  it.  God  heals  them  there.  It  is  said  that  it  is  the  arsenal  of  hell. 
God  makes  of  it  the  sanctuary  of  His  grace.  Lastly,  they  are  threatened  with  all 
the  fury  and  vengeance  of  heaven;  and  God  overwhelms  them  with  favours.  A 
man  would  need  to  have  lost  his  senses  to  conclude  from  this  that  they  are  there¬ 
fore  in  the  way  of  perdition. 

(We  have  without  doubt  the  same  signs  as  Saint  Athanasius.) 

842.  Si  tu  es  Christus ,  die  nobis} 

Opera  qua  ego  facio  in  nomine  patris  mei ,  hac  testimonium  perhibent  de  me.  Sed  vos  non 
creditis  quia  non  estis  ex  ovibus  meis.  Oves  me  a  vocem  meam  audiunt .3 

John  6.  30.  Quod  ergo  tu  facis  signum  ut  videamus  et  credamus  tibi?  ( Non  dicunt: 
Quam  doctrinam  pradicas ?)4 

Nemo  potest  facere  signa  qua  tu  facis  nisi  Deus.b 

II  Macc.  14.  15.  Deus  qui si gnis  evidentibus suam portionem protegit} 

Volumus  signum  videre  de  ccelo ,  tentantes  eum?  Luke  1 1.  16. 

Generatio  prava  signum  quarit;  et  non  dabitur } 

Et  ingemiscens  ait:  Quid  generatio  ista  signum  quarit ?9  (Mark  8. 12.)  They  asked 
a  sign  with  an  evil  intention. 

Et  non  poterat  facere .10  And  yet  he  promises  them  the  sign  of  Jonah,  the  great  and 
wonderful  miracle  of  his  resurrection. 

JPs.  138.24.  "And  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me." 

2Luke  22.66.  "Art  thou  the  Christ?  tell  us." 

3John  5.36.  "The  works  which  the  father  hath  given  me  to  finish  .  .  .  bear  witness  of  me." 
John  10.26-27.  "But  ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep . . .  My  sheep  hear  my  voice." 

4"What  sign  shewest  thou  then,  that  we  may  see,  and  believe  thee.  (They  do  not  say:  What 
doctrine  do  you  preach?)" 

John  3.2.  "No  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him." 

6"The  Lord,  making  manifest  his  presence,  upholdeth  them  that  are  his  own  portion." 

7"And  others,  tempting  him,  sought  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven." 

8Matt.  12.39.  "An  evil  generation  seeketh  after  a  sign;  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it." 

9"And  he  sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit,  and  saith,  why  doth  this  generation  seek  after  a  sign?" 

10Mark  6.5.  "And  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work." 


SECTION  XIII  337 

Nisi  videritis ,  non  creditis }  He  does  not  blame  them  for  not  believing  unless 
there  are  miracles,  but  for  not  believing  unless  they  are  themselves  spectators  of 
them. 

Antichrist  in  signis  mendacibusp  says  Saint  Paul,  II  Thess.  2. 

Secundum  operationem  Satance ,  in  seductione  Us  qui pereunt  eo  quod  charitatem  veritatis 
non  receperunt  ut  salvi  fie  rent,  ideo  mittet  illis  Deus  optationes  erroris  ut  credant  mendacioP 

As  in  the  passage  of  Moses:  Tentat  enim  vos  Deus ,  utrum  diligatis  eumP 

Ecce prcedixi  vobis :  vos  ergo  videteP 

843.  Here  is  not  the  country  of  truth.  She  wanders  unknown  amongst  men. 
God  has  covered  her  with  a  veil,  which  leaves  her  unrecognised  by  those  who  do 
not  hear  her  voice.  Room  is  opened  for  blasphemy,  even  against  the  truths  that 
are  at  least  very  likely.  If  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  are  published,  the  contrary  is 
published  too,  and  the  questions  are  obscured,  so  that  the  people  cannot  dis¬ 
tinguish.  And  they  ask,  "What  have  you  to  make  you  believed  rather  than  others? 
What  sign  do  you  give?  You  have  only  words,  and  so  have  we.  If  you  had  miracles, 
good  and  well."  That  doctrine  ought  to  be  supported  by  miracles  is  a  truth, 
which  they  misuse  in  order  to  revile  doctrine.  And  if  miracles  happen,  it  is  said 
that  miracles  are  not  enough  without  doctrine;  and  this  is  another  truth,  which 
they  misuse  in  order  to  revile  miracles. 

Jesus  Christ  cured  the  man  born  blind  and  performed  a  number  of  miracles  on 
the  Sabbath  day.  In  this  way  He  blinded  the  Pharisees,  who  said  that  miracles 
must  be  judged  by  doctrine. 

"We  have  Moses:  but,  as  for  this  fellow,  we  know  not  from  whence  he  is."  It  is 
wonderful  that  you  know  not  whence  He  is,  and  yet  He  does  such  miracles. 

Jesus  Christ  spoke  neither  against  God,  nor  against  Moses. 

Antichrist  and  the  false  prophets,  foretold  by  both  Testaments,  will  speak 
openly  against  God  and  against  Jesus  Christ.  Who  is  not  hidden  .  .  .  God  would 
not  allow  him,  who  would  be  a  secret  enemy,  to  do  miracles  openly. 

In  a  public  dispute  where  the  two  parties  profess  to  be  for  God,  for  Jesus  Christ, 
for  the  Church,  miracles  have  never  been  on  the  side  of  the  false  Christians,  and 
the  other  side  has  never  been  without  a  miracle. 

"He  hath  a  devil."  John  10.  21.  And  others  said,  "Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of 
the  blind?" 

The  proofs  which  Jesus  Christ  and  the  apostles  draw  from  Scripture  are  not 
conclusive;  for  they  say  only  that  Moses  foretold  that  a  prophet  should  come. 
But  they  do  not  thereby  prove  that  this  is  He;  and  that  is  the  whole  question. 
These  passages,  therefore,  serve  only  to  show  that  they  are  not  contrary  to  Scrip¬ 
ture  and  that  there  appears  no  inconsistency,  but  not  that  there  is  agreement. 
Now  this  is  enough,  namely,  exclusion  of  inconsistency,  along  with  miracles. 

^John  4.48.  "Except  ye  see  .  .  .  ye  will  not  believe." 

29.  "In  signs  and  lying  wonders." 

3IIThess.  2.9- 1 1  "After  the  working  of  Satan  .  .  .  and  with  all  deceivableness  of  unright¬ 
eousness  in  them  that  perish,  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might 
be  saved.  And  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe 
a  lie.” 

4Deut.  13.3  "for  the  Lord  your  God  proveth  you,  to  know  whether  ye  love  the  Lord." 

5Matt.  24.25-26.  "Behold,  I  have  told  you  before.  Wherefore  if  they  shall  say  unto  you, 
Behold." 


PENSEES 


338 

There  is  a  mutual  duty  between  God  and  men.  We  must  pardon  Him  this  say¬ 
ing:  Quid  debut?1  "  Accuse  me,”  said  God  in  Isaiah. 

"God  must  fulfil  His  promises,”  etc. 

Men  owe  it  to  God  to  accept  the  religion  which  He  sends.  God  owes  it  to  men 
not  to  lead  them  into  error.  Now,  they  would  be  led  into  error,  if  the  workers  of 
miracles  announced  a  doctrine  which  should  not  appear  evidently  false  to  the 
light  of  common  sense,  and  if  a  greater  worker  of  miracles  had  not  already  warned 
men  not  to  believe  them. 

Thus,  if  there  were  divisions  in  the  Church,  and  the  Arians,  for  example,  who 
declared  themselves  founded  on  Scripture  just  as  the  Catholics,  had  done  miracles, 
and  not  the  Catholics,  men  should  have  been  led  into  error. 

For,  as  a  man,  who  announces  to  us  the  secrets  of  God,  is  not  worthy  to  be  be¬ 
lieved  on  his  private  authority,  and  that  is  why  the  ungodly  doubt  him;  so  when 
a  man,  as  a  token  of  the  communion  which  he  has  with  God,  raises  the  dead,  fore¬ 
tells  the  future,  removes  the  seas,  heals  the  sick,  there  is  none  so  wicked  as  not  to 
bow  to  him,  and  the  incredulity  of  Pharaoh  and  the  Pharisees  is  the  effect  of  a 
supernatural  obduracy. 

When,  therefore,  we  see  miracles  and  a  doctrine  not  suspicious,  both  on  one 
side,  there  is  no  difficulty.  But  when  we  see  miracles  and  suspicious  doctrine  on 
the  same  side,  we  must  then  see  which  is  the  clearest.  Jesus  Christ  was  suspected. 

Bar-jesus  blinded.  The  power  of  God  surpasses  that  of  His  enemies. 

The  Jewish  exorcists  beaten  by  the  devils,  saying,  "Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul  I 
know;  but  who  are  ye”? 

Miracles  are  for  doctrine,  and  not  doctrine  for  miracles. 

If  the  miracles  are  true,  shall  we  be  able  to  persuade  men  of  all  doctrine?  No; 
for  this  will  not  come  to  pass.  Si  angelus  .  .  .2 

Rule:  we  must  judge  of  doctrine  by  miracles;  we  must  judge  of  miracles  by 
doctrine.  All  this  is  true,  but  contains  no  contradiction. 

For  we  must  distinguish  the  times. 

How  glad  you  are  to  know  the  general  rules,  thinking  thereby  to  set  up  dis¬ 
sension  and  render  all  useless!  We  shall  prevent  you,  my  father;  truth  is  one  and 
constant. 

It  is  impossible,  from  the  duty  of  God  to  men,  that  a  man,  hiding  his  evil 
teaching,  and  only  showing  the  good,  saying  that  he  conforms  to  God  and  the 
Church,  should  do  miracles  so  as  to  instil  insensibly  a  false  and  subtle  doctrine. 
This  cannot  happen. 

And  still  less  that  God,  who  knows  the  heart  should  perform  miracles  in  favour 
of  such  a  one. 

844.  The  three  marks  of  religion:  perpetuity,  a  good  life,  miracles.  They  destroy 
perpetuity  by  their  doctrine  of  probability;  a  good  life  by  their  morals,  miracles 
by  destroying  either  their  truth  or  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them. 

If  we  believe  them,  the  Church  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  perpetuity,  holi¬ 
ness,  and  miracles.  The  heretics  deny  them,  or  deny  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn 
from  them;  they  do  the  same.  But  one  would  need  to  have  no  sincerity  in  order 

1Is.  5.4.  Quis  est  quod  debut  ultra  facere  vinece  mece,  et  non  fact  ei?  "What  could  have  been  done 
more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done  in  it?” 

2Gal.i.8.  "But  though  an  angel.” 


SECTION  XIII 


339 

to  deny  them,  or  again  to  lose  one's  senses  in  order  to  deny  the  conclusions  to 
be  drawn  from  them. 

Nobody  has  ever  suffered  martyrdom  for  the  miracles  which  he  says  he  has 
seen;  for  the  folly  of  men  goes  perhaps  to  the  length  of  martyrdom,  for  those 
which  the  Turks  believe  by  tradition,  but  not  for  those  which  they  have  seen. 

845.  The  heretics  have  always  attacked  these  three  marks,  which  they  have  not. 

846.  First  objection:  “An  angel  from  heaven.  We  must  not  judge  of  truth  by 
miracles,  but  of  miracles  by  truth.  Therefore  the  miracles  are  useless.” 

Now  they  are  of  use,  and  they  must  not  be  in  opposition  to  the  truth.  There¬ 
fore  what  Father  Lingende  has  said  that  "God  will  not  permit  that  a  miracle  may 
lead  into  error  ...” 

When  there  shall  be  a  controversy  in  the  same  Church,  miracle  will  decide. 

Second  objection:  "But  Antichrist  will  do  miracles.” 

The  magicians  of  Pharaoh  did  not  entice  to  error.  Thus  we  cannot  say  to  Jesus 
respecting  Antichrist,  "You  have  led  me  into  error.”  For  Antichrist  will  do  them 
against  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  they  cannot  lead  into  error.  Either  God  will  not  per¬ 
mit  false  miracles,  or  He  will  procure  greater. 

[Jesus  Christ  has  existed  since  the  beginning  of  the  world:  this  is  more  impres¬ 
sive  than  all  the  miracles  of  Antichrist.] 

If  in  the  same  Church  there  should  happen  a  miracle  on  the  side  of  those  in 
error,  men  would  be  led  into  error.  Schism  is  visible;  a  miracle  is  visible.  But 
schism  is  more  a  sign  of  error  than  a  miracle  is  a  sign  of  truth.  Therefore  a  miracle 
cannot  lead  into  error. 

But,  apart  from  schism,  error  is  not  so  obvious  as  a  miracle  is  obvious.  There¬ 
fore  a  miracle  could  lead  into  error. 

Ubi  est  Deus  tuns?1  Miracles  show  Him,  and  are  a  light. 

847.  One  of  the  anthems  for  Vespers  at  Christmas:  Exortum  est  in  tenebris  lumen 
rectis  corde .2 

848.  If  the  compassion  of  God  is  so  great  that  He  instructs  us  to  our  benefit, 
even  when  He  hides  Himself,  what  light  ought  we  not  to  expect  from  Him  when 
He  reveals  Himself? 

849.  Will  Est  et  non  est.3  be  received  in  faith  itself  as  well  as  in  miracles?  And  if  it 
is  inseparable  in  the  others  .  .  . 

When  Saint  Xavier  works  miracles.  [Saint  Hilary.  "Ye  wretches,  who  oblige  us 
to  speak  of  miracles.”] 

Unjust  judges,  make  not  your  own  laws  on  the  moment;  judge  by  those  which 
are  established,  and  by  yourselves.  V<x  qui  conditis  leges  iniquas .4 

Miracles  endless,  false. 

In  order  to  weaken  your  adversaries,  you  disarm  the  whole  Church. 

Ts.  41.4.  "Where  is  thy  God?" 

2Ps.  1 1 1.4.  "Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness." 

3"The^j  and  the  no ." 

4Js.  10. 1.  "Woe  unto  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees." 


PENSEES 


340 

If  they  say  that  our  salvation  depends  upon  God,  they  are  "heretics.”  If  they  say 
that  they  are  obedient  to  the  Pope,  that  is  "hypocrisy.”  If  they  are  ready  to  sub¬ 
scribe  to  all  the  articles,  that  is  not  enough.  Iftheysaythata  man  must  not  be  killed 
for  an  apple,  "they  attack  the  morality  of  Catholics.”  If  miracles  are  done  among 
them,  it  is  not  a  sign  of  holiness,  and  is,  on  the  contrary  a  symptom  of  heresy. 

This  way  in  which  the  Church  has  existed  is  that  truth  has  been  without  dispute, 
or,  if  it  has  been  contested,  there  has  been  the  Pope,  or,  failing  him,  there  has  been 
the  Church. 

850.  The  five  propositions  condemned,  but  no  miracle;  for  the  truth  was  not 
attacked.  But  the  Sorbonne  .  .  .  but  the  bull  .  .  . 

It  is  impossible  that  those  who  love  God  with  all  their  heart  should  fail  to 
recognise  the  Church;  so  evident  is  she.  It  is  impossible  that  those  who  do  not 
love  God  should  be  convinced  of  the  Church. 

Miracles  have  such  influence  that  it  was  necessary  that  God  should  warn  men 
not  to  believe  in  them  in  opposition  to  Him,  all  clear  as  it  is  that  there  is  a  God. 
Without  this  they  would  have  been  able  to  disturb  men. 

And  thus  so  far  from  these  passages,  Deut.  13,  making  against  the  authority 
of  the  miracles,  nothing  more  indicates  their  influence.  And  the  same  in  respect 
of  Antichrist.  "To  seduce,  if  it  were  possible,  even  the  elect.” 

851.  The  history  of  the  man  born  blind. 

What  says  Saint  Paul?  Does  he  continually  speak  of  the  evidence  of  the  proph¬ 
ecies?  No,  but  of  his  own  miracle.  What  says  Jesus  Christ?  Does  He  speak  of 
the  evidence  of  the  prophecies?  No;  His  death  had  not  fulfilled  them.  But  he 
says,  Si  non  fecissem }  Believe  the  works. 

Two  supernatural  foundations  of  our  wholly  supernatural  religion;  one  visible, 
the  other  invisible;  miracles  with  grace,  miracles  without  grace. 

The  synagogue,  which  had  been  treated  with  love  as  a  type  of  the  Church,  and 
with  hatred,  because  it  was  only  the  type,  has  been  restored,  being  on  the  point  of 
falling  when  it  was  well  with  God,  and  thus  a  type. 

Miracles  prove  the  power  which  God  has  over  hearts,  by  that  which  He  exer¬ 
cises  over  bodies. 

The  Church  has  never  approved  a  miracle  among  heretics. 

Miracles  a  support  of  religion:  they  have  been  the  test  of  Jews;  they  have  been 
the  test  of  Christians,  saints,  innocents,  and  true  believers. 

A  miracle  among  schismatics  is  not  so  much  to  be  feared;  for  schism,  which  is 
more  obvious  than  a  miracle,  visibly  indicates  their  error.  But,  when  there  is  no 
schism  and  error  is  in  question,  miracle  decides. 

Si  non  fecissem  quce  alius  non  fecit.2  The  wretches  who  have  obliged  us  to  speak  of 
miracles. 

Abraham  and  Gideon  confirm  faith  by  miracles. 

Judith.  God  speaks  at  last  in  their  greatest  oppression. 

If  the  cooling  of  love  leaves  the  Church  almost  without  believers,  miracles  will 
rouse  them.  This  is  one  of  the  last  effects  of  grace. 

If  one  miracle  were  wrought  among  the  Jesuits! 

^ohn  15.24.  "If  he  had  not  done." 

2John  15.24.  "If  he  had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which  none  other  man  did." 


SECTION  XIII  341 

When  a  miracle  disappoints  the  expectation  of  those  in  whose  presence  it  hap¬ 
pens,  and  there  is  a  disproportion  between  the  state  of  their  faith  and  the  instru¬ 
ment  of  the  miracle,  it  ought  then  to  induce  them  to  change.  But  with  you  it  is 
otherwise.  There  would  be  as  much  reason  in  saying  that,  if  the  Eucharist  raised  a 
dead  man,  it  would  be  necessary  for  one  to  turn  a  Calvinist  rather  than  remain  a 
Catholic.  But  when  it  crowns  the  expectation,  and  those,  who  hoped  that  God 
would  bless  the  remedies,  see  themselves  healed  without  remedies  .  .  . 

The  ungodly. — No  sign  has  ever  happened  on  the  part  of  the  devil  without  a 
stronger  sign  on  the  part  of  God,  or  even  without  it  having  been  foretold  that 
such  would  happen. 

852.  Unjust  persecutors  of  those  whom  God  visibly  protects.  If  they  reproach 
you  with  your  excesses,  "they  speak  as  the  heretics."  If  they  say  that  the  grace  of 
Jesus  Christ  distinguishes  us,  "they  are  heretics."  If  they  do  miracles,  "it  is  the 
mark  of  their  heresy.” 

Ezekiel.  They  say:  These  are  the  people  of  God  who  speak  thus. 

It  is  said,  "Believe  in  the  Church";  but  it  is  not  said,  "Believe  in  miracles";  be¬ 
cause  the  last  is  natural,  and  not  the  first.  The  one  had  need  of  a  precept,  not  the 
other.  Hezekiah. 

The  synagogue  was  only  a  type,  and  thus  it  did  not  perish;  and  it  was  only  a 
type,  and  so  it  is  decayed.  It  was  a  type  which  contained  the  truth,  and  thus  it  has 
lasted  until  it  no  longer  contained  the  truth. 

My  reverend  father,  all  this  happened  in  types.  Other  religions  perish;  this  one 
perishes  not. 

Miracles  are  more  important  than  you  think.  They  have  served  for  the  founda¬ 
tion,  and  will  serve  for  the  continuation  of  the  Church  till  Antichrist,  till  the  end. 

The  two  witnesses. 

In  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,  miracles  are  performed  in  connection  with 
types.  Salvation,  or  a  useless  thing,  if  not  to  show  that  we  must  submit  to  the 
Scriptures:  type  of  the  sacrament. 

853.  [We  must  judge  soberly  of  divine  ordinances,  my  father.  Saint  Paul  in  the 
isle  of  Malta.] 

854.  The  hardness  of  the  Jesuits,  then,  surpasses  that  of  the  Jews,  since  those 
refused  to  believe  Jesus  Christ  innocent  only  because  they  doubted  if  His  miracles 
were  of  God.  Whereas  the  Jesuits,  though  unable  to  doubt  that  the  miracles  of 
Port-Royal  are  of  God,  do  not  cease  to  doubt  still  the  innocence  of  that  house. 

855.  I  suppose  that  men  believe  miracles.  You  corrupt  religion  either  in  favour 
of  your  friends  or  against  your  enemies.  You  arrange  it  at  your  will. 

856.  On  the  miracle. — As  God  has  made  no  family  more  happy,  let  it  also  be  the 
case  that  He  find  none  more  thankful. 


342 


PENSEES 


SECTION  XIV 

APPENDIX:  POLEMICAL  FRAGMENTS 

857.  Clearness ,  obscurity. — There  would  be  too  great  darkness,  if  truth  had  not 
visible  signs.  This  is  a  wonderful  one,  that  it  has  always  been  preserved  in  one 
Church  and  one  visible  assembly  [of  men].  There  would  be  too  great  clearness,  if 
there  were  only  one  opinion  in  this  Church.  But  in  order  to  recognise  what  is 
true,  one  has  only  to  look  at  what  has  always  existed;  for  it  is  certain  that  truth 
has  always  existed,  and  that  nothing  false  has  always  existed. 

858.  The  history  of  the  Church  ought  properly  to  be  called  the  history  of  truth. 

859.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  being  in  a  ship  beaten  about  by  a  storm,  when  we 
are  sure  that  it  will  not  founder.  The  persecutions  which  harass  the  Church  are  of 
this  nature. 

860.  In  addition  to  so  many  other  signs  of  piety,  they  are  also  persecuted,  which 
is  the  best  sign  of  piety. 

861.  The  Church  is  in  an  excellent  state  when  it  is  sustained  by  God  only. 

862.  The  Church  has  always  been  attacked  by  opposite  errors,  but  perhaps 
never  at  the  same  time,  as  now.  And  if  she  suffer  more  because  of  the  multiplicity 
of  errors,  she  derives  this  advantage  from  it,  that  they  destroy  each  other. 

She  complains  of  both,  but  far  more  of  the  Calvinists,  because  of  the  schism. 

It  is  certain  that  many  of  the  two  opposite  sects  are  deceived.  They  must  be 
disillusioned. 

Faith  embraces  many  truths  which  seem  to  contradict  each  other.  There  is  a  time 
to  laugh ,  and  a  time  to  weep ,  etc.  Responde.  Ne  respondeas}  etc. 

The  source  of  this  is  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  also  the 
two  worlds  (the  creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth;  a  new  life  and  a  new 
death;  all  things  double,  and  the  same  names  remaining);  and  finally  the  two  na¬ 
tures  that  are  in  the  righteous  (for  they  are  the  two  worlds,  and  a  member  and 
image  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  thus  all  the  names  suit  them:  righteous,  yet  sinners; 
dead,  yet  living;  living,  yet  dead;  elect,  yet  outcast,  etc.). 

There  are  then  a  great  number  of  truths,  both  of  faith  and  of  morality,  which 
seem  contradictory  and  which  all  hold  good  together  in  a  wonderful  system.  The 
source  of  all  heresies  is  the  exclusion  of  some  of  these  truths;  and  the  source  of  all 
the  objections  which  the  heretics  make  against  us  is  the  ignorance  of  some  of  our 
truths.  And  it  generally  happens  that,  unable  to  conceive  the  connection  of  two 
opposite  truths,  and  believing  that  the  admission  of  one  involves  the  exclusion 
of  the  other,  they  adhere  to  the  one,  exclude  the  other,  and  think  of  us  as  op¬ 
posed  to  them.  Now  exclusion  is  the  cause  of  their  heresy;  and  ignorance  that  we 
hold  the  other  truth  causes  their  objections. 

^rov.  26.4-5.  "Answer .  .  .  Answer  not.” 


SECTION  XIV  343 

i st  example:  Jesus  Christ  is  God  and  man.  The  Arians,  unable  to  reconcile 
these  things,  which  they  believe  incompatible,  say  that  He  is  man;  in  this  they 
are  Catholics.  But  they  deny  that  He  is  God;  in  this  they  are  heretics.  They  allege 
that  we  deny  His  humanity;  in  this  they  are  ignorant. 

2nd  example:  On  the  subject  of  the  Holy  Sacrament.  We  believe  that,  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  bread  being  changed,  and  being  consubstantial  with  that  of  the  body 
of  our  Lord,  Jesus  Christ  is  therein  really  present.  That  is  one  truth.  Another  is 
that  this  Sacrament  is  also  a  type  of  the  cross  and  of  glory,  and  a  commemoration 
of  the  two.  That  is  the  Catholic  faith,  which  comprehends  these  two  truths  which 
seem  opposed. 

The  heresy  of  to-day,  not  conceiving  that  this  Sacrament  contains  at  the  same 
time  both  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  and  a  type  of  Him,  and  that  it  is  a  sacrifice 
and  a  commemoration  of  a  sacrifice,  believes  that  neither  of  these  truths  can  be 
admitted  without  excluding  the  other  for  this  reason. 

They  fasten  to  this  point  alone,  that  this  Sacrament  is  typical;  and  in  this  they 
are  not  heretics.  They  think  that  we  exclude  this  truth;  hence  it  comes  that  they 
raise  so  many  objections  to  us  out  of  the  passages  of  the  Fathers  which  assert  it. 
Finally,  they  deny  the  presence;  and  in  this  they  are  heretics. 

3rd  example:  Indulgences. 

The  shortest  way,  therefore,  to  prevent  heresies  is  to  instruct  in  all  truths;  and 
the  surest  way  to  refute  them  is  to  declare  them  all.  For  what  will  the  heretics  say? 

In  order  to  know  whether  an  opinion  is  a  Father’s  .  .  . 

863.  All  err  the  more  dangerously,  as  they  each  follow  a  truth.  Their  fault  is  not 
in  following  a  falsehood,  but  in  not  following  another  truth. 

864.  Truth  is  so  obscure  in  these  times,  and  falsehood  so  established,  that,  un¬ 
less  we  love  the  truth,  we  cannot  know  it. 

865.  If  there  is  ever  a  time  in  which  we  must  make  profession  of  two  opposite 
truths,  it  is  when  we  are  reproached  for  omitting  one.  Therefore  the  Jesuits  and 
Jansenists  are  wrong  in  concealing  them,  but  the  Jansenists  more  so,  for  the 
Jesuits  have  better  made  profession  of  the  two. 

866.  Two  kinds  of  people  make  things  equal  to  one  another,  as  feasts  to  work¬ 
ing  days,  Christians  to  priests,  all  things  among  them,  etc.  And  hence  the  one 
party  conclude  that  what  is  then  bad  for  priests  is  also  so  for  Christians,  and  the 
other  that  what  is  not  bad  for  Christians  is  lawful  for  priests. 

867.  If  the  ancient  Church  was  in  error,  the  Church  is  fallen.  If  she  should  be  in 
error  to-day,  it  is  not  the  same  thing;  for  she  has  always  the  superior  maxim  of 
tradition  from  the  hand  of  the  ancient  Church;  and  so  this  submission  and  this 
conformity  to  the  ancient  Church  prevail  and  correct  all.  But  the  ancient  Church 
did  not  assume  the  future  Church  and  did  not  consider  her,  as  we  assume  and 
consider  the  ancient. 

868.  That  which  hinders  us  in  comparing  what  formerly  occurred  in  the  Church 
with  what  we  see  there  now  is  that  we  generally  look  upon  Saint  Athanasius, 


344  PENSEES 

Saint  Theresa,  and  the  rest,  as  crowned  with  glory  and  acting  towards  us  as  gods. 
Now  that  time  has  cleared  up  things,  it  does  so  appear.  But  at  the  time  when  he 
was  persecuted,  this  great  saint  was  a  man  called  Athanasius;  and  Saint  Theresa 
was  a  nun.  "Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we  are,"  says  Saint  James, 
to  disabuse  Christians  of  that  false  idea  which  makes  us  reject  the  example  of  the 
saints  as  disproportioned  to  our  state.  "They  were  saints,"  say  we,  "they  are  not 
like  us."  What  then  actually  happened?  Saint  Athanasius  was  a  man  called 
Athanasius,  accused  of  many  crimes,  condemned  by  such  and  such  a  council  for 
such  and  such  a  crime.  All  the  bishops  assented  to  it,  and  finally  the  Pope.  What 
said  they  to  those  who  opposed  this?  That  they  disturbed  the  peace,  that  they 
created  schism,  etc. 

Zeal,  light.  Four  kinds  of  persons:  zeal  without  knowledge;  knowledge  with¬ 
out  zeal;  neither  knowledge  nor  zeal;  both  zeal  and  knowledge.  The  first  three 
condemned  him.  The  last  acquitted  him,  were  excommunicated  by  the  Church 
and  yet  saved  the  Church. 

869.  If  Saint  Augustine  came  at  the  present  time  and  was  as  little  authorised  as 
his  defenders,  he  would  accomplish  nothing.  God  directs  His  Church  well,  by 
having  sent  him  before  with  authority. 

870.  God  has  not  wanted  to  absolve  without  the  Church.  As  she  has  part  in  the 
offence,  He  desires  her  to  have  part  in  the  pardon.  He  associates  her  with  this 
power,  as  kings  their  parliaments.  But  if  she  absolves  or  binds  without  God,  she 
is  no  longer  the  Church.  For,  as  in  the  case  of  parliament,  even  if  the  king  have 
pardoned  a  man,  it  must  be  ratified;  but  if  parliament  ratifies  without  the  king,  or 
refuses  to  ratify  on  the  order  of  the  king,  it  is  no  longer  the  parliament  of  the  king, 
but  a  rebellious  assembly. 

871.  The  Church ,  the  Pope .  Unity ,  plurality. — Considering  the  Church  as  a  unity, 
the  Pope,  who  is  its  head,  is  as  the  whole.  Considering  it  as  a  plurality,  the  Pope 
is  only  a  part  of  it.  The  Fathers  have  considered  the  Church  now  in  the  one  way, 
now  in  the  other.  And  thus  they  have  spoken  differently  of  the  Pope.  (Saint 
Cyprian:  Sacerdos  Dei.)1  But  in  establishing  one  of  these  truths,  they  have  not 
excluded  the  other.  Plurality  which  is  not  reduced  to  unity  is  confusion;  unity 
which  does  not  depend  on  plurality  is  tyranny.  There  is  scarcely  any  other  country 
than  France  in  which  it  is  permissible  to  say  that  the  Council  is  above  the  Pope. 

872.  The  Pope  is  head.  Who  else  is  known  of  all?  Who  else  is  recognised  by  all, 
having  power  to  insinuate  himself  into  all  the  body,  because  he  holds  the  princi¬ 
pal  shoot,  which  insinuates  itself  everywhere?  How  easy  it  was  to  make  this  de¬ 
generate  into  tyranny!  That  is  why  Christ  has  laid  down  for  them  this  precept: 
Vos  autem  non  sic.2 

873.  The  Pope  hates  and  fears  the  learned,  who  do  not  submit  to  him  at  will. 

874.  We  must  not  judge  of  what  the  Pope  is  by  some  words  of  the  Fathers — as 

epistle  63.  "Priest  of  the  Lord." 

2Luke  22.26.  "But  ye  shall  not  be  so." 


SECTION  XIV  345 

the  Greeks  said  in  a  council,  important  rules — but  by  the  acts  of  the  Church  and 
the  Fathers,  and  by  the  canons. 

Duo 1  aut  tres.2  In  unum.  Unity  and  plurality.  It  is  an  error  to  exclude  one  of  the 
two,  as  the  papists  do  who  exclude  plurality,  or  the  Huguenots  who  exclude  unity. 

875.  Would  the  Pope  be  dishonoured  by  having  his  knowledge  from  God 
and  tradition;  and  is  it  not  dishonouring  him  to  separate  him  from  this  holy  union? 

876.  God  does  not  perform  miracles  in  the  ordinary  conduct  of  His  Church.  It 
would  be  a  strange  miracle  if  infallibility  existed  in  one  man.  But  it  appears  so 
natural  for  it  to  reside  in  a  multitude,  since  the  conduct  of  God  is  hidden  under 
nature,  as  in  all  His  other  works. 

877.  Kings  dispose  of  their  own  power;  but  the  Popes  cannot  dispose  of  theirs. 

878.  Summum jus,  summa  injuria? 

The  majority  is  the  best  way,  because  it  is  visible  and  has  strength  to  make  it¬ 
self  obeyed.  Yet  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  least  able. 

If  men  could  have  done  it,  they  would  have  placed  might  in  the  hands  of  jus¬ 
tice.  But  as  might  does  not  allow  itself  to  be  managed  as  men  want,  because  it  is  a 
palpable  quality,  whereas  justice  is  a  spiritual  quality  of  which  men  dispose  as 
they  please,  they  have  placed  justice  in  the  hands  of  might.  And  thus  that  is  called 
just  which  men  are  forced  to  obey. 

Hence  comes  the  right  of  the  sword,  for  the  sword  gives  a  true  right.  Other¬ 
wise  we  should  see  violence  on  one  side  and  justice  on  the  other  (end  of  the  twelfth 
Provincial  Letter).  Hence  comes  the  injustice  of  the  Fronde,  which  raises  its  alleged 
justice  against  power.  It  is  not  the  same  in  the  Church,  for  there  is  a  true  justice 
and  no  violence. 

879.  Injustice. — -Jurisdiction  is  not  given  for  the  sake  of  the  judge,  but  for  that 
of  the  litigant.  It  is  dangerous  to  tell  this  to  the  people.  But  the  people  have  too 
much  faith  in  you;  it  will  not  harm  them  and  may  serve  you.  It  should,  therefore, 
be  made  known.  Pasce  oves  meas ,  not  tuas?  You  owe  me  pasturage. 

880.  Men  like  certainty.  They  like  the  Pope  to  be  infallible  in  faith,  and  grave 
doctors  to  be  infallible  in  morals,  so  as  to  have  certainty. 

881.  The  Church  teaches,  and  God  inspires,  both  infallibly.  The  work  of  the 
Church  is  of  use  only  as  a  preparation  for  grace  or  condemnation.  What  it  does  is 
enough  for  condemnation,  not  for  inspiration. 

882.  Every  time  the  Jesuits  may  impose  upon  the  Pope,  they  will  make  all 
Christendom  perjured. 

^ohn  10.30.  "I  and  my  father  are  one." 

2I  John  5.7.  "And  these  three  agree  in  one." 

3"The  strictest  law  is  the  greatest  injustice."  Terrence,  Heauton  Timorumenus ,  iv.5.47;  and 
Cicero,  De  officiis ,  i.10. 

4John  21.17  'Teed  my  sheep."  Not  "yours." 


346  PENSEES 

The  Pope  is  very  easily  imposed  upon,  because  of  his  occupations,  and  the 
confidence  which  he  has  in  the  Jesuits;  and  the  Jesuits  are  very  capable  of  impos¬ 
ing  upon  him  by  means  of  calumny. 

883.  The  wretches  who  have  obliged  me  to  speak  of  the  basis  of  religion. 

884.  Sinners  purified  without  penitence;  the  righteous  justified  without  love; 
all  Christians  without  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ;  God  without  power  over  the  will 
of  men;  a  predestination  without  mystery;  a  redemption  without  certitude! 

885.  Any  one  is  made  a  priest,  who  wants  to  be  so,  as  under  Jeroboam. 

It  is  a  horrible  thing  that  they  propound  to  us  the  discipline  of  the  Church  of 
to-day  as  so  good  that  it  is  made  a  crime  to  desire  to  change  it.  Formerly  it  was 
infallibly  good,  and  it  was  thought  that  it  could  be  changed  without  sin;  and 
now,  such  as  it  is,  we  cannot  wish  it  changed!  It  has  indeed  been  permitted  to 
change  the  custom  of  not  making  priests  without  such  great  circumspection  that 
there  were  hardly  any  who  were  worthy;  and  it  is  not  allowed  to  complain  of  the 
custom  which  makes  so  many  who  are  unworthy! 

886.  Heretics. — Ezekiel.  All  the  heathen,  and  also  the  Prophet,  spoke  evil  of 
Israel.  But  the  Israelites  were  so  far  from  having  the  right  to  say  to  him,  "You 
speak  like  the  heathen,"  that  he  is  most  forcible  upon  this,  that  the  heathen  say 
the  same  as  he. 

887.  The  Jansenists  are  like  the  heretics  in  the  reformation  of  morality;  but 
you  are  like  them  in  evil. 

888.  You  are  ignorant  of  the  prophecies,  if  you  do  not  know  that  all  this  must 
happen;  princes,  prophets,  Pope,  and  even  the  priests.  And  yet  the  Church  is  to 
abide.  By  the  grace  of  God  we  have  not  come  to  that.  Woe  to  these  priests!  But 
we  hope  that  God  will  bestow  His  mercy  upon  us  that  we  shall  not  be  of  them. 

Saint  Peter,  Epistle  ii:  false  prophets  in  the  past,  the  image  of  future  ones. 

889.  ...  So  that  if  it  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  that  some  lax  monks  and  some 
corrupt  casuists,  who  are  not  members  of  the  hierarchy,  are  steeped  in  these  cor¬ 
ruptions,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  certain  that  the  true  pastors  of  the  Church,  who 
are  the  true  guardians  of  the  Divine  Word,  have  preserved  it  unchangeably  against 
the  efforts  of  those  who  have  attempted  to  destroy  it. 

And  thus  true  believers  have  no  pretext  to  follow  that  laxity,  which  is  only 
offered  to  them  by  the  strange  hands  of  these  casuists,  instead  of  the  sound  doc¬ 
trine  which  is  presented  to  them  by  the  fatherly  hands  of  their  own  pastors.  And 
the  ungodly  and  heretics  have  no  ground  for  publishing  these  abuses  as  evidence 
of  imperfection  in  the  providence  of  God  over  His  Church;  since,  the  Church 
consisting  properly  in  the  body  of  the  hierarchy,  we  are  so  far  from  being  able  to 
conclude  from  the  present  state  of  matters  that  God  has  abandoned  her  to  cor¬ 
ruption,  that  it  has  never  been  more  apparent  than  at  the  present  time  that  God 
visibly  protects  her  from  corruption. 

For  if  some  of  these  men,  who,  by  an  extraordinary  vocation,  have  made  pro- 


SECTION  XIV  347 

fession  of  withdrawing  from  the  world  and  adopting  the  monks’  dress,  in  order  to 
live  in  a  more  perfect  state  than  ordinary  Christians,  have  fallen  into  excesses 
which  horrify  ordinary  Christians,  and  have  become  to  us  what  the  false  prophets 
were  among  the  Jews;  this  is  a  private  and  personal  misfortune,  which  must  in¬ 
deed  be  deplored,  but  from  which  nothing  can  be  inferred  against  the  care  which 
God  takes  of  His  Church;  since  all  these  things  are  so  clearly  foretold,  and  it  has 
been  so  long  since  announced  that  these  temptations  would  arise  from  people  of 
this  kind;  so  that  when  we  are  well  instructed,  we  see  in  this  rather  evidence  of  the 
care  of  God  than  of  His  forgetfulness  in  regard  to  us. 

890.  Tertullian:  Nunquam  Ecclesia  reformabitur } 

891.  Heretics,  who  take  advantage  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Jesuits,  must  be  made 
to  know  that  it  is  not  that  of  the  Church,  and  that  our  divisions  do  not  separate 
us  from  the  altar. 

892.  If  in  differing  we  condemned,  you  would  be  right.  Uniformity  without 
diversity  is  useless  to  others;  diversity  without  uniformity  is  ruinous  for  us.  The 
one  is  harmful  outwardly;  the  other  inwardly. 

893.  By  showing  the  truth,  we  cause  it  to  be  believed;  but  by  showing  the  in¬ 
justice  of  ministers,  we  do  not  correct  it.  Our  mind  is  assured  by  a  proof  of  false¬ 
hood;  our  purse  is  not  made  secure  by  proof  of  injustice. 

894.  Those  who  love  the  Church  lament  to  see  the  corruption  of  morals;  but 
laws  at  least  exist.  But  these  corrupt  the  laws.  The  model  is  damaged. 

895.  Men  never  do  evil  so  completely  and  cheerfully  as  when  they  do  it  from 
religious  conviction. 

896.  It  is  in  vain  that  the  Church  has  established  these  words,  anathemas, 
heresies,  etc.  They  are  used  against  her. 

897.  The  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth,  for  the  master  tells  him 
only  the  act  and  not  the  intention.  And  this  is  why  he  often  obeys  slavishly,  and 
defeats  the  intention.  But  Jesus  Christ  has  told  us  the  object.  And  you  defeat  that 
object. 

898.  They  cannot  have  perpetuity,  and  they  seek  universality;  and  therefore 
they  make  the  whole  Church  corrupt,  that  they  may  be  saints. 

899.  Against  those  who  misuse  passages  of  Scripture ,  and  who  pride  themselves  in  find¬ 
ing  one  which  seems  to  favour  their  error . — The  chapter  for  Vespers,  Passion  Sunday, 
the  prayer  for  the  king. 

Explanation  of  these  words:  "He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me."  And  of 
these  others:  "He  that  is  not  against  you  is  for  you."  A  person  who  says:  "I  am 
neither  for  nor  against";  we  ought  to  reply  to  him  .  .  . 

l”The  Church  will  never  be  reformed.” 


348  PENSEES 

900.  He  who  will  give  the  meaning  of  Scripture,  and  does  not  take  it  from 
Scripture,  is  an  enemy  of  Scripture.  (St.  Augustine,  Of  Christian  Doctrine.) 

901.  Humilibus  dat  gratiam;1  an  ideo  non  dedit  humilitatem}2 

Sui  eum  non  receperunt;  quotquot  autem  non  receperunt ,3  an  non  er ant  sup 4 

902.  "It  must  indeed  be,"  says  Feuillant,  "that  this  is  not  so  certain;  for  con¬ 
troversy  indicates  uncertainty  (Saint  Athanasius,  Saint  Chrysostom,  morals,  un¬ 
believers)." 

The  Jesuits  have  not  made  the  truth  uncertain,  but  they  have  made  their  own 
ungodliness  certain. 

Contradiction  has  always  been  permitted,  in  order  to  blind  the  wicked;  for  all 
that  offends  truth  or  love  is  evil.  This  is  the  true  principle. 

903.  All  religions  and  sects  in  the  world  have  had  natural  reason  for  a  guide. 
Christians  alone  have  been  constrained  to  take  their  rules  from  without  them¬ 
selves,  and  to  acquaint  themselves  with  those  which  Jesus  Christ  bequeathed  to 
men  of  old  to  be  handed  down  to  true  believers.  This  constraint  wearies  these 
good  Fathers.  They  desire,  like  other  people,  to  have  liberty  to  follow  their  own 
imaginations.  It  is  in  vain  that  we  cry  to  them,  as  the  prophets  said  to  the  Jews  of 
old:  "Enter  into  the  Church;  acquaint  yourselves  with  the  precepts  which  the 
men  of  old  left  to  her,  and  follow  those  paths."  They  have  answered  like  the 
Jews:  "We  will  not  walk  in  them;  but  we  will  follow  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts"; 
and  they  have  said,  "We  will  be  as  the  other  nations." 

904.  They  make  a  rule  of  exception. 

Have  the  men  of  old  given  absolution  before  penance?  Do  this  as  exceptional. 
But  of  the  exception  you  make  a  rule  without  exception,  so  that  you  do  not  even 
want  the  rule  to  be  exceptional. 

905.  On  confessions  and  absolutions  without  signs  of  regret. 

God  regards  only  the  inward;  the  Church  judges  only  by  the  outward.  God 
absolves  as  soon  as  He  sees  penitence  in  the  heart;  the  Church  when  she  sees  it  in 
works.  God  will  make  a  Church  pure  within,  which  confounds,  by  its  inward  and 
entirely  spiritual  holiness,  the  inward  impiety  of  proud  sages  and  Pharisees;  and 
the  Church  will  make  an  assembly  of  men  whose  external  manners  are  so  pure  as 
to  confound  the  manners  of  the  heathen.  If  there  are  hypocrites  among  them, 
but  so  well  disguised  that  she  does  not  discover  their  venom,  she  tolerates  them; 
for,  though  they  are  not  accepted  of  God,  whom  they  cannot  deceive,  they  are  of 
men,  whom  they  do  deceive.  And  thus  she  is  not  dishonoured  by  their  conduct, 
which  appears  holy.  But  you  want  the  Church  to  judge  neither  of  the  inward,  be¬ 
cause  that  belongs  to  God  alone,  nor  of  the  outward,  because  God  dwells  only 
upon  the  inward;  and  thus,  taking  away  from  her  all  choice  of  men,  you  retain  in 
the  Church  the  most  dissolute  and  those  who  dishonour  her  so  greatly  that  the 

\Jas.  4.6.  "God  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble." 

2"But  did  he  not  give  them  humility?" 

3John  1. 1 1- 12.  "The  world  knew  him  not;  and  his  own  received  him  not." 

4"And  were  they  not  his?" 


SECTION  XIV  349 

synagogues  of  the  Jews  and  sects  of  philosophers  would  have  banished  them  as 
unworthy  and  have  abhorred  them  as  impious. 

906.  The  easiest  conditions  to  live  in  according  to  the  world  are  the  most  diffi¬ 
cult  to  live  in  according  to  God,  and  vice  versa.  Nothing  is  so  difficult  according 
to  the  world  as  the  religious  life;  nothing  is  easier  than  to  live  it  according  to  God. 
Nothing  is  easier,  according  to  the  world,  than  to  live  in  high  office  and  great 
wealth;  nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  live  in  them  according  to  God,  and  with¬ 
out  acquiring  an  interest  in  them  and  a  liking  for  them. 

907.  The  casuists  submit  the  decision  to  the  corrupt  reason,  and  the  choice  of 
decisions  to  the  corrupt  will,  in  order  that  all  that  is  corrupt  in  the  nature  of  man 
may  contribute  to  his  conduct. 

908.  But  is  it  probable  that  probability  gives  assurance? 

Difference  between  rest  and  security  of  conscience.  Nothing  gives  certainty 
but  truth;  nothing  gives  rest  but  the  sincere  search  for  truth. 

909.  The  whole  society  itself  of  their  casuists  cannot  give  assurance  to  a  con¬ 
science  in  error,  and  that  is  why  it  is  important  to  choose  good  guides. 

Thus  they  will  be  doubly  culpable,  both  in  having  followed  ways  which  they 
should  not  have  followed,  and  in  having  listened  to  teachers  to  whom  they  should 
not  have  listened. 

910.  Can  it  be  anything  but  compliance  with  the  world  which  makes  you  find 
things  probable?  Will  you  make  us  believe  that  it  is  truth  and  that,  if  duelling 
were  not  the  fashion,  you  would  find  it  probable  that  they  might  fight,  consider¬ 
ing  the  matter  in  itself? 

91 1.  Must  we  kill  to  prevent  there  being  any  wicked?  This  is  to  make  both 
parties  wicked  instead  of  one.  Vince  in  bono  malum }  (Saint  Augustine.) 

912.  Universal. — Ethics  and  language  are  special,  but  universal  sciences. 

913.  Probability. — Each  one  can  employ  it;  no  one  can  take  it  away. 

914.  They  allow  lust  to  act,  and  check  scruples;  whereas  they  should  do  the 
contrary. 

915.  Montalte. — Lax  opinions  please  men  so  much,  that  it  is  strange  that  theirs 
displease.  It  is  because  they  have  exceeded  all  bounds.  Again,  there  are  many 
people  who  see  the  truth,  and  who  cannot  attain  to  it;  but  there  are  few  who  do 
not  know  that  the  purity  of  religion  is  opposed  to  our  corruptions.  It  is  absurd  to 
say  that  an  eternal  recompense  is  offered  to  the  morality  of  Escobar. 

916.  Probability. — They  have  some  true  principles;  but  they  misuse  them.  Now, 

^om.  12.21.  "But  overcome  evil  with  good." 


350  PENSEES 

the  abuse  of  truth  ought  to  be  as  much  punished  as  the  introduction  of  falsehood. 

As  if  there  were  two  hells,  one  for  sins  against  love,  the  other  for  those  against 
justice! 

917.  Probability. — The  earnestness  of  the  saints  in  seeking  the  truth  was  useless, 
if  the  probable  is  trustworthy.  The  fear  of  the  saints  who  have  always  followed  the 
surest  way.  (Saint  Theresa  having  always  followed  her  confessor.) 

918.  Take  away  probability ,  and  you  can  no  longer  please  the  world;  give  proba¬ 
bility ,  and  you  can  no  longer  displease  it. 

919.  These  are  the  effects  of  the  sins  of  the  peoples  and  of  the  Jesuits.  The 
great  have  wished  to  be  flattered.  The  Jesuits  have  wished  to  be  loved  by  the 
great.  They  have  all  been  worthy  to  be  abandoned  to  the  spirit  of  lying,  the  one 
party  to  deceive,  the  others  to  be  deceived.  They  have  been  avaricious,  ambitious, 
voluptuous.  Coacervabunt  tibi  magistros.1  Worthy  disciples  of  such  masters,  they 
have  sought  flatterers,  and  have  found  them. 

920.  If  they  do  not  renounce  their  doctrine  of  probability,  their  good  maxims 
are  as  little  holy  as  the  bad,  for  they  are  founded  on  human  authority;  and  thus, 
if  they  are  more  just,  they  will  be  more  reasonable,  but  not  more  holy.  They 
take  after  the  wild  stem  on  which  they  are  grafted. 

If  what  I  say  does  not  serve  to  enlighten  you,  it  will  be  of  use  to  the  people. 

If  these  are  silent,  the  stones  will  speak. 

Silence  is  the  greatest  persecution;  the  saints  were  never  silent.  It  is  true  that  a 
call  is  necessary;  but  it  is  not  from  the  decrees  of  the  Council  that  we  must  learn 
whether  we  are  called,  it  is  from  the  necessity  of  speaking.  Now,  after  Rome  has 
spoken,  and  we  think  that  she  has  condemned  the  truth,  and  that  they  have 
written  it,  and  after  the  books  which  have  said  the  contrary  are  censured;  we  must 
cry  out  so  much  the  louder,  the  more  unjustly  we  are  censured,  and  the  more 
violently  they  would  stifle  speech,  until  there  come  a  Pope  who  hears  both  parties, 
and  who  consults  antiquity  to  do  justice.  So  the  good  Popes  will  find  the  Church 
still  in  outcry. 

The  Inquisition  and  the  Society  are  the  two  scourges  of  the  truth. 

Why  do  you  not  accuse  them  of  Arianism?  For,  though  they  have  said  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  God,  perhaps  they  mean  by  it  not  the  natural  interpretation,  but, 
as  it  is  said,  DU  estis2 

If  my  Letters  are  condemned  at  Rome,  that  which  I  condemn  in  them  is  con¬ 
demned  in  heaven.  Ad tuum ,  Domine Jesu ,  tribunal  appello .3 

You  yourselves  are  corruptible. 

I  feared  that  I  had  written  ill,  seeing  myself  condemned;  but  the  example  of  so 
many  pious  writings  makes  me  believe  the  contrary.  It  is  no  longer  allowable  to 
write  well,  so  corrupt  or  ignorant  is  the  Inquisition! 

"It  is  better  to  obey  God  than  men.” 

I  fear  nothing;  I  hope  for  nothing.  It  is  not  so  with  the  bishops.  Port-Royal 

mTim.  4.3.  "Shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers." 

2Ps.  81.6.  "Ye  are  gods." 

3"To  your  tribunal,  Lord  Jesus,  I  call." 


SECTION  XIV  351 

fears,  and  it  is  bad  policy  to  disperse  them;  for  they  will  fear  no  longer  and  will 
cause  greater  fear.  I  do  not  even  fear  your  like  censures,  if  they  are  not  founded  on 
those  of  tradition.  Do  you  censure  all?  What!  Even  my  respect?  No.  Say  then 
what,  or  you  will  do  nothing,  if  you  do  not  point  out  the  evil,  and  why  it  is  evil. 
And  this  is  what  they  will  have  great  difficulty  in  doing. 

Probability. — They  have  given  a  ridiculous  explanation  of  certitude;  for,  after 
having  established  that  all  their  ways  are  sure,  they  have  no  longer  called  that  sure 
which  leads  to  heaven  without  danger  of  not  arriving  there  by  it,  but  that  which 
leads  there  without  danger  of  going  out  of  that  road. 

921.  ..  .  The  saints  indulge  in  subtleties  in  order  to  think  themselves  criminals 
and  impeach  their  better  actions.  And  these  indulge  in  subtleties  in  order  to  ex¬ 
cuse  the  most  wicked. 

The  heathen  sages  erected  a  structure  equally  fine  outside,  but  upon  a  bad 
foundation;  and  the  devil  deceived  men  by  this  apparent  resemblance  based  upon 
the  most  different  foundation. 

Man  never  had  so  good  a  cause  as  I;  and  others  have  never  furnished  so  good  a 
capture  as  you  .  .  . 

The  more  they  point  out  weakness  in  my  person,  the  more  they  authorise  my 
cause. 

You  say  that  I  am  a  heretic.  Is  that  lawful?  And  if  you  do  not  fear  that  men  do 
justice,  do  you  not  fear  that  God  does  justice? 

You  will  feel  the  force  of  the  truth,  and  you  will  yield  to  it  .  .  . 

There  is  something  supernatural  in  such  a  blindness.  Digna  necessitas }  Mentiris 
impudentissime  .  .  .2 

Doctrina  sua  noscetur  vir  .  .  .3 

False  piety,  a  double  sin. 

I  am  alone  against  thirty  thousand.  No.  Protect  you,  the  court;  protect,  you, 
deception;  let  me  protect  the  truth.  It  is  all  my  strength.  If  I  lose  it,  I  am  undone. 
I  shall  not  lack  accusations,  and  persecutions.  But  I  possess  the  truth,  and  we 
shall  see  who  will  take  it  away. 

I  do  not  need  to  defend  religion,  but  you  do  not  need  to  defend  error  and  in¬ 
justice.  Let  God,  out  of  His  compassion,  having  no  regard  to  the  evil  which  is  in 
me,  and  having  regard  to  the  good  which  is  in  you,  grant  us  all  grace  that  truth 
may  not  be  overcome  in  my  hands,  and  that  falsehood  .  .  . 

922.  Probable. — Let  us  see  if  we  seek  God  sincerely,  by  comparison  of  the 
things  which  we  love.  It  is  probable  that  this  food  will  not  poison  me.  It  is  probable 
that  I  shall  not  lose  my  action  by  not  prosecuting  it .  .  . 

923.  It  is  not  absolution  only  which  remits  sins  by  the  sacrament  of  penance, 
but  contrition,  which  is  not  real  if  it  does  not  seek  the  sacrament. 

924.  People  who  do  not  keep  their  word,  without  faith,  without  honour,  with¬ 
out  truth,  deceitful  in  heart,  deceitful  in  speech;  for  which  that  amphibious  ani- 

1'Wisd.  of  Sol.  19.4.  "Doom  which  they  deserved.” 

2"Most  impudent  Liars.”  See  Provincial  Letter  xvi. 

3Prov.  12.8.  "A  man  shall  be  commended  according  to  his  wisdom.” 


352  PENSEES 

mal  in  fable  was  once  reproached,  which  held  itself  in  a  doubtful  position  be¬ 
tween  the  fish  and  the  birds  .  .  . 

It  is  important  to  kings  and  princes  to  be  considered  pious;  and  therefore  they 
must  confess  themselves  to  you. 


CONTENTS 

SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


Preface  to  the  treatise  on  the  vacuum,  p.  355 
New  experiments  concerning  the  vacuum,  p.  359 
Account  of  the  great  experiment  concerning  the 

EQUILIBRIUM  OF  FLUIDS,  P.  382 

Treatises  on  the  equilibrium  of  liquids  and  on  the 

WEIGHT  OF  THE  MASS  OF  THE  AIR,  P.  390 

On  geometrical  demonstration,  p.  430 
Treatise  on  the  arithmetical  triangle,  p.  447 
Correspondence  with  fermat  on  the  theory  of 

PROBABILITIES,  P.  474 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


PREFACE  TO  THE  TREATISE  ON  THE  VACUUM 

We  have  carried  our  respect  for  antiquity  so  far  today,  in  matters  in  which  it 
should  have  less  influence,  that  we  treat  all  its  ideas  as  revelations  and  even  its 
obscurities  as  mysteries;  we  can  no  longer  advance  new  opinions  without  danger, 
and  an  author’s  text  is  enough  to  destroy  the  strongest  arguments.  .  . 

Not  that  my  intention  is  to  correct  one  vice  by  another,  and  to  have  no  esteem 
for  the  ancients  because  they  are  too  much  esteemed.  I  do  not  want  to  banish 
their  authority  to  set  up  reason  alone,  although  there  is  an  attempt  to  establish 
their  authority  alone  to  the  prejudice  of  reason.  .  . 

To  make  this  important  distinction  with  care  we  must  consider  that  one  group 
depend  exclusively  on  memory  and  are  purely  historical,  having  as  their  only 
object  to  know  what  the  authors  have  written;  the  other  group  depend  exclusively 
on  reason  and  are  wholly  dogmatic,  having  as  their  object  to  seek  and  discover 
hidden  truths.  Those  of  the  first  kind  have  the  same  limits  as  the  books  containing 
them.  .  . 

It  is  in  accordance  with  this  distinction  that  we  should  regulate  differently  the 
extent  of  our  respect.  The  respect  that  we  should  have  for.  .  . 

In  matters  in  which  we  seek  to  know  only  what  authors  have  written,  as  in 
history,  geography,  jurisprudence,  languages,  and  above  all  in  theology,  and  in 
short  wherever  either  the  simple  fact  or  an  institution,  human  or  divine,  is  the 
starting  point,  we  must  necessarily  have  recourse  to  books,  since  all  that  can  be 
known  about  such  matters  is  contained  there.  Whence  it  is  evident  that  we  can 
have  the  whole  of  that  knowledge  and  that  it  is  not  possible  to  add  anything  to  it. 

If  it  is  a  question  of  knowing  who  was  the  first  king  of  France,  where  the 
geographers  put  the  first  meridian,  what  words  are  used  in  a  dead  language,  and 
everything  of  this  sort,  how  could  we  find  it  out  except  from  books?  And  who 
can  add  anything  new  to  what  they  tell  us  about  it,  since  we  desire  to  know  only 
what  they  contain?  Authority  alone  can  give  us  light  on  such  matters.  But  it  is  in 
theology  that  authority  has  its  chief  weight  because  there  it  is  inseparable  from 
truth,  which  we  know  only  through  it;  so  that  to  give  absolute  certainty  to  things 
which  reason  can  least  grasp,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  them  out  in  Holy  Scripture 
(as,  to  show  the  uncertainty  of  the  most  probable  things,  we  need  only  point  out 
that  they  are  not  included  there);  because  the  principles  of  theology  are  above 
nature  and  reason,  and  the  mind  of  man,  too  feeble  to  reach  them  by  its  own 
efforts,  can  arrive  at  this  highest  knowledge  only  if  carried  there  by  an  all-powerful 
and  supernatural  force. 


355 


356  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

It  is  quite  otherwise  with  subjects  accessible  to  sense  or  reasoning:  here  author¬ 
ity  is  useless,  only  reason  can  know  them.  Authority  and  reason  have  their  sepa¬ 
rate  rights:  a  moment  ago  one  had  all  the  advantage;  here  the  other  is  queen  in 
her  turn.  But  since  subjects  of  this  kind  are  suited  to  the  mind’s  reach,  it  has 
perfect  freedom  to  concern  itself  with  them;  its  inexhaustible  fertility  produces 
continually,  and  its  discoveries  can  be  at  once  without  end  and  without  inter¬ 
ruption.  .  . 

Thus  it  is  that  geometry,  arithmetic,  music,  physics,  medicine,  architecture, 
and  all  the  sciences  subject  to  experiment  and  reason  must  be  added  to  if  they  are 
to  become  perfect.  The  ancients  found  them  merely  sketched  by  their  predeces¬ 
sors,  and  we  shall  leave  them  to  our  successors  in  a  more  perfected  state  than  we 
received  them.  Since  their  perfection  depends  upon  time  and  effort,  it  is  evident 
that  even  if  our  effort  and  time  had  gained  us  less  than  the  labors  of  the  ancients, 
separated  from  ours,  the  two  together  nevertheless  must  have  more  effect  than 
either  alone. 

The  clearing  up  of  this  difference  should  make  us  pity  the  blindness  of  those 
who  advance  authority  alone  as  proof  in  physics  instead  of  reason  or  experiment, 
and  should  fill  us  with  horror  at  the  wickedness  of  others  who  use  reason  alone  in 
theology  instead  of  the  authority  of  Scripture  and  the  Fathers.  We  must  strengthen 
the  courage  of  those  timid  souls  who  dare  discover  nothing  in  physics,  and  con¬ 
found  the  insolence  of  that  temerity  which  introduces  novelty  into  theology. 
Meanwhile  the  misfortune  of  the  age  is  such  that  we  see  many  new  opinions  in 
theology  altogether  unknown  to  antiquity  maintained  with  obstinacy  and  re¬ 
ceived  with  applause;  whereas  those  put  forward  in  physics,  though  few  in  num¬ 
ber,  must  be  convicted  of  error,  it  seems,  as  soon  as  they  shock,  however  little, 
received  opinions.  As  if  respect  for  the  philosophers  of  antiquity  were  a  duty  but 
for  the  most  ancient  of  the  Fathers  only  decorum!  I  leave  it  to  the  judicious  to 
observe  the  importance  of  this  abuse  which  perverts  the  order  of  the  sciences  so 
unjustly,  and  I  think  there  will  be  few  who  do  not  wish  this  ...  to  be  applied  to 
other  subjects,  since  new  discoveries  are  inevitably  errors  in  those  matters  we 
profane  with  impunity,  whereas  they  are  absolutely  necessary  for  the  perfection 
of  so  many  other  subjects  incomparably  lower,  which  however  we  would  be 
afraid  to  touch. 

Let  us  make  a  more  just  distribution  of  our  credulity  and  our  doubt,  and  set 
limits  to  our  respect  for  the  ancients.  Since  reason  is  its  source,  reason  should  also 
be  its  measure.  Let  us  consider  that  if  the  ancients  had  kept  to  this  deference  of 
daring  to  add  nothing  to  the  knowledge  transmitted  to  them  and  if  their  con¬ 
temporaries  had  been  as  much  opposed  to  accepting  anything  new,  they  would 
have  deprived  both  themselves  and  their  posterity  of  the  fruit  of  their  discoveries. 
Just  as  they  used  the  discoveries  handed  down  to  them  only  as  the  means  of 
making  new  ones,  and  that  happy  daring  had  opened  the  road  for  them  to  great 
achievements,  so  we  should  take  the  discoveries  won  for  us  by  them  in  the  same 
spirit,  and  following  their  example  make  these  discoveries  the  means  and  not  the 
end  of  our  study,  and  thus  by  imitating  the  ancients  try  to  surpass  them.  For 
what  is  more  unfair  than  to  treat  our  predecessors  with  more  respect  than  they 
treated  those  who  preceded  them,  and  to  have  for  them  that  inviolable  respect 
they  have  deserved  from  us  only  because  they  did  not  themselves  have  it  for  those 
who  had  the  same  advantage  over  them?  .  .  . 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  357 

The  secrets  of  nature  are  hidden.  Although  she  is  always  at  work,  her  effects 
are  not  always  discovered:  time  reveals  them  from  generation  to  generation,  and 
although  always  the  same  in  herself,  she  is  not  always  equally  known.  The  ex¬ 
periments  which  give  us  our  knowledge  of  nature  multiply  continually;  and 
since  they  are  the  only  principles  of  physics,  the  consequences  multiply  in  pro¬ 
portion.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we  can  today  have  other  ideas  and  new  opinions 
without  scorn  and  without  ingratitude,  since  the  first  knowledge  given  us  by  the 
ancients  has  served  as  steps  to  our  own,  and  since  we  are  indebted  to  them  for 
the  advantage  of  a  position  higher  than  theirs;  because  placed  by  them  part  way 
up  the  ladder,  we  are  carried  higher  by  our  slightest  effort,  and  with  less  labor  and 
less  glory  we  find  ourselves  above  them.  It  is  from  that  height  we  can  discover 
things  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  see.  Our  view  has  a  wider  range,  and  although 
they  knew  as  well  as  we  do  everything  they  could  observe  of  nature,  they  never¬ 
theless  did  not  know  so  much  and  we  see  more  than  they  did. 

However  it  is  a  strange  thing  how  we  reverence  their  opinions.  To  contradict 
them  counts  as  a  crime  and  to  add  to  them  is  an  outrage,  as  if  they  had  left  no 
more  truths  to  know.  Is  not  this  to  treat  man’s  reason  with  indignity  and  to  put 
it  on  a  level  with  animal  instinct,  since  we  thereby  take  away  the  main  difference, 
which  consists  in  this  that  the  effects  of  reason  increase  continually  whereas  in¬ 
stinct  always  remains  in  the  same  state?  Beehives  were  as  well  laid  out  a  thousand 
years  ago  as  today,  and  each  bee  forms  that  hexagon  as  exactly  the  first  time  as 
the  last.  It  is  the  same  with  everything  animals  make  by  that  hidden  motion. 
Nature  teaches  them  in  response  to  the  pressure  of  necessity;  but  this  frail  knowl¬ 
edge  dies  with  its  need:  as  they  receive  it  without  study,  they  do  not  have  the 
happiness  of  preserving  it;  and  every  time  they  are  given  it,  they  find  it  new,  be¬ 
cause  nature,  whose  object  is  merely  to  maintain  animals  in  an  order  of  limited 
perfection,  infuses  in  them  this  necessary  knowledge,  always  the  same,  lest  they 
perish,  and  does  not  allow  them  to  add  to  it  lest  they  go  beyond  the  boundaries 
prescribed  to  them.  It  is  different  with  man,  made  only  for  infinity.  He  is  ignorant 
in  his  life’s  first  age,  but  he  never  ceases  to  learn  as  he  goes  forward,  for  he  has  the 
advantage  not  only  of  his  own  experience  but  also  of  his  predecessors’,  because 
he  always  keeps  in  his  memory  the  knowledge  he  has  once  acquired,  and  that  of 
the  ancients  is  always  at  hand  in  the  books  they  have  left.  And  since  he  keeps  his 
knowledge,  he  can  also  easily  increase  it,  so  that  men  today  are  in  a  certain  sense 
in  the  same  condition  in  which  those  ancient  philosophers  would  be  if  they  could 
have  prolonged  their  old  age  until  now,  adding  to  the  knowledge  they  had  what 
their  studies  might  have  won  for  them  by  the  grace  of  so  many  centuries.  Hence 
it  is  that  by  a  special  prerogative  not  only  does  each  man  advance  from  day  to  day 
in  the  sciences,  but  all  men  together  make  a  continual  progress  as  the  universe 
grows  old,  because  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  succession  of  men  as  in  the 
different  ages  of  an  individual  man.  So  that  the  whole  series  of  men  during  the 
course  of  so  many  centuries  should  be  considered  as  one  self-same  man,  always 
in  existence  and  continually  learning.  Whence  it  is  seen  with  what  injustice  we 
respect  antiquity  in  the  persons  of  its  philosophers;  for  since  old  age  is  the  age 
furthest  removed  from  childhood,  who  does  not  see  that  the  old  age  of  this  uni¬ 
versal  man  should  be  sought  not  in  the  times  near  his  birth  but  in  those  which 
are  most  distant  from  it?  Those  whom  we  call  ancients  were  in  truth  new  in  every 
respect,  and  actually  formed  the  childhood  of  man;  and  since  we  have  added  to 


358  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

their  knowledge  the  experience  of  the  succeeding  centuries,  it  is  in  ourselves  that 
that  antiquity  can  be  found  which  we  revere  in  others. 

The  ancients  should  be  admired  for  the  consequences  they  drew  correctly  from 
the  little  stock  of  principles  they  had,  and  they  should  be  excused  for  those  in 
which  they  lacked  the  advantage  of  experiment  rather  than  force  of  reason. 

For  were  they  not  excusable  for  their  opinion  about  the  Milky  Way  when,  the 
weakness  of  their  eyes  as  yet  unaided  by  artifice,  they  attributed  its  color  to  a 
greater  density  in  that  part  of  the  sky,  which  would  more  powerfully  reflect  the 
light?  But  would  we  not  be  inexcusable  for  holding  to  the  same  opinion  now 
that  with  the  help  of  the  telescope  we  have  discovered  an  infinity  of  little  stars 
there,  whose  more  abundant  light  has  made  us  recognize  the  true  cause  of  that 
whiteness? 

Did  they  not  also  have  cause  to  say  that  all  corruptible  bodies  were  contained 
within  the  sphere  of  the  moon’s  heaven,  when  during  the  course  of  so  many 
centuries  they  had  never  yet  observed  corruption  or  generation  beyond  this 
space?  But  should  we  not  give  contrary  assurance  when  the  whole  earth  has  seen 
with  its  eyes  comets  burst  into  flame  and  vanish  far  beyond  that  sphere? 

Thus  it  is  that  concerning  the  vacuum  the  ancients  were  right  to  say  that  nature 
did  not  permit  it,  because  all  their  experiments  had  always  led  to  the  observation 
that  she  abhorred  it  and  could  not  endure  it.  But  if  the  new  experiments  had  been 
known  to  them,  perhaps  they  would  have  found  reason  to  affirm  what  they  had 
reason  to  deny  because  the  vacuum  had  not  yet  appeared.  Therefore  in  making 
the  judgment  that  nature  did  not  permit  a  vacuum,  they  meant  to  speak  of  nature 
only  as  they  knew  her;  since  to  make  the  judgment  in  general  it  would  not  be 
enough  to  have  seen  it  true  in  a  hundred  instances  or  in  a  thousand  or  in  any 
other  number  however  great,  for  if  there  remained  a  single  case  to  examine,  it 
alone  would  suffice  to  prevent  the  general  definition,  and  if  a  single  case  were 
opposed,  it  alone.  .  .  .  For  in  all  matters  whose  proof  is  by  experiment  and  not  by 
demonstration  no  universal  assertion  can  be  made  except  by  the  general  enumera¬ 
tion  of  all  the  parts  and  all  the  different  cases.  Thus  when  we  say  the  diamond  is 
the  hardest  of  all  bodies,  we  mean  of  all  bodies  we  know,  and  we  neither  can  nor 
should  include  those  we  do  not  know.  And  when  we  say  that  gold  is  the  heaviest 
of  all  bodies,  it  would  be  rash  of  us  to  include  in  this  general  proposition  bodies 
not  yet  in  our  knowledge,  although  it  is  not  impossible  they  are  in  nature.  Simi¬ 
larly  when  the  ancients  asserted  that  nature  did  not  permit  a  vacuum,  they  meant 
she  did  not  permit  a  vacuum  in  all  the  experiments  they  had  seen,  and  they  could 
not  without  rashness  include  experiments  they  did  not  know.  But  if  they  had 
known  them,  undoubtedly  they  would  have  drawn  the  same  consequences  as  we 
do  and  would  by  their  avowal  have  given  them  the  authority  of  that  antiquity 
which  men  today  want  to  make  the  sole  principle  of  the  sciences. 

Thus  without  contradicting  the  ancients  we  can  assert  the  opposite  of  what 
they  said;  and  finally  whatever  the  weight  of  antiquity,  truth  should  always  have 
the  advantage,  even  when  newly  discovered,  since  it  is  always  older  than  every 
opinion  men  have  held  about  it,  and  only  ignorance  of  its  nature  could  imagine 
it  began  to  be  at  the  time  it  began  to  be  known. 


NEW  EXPERIMENTS  CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM 


Done  in  tubes,  syringes,  bellows,  and  siphons  of  various  lengths,  sizes, 

AND  SHAPES,  WITH  DIVERS  FLUIDS,  SUCH  AS  QUICKSILVER,  WATER,  WINE,  OIL,  AIR, 
ETC. 

With  a  discourse  on  the  same  subject,  in  which  it  is  shown  that  a  ves¬ 
sel  AS  LARGE  AS  CAN  BE  PROCURED  MAY  BE  EMPTIED  OF  ALL  SUBSTANCES  KNOWN 
IN  NATURE  WHICH  ARE  CAPABLE  OF  BEING  PERCEIVED  BY  THE  SENSES,  AND  WHAT 
FORCE  IS  NECESSARY  FOR  THE  CREATION  OF  THIS  VACUUM. 

Dedicated  to  M.  Pascal,  privy  councilor  and  councilor  of  state  to 

THE  KING,  BY  B.  P.,  HIS  SON,  THE  WHOLE  HAVING  BEEN  REDUCED  TO  A  SUMMARY 
AND  PUBLISHED  IN  ADVANCE  OF  A  LARGER  TREATISE  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT. 

To  the  Reader 

My  dear  reader,  since  certain  considerations  prevent  my  publishing  at  this 
time  in  its  entirety  a  treatise  in  which  I  have  reported  many  new  experiments  I 
have  made  concerning  the  vacuum  together  with  the  conclusions  I  have  drawn 
from  them,  I  decided  to  give  an  account  of  the  chief  of  them  in  this  summary, 
where  you  will  see  in  advance  the  plan  of  the  whole  work. 

The  occasion  of  these  experiments  was  as  follows:  About  four  years  ago  in  Italy 
it  was  found  that  a  glass  tube  four  feet  in  height ,  with  one  end  open  and  the  other  hermeti¬ 
cally  sealed ,  having  been  filled  with  quicksilver  and  the  open  end  then  stopped  by  a  finger 
or  in  some  other  way  and  the  tube  placed  vertically  with  the  stopped  end  down  and  plunged 
two  or  three  fingers  breadths  into  some  more  quicksilver  contained  in  a  vessel  half  full  of 
quicksilver  and  half  full  of  water;  if  the  stopper  is  removed ,  the  tube  remaining  plunged 
in  the  quicksilver  of  the  vessel ,  the  quicksilver  of  the  tube  descends  part  way ,  leaving  at 
the  top  of  the  tube  an  apparently  empty  space ,  the  bottom  of  the  tube  remaining  full  of 
quicksilver  up  to  a  certain  height.  And  if  the  tube  is  lifted  a  little  until  its  open  end ,  which 
had  been  dipped  in  the  quicksilver  of  the  vessel ,  leaving  this  quicksilver ,  reaches  the  region 
of  water ,  the  quicksilver  of  the  tube  rises  to  the  top  with  the  water  and  these  two  liquids 
are  mingled  in  the  tube ,  but  finally  all  the  quicksilver  falls ,  and  the  tube  is  found  to  be 
entirely  filled  with  water. 

An  account  of  this  experiment  having  been  sent  from  Rome  to  the  Rev.  Father 
Mersenne,  Minim,  at  Paris,  he  made  it  public  in  France  in  the  year  1644,  to  the 
admiration  of  all  the  learned  and  curious,  through  whose  intercourse  it  became 
famous  on  all  sides.  I  heard  about  it  from  M.  Petit,  Superintendent  of  Fortifica¬ 
tions  and  skilled  in  all  good  learning,  who  had  heard  about  it  from  the  Rev.  Father 
Mersenne  himself.  We  did  the  experiment  together  at  Rouen,  the  said  M.  Petit 
and  I,  in  the  same  way  it  had  been  done  in  Italy,  and  we  found  every  detail  just  as  it 
had  been  reported  from  that  country,  without  noticing  at  that  time  anything  new. 

Afterwards,  reflecting  on  the  consequences  of  these  experiments,  I  was  con¬ 
firmed  in  the  opinion  I  had  always  held  that  the  vacuum  was  not  a  thing  imposs¬ 
ible  in  nature  and  that  she  did  not  flee  it  with  such  horror  as  many  imagine. 

359 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


360 

I  was  forced  to  this  opinion  by  seeing  how  slight  was  the  foundation  of  the 
maxim  so  widely  accepted  that  nature  does  not  permit  a  vacuum,  a  maxim  based 
only  on  experiments  of  which  the  greater  number  are  false  though  considered 
most  certain;  and  of  the  rest,  some  are  so  far  from  contributing  to  its  proof  that 
they  show  nature  abhors  too  much  fulness  rather  than  flees  a  vacuum,  and  the 
most  favorable  do  not  bring  anything  more  to  light  than  that  nature  abhors  a 
vacuum;  they  do  not  show  that  she  cannot  suffer  it  to  be. 

To  the  weakness  of  this  principle  I  added  our  daily  observations  of  the  rare¬ 
faction  and  condensation  of  the  air,  which,  as  some  have  found,  can  be  con¬ 
densed  to  the  thousandth  part  of  the  place  it  seemed  to  occupy  before  and  which 
can  become  so  rare  that  I  thought  there  must  be  either  a  large  vacuum  between 
its  parts  or  penetration  of  dimensions.  But  since  everyone  did  not  accept  that 
as  proof,  I  believed  this  Italian  experiment  might  convince  even  those  who  were 
the  most  obsessed  with  the  impossibility  of  the  vacuum. 

However  prejudice  was  strong  enough  again  to  invent  objections  which  robbed 
the  experiment  of  the  belief  it  deserved.  Some  said  that  the  top  of  the  tube  was 
filled  with  spirits  of  mercury,  others  with  a  rarefied  and  imperceptible  particle  of 
air,  others  with  a  kind  of  matter  which  only  existed  in  their  imagination;  and  all, 
in  a  conspiracy  to  banish  the  vacuum,  vied  with  each  other  in  the  exercise  of  that 
power  of  the  mind  called  subtlety  in  the  schools,  which  for  the  solution  of  real 
difficulties  gives  only  empty  words  without  foundation.  I  resolved  therefore  to 
devise  such  convincing  experiments  that  they  should  be  proof  against  all  possible 
objections;  and  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  I  performed  a  great  many,  of  which 
some  are  related  to  the  Italian  experiment  and  others  are  entirely  different,  having 
nothing  in  common  with  it.  These  experiments  were  so  accurate  and  so  success¬ 
ful  that  I  showed  by  means  of  them  that  the  largest  vessel  procurable  can  be 
emptied  of  every  substance  perceived  by  sense  and  known  in  nature,  and  what 
force  is  necessary  for  the  creation  of  this  vacuum.  In  this  way  I  also  tested  the 
height  a  siphon  must  have  if  it  is  to  do  what  is  expected  of  it,  beyond  which  height 
it  ceases  to  act,  contrary  to  the  opinion  universally  accepted  by  the  world  for  so 
many  centuries,  as  also  the  slight  force  required  to  draw  up  the  piston  of  a  syringe, 
without  any  matter  taking  its  place,  and  many  other  things  that  you  will  find  in 
the  complete  work,  in  which  it  is  my  intention  to  show  what  force  nature  exerts 
to  avoid  a  vacuum  and  that  she  actually  admits  it  and  suffers  its  existence  in  a 
large  space  which  can  easily  be  emptied  of  every  substance  perceptible  to  sense. 
Accordingly  I  have  divided  the  complete  treatise  into  two  parts,  of  which  the 
first  contains  a  detailed  account  of  all  my  experiments,  with  accompanying 
figures,  and  a  summary  of  the  results,  divided  into  a  number  of  maxims.  And  the 
second  part  contains  the  consequences  I  have  drawn  from  the  experiments, 
divided  into  several  propositions,  in  which  I  have  shown  that  the  apparently 
empty  space  which  appeared  in  the  experiments  is  actually  empty  of  every  sub¬ 
stance  perceptible  to  sense  and  known  in  nature.  And  in  the  conclusion  I  give  my 
opinion  on  the  subject  of  the  vacuum,  and  reply  to  the  objections  that  can  be 
made.  Thus  I  am  content  to  show  a  large  empty  space,  and  I  leave  it  to  the 
learned  and  curious  to  find  out  what  goes  on  in  such  a  space  (as  whether  animals 
live  there,  whether  the  refraction  of  glass  is  diminished  by  it,  and  whatever  can 
be  done  there),  making  no  mention  of  it  in  this  treatise,  a  summary  of  which  I 
have  thought  it  appropriate  to  give  you  in  advance;  because  having  made  these 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  361 

experiments  with  much  expense,  effort,  and  time,  I  was  afraid  that  someone  else 
who  had  spent  neither  time,  money,  nor  effort  might  anticipate  me  and  make 
public  things  he  had  not  seen  and  which  consequently  he  could  not  report  with 
the  exactness  and  order  necessary  for  their  proper  deduction;  for  there  is  no  one 
who  has  had  tubes  and  siphons  so  long  as  mine,  and  there  are  few  who  would  be 
willing  to  take  the  necessary  trouble  to  get  them. 

And  since  honest  men  add  to  the  common  desire  of  all  men  to  maintain  them¬ 
selves  in  their  rightful  possessions  the  desire  to  refuse  the  honor  which  is  not 
their  due,  you  will  undoubtedly  approve  of  my  defending  myself  equally  against 
those  who  would  take  from  me  some  of  the  experiments  which  I  report  to  you 
here  and  which  I  promise  you  in  the  complete  treatise,  since  they  are  of  my  own 
invention,  and  against  those  who  would  attribute  to  me  the  Italian  experiment  I 
have  spoken  to  you  about,  since  it  is  not  mine.  For  although  I  have  performed  it 
in  more  ways  than  anyone  else  and  with  tubes  twelve  and  even  fifteen  feet  long, 
nevertheless  I  shall  not  even  speak  of  it  in  these  writings  because  I  am  not  its 
discoverer  and  because  it  is  my  intention  to  give  only  those  experiments  which 
are  of  my  own  invention  and  altogether  mine. 

Summary  of  the  first  part ,  in  which  the  experiments  are  reported 
Experiments 

1.  A  glass  syringe  with  a  carefully  fitted  piston  having  been  completely  im¬ 
mersed  in  water  and  its  opening  closed  by  a  finger  touching  the  bottom  of  the 
piston  (thus  obliging  the  hand  and  arm  to  be  in  the  water),  only  a  moderate  force 
is  required  to  draw  the  piston  up  and  make  it  separate  from  the  finger,  without 
any  water  coming  in  (which  the  philosophers  believed  could  not  be  done  with 
any  finite  force);  and  thereby  the  finger  is  felt  to  be  strongly  and  painfully  pulled, 
and  the  piston  leaves  an  apparently  empty  space,  into  which  it  does  not  appear 
any  body  can  have  entered,  since  it  is  entirely  surrounded  by  water  which  could 
have  had  no  access  to  it  because  the  opening  had  been  closed;  and  if  the  piston 
is  drawn  higher,  the  apparently  empty  space  becomes  greater,  but  the  finger  is 
not  felt  to  be  more  pulled.  And  if  the  syringe  is  lifted  almost  entirely  out  of  the 
water  so  that  only  its  opening  and  the  covering  finger  remain  in  it,  then  upon  the 
finger’s  being  removed  the  water,  contrary  to  its  nature,  rises  with  violence  and 
entirely  fills  all  the  space  left  by  the  piston. 

2.  A  bellows  carefully  closed  on  every  side  produces  the  same  effect,  with  a 
similar  preparation,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  same  philosophers. 

3.  A  glass  tube  forty-six  feet  long,  open  at  one  end  and  hermetically  sealed 
at  the  other,  having  been  filled  with  water  or  rather  with  very  red  wine,  for  greater 
visibility,  then  stoppered  and  lifted  in  this  condition  and  placed  vertically,  the 
stoppered  end  down,  in  a  vessel  full  of  water,  with  about  one  foot  of  the  tube 
below  the  surface  of  the  water;  if  the  stopper  is  removed,  the  wine  in  the  tube 
descends  to  a  certain  height,  which  is  about  thirty-two  feet  above  the  surface  of 
the  water  in  the  vessel,  and  runs  out  and  mingles  with  the  water  in  the  vessel,  to 
which  it  gives  a  tinge  of  color,  and  separating  from  the  top  of  the  glass  leaves  a 
space  of  about  thirteen  feet  apparently  empty,  where  again  it  does  not  appear 
any  body  can  have  taken  its  place.  And  if  the  tube  is  inclined,  as  then  the  height 
of  the  wine  in  the  tube  is  decreased  by  this  inclination,  the  wine  ascends  until  it 


362  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

reaches  the  height  of  thirty-two  feet.  And  finally  if  the  tube  is  inclined  to  the 
height  of  thirty-two  feet,  it  is  entirely  refilled,  thus  drawing  back  as  much  water 
as  it  had  rejected  wine,  so  that  it  is  seen  to  be  full  of  wine  from  the  top  to  about 
thirteen  feet  from  the  bottom  and  filled  with  slightly  colored  water  in  the  thirteen 
feet  remaining. 

4.  A  scalene  siphon,  of  which  the  longer  leg  is  fifty  feet  long  and  the  shorter 
leg  is  forty-five,  having  been  filled  with  water  and  the  two  stoppered  openings 
immersed  about  a  foot  in  two  vessels  filled  with  water  so  that  the  siphon  is  verti¬ 
cal  and  the  surface  of  the  water  of  one  vessel  is  five  feet  higher  than  the  surface 
of  the  other;  if  the  stoppers  of  the  openings  are  removed  with  the  siphon  in  the 
position  described,  the  longer  leg  does  not  attract  the  water  in  the  shorter  leg  nor 
consequently  that  in  the  vessel  in  which  the  shorter  leg  dips,  contrary  to  the 
opinion  of  all  philosophers  and  artisans,  but  the  water  descends  from  both  legs 
into  the  two  vessels  until  it  reaches  the  same  height  as  in  the  afore-mentioned 
tube,  measuring  the  height  from  the  surface  of  the  water  of  each  vessel.  But  when 
the  siphon  is  inclined  at  a  height  less  than  about  thirty-one  feet,  the  longer  leg 
attracts  the  water  in  the  vessel  of  the  shorter  leg,  and  when  the  siphon  is  drawn 
up  again  toward  the  vertical,  the  attraction  stops  and  water  flows  from  both  sides 
into  their  respective  vessels.  And  when  the  siphon  is  lowered  again,  the  water  in 
the  longer  leg  attracts  the  water  in  the  shorter  as  before. 

5.  If  a  cord  about  fifteen  feet  long  with  a  thread  fastened  to  the  end  (having 
been  left  in  water  for  a  long  time  in  order  that  whatever  air  may  have  been  en¬ 
closed  in  the  cord  might  be  expelled  by  the  gradual  absorption  of  moisture)  is 
put  in  a  tube  fifteen  feet  long,  sealed  at  one  end  as  above  and  filled  with  water, 
so  that  outside  the  tube  there  is  only  the  thread  attached  to  the  cord  to  pull  it 
with,  and  the  opening  of  the  tube  is  placed  in  quicksilver;  when  the  cord  is  pulled 
little  by  little,  the  quicksilver  rises  in  proportion  until  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver,  added  to  the  fourteenth  part  of  the  height  of  the  water  remaining,  is  two 
feet,  three  inches.  For  afterwards,  when  the  cord  is  pulled,  the  water  quits  the 
top  of  the  glass  and  leaves  an  apparently  empty  space,  which  increases  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  the  cord  is  pulled.  But  if  the  tube  is  inclined,  the  quicksilver  of  the  vessel 
rises  in  it,  so  that  if  it  is  inclined  enough,  it  is  completely  filled  with  quicksilver 
and  water,  which  strikes  the  top  of  the  tube  with  violence,  making  the  same  noise 
and  the  same  sharp  sound  as  if  it  were  breaking  the  glass,  which  does  in  fact  run 
the  risk  of  being  broken.  And  lest  it  be  suspected  that  some  air  may  have  re¬ 
mained  in  the  cord,  the  same  experiment  may  be  performed  with  a  number  of 
little  wooden  cylinders  fastened  together  with  brass  wire. 

6.  A  syringe  with  an  accurately  fitted  piston  having  been  placed  in  quicksilver 
so  that  its  opening  is  immersed  at  least  an  inch  and  the  rest  of  the  syringe  stands 
vertically  outside,  if  the  piston  is  drawn  up,  the  syringe  remaining  as  described, 
the  quicksilver,  entering  by  the  opening  of  the  syringe,  rises  and  remains  in  con¬ 
tact  with  the  piston  until  it  has  been  drawn  up  in  the  syringe  two  feet,  three  inches. 
But  after  this  height  if  the  piston  is  drawn  up  more,  it  does  not  attract  the  quick¬ 
silver  higher,  which  continuing  to  remain  at  this  height  of  two  feet,  three  inches 
quits  the  piston,  so  that  an  apparently  empty  space  is  formed,  which  increases  in 
proportion  as  the  piston  is  drawn  up  more.  It  is  probable  that  the  same  thing  happens 
in  a  suction  pump ,  and  that  the  water  rises  only  to  a  height  of  thirty-one  feet ,  which  cor¬ 
responds  to  that  of  two  feet ,  three  inches  of  quicksilver.  And  what  is  more  remarkable  is 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  363 

that  the  syringe,  weighed  as  it  is  without  being  taken  from  the  quicksilver  or 
moved  in  any  way,  weighs  just  as  much  (although  the  apparently  empty  space  be 
as  small  as  we  please)  as  when,  the  piston  having  been  drawn  up  more,  the  ap¬ 
parently  empty  space  is  made  as  great  as  we  please,  and  that  it  always  weighs  the 
same  as  the  body  of  the  syringe  with  the  two  feet,  three  inches  of  quicksilver  it 
contains  when  there  is  not  yet  any  apparently  empty  space,  that  is,  when  the  pis¬ 
ton  has  not  yet  quit  the  quicksilver  in  the  syringe,  but  is  ready  to  separate  from 
it  at  the  slightest  pull.  So  that  the  apparently  empty  space,  although  all  the  bodies 
surrounding  it  tend  to  fill  it,  does  not  change  its  weight,  and  however  these 
spaces  may  differ  in  size,  they  differ  not  at  all  in  weight. 

7.  A  siphon  with  one  leg  ten  feet  long  and  the  other  nine  and  a  half,  having 
been  filled  with  quicksilver  and  the  two  openings  having  been  immersed  about 
an  inch  each  in  two  vessels  of  quicksilver  so  that  the  surface  of  the  quicksilver  in 
one  vessel  is  half  a  foot  higher  than  in  the  other;  when  the  siphon  is  vertical,  the 
longer  leg  does  not  attract  the  quicksilver  of  the  shorter,  but  the  quicksilver, 
breaking  at  the  top,  descends  in  each  of  the  legs  and  pours  into  the  vessels,  fall¬ 
ing  to  the  ordinary  height  of  two  feet,  three  inches  from  the  surface  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  in  each  vessel.  But  if  the  siphon  is  inclined,  the  quicksilver  in  the  vessels 
rises  again  in  the  legs,  fills  them  and  begins  to  run  from  the  shorter  leg  into  the 
longer  leg  and  thus  empties  the  shorter  leg’s  vessel;  for  the  inclining  of  tubes 
containing  an  apparent  vacuum,  when  they  are  in  a  fluid,  always  attracts  the 
fluids  in  the  vessels  if  the  openings  of  the  tubes  are  not  closed,  or  attracts  the 
finger  if  it  closes  these  openings. 

8.  The  same  siphon  having  been  entirely  filled  with  water  and  afterwards  with 
a  cord  as  above  and  the  two  openings  having  also  been  put  in  the  same  two  ves¬ 
sels  of  quicksilver,  when  the  cord  is  drawn  through  one  of  the  openings,  the 
quicksilver  rises  from  the  vessels  into  both  of  the  legs,  so  that  the  fourteenth 
part  of  the  height  of  the  water  in  one  leg,  together  with  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  which  has  risen,  is  equal  to  the  fourteenth  part  of  the  height  of  the  water 
in  the  other,  added  to  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  which  has  risen;  which  will 
be  the  case  as  long  as  the  fourteenth  part  of  the  height  of  the  water,  added  to  the 
height  of  the  quicksilver  in  each  leg,  is  two  feet,  three  inches  high,  for  afterwards 
the  water  will  divide  at  the  top  and  there  will  be  an  apparent  vacuum. 

From  these  experiments  and  from  several  others  reported  in  the  complete  book ,  in  which 
are  seen  tubes  of  all  lengths ,  sizes,  and  shapes ,  filled  with  different  fluids ,  immersed  in 
divers  ways  in  different  fluids ,  carried  from  one  to  another ,  weighed  in  several  ways ,  and 
in  which  are  observed  the  different  attractions  felt  by  the  finger  stopping  the  mouths  of 
tubes  containing  an  apparent  vacuum ,  it  is  clear  that  we  may  deduce  the  following  maxims : 

Maxims 

1.  That  it  is  repugnant  to  all  bodies  to  separate  from  each  other  and  to  admit 
an  apparent  vacuum  between  them;  that  is,  nature  abhors  an  apparent  vacuum. 

2.  That  this  abhorrence  or  repugnance  on  the  part  of  all  bodies  is  not  greater 
for  a  large  apparent  vacuum  than  for  a  small  one,  that  is,  for  a  wide  interval  of 
separation  than  for  a  narrow  one. 

3.  That  the  force  of  this  abhorrence  is  limited,  and  equal  to  that  with  which 
water  at  a  certain  height,  which  is  about  thirty-one  feet,  tends  to  flow  downward. 

4.  That  the  bodies  forming  the  boundaries  of  an  apparent  vacuum  tend  to  fill  it. 


364  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

5.  That  this  tendency  is  not  greater  for  a  large  apparent  vacuum  than  for  a 
small  one. 

6.  That  the  force  of  this  tendency  is  limited,  and  always  equal  to  that  with 
which  water  at  a  certain  height,  which  is  about  thirty-one  feet,  tends  to  flow 
downward. 

7.  That  a  force  greater  by  however  little  than  that  with  which  water  at  a  height 
of  about  thirty-one  feet  tends  to  flow  downward  is  sufficient  to  cause  an  apparent 
vacuum,  and  as  great  as  we  please,  that  is,  to  separate  bodies  by  as  great  an  inter¬ 
val  as  we  please,  provided  there  is  no  other  obstacle  to  their  separation  and  going 
apart  than  nature’s  horror  of  an  apparent  vacuum. 

Summary  of  the  second  part ,  in  which  are  reported  the  consequences  of  these  experi¬ 
ments ,  concerning  the  matter  that  might  fill  this  apparently  empty  space ,  divided 

into  several  propositions  with  their  demonstrations . 

Propositions 

1.  That  the  apparently  empty  space  is  not  filled  with  the  outside  air  surround¬ 
ing  the  tube  and  that  air  has  not  come  in  through  the  pores  of  the  glass. 

2.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  the  air  which  some  philosophers  say  is  enclosed  in 
the  pores  of  all  bodies,  air  which  would  be  in  this  way  in  the  liquid  filling  the 
tubes. 

3.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  the  air  which  some  consider  to  be  between  the  tube 
and  the  liquid  which  fills  it,  and  enclosed  in  the  interstices  or  atoms  of  the  small 
bodies  constituting  these  liquids. 

4.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  an  imperceptible  particle  of  air,  remaining  by 
chance  between  the  liquid  and  the  glass,  either  carried  by  the  finger  acting  as  a 
stopper  or  introduced  in  some  other  way,  which  would  become  extraordinarily 
rarefied,  and  which  some,  rather  than  admit  a  vacuum,  would  maintain  could 
become  sufficiently  rarefied  to  fill  the  whole  world. 

5.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  a  bit  of  quicksilver  or  water,  which,  drawn  in  one 
direction  by  the  walls  of  the  glass  and  in  the  other  by  the  force  of  the  liquid, 
becomes  rarefied  and  transformed  into  vapor,  so  that  this  reciprocal  attraction 
has  the  same  effect  as  heat,  which  transforms  these  liquids  into  vapor  and  makes 
them  volatile. 

6.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  the  spirits  of  the  liquid  contained  in  the  tube. 

7.  That  it  is  not  filled  with  a  finer  air  mixed  with  the  outside  air,  which,  sepa¬ 
rated  from  it  and  having  entered  through  the  pores  of  the  glass,  would  always 
tend  to  return  or  would  be  continually  attracted  back. 

8.  That  the  apparently  empty  space  is  not  filled  by  any  substance  known  in 
nature  and  perceptible  to  any  sense. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  CONCLUSION ,  IN  WHICH  I  GIVE  MY  OPINION 

After  having  demonstrated  that  none  of  the  substances  perceived  by  our  senses  and  known 
by  us  fills  this  apparently  empty  space ,  I  shall  think ,  until  I  am  shown  the  existence  of  a 
substance  filling  it ,  that  it  is  really  empty  and  void  of  all  matter. 

Therefore  I  shall  say  of  the  real  vacuum  what  I  have  shown  of  the  apparent  vacuum , 
and  I  shall  consider  the  above  maxims  as  true  when  now  enunciated  of  the  absolute  vacuum 
as  before  of  the  apparent. 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM 


365 


Maxims 

1.  That  it  is  repugnant  to  all  bodies  to  separate  from  each  other  and  to  admit 
a  vacuum  between  them;  that  is,  nature  abhors  a  vacuum. 

2.  That  this  abhorrence  or  repugnance  on  the  part  of  all  bodies  is  not  greater 
for  a  large  vacuum  than  for  a  small  one,  that  is,  for  a  wide  interval  of  separation 
than  for  a  narrow  one. 

3.  That  the  force  of  this  abhorrence  is  limited,  and  equal  to  that  with  which 
water  at  a  certain  height,  which  is  about  thirty-one  feet,  tends  to  flow  downward. 

4.  That  the  bodies  forming  the  boundaries  of  a  vacuum  tend  to  fill  it. 

5.  That  this  tendency  is  not  greater  for  a  large  vacuum  than  for  a  small  one. 

6.  That  the  force  of  this  tendency  is  limited,  and  always  equal  to  that  with 
which  water  at  a  certain  height,  which  is  about  thirty-one  feet,  tends  to  flow 
downward. 

7.  That  a  force  greater  by  however  little  than  that  with  which  water  at  a  height 
of  about  thirty-one  feet  tends  to  flow  downward  is  sufficient  to  cause  a  vacuum, 
and  as  great  as  we  please,  that  is,  to  separate  bodies  by  as  great  an  interval  as  we 
please,  provided  there  is  no  other  obstacle  to  their  separation  and  going  apart 
than  nature’s  horror  of  a  vacuum. 

AFTERWARDS  I  REPLY  TO  THE  OBJECTIONS  THAT  COULD  BE 
MADE ,  OF  WHICH  THE  CHIEF  ARE: 

Objections 

1.  That  this  proposition,  a  space  is  empty,  is  repugnant  to  common  sense. 

2.  That  this  proposition,  nature  abhors  a  vacuum  and  nevertheless  permits  it 
to  exist,  accuses  her  of  impotence  or  implies  contradiction. 

3.  That  many  experiments,  and  even  our  everyday  experience,  show  that  na¬ 
ture  cannot  suffer  the  existence  of  a  vacuum. 

4.  That  an  imperceptible  matter,  unheard  of  and  unknown  to  any  sense,  fills 
this  space. 

5.  That  since  light  is  either  an  accident  or  a  substance,  it  is  not  possible  for  it 
to  exist  in  a  vacuum  if  it  is  an  accident,  and  that  it  fills  the  apparently  empty 
space  if  it  is  a  substance. 

PASCAL’S  ANSWER 

To  the  Very  Good  Reverend  Father  Noel ,  Rector ,  of  the  Society  of  Jesus ,  Paris 
My  Very  Reverend  Father, 

The  honor  you  have  done  me  in  writing  to  me  obliges  me  to  give  up  my  in¬ 
tention  of  resolving  none  of  the  difficulties  mentioned  in  my  abridgement  except 
in  the  complete  work  on  which  I  am  at  present  engaged;  for  since  the  civilities 
of  your  letter  are  joined  to  the  objections  you  raise  against  me,  I  cannot  divide 
my  answer  nor  acknowledge  the  former  without  satisfying  the  latter. 

But  to  proceed  with  more  order,  permit  me  to  remind  you  of  a  universal  rule 
which  is  applicable  to  all  the  particular  subjects  in  which  our  concern  is  with 
establishing  truth.  I  do  not  doubt  your  acceptance  of  it  since  it  is  generally  ad¬ 
mitted  by  all  who  consider  things  with  an  open  mind  and  since  it  constitutes  the 
chief  part  of  the  method  of  the  schools  in  dealing  with  the  sciences  and  that  used 
by  seekers  after  what  is  really  solid,  filling  and  fully  satisfying  the  mind.  The  rule 


3 66  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

is  never  to  make  a  decisive  judgment,  affirming  or  denying  a  proposition,  unless 
what  one  affirms  or  denies  satisfies  one  of  the  two  following  conditions:  either 
that  of  itself  it  appear  so  clearly  and  distinctly  to  sense  or  to  reason,  according  as 
it  is  subject  to  one  or  the  other,  that  the  mind  cannot  doubt  its  certainty,  and 
this  is  what  we  call  a  principle  or  axiom ,  as,  for  example,  if  equals  are  added  to  equals , 
the  results  are  equal;  or  that  it  be  deduced  as  an  infallible  and  necessary  consequence 
from  such  principles  or  axioms,  upon  whose  certainty  entirely  depends  that  of 
the  consequences  correctly  drawn  from  them,  as  this  proposition,  the  three  angles 
of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles ,  “which  not  being  self-evident,  ”  is  evidently 
demonstrated  as  an  infallible  consequence  of  such  axioms.  Everything  satisfying 
one  of  these  two  conditions  is  certain  and  true,  and  everything  satisfying  neither 
is  considered  doubtful  and  uncertain.  We  pass  decisive  judgment  on  things  of 
the  first  kind  and  leave  the  rest  undecided,  calling  them,  according  to  their  deserts, 
now  a  vision ,  now  a  caprice ,  occasionally  a  fancy ,  sometimes  an  idea ,  and  at  the 
most  a  happy  thought;  and  since  it  is  rash  to  affirm  them,  we  incline  rather  to  the 
negative,  ready  however  to  return  to  the  affirmative  if  a  convincing  demonstration 
brings  their  truth  to  light.  And  we  reserve  for  the  mysteries  of  the  faith,  revealed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  that  submission  of  mind  which  leads  us  to  believe  in 
mysteries  hidden  from  sense  and  reason. 

This  principle  having  been  laid  down,  I  turn  to  your  letter,  in  whose  first  lines, 
to  prove  that  the  space  in  question  is  a  body,  you  make  use  of  the  following 
words :  I  say  that  it  is  a  body  since  it  acts  tike  a  body ,  transmitting  light  with  refraction 
and  reflection ,  and  retarding  the  motion  of  another  body.  Upon  which  I  observe  that 
you  base  your  claim  that  it  is  a  body  upon  two  principles:  the  first  is  that  it  trans¬ 
mits  light  with  refraction  and  reflection;  the  second,  that  it  retards  the  motion  of 
a  body.  Of  these  two  principles  the  first  has  seemed  true  to  none  of  those  who 
have  tried  to  get  experimental  evidence  of  it,  and  we  have  always  found  on  the 
contrary  that  the  ray  penetrating  the  glass  and  the  apparently  empty  space  has  no 
refraction  other  than  that  caused  by  the  glass,  and  that  therefore  if  some  matter 
fills  this  space,  either  it  in  nowise  bends  the  ray  or  the  refraction  is  not  perceptible; 
so  that  since  you  have  undoubtedly  experienced  nothing  to  the  contrary,  I  per¬ 
ceive  that  the  meaning  of  your  words  is  that  the  ray  reflected  or  refracted  by  the 
glass  passes  through  this  space.  From  that  and  from  the  fact  that  bodies  take 
time  to  fall  there,  you  wish  to  conclude  that  it  is  filled  by  a  material  substance 
which  transmits  the  light  and  causes  the  retardation  of  motion. 

But,  Reverend  Father,  if  we  refer  this  to  the  method  of  reasoning  we  have 
spoken  of,  we  shall  find  that  we  should  first  have  to  agree  upon  the  definition  of 
empty  space,  of  light,  and  of  motion,  and  to  show  from  the  nature  of  these  things 
a  manifest  contradiction  in  the  propositions:  "Light  penetrates  empty  space,  and 
it  takes  time  for  a  body  to  move  there.”  Until  then  your  proof  cannot  hold,  and 
since  moreover  the  nature  of  light  is  unknown  both  to  you  and  to  me,  since  of 
all  those  who  have  tried  to  define  it  not  one  has  satisfied  any  seeker  after  experi- 
enceable  truths,  and  since  it  will  perhaps  remain  eternally  unknown  to  us,  I  fore¬ 
see  that  it  will  be  a  long  time  before  this  argument  acquires  enough  strength  to 
be  convincing. 

For  I  beg  you  to  consider  how  it  is  possible  to  conclude  infallibly  that  the 
nature  of  light  is  such  that  it  cannot  exist  in  the  void  when  we  do  not  know  what 
the  nature  of  light  is.  But  if  our  knowledge  of  it  were  as  complete  as  is  our  ig- 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  367 

norance,  we  should  know  perhaps  that  it  would  exist  in  the  void  with  more  brilli¬ 
ance  than  in  any  other  medium  since  we  perceive  that  it  increases  its  strength 
according  as  the  medium  in  which  it  is  becomes  rarer,  and  so  somehow  closer  to 
nothingness.  And  if  we  knew  the  nature  of  motion,  I  do  not  at  all  doubt  that  it 
would  appear  to  us  that  motion  ought  to  take  almost  as  much  time  in  a  vacuum 
as  in  air,  whose  non-resistance  is  apparent  in  the  equal  falling-time  of  bodies  of 
different  weights. 

This  is  why,  with  our  slight  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  these  things,  if  by  a 
similar  liberty  I  conceive  a  thought  which  I  offer  as  a  principle,  I  can  say  with  as 
much  show  of  reason:  light  subsists  in  a  vacuum  and  it  takes  time  for  a  body  to 
move  there;  but  light  penetrates  this  apparently  empty  space  and  it  takes  time 
for  a  body  to  move  there;  hence  it  may  be  really  empty. 

Therefore  let  us  put  off  this  proof  until  such  time  as  we  shall  know  the  nature 
of  light.  Until  then  I  cannot  admit  your  principle,  and  it  will  be  hard  for  you  to 
prove  it.  And  let  us  not,  I  beg  you,  draw  infallible  consequences  from  the  nature 
of  a  thing  when  we  do  not  know  it;  otherwise  I  should  be  afraid  that  you  were 
not  in  agreement  with  me  on  the  conditions  necessary  for  a  perfect  demonstra¬ 
tion,  and  that  you  would  call  certain  what  we  only  call  doubtful. 

In  the  rest  of  your  letter,  as  if  you  had  invincibly  established  that  this  void 
space  is  a  body,  you  concern  yourself  only  with  finding  what  body  it  is,  and  to 
decide  positively  what  kind  of  matter  fills  it  you  begin  as  follows:  "Let  us  assume 
that,  just  as  blood  is  made  up  of  several  liquids  mingled  together,  so  air  is  made 
up  of  air  and  fire  and  the  (remaining)  four  elements  which  enter  into  the  com¬ 
position  of  all  natural  bodies."  You  then  assume  that  this  fire  can  be  separated 
from  the  air,  and  that  once  separated  it  can  penetrate  the  pores  of  the  glass;  you 
again  assume  that  once  separated  it  has  an  inclination  to  return  and  again  that  it  is 
incessantly  drawn  back;  and  you  explain  these  statements,  intelligible  enough  in 
themselves,  by  bringing  in  certain  analogies. 

But  I  think  you  offer  this  as  an  idea,  Father,  and  not  as  a  demonstration,  and 
however  hard  it  is  for  me  to  reconcile  this  belief  with  the  end  of  your  letter,  I 
believe  that  if  you  wanted  to  give  proofs,  they  would  not  be  so  unfounded.  For 
in  these  times  when  so  many  learned  men  are  trying  with  such  care  to  find  what 
matter  fills  this  space,  when  this  problem  is  agitating  so  many  minds,  it  would  be 
hard  for  me  to  believe  you  would  offer  as  the  longed-for  solution  of  a  question 
so  justly  doubtful  nothing  but  a  substance  of  which  you  suppose  not  only  the 
properties  but  the  very  existence  itself,  so  that  if  anyone  will  make  the  contrary 
assumption ,  he  will  draw  a  contrary  consequence  just  as  necessarily.  If  this  kind  of 
proof  is  acceptable,  there  will  no  longer  be  any  difficulty  in  solving  the  greatest 
difficulties.  And  the  ocean  tides  and  the  magnet’s  attraction  will  become  easy  to 
understand,  if  it  is  permissible  to  make  substances  and  properties  for  the  purpose. 

For  all  things  of  this  kind  whose  existence  is  not  manifest  to  sense  are  as  hard 
to  believe  as  they  are  easy  to  invent.  Many  persons,  even  among  the  most  learned 
men  of  the  day,  have  opposed  me  with  this  same  substance  before  you  (but  sim¬ 
ply  as  an  idea  and  not  as  a  certain  truth),  and  that  is  why  I  mentioned  it  among 
my  propositions.  Others,  to  fill  empty  space  with  some  kind  of  matter,  have 
imagined  one  with  which  they  have  filled  the  entire  universe,  because  imagina¬ 
tion  has  this  peculiarity  that  it  produces  the  greatest  things  with  as  little  time 
and  trouble  as  little  things;  some  have  considered  this  matter  as  of  the  same  sub- 


368  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

stance  as  the  sky  and  the  elements,  and  others  of  a  different  substance,  as  their 
fancy  dictated,  for  they  disposed  of  it  as  of  their  own  work. 

But  if  we  ask  of  them,  as  of  you,  that  they  show  us  this  matter,  they  answer 
that  it  cannot  be  seen;  if  we  ask  that  it  make  a  sound,  they  say  it  cannot  be  heard, 
and  so  with  all  the  remaining  senses;  and  they  think  they  have  done  much  when 
they  have  convicted  others  of  powerlessness  to  show  that  it  does  not  exist  by 
depriving  themselves  of  all  power  to  show  that  it  does. 

But  we  find  more  cause  to  deny  its  existence  on  account  of  our  inability  to 
prove  it  than  to  believe  it  for  the  sole  reason  that  it  cannot  be  shown  not  to  be. 

For  we  cannot  believe  in  all  these  substances  at  once  without  making  nature  a 
monster,  and  since  reason  cannot  incline  more  toward  one  than  toward  another  be¬ 
cause  she  finds  them  equally  remote,  she  rejects  them  all  to  avoid  an  unjust  choice. 

I  know  you  can  say  that  you  have  not  made  this  matter  of  yours  all  by  yourself 
and  that  many  physicists  had  already  worked  at  it.  But  in  this  matter  we  base 
nothing  on  authority;  when  we  cite  authors,  we  cite  their  demonstrations  and 
not  their  names;  we  respect  them  only  in  historical  matters,  so  that  if  the  authors 
you  cite  said  they  saw  those  little  fiery  bodies  mingled  with  the  air,  I  should 
sufficiently  defer  to  their  sincerity  and  to  their  accuracy  to  believe  they  were  tell¬ 
ing  the  truth  and  I  should  believe  them  as  historians;  but  since  they  only  say  they 
think  these  particles  are  constituents  of  the  air,  you  will  permit  me  to  remain  in 
my  first  doubt. 

Finally,  Father,  consider,  I  beg  you,  that  all  the  men  there  are  put  together 
could  not  demonstrate  that  any  body  succeeds  that  which  leaves  the  apparent 
vacuum,  and  again  that  it  is  impossible  for  all  the  men  there  are  to  show  that 
when  the  water  refills  it  some  body  has  left.  Should  not  that  be  sufficient,  follow¬ 
ing  your  maxims,  to  assure  the  emptiness  of  the  space?  However  I  simply  say 
that  my  opinion  is  that  it  is  empty.  Judge  whether  those  who  speak  with  so  much 
restraint  about  something  they  have  a  right  to  speak  about  with  so  much  assur¬ 
ance  will  find  it  possible  to  make  a  decisive  judgment  on  the  existence  of  this 
fiery  matter,  so  doubtful  and  so  little  established. 

After  having  supposed  this  substance  with  all  the  properties  you  wanted  it  to 
have,  you  explain  some  of  my  experiments.  It  is  not  a  very  difficult  thing  to  ex¬ 
plain  how  an  effect  can  be  produced  if  we  suppose  the  substance,  the  nature,  and 
the  qualities  of  its  cause;  however  it  is  hard  for  those  who  imagine  them  to  resist 
an  idle  satisfaction  and  a  secret  charm  which  they  find  in  their  invention,  espe¬ 
cially  when  they  have  worked  them  out  so  well  that  from  the  imaginations  they 
have  supposed  they  necessarily  infer  truths  already  evident. 

But  I  feel  obliged  to  say  a  word  or  two  to  you  in  this  connection.  Every  time 
to  find  the  cause  of  several  known  phenomena  we  frame  an  hypothesis,  this  hy¬ 
pothesis  can  be  of  three  kinds. 

For  sometimes  an  obvious  absurdity  follows  from  its  negation,  and  then  the 
hypothesis  is  true  and  certain;  or  an  obvious  absurdity  follows  from  its  affirma¬ 
tion,  and  then  the  hypothesis  is  considered  false;  and  when  we  have  not  yet  been 
able  to  draw  an  absurdity  either  from  its  negation  or  from  its  affirmation,  the 
hypothesis  remains  doubtful.  So  that  to  establish  the  truth  of  an  hypothesis  it  is 
not  enough  that  all  the  phenomena  should  follow  from  it,  whereas  if  there  follows 
from  it  something  opposed  to  a  single  phenomenon,  that  is  enough  to  make  cer¬ 
tain  its  falsity. 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  369 

For  example,  if  someone  finds  a  hot  stone  without  knowing  why  it  is  hot, 
would  he  who  should  reason  as  follows  be  thought  to  have  found  the  true  cause: 
Let  us  assume  that  this  stone  has  been  put  in  a  big  fire,  from  which  it  has  very 
recently  been  removed;  therefore  this  stone  should  still  be  hot;  but  it  is  hot; 
consequently  it  had  been  put  in  the  fire?  For  that,  fire  would  have  to  be  the  only 
cause  of  a  stone’s  being  hot;  but  since  such  heat  can  come  from  the  sun  or  from 
friction,  this  inference  would  have  no  cogency.  For  just  as  the  same  cause  can 
produce  several  different  effects,  so  the  same  effect  can  be  produced  by  several 
different  causes.  Thus  in  the  discourse  of  natural  reason  on  the  motion  or  the 
stability  of  the  earth  all  the  phenomena  of  the  motions  and  retrogradations  of  the 
planets  follow  perfectly  from  the  hypotheses  of  Ptolemy,  of  Tycho,  of  Coper¬ 
nicus  and  from  many  others  that  could  be  framed,  of  all  of  which  only  one  can 
be  true.  But  who  will  venture  to  discern  so  far,  and  who  can  without  risk  of  error 
support  one  to  the  prejudice  of  the  others,  as  in  the  analogy  of  the  stone  who  can 
with  insistence  maintain  it  is  hot  because  of  fire  without  making  himself  ridicu¬ 
lous? 

You  see  from  this  that  even  if  all  the  phenomena  of  my  experiments  followed 
from  your  hypothesis,  it  would  still  be  like  the  rest;  and  that  always  remaining 
in  terms  of  probability,  it  would  never  reach  those  of  demonstration.  But  I  hope 
one  day  to  make  you  see  more  at  length  that  the  necessary  consequences  of  its 
affirmation  are  opposed  to  the  experiments.  And  to  touch  upon  one  of  them  in  a 
few  words  here:  If  it  is  true,  as  you  suppose,  that  the  apparent  vacuum  is  filled 
with  that  more  subtle  and  fiery  air,  and  that  it  has  the  inclination  you  suppose  to 
return  to  the  air  it  left,  and  that  the  outside  air  has  the  force  to  draw  it  back  like  a 
squeezed  sponge ,  and  that  it  is  by  this  mutual  attraction  that  the  quicksilver  is  held 
suspended  and  is  even  made  to  rise  again  when  the  tube  is  inclined;  it  necessarily 
follows  that  when  the  apparent  vacuum  is  greater,  a  larger  column  of  quicksilver 
should  be  suspended  (contrary  to  what  is  seen  in  the  experiments).  For  since  all 
the  parts  of  the  inside  and  outside  air  have  this  power  of  attraction,  it  is  certain  by 
all  the  laws  of  mechanics  that  their  quantity,  increased  directly  as  the  space,  must 
necessarily  increase  their  effect,  as  a  large  sponge  when  squeezed  absorbs  more 
water  than  a  small  one. 

But  if  to  resolve  this  difficulty  you  make  a  second  supposition;  and  if  you  make 
another  quality  on  purpose  to  save  this  awkwardness,  which,  still  not  accurate 
enough,  obliges  you  to  imagine  a  third  supposition  to  save  the  other  two,  without 
any  proof,  any  support;  I  shall  never  have  anything  to  say  except  what  I  have 
already  said,  or  rather  I  shall  think  I  have  already  answered  you. 

But  when  I  say  this,  Father,  and  when  I  anticipate  in  some  sort  these  last  sup¬ 
positions,  I  myself  make  a  false  supposition,  for  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  you  give 
us  something,  it  will  be  supported  by  convincing  arguments,  since  otherwise  you 
would  be  imitating  those  who  wish  only  to  show  that  they  have  no  lack  of  words. 

Finally,  Father,  to  restate  the  whole  of  my  answer,  if  it  should  be  true  that  this 
apparently  empty  space  where  a  body  (which  I  am  very  far  from  granting  you), 
and  the  air  were  filled  with  fiery  spirits  (which  I  do  not  even  find  probable),  and 
that  they  had  the  qualities  you  assign  them  (which  is  only  a  mere  idea,  evident 
neither  to  you  nor  to  anyone) ;  it  would  not  follow  that  this  space  was  filled  with 
them.  And  again  if  it  should  be  true  that  by  supposing  it  were  filled  with  them 
(which  is  in  no  way  apparent)  we  could  deduce  everything  in  the  experiments. 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


370 

the  most  favorable  judgment  we  could  make  of  this  opinion  would  be  that  it  is 
probable.  But  since  we  necessarily  infer  from  it  things  opposed  to  the  experi¬ 
ments,  judge  what  place  it  should  have  among  the  three  kinds  of  hypotheses  we 
spoke  of  above. 

Toward  the  end  of  your  letter,  to  define  body,  you  only  mention  a  few  acci¬ 
dents,  and  those  relative,  as  top ,  bottom ,  right ,  left ,  which  actually  constitute  the 
definition  of  space,  and  which  apply  to  a  body  only  in  so  far  as  it  occupies  space. 
For  according  to  your  own  authors  body  is  defined  as  what  is  composed  of  form  and 
matter;  and  what  we  call  a  void  space  is  a  space  having  length,  breadth,  and  depth, 
motionless  and  capable  of  receiving  and  containing  a  body  of  the  same  size  and 
shape;  this  is  what  we  call  a  solid  in  geometry,  where  we  consider  only  abstract 
and  immaterial  things.  So  that  the  essential  difference  between  empty  space  and 
body,  which  has  length,  breadth,  and  depth,  is  that  one  is  immobile  and  the  other 
is  mobile,  and  that  one  can  receive  within  itself  a  body  which  penetrates  its  di¬ 
mensions,  whereas  the  other  cannot;  for  the  maxim  on  the  impenetrability  of 
dimensions  is  to  be  understood  only  of  the  dimensions  of  two  material  bodies; 
otherwise  it  would  not  be  universally  accepted.  Whence  it  can  be  seen  that  there 
is  as  much  difference  between  nothingness  and  empty  space  as  there  is  between 
empty  space  and  material  body,  and  that  thus  empty  space  is  a  mean  between 
material  body  and  nothingness.  That  is  why  the  maxim  of  Aristotle  you  mention, 
that  non-beings  do  not  have  differences ,  is  to  be  understood  of  true  nothingness  and 
not  of  empty  space. 

I  take  leave  of  your  letter  where  you  say  that  you  do  not  recognize  as  being  held 
by  any  physicist  the  fourth  of  my  objections,  namely,  that  a  matter  unheard  of  and 
not  known  to  any  sense  fills  this  space.  To  which  I  answer  that  I  can  assure  you 
of  the  contrary,  since  it  is  held  by  one  of  the  most  celebrated  physicists  of  our 
time,  whom  you  could  have  found  in  his  works  filling  the  whole  universe  with  a 
universal  matter,  imperceptible  and  unheard  of,  of  the  same  substance  as  the  sky 
and  the  elements;  and  moreover  that  in  examining  your  own  matter  I  have  found 
it  to  be  so  imperceptible  and  to  have  qualities  so  unheard  of,  that  is,  never  con¬ 
sidered  as  belonging  to  it,  that  I  find  it  to  be  of  the  same  nature. 

The  sentence  preceding  your  final  civilities  defines  light  as  follows:  Light  is  a 
luminary  motion  of  rays  composed  of  lucid ,  that  is ,  luminous  bodies;  with  respect  to 
which  I  must  say  that  it  seems  to  me  you  should  first  have  defined  luminary ,  and 
lucid  or  luminous  body ,  for  until  that  is  done  I  cannot  understand  what  light  is. 
And  since  we  never  use  in  definitions  the  term  defined ,  I  should  have  difficulty  in 
accepting  yours,  which  says  that  light  (lumiere)  is  a  luminary  motion  of  luminous 
bodies.  There  you  have  my  views,  Father,  which  I  shall  always  submit  to  yours. 

For  the  rest,  you  cannot  be  denied  the  glory  of  having  maintained  Peripatetic 
physics  as  well  as  it  can  be  maintained;  and  I  find  your  letter  not  less  a  mark  of 
the  weakness  of  the  opinion  you  defend  than  of  the  vigor  of  your  mind. 

Certainly  the  skill  with  which  you  have  defended  the  impossibility  of  a  vacuum 
in  the  decline  of  its  strength  makes  it  easy  to  see  that  with  an  equal  effort  you 
would  invincibly  have  established  the  opposed  opinion  in  the  advantages  given  it 
by  the  experiments. 

The  same  indisposition  that  has  deprived  me  of  the  honor  of  seeing  you  has 
kept  me  from  writing  with  my  own  hand.  It  is  for  this  reason  I  beg  you  to  excuse 
the  mistakes  of  my  letter,  especially  in  spelling. 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  371 

I  am  with  all  my  heart,  Very  Reverend  Father,  your  very  humble  and  very 
obedient  servant, 

Pascal 

Paris,  October  29,  1647. 

LETTER  FROM  PASCAL  TO  M.  LE  PAILLEUR, 
CONCERNING  FATHER  NOEL,  JESUIT. 

Sir, 

Since  you  wish  to  know  why  I  broke  off  the  correspondence  which  the  Rever¬ 
end  Father  Noel  had  done  me  the  honor  of  engaging  me  in,  I  want  to  give  you 
prompt  satisfaction;  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  you  blamed  my  conduct  before 
knowing  its  cause,  you  will  approve  it  when  you  know  the  reasons  that  have  held 
me  back. 

The  strongest  is  that  the  Reverend  Father  Talon,  when  he  took  the  trouble  to 
bring  me  Father  Noel's  last  letter,  informed  me  in  the  presence  of  three  of  your 
good  friends  that  Father  Noel  was  distressed  by  my  illness,  that  he  feared  my  first 
letter  had  affected  my  health,  and  that  he  begged  me  not  to  run  the  risk  of  a 
second;  in  a  word,  not  to  answer;  that  we  could  clear  up  by  word  of  mouth  any 
remaining  difficulties,  and  that  moreover  he  begged  me  not  to  show  his  letter  to 
anyone,  that  since  he  had  written  it  only  for  me,  he  wished  it  to  be  seen  by  no  one 
else,  and  that  to  make  letters  public  was  to  violate  their  nature,  addressed,  as  they 
are,  to  particular  persons. 

I  confess  that  if  this  proposal  had  come  from  anyone  except  these  good  fathers, 
I  should  have  been  suspicious  and  I  should  have  feared  that  its  author  wished  to 
take  advantage  of  my  silence  after  having  secured  it  by  trickery.  But  I  had  so  lit¬ 
tle  doubt  of  their  sincerity  that  I  promised  everything  without  reservation  or  fear. 
Afterwards  I  was  especially  careful  to  keep  Father  Noel’s  letter  to  myself  and  not 
to  answer  it.  Whereupon  several  persons  and  even  some  Jesuit  fathers  who  were 
not  well  informed  of  the  wishes  of  Father  Noel  took  occasion  to  say  that,  having 
found  in  his  letter  the  overthrow  of  my  opinions,  I  concealed  its  beauties  lest  my 
shame  be  discovered,  and  that  it  was  by  my  weakness  alone  I  was  prevented  from 
replying. 

You  see,  Sir,  how  unfortunate  for  me  this  circumstance  was,  since  I  could  not 
conceal  the  letter  without  disadvantage  nor  make  it  public  without  breach  of 
faith,  and  that  my  honor  was  equally  threatened  both  by  a  reply  and  by  silence  in 
that  one  betrayed  my  promise  and  the  other  my  interest. 

However  I  religiously  kept  my  word,  and  I  was  saving  my  reply  to  his  letter  for 
the  treatise  in  which  I  have  to  make  specific  answers  to  all  the  objections  made 
against  the  proposition  advanced  in  my  abridgement,  "that  this  space  is  not  filled 
with  any  substance  perceptible  to  sense  and  known  in  nature."  Accordingly  I 
thought  I  was  not  at  all  obliged  to  be  in  a  hurry  with  my  reply,  which  I  wished  to 
make  more  exact  by  postponing  it  for  a  while.  To  these  considerations  I  added 
this,  that  since  all  differences  of  this  kind  go  on  forever  unless  someone  breaks 
them  off  and  since  they  cannot  be  concluded  unless  one  of  the  two  parties  begins 
to  make  an  end,  I  thought  that  the  age,  distinction,  and  calling  of  Father  Noel 
obliged  me  to  yield  him  the  advantage  of  having  had  the  last  word  in  the  matter. 
But  besides  all  these  reasons,  I  confess  that  his  letter  alone  was  enough  to  give  me 
a  dispensation  from  answering,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  find  that  it  seems  to  have 


372  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

been  expressly  conceived  in  terms  that  would  not  put  upon  me  the  obligation  of 
a  reply. 

To  make  this  clear  I  shall  put  before  you  the  points  Father  Noel  takes  up,  but 
in  a  different  order  such  as  he  undoubtedly  would  have  followed  in  a  more  elabo¬ 
rate  work  but  did  not  judge  necessary  in  the  artlessness  of  a  letter;  for  each  of 
these  points  is  scattered  throughout  the  whole  body  of  his  discourse  and  lodged 
in  almost  every  part  of  it. 

It  is  his  intention  to  state  that  he  was  led  by  my  letter  to  give  up  his  first  opin¬ 
ion  without  being  able  however  to  fall  in  with  mine.  So  that  we  may  consider  his 
letter  as  having  two  parts,  of  which  one  contains  the  things  that  prevent  him  from 
agreeing  with  me  and  the  other  those  that  support  his  second  view.  With  respect 
to  each  of  these  parts  I  hope  to  show  you  how  little  I  was  obliged  to  reply. 

As  to  the  first,  concerning  the  things  that  keep  him  from  my  view,  his  first  dif¬ 
ficulties  are  that  the  apparently  empty  space  can  only  be  a  body  since  it  receives 
and  transmits  light,  and  since  it  retards  the  motion  of  another  body.  But  I  thought 
I  had  sufficiently  shown  him  in  my  letter  the  weakness  of  these  same  objections 
as  contained  in  his  first  letter;  for  I  told  him  in  tolerably  clear  words  that  even  if 
it  takes  time  for  bodies  to  fall  in  this  space  and  even  if  it  is  penetrated  by  light, 
these  effects  should  not  necessarily  be  attributed  to  a  substance  filling  it,  since  it 
is  possible  that  they  belong  to  the  nature  of  motion  and  of  light,  and  that  as  long 
as  we  remain  in  our  present  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  these  things,  we  should 
make  no  inferences  from  it  since  they  would  be  based  merely  on  uncertainty  ;  and 
that,  just  as  Father  Noel  infers  from  the  appearance  of  these  effects  that  this  space 
is  filled  by  a  substance  receiving  light  and  retarding  motion,  it  is  possible  with  as 
much  reason  to  infer  from  these  effects  that  light  subsists  and  motion  requires 
time  in  a  vacuum,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  so  many  other  things  were  favorable  to 
this  latter  view  that  it  was,  in  the  opinion  of  the  learned,  incomparably  more 
probable  than  the  other  even  before  it  received  the  support  of  these  experiments. 

But  if  Father  Noel  has  shown  here  that  he  paid  little  attention  to  that  part  of  my 
letter,  he  gives  evidence  of  not  having  understood  another  part  by  the  second 
thing  shocking  him  in  my  view;  for  he  imputes  to  me  an  opinion  contrary  to  the 
terms  both  of  my  letter  and  of  my  printed  statement  and  entirely  opposed  to  the 
foundation  of  all  my  maxims.  He  imagines  that  I  decisively  asserted  the  real  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  vacuum,  and  on  the  basis  of  this  imagination,  which  he  takes  as  cer¬ 
tain  truth,  he  exercises  his  pen  to  show  the  weakness  of  the  assertion. 

However  he  could  have  seen  I  wrote  in  my  printed  statement  that  my  conclu¬ 
sion  is  simply  that  I  shall  think  "this  space  is  empty  until  I  have  been  shown  that 
some  substance  fills  it,"  which  is  not  an  assertion  of  the  reality  of  the  vacuum; 
and  he  could  also  have  seen  that  I  wrote  in  my  letter  the  following  words,  which 
seem  to  me  sufficiently  clear:  "Finally,  Father,  consider,  I  beg  you,  that  all  the 
men  there  are  put  together  could  not  demonstrate  that  any  body  succeeds  that 
which  leaves  the  apparent  vacuum,  and  again  that  it  is  impossible  for  all  the  men 
there  are  to  show  that  when  the  water  refills  it  some  body  has  left.  Should  not  that 
be  sufficient,  following  your  maxims,  to  assure  the  emptiness  of  the  space?  How¬ 
ever  I  simply  say  that  my  opinion  is  that  it  is  empty.  Judge  whether  those  who 
speak  with  so  much  restraint  about  something  they  have  a  right  to  speak  about 
with  so  much  assurance  will  find  it  possible  to  make  a  decisive  judgment  on  the 
existence  of  this  fiery  matter,  so  doubtful  and  so  little  established." 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  373 

Accordingly  I  should  never  have  guessed  what  gave  rise  to  this  idea  in  Father 
Noel  if  he  had  not  revealed  it  to  me  himself  in  the  first  page,  where  he  faithfully 
repeats  the  definition  of  void  space  I  gave  in  my  letter,  which  is  as  follows:  '  What 
we  call  a  void  space  is  a  space  having  length,  breadth,  and  depth,  motionless  and 
capable  of  receiving  and  containing  a  body  of  the  same  size  and  shape;  this  is 
what  we  call  a  solid  in  geometry,  where  we  consider  only  abstract  and  immaterial 
things.”  After  having  repeated  this  definition  word  for  word  he  immediately  de¬ 
rives  from  it  this  consequence:  "There,  Sir,  is  your  notion  of  void  space,  very 
clearly  stated;  I  am  willing  to  believe  that  all  this  is  obvious  to  you  and  that  your 
mind  is  convinced  and  fully  satisfied  by  it,  since  you  affirm  it.” 

If  he  had  not  repeated  my  own  words,  I  should  have  supposed  he  had  misread 
them  or  that  they  had  been  badly  written,  and  that  instead  of  the  first  words,  / 
call,  he  must  have  found,  I  assert.  But  since  he  quoted  my  entire  sentence,  I  can 
only  suppose  he  believes  one  of  these  terms  necessarily  implies  the  other,  and 
that  he  does  not  distinguish  between  defining  a  thing  and  asserting  its  existence. 

Therefore  he  believed  that  I  asserted  the  real  existence  of  the  vacuum  by  the 
very  terms  with  which  I  defined  it.  I  know  that  those  who  are  not  accustomed  to 
seeing  things  handled  in  the  true  order  imagine  that  we  cannot  define  a  thing 
unless  we  are  assured  of  its  existence;  but  they  should  notice  that  we  ought  always 
to  define  things  before  investigating  their  possibility,  and  that  the  steps  leading 
to  the  knowledge  of  truths  are  definition,  axiom,  and  proof.  For  first  we  conceive 
the  idea  of  a  thing;  then  we  give  a  name  to  this  idea,  that  is,  we  define  it;  and 
finally  we  try  to  discover  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the  thing.  If  we  find  it  is  impos¬ 
sible,  it  passes  for  error;  if  we  demonstrate  its  truth,  it  passes  for  truth;  and  as 
long  as  we  can  demonstrate  neither  its  possibility  nor  its  impossibility,  it  passes  for 
imagination.  Whence  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between 
the  definition  of  a  thing  and  the  assertion  of  its  existence,  and  that  we  can  just  as 
well  define  an  impossible  thing  as  a  true  thing.  Thus  we  can  call  rectilinear  and 
rectangular  a  triangle  we  should  imagine  as  having  two  right  angles,  and  after¬ 
wards  show  that  such  a  triangle  is  impossible;  thus  Euclid  first  defines  parallels 
and  shows  afterwards  that  they  can  be,  and  the  definition  of  the  circle  precedes 
the  postulate  which  lays  down  its  possibility;  thus  the  astronomers  have  given 
names  to  the  concentric  and  eccentric  circles  and  to  the  epicycles  they  have 
imagined  in  the  heavens,  without  possessing  any  certainty  that  the  stars  actually 
describe  such  figures  by  their  motions;  thus  the  Peripatetics  have  given  a  name  to 
that  fiery  sphere  whose  truth  it  would  be  difficult  to  demonstrate. 

This  is  why  when  I  wished  to  oppose  Father  Noel’s  decision,  which  excluded 
the  vacuum  from  nature,  I  thought  that  I  could  not  enter  upon  this  attempt  or 
even  say  a  word  about  the  matter  until  I  had  declared  what  I  understand  by  the 
word  vacuum ,  to  which  I  felt  myself  the  more  obliged  by  certain  passages  in 
Father  Noel’s  first  letter  from  which  I  judged  that  his  notion  of  the  vacuum  was 
not  in  conformity  with  mine.  I  saw  that  he  was  unable  to  distinguish  between 
dimensions  and  matter,  between  immateriality  and  non-being;  and  that  this  con¬ 
fusion  made  him  conclude  that  when  I  attributed  to  the  apparently  empty  space 
length,  breadth,  and  depth,  I  committed  myself  to  saying  that  it  was  a  body,  and 
that  from  the  moment  I  made  it  immaterial,  I  reduced  it  to  nothing.  To  untangle 
all  these  ideas,  I  stated  this  definition  for  him,  in  which  he  can  see  that  what  we 
conceive  and  express  by  the  words  empty  space  holds  the  mean  position  between 


374  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

material  substance  and  nothingness,  without  participating  in  either;  that  it  differs 
from  non-being  by  having  dimensions,  and  that  its  non-resistance  and  immobility 
distinguish  it  from  matter,  so  that  it  keeps  between  these  two  extremes  without 
losing  itself  in  either. 

Toward  the  end  of  his  letter  Father  Noel  gathers  together  into  one  sentence  all 
his  objections  to  make  them  stronger  by  uniting  them.  His  words  are:  this  space 
which  is  neither  God  nor  creature ,  neither  mind  nor  body ,  neither  substance  nor  accident , 
which  transmits  light  without  being  transparent ,  which  resists  without  resistance ,  which 
though  immobile  is  moved  with  the  tube ,  which  is  everywhere  and  nowhere ,  which  does 
everything  and  nothing.  These  are  the  wonderful  qualities  of  void  space:  as  space  it  exists 
and  performs  miracles ,  as  void  it  is  nothing  and  does  nothing;  as  space  it  has  length , 
breadth,  and  depth ,  as  void  it  excludes  length ,  breadth,  and  depth.  If  desired,  I  shall 
show  that  all  these  fine  properties  follow  necessarily  from  a  void  space. 

Since  a  long  series  of  fine  things  is  fatiguing  in  the  end  by  its  very  length,  I 
think  Father  Noel  grew  weary  on  this  occasion  from  having  given  birth  to  so 
many;  and  that,  foreseeing  a  like  fatigue  on  the  part  of  his  readers,  he  wanted  to 
descend  from  a  graver  to  a  less  serious  style,  to  refresh  them  with  a  little  raillery 
in  order  that,  after  having  supplied  them  with  so  many  things  calling  for  the 
effort  of  admiration,  he  might  give  them,  of  his  charity,  something  for  amuse¬ 
ment.  I  was  the  first  to  feel  the  effect  of  this  benevolence,  and  whoever  reads  his 
letter  afterwards  will  experience  it  too;  for  no  one,  reading  what  I  wrote,  but  will 
laugh  at  the  inferences  Father  Noel  draws  from  it  and  at  those  antitheses  opposed 
with  so  nice  a  care  that  it  is  easy  to  see  he  was  more  concerned  with  making 
his  terms  antithetical  to  each  other  than  conformable  to  reason  and  truth. 

For  to  take  up  these  objections  one  by  one:  this  space,  he  says,  is  neither  God  nor 
creature.  Mysteries  having  to  do  with  the  Divine  Nature  are  too  holy  for  us  to 
profane  with  our  disputes;  they  should  be  an  object  of  worship  for  us  and  not 
a  subject  of  discourse.  So  that  without  discussing  them  in  any  way  I  submit  my 
judgment  entirely  to  what  they  shall  decide  who  have  the  right  to  decide. 

Neither  mind  nor  body.  It  is  true  that  space  is  neither  mind  nor  body  but  is  space; 
just  as  time  is  neither  mind  nor  body  but  is  time;  and  just  as  time  does  not  cease 
to  be  although  it  is  neither  of  these  things,  so  void  space  may  perfectly  well  be, 
without  having  to  be  either  mind  or  body. 

Neither  substance  nor  accident.  True,  if  we  understand  by  the  word  substance  what 
is  either  mind  or  body.  For  in  this  sense  space  will  be  neither  substance  nor  acci¬ 
dent  but  will  be  space;  just  as  in  this  same  sense  time  is  neither  substance  nor 
accident,  but  is  time;  because  in  order  to  be,  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  either  sub¬ 
stance  or  accident  certain  of  the  Jesuits  maintaining  that  God  is  neither  one  nor 
the  other  although  he  is  the  Supreme  Being. 

Which  transmits  light  without  being  transparent.  These  words  are  so  lacking  in  light 
that  they  are  dark  to  me.  For  I  do  not  understand  what  meaning  the  word  trans¬ 
parent  has  for  Father  Noel,  since  he  finds  that  it  cannot  be  said  of  void  space.  For 
if  like  all  opticians  he  understands  by  transparence  the  absence  of  any  hindrance 
to  the  passage  of  light,  I  do  not  see  why  he  denies  it  to  our  space,  which  lets 
light  pass  freely.  So  that  speaking  on  this  subject  with  my  small  knowledge,  I 
should  have  said  to  him  that  the  words  transmit  light,  which  belong  only  to  his 
way  of  imagining  light,  mean  the  same  as  let  light  pass  and  it  is  transparent,  that  is, 
offers  no  obstacle  to  light,  in  which  I  find  neither  absurdity  nor  contradiction. 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  375 

It  resists  without  resistance.  Since  he  judges  of  the  resistance  of  this  space  only 
by  the  fact  that  it  takes  time  for  bodies  to  move  in  it,  and  since  we  have  had  so 
much  to  say  on  the  nullity  of  this  inference,  it  will  be  seen  that  he  is  wrong  in  say¬ 
ing  it  resists;  and  it  will  be  found  on  the  contrary  that  this  space  does  not  resist 
or  that  it  is  without  resistance,  in  which  I  see  nothing  but  what  is  perfectly  con¬ 
formable  to  reason. 

Which  though  immobile  is  moved  with  the  tube.  Here  Father  Noel  shows  how  little 
he  understands  the  opinion  he  wishes  to  refute;  and  I  should  have  to  beg  him  to 
observe  in  this  connection  that  when  an  opinion  is  embraced  by  a  number  of 
learned  men,  we  should  not  attach  importance  to  objections  that  appear  fatal 
when  they  are  very  easy  to  anticipate,  because  we  should  suppose  that  those  who 
maintain  this  opinion  are  already  aware  of  them,  and  that  since  they  stick  to  their 
opinion  in  spite  of  the  obviousness  of  the  objections,  they  have  found  an  answer 
to  them.  But  to  examine  this  difficulty  in  particular,  if  these  antitheses  or  con¬ 
traries  had  not  dazzled  his  mind  as  much  as  they  charmed  his  fancy,  he  would 
undoubtedly  have  noticed  that,  whatever  may  seem  to  be  the  case,  the  vacuum 
is  not  moved  with  the  tube,  and  that  immobility  is  as  natural  to  space  as  motion 
is  to  body.  To  make  this  truth  evident  we  must  observe  that  space  in  general 
comprehends  all  natural  bodies,  each  one  of  which  individually  occupies  a  certain 
part  of  it,  but  that  although  they  are  all  mobile,  the  space  they  fill  is  not.  For  when 
a  body  is  moved  from  one  position  to  another,  it  merely  changes  place,  without 
carrying  with  it  the  place  it  occupied  while  at  rest.  In  fact  what  does  it  do  except 
leave  its  first  immobile  place,  successively  to  take  up  others  equally  immobile? 
But  the  place  it  quits  remains  still  firm  and  unshakeable,  so  that  either  it  is  filled 
by  another  body  succeeding  that  which  has  gone  or  it  is  left  empty  if  no  successor 
presents  itself;  but  whether  void  or  filled,  ever  equally  at  rest,  this  vast  space, 
whose  immensity  embraces  the  universe,  is  as  stable  and  immobile  in  each  of  its 
parts  as  in  its  totality.  Therefore  I  cannot  see  how  Father  Noel  could  maintain 
that  the  tube  communicates  its  motion  to  the  void  space,  which,  offering  neither 
consistency  for  pushing  nor  a  hold  for  pulling  and  without  susceptibility  to 
weight  or  to  any  attractive  force,  obviously  cannot  be  made  to  change.  Father 
Noel  was  led  astray  by  the  fact  that  when  the  tube  was  carried  from  one  place  to 
another,  he  saw  no  change  inside  it,  and  so  he  thought  the  space  continued  to  be 
the  same  since  it  was  always  like  itself.  But  he  should  observe  that  the  space  en¬ 
closed  by  the  tube  in  one  position  is  not  the  same  as  the  space  enclosed  by  it  in 
the  following  position,  and  that  the  tube  in  the  course  of  its  motion  continually 
acquires  new  spaces;  so  that  the  space  that  was  empty  in  its  first  position  is  filled 
with  air  when  it  quits  it  to  take  the  second,  in  which  it  makes  void  the  space 
encountered  whereas  this  space  was  filled  with  air  before;  but  both  of  these 
spaces,  alternately  filled  and  void,  always  remain  equally  immobile.  Whence  it  is 
evident  that  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  believe  that  the  void  space  changes  place; 
and  what  is  strangest  is  that  the  substance  with  which  Father  Noel  fills  it  is  such 
that  according  to  his  own  hypothesis  it  could  not  be  carried  by  the  moving  tube; 
for  since  it  would  enter  and  leave  the  glass  through  its  pores  with  perfect  ease 
without  in  any  way  adhering  to  it,  like  water  in  a  sieve,  it  is  obvious  that  it  would 
not  be  carried  along  with  it,  just  as  we  see  that  this  same  tube  does  not  trans¬ 
port  light,  which  penetrates  it  easily  and  freely,  and  that  our  space  itself,  when 
exposed  to  sunlight,  changes  rays  when  it  changes  place  without  carrying  with 


376  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

it  to  its  second  place  the  light  which  filled  it  in  the  first,  and  in  different  positions 
it  receives  different  rays  as  well  as  divers  spaces. 

Finally  Father  Noel  is  amazed  that  it  should  do  everything  and  nothing, ,  that  it 
should  he  everywhere  and  nowhere ,  that  it  should  exist  and  perform  miracles  though  not 
existing, ,  that  it  should  have  dimensions  without  having  them.  If  these  words  have  any 
meaning,  I  confess  that  I  do  not  understand  it;  therefore  I  do  not  consider  myself 
obliged  to  answer  them. 

There  you  have,  Sir,  Father  Noel’s  objections  and  the  things  that  shock  him 
in  my  view.  But  since  they  are  evidence  rather  of  his  not  understanding  my  opin¬ 
ion  than  of  his  gainsaying  it  and  since  he  seems  to  find  obscurity  rather  than  error 
in  it,  I  thought  he  would  find  its  clarification  in  my  letter  if  he  would  take  the 
trouble  to  read  it  more  carefully;  and  that  therefore  I  was  under  no  obligation  to 
answer  him  since  a  second  reading  would  sufficiently  resolve  the  doubts  arising 
from  the  first. 

With  reference  to  the  second  part  of  his  letter,  which  is  taken  up  with  the 
changing  of  his  first  opinion  and  the  establishing  of  his  second  opinion,  he  first 
states  why  he  denies  the  vacuum.  The  reason  he  gives  is  that  the  vacuum  cannot 
be  perceived  by  any  of  the  senses;  whence  he  takes  occasion  to  say  that  just  as  I 
deny  the  existence  of  matter  [in  the  top  of  the  tube]  for  this  reason  alone  that  it 
gives  no  sensible  indication  of  its  presence  and  that  the  mind  conceives  no  neces¬ 
sity  for  it,  he  can  with  as  much  force  and  more  deny  the  vacuum  because  it  has 
this  in  common  with  the  matter,  that  it  is  perceived  by  no  sense.  His  words  are: 
We  say  that  there  is  water  because  we  see  and  touch  it;  we  say  that  there  is  air  in  an  in¬ 
flated  balloon  because  we  feel  its  resistance;  that  there  is  fire  because  we  feel  the  heat;  but  the 
true  vacuum  touches  none  of  our  senses. 

But  I  am  surprised  that  Father  Noel  should  compare  things  so  dissimilar,  and 
that  he  should  not  have  observed  that,  as  there  is  nothing  so  opposed  to  being  as 
non-being  or  to  affirmation  as  negation,  we  proceed  to  their  demonstration  by 
opposed  methods,  and  that  what  establishes  one  overthrows  the  other.  For  what 
is  needed  for  the  knowledge  of  non-being  except  to  know  the  utter  lack  of  every 
kind  of  quality  and  effect;  whereas  if  a  single  one  appeared,  we  would  infer  on  the 
contrary  the  real  existence  of  a  cause  producing  it?  And  then  he  says:  Consider , 
Sir ,  which  of  us  two  is  the  more  to  be  believed ,  you  who  assert  the  existence  of  a  space  hidden 
to  sense  and  serving  neither  art  nor  nature ,  which  you  make  use  of  only  to  decide  a  very 
doubtful  question ,  etc. 

But  I  leave  it  to  you  to  decide,  Sir,  when  we  see  nothing  and  the  senses  perceive 
nothing  in  a  place,  which  is  on  firmer  ground,  he  who  asserts  that  there  is  some¬ 
thing  although  he  perceives  nothing  or  he  who  thinks  there  is  nothing  because 
he  does  not  see  anything. 

After  Father  Noel  has  declared,  as  we  have  just  seen,  his  reason  for  excluding 
the  vacuum,  and  has  found  grounds  for  denying  it  in  that  very  privation  of  qual¬ 
ities  which  so  justly  gives  occasion  to  others  to  believe  in  it  and  is  the  only 
sensible  means  of  proving  its  existence,  he  now  undertakes  to  show  that  it  is  a 
body.  To  this  end  he  thought  up  a  definition  of  body  expressly  conceived  to  fit 
our  space  that  he  might  easily  draw  his  inference  from  it.  His  words  are:  I  define 
body  as  that  which  is  composed  of  separate  parts ,  and  I  say  that  every  body  is  space  when  it 
is  considered  between  its  boundaries ,  and  that  every  other  space  is  body  because  it  is  com¬ 
posed  of  separate  parts. 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  377 

But  to  show  that  our  space  is  not  void  it  is  not  a  question  here  of  giving  it  the 
name  of  body,  as  Father  Noel  has  done,  but  of  showing  that  it  is  a  body,  as  he 
claims  to  have  done.  Not  that  it  is  not  permissible  for  him  to  give  to  what  has 
separate  parts  any  name  that  pleases  him;  but  he  will  win  small  advantage  from 
this  liberty,  for  the  word  body  as  a  result  of  his  use  of  it  becomes  equivocal.  So 
that  there  will  be  two  kinds  of  things,  entirely  different  and  even  heterogeneous, 
called  body:  one,  that  which  has  separate  parts,  for  we  shall  call  that  body ,  following 
Father  Noel;  the  other,  a  material  substance,  mobile  and  impenetrable,  for  we 
shall  call  that  body  in  common  parlance.  But  he  will  not  be  able  to  conclude  from 
this  nominal  resemblance  a  resemblance  of  real  properties  or  to  show  in  this  way 
that  what  has  separate  parts  is  the  same  thing  as  a  material,  immobile,  impene¬ 
trable  substance,  because  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  make  them  agree  in  nature  as 
well  as  in  name.  Just  as,  if  he  had  given  to  what  has  separate  parts  the  name 
water ,  mind ,  or  light ,  which  he  could  have  done  as  easily  as  give  it  that  of  body,  he 
could  not  have  drawn  the  conclusion  that  our  space  was  any  of  these  things. 
Thus  when  he  has  called  body  what  has  separate  parts  and  says  as  a  consequence 
of  that  definition,  I  say  that  every  space  is  body ,  we  should  take  the  word  body  in  the 
sense  he  has  just  given  it;  so  that  if  we  substitute  the  definition  in  place  of  the 
thing  defined,  which  can  always  be  done  without  changing  the  meaning  of  a 
proposition,  it  will  be  found  that  the  conclusion,  every  space  is  body ,  is  nothing  but 
every  space  has  separate  parts ,  but  not  every  space  is  material ,  as  Father  Noel  fancied. 
I  shall  not  dwell  longer  on  an  inference  so  patently  weak,  since  I  am  speaking  to 
an  excellent  mathematician  and  since  you  have  as  much  skill  in  discovering  de¬ 
fects  in  reasoning  as  you  have  strength  to  avoid  them. 

The  Reverend  Father  Noel,  going  further,  wishes  to  show  what  this  body  is; 
and  to  establish  his  view  he  begins  with  a  long  discourse,  in  which  he  claims  to 
prove  the  continual  and  necessary  mixture  of  the  elements,  but  shows  nothing 
except  that  some  parts  of  one  element  are  found  among  those  of  another,  and 
that  they  are  confounded  rather  by  accident  than  by  nature;  so  that  it  might  come 
about  that  they  would  separate  without  violence  and  return  of  themselves  to 
their  original  unmixed  state.  For  the  natural  mingling  of  two  bodies  occurs 
when  their  separation  makes  them  change  both  their  name  and  their  nature.  Such 
is  the  mingling  of  all  metals  and  of  all  things  made  up  of  different  elements, 
because  when  the  mercury  which  enters  into  the  composition  of  gold  has  been 
removed,  what  remains  is  no  longer  gold.  But  in  the  mixture  Father  Noel  imagines 
for  us  we  see  only  a  violent  confusion  of  certain  vapors  scattered  in  the  air,  which 
remains  there  like  dust,  without  appearing  to  enter  into  the  composition  of  the 
air,  and  similarly  for  the  other  mixtures.  And  as  for  that  of  water  and  air,  which 
he  offers  as  the  best  demonstrated  and  which  he  says  is  peremptorily  proved  by 
those  bellows  made  by  water  falling  into  a  chamber  almost  entirely  closed  (which 
you  see  explained  at  length  in  his  letter),  it  is  strange  that  Father  Noel  has  not 
noticed  that  the  air  which  he  says  emerges  from  the  water  is  nothing  but  the  out¬ 
side  air  carried  with  it  by  the  falling  water,  which  air  is  completely  free  to  go  in 
by  the  same  opening  (wider  than  the  opening  from  which  the  water  comes), 
so  that  the  water,  spreading  out  as  it  falls  into  this  opening,  carries  in  with  it  all 
the  air  it  meets  and  envelops,  preventing  its  escape  by  the  violence  of  its  fall  and 
the  impact  of  its  motion;  so  that  air,  continually  entering  through  this  opening 
and  unable  ever  to  leave  by  it,  escapes  with  violence  through  the  opening  it 


378  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

finds  free.  Since  it  is  by  this  experiment  alone  that  Father  Noel  proves  the  mixture 
of  water  and  air  and  since  the  experiment  in  no  way  shows  it,  he  is  found  not  at 
all  to  have  proved  it. 

The  mixture  he  least  proves  and  is  most  concerned  with  is  the  mixture  of  fire 
with  the  other  elements;  for  all  that  can' be  concluded  from  the  experiments  of 
the  handkerchief  and  the  cat  is  that  certain  of  their  greasiest  and  most  oily  particles 
catch  fire  from  the  friction,  since  they  are  already  so  disposed  by  the  heat.  He  then 
declares  it  to  be  his  opinion  that  our  space  is  filled  with  this  fiery  matter,  spread 
out  and  intermingled,  as  he  supposes  without  proof,  in  all  the  elements  and  ex¬ 
tended  over  the  whole  universe.  This  is  the  matter  he  puts  in  the  tube.  As  for  the 
suspension  of  the  liquid,  he  attributes  it  to  the  weight  of  the  outside  air.  In  this 
I  was  delighted  to  see  him  adopting  the  view  of  those  who  have  the  most  pene- 
tratingly  examined  these  experiments;  for  you  know  that  the  letter  written  by  the 
great  Torricelli  to  Ricci  more  than  four  years  ago  shows  that  at  that  time  he  al¬ 
ready  held  this  opinion,  and  that  more  and  more  all  our  men  of  science  are  in 
agreement  and  support  each  other  on  this  point.  However  we  are  waiting  for  the 
confirmation  of  the  experiment  which  is  to  be  performed  on  one  of  our  high 
mountains.  But  I  do  not  hope  to  hear  the  results  for  some  time  because,  in  an¬ 
swer  to  letters  I  wrote  more  than  six  months  ago,  I  have  always  been  told  that  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  are  inaccessible  because  of  the  snow. 

This  then  is  Father  Noel’s  second  opinion;  and  although  there  seems  to  be 
little  difference  between  this  matter  and  the  matter  he  puts  in  the  tube  in  his  first 
letter,  it  is  nevertheless  greater  than  appears,  as  I  shall  show. 

In  his  first  view  nature  abhorred  a  vacuum  and  made  that  horror  felt;  in  his 
second  view  nature  gives  no  indication  of  the  horror  she  has  of  the  vacuum  and 
does  nothing  to  prevent  it.  In  the  first  he  attributed  an  attractive  faculty  to  this 
subtle  matter  and  to  all  other  bodies;  in  the  second  he  does  away  with  all  attrac¬ 
tion  both  active  and  passive.  Finally  he  attributed  many  properties  to  it  in  the  first 
of  which  he  deprives  it  in  the  second.  So  that  if  there  are  several  steps  in  the  de¬ 
scent  to  nothingness,  this  matter  is  now  on  the  last,  and  it  seems  there  is  only  some 
remnant  of  prejudice  that  prevents  him  from  throwing  it  headlong  in. 

But  I  should  like  to  know  from  Father  Noel  how  he  comes  to  have  such  an 
ascendancy  over  nature  and  to  exercise  so  absolute  an  empire  over  the  subservient 
elements  that  they  change  their  properties  as  he  changes  his  mind,  and  that  the 
universe  accommodates  its  effects  to  the  inconstancy  of  his  intentions.  I  do  not 
understand  what  blindness  can  be  proof  against  such  light  or  how  any  faith  can 
be  placed  in  what  oneself  causes  to  be  or  not  to  be  with  such  ease. 

But  the  chief  difference  I  find  between  the  two  opinions  is  that  Father  Noel 
affirmatively  asserted  the  truth  of  the  first  and  that  he  proposes  the  second  simply 
as  an  opinion.  This  is  the  influence  of  my  first  letter  and  the  chief  effect  it  had  on 
his  mind;  so  that,  just  as  I  had  replied  to  his  first  opinion  that  I  did  not  believe  it 
met  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  affirmation  of  a  thing,  so  I  shall  say  to  the 
second  opinion  that  since  he  offers  it  only  as  an  idea  and  since  neither  reason  nor 
sense  bears  witness  to  the  matter  he  establishes,  I  leave  him  in  his  opinion,  as  I 
leave  in  their  opinion  those  who  think  there  are  dwellers  in  the  moon  and  that  in 
the  inaccessible  regions  about  the  poles  there  are  men  entirely  different  from 
ourselves. 

Thus  you  see,  Sir,  that  Father  Noel  puts  in  the  tube  a  subtle  matter  spread 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  379 

throughout  the  whole  universe,  and  that  he  gives  to  the  outer  air  the  force  to 
suspend  the  liquid.  Whence  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  idea  is  in  no  respect  different 
from  M.  Descartes’,  since  Father  Noel  concurs  in  the  cause  of  the  suspension  of 
the  quicksilver  as  well  as  in  the  matter  which  fills  the  apparently  empty  space,  as 
is  seen  by  his  own  words  on  page  6  where  he  says  that  this  matter,  which  he  calls 
subtle  air ,  is  the  same  as  that  M.  Descartes  calls  subtle  matter.  Therefore  I  have  be¬ 
lieved  myself  less  obliged  to  answer  him,  since  I  should  make  my  answer  to  the 
father  of  this  opinion. 

As  I  was  writing  these  last  lines  Father  Noel  did  me  the  honor  of  sending  me 
his  book  on  another  subject,  bearing  the  title,  The  Plenum  of  the  Vacuum.  He 
charged  the  person  who  took  the  trouble  to  deliver  it  to  assure  me  there  was  noth¬ 
ing  in  it  against  myself,  and  that  any  words  that  seemed  to  be  harsh  were  addressed 
not  to  me  but  to  the  Reverend  Father  Valerianus  Magni,  Capuchin.  And  the  rea¬ 
son  he  gave  is  that  Father  Magni  affirms  the  existence  of  the  vacuum,  whereas  I 
only  profess  to  oppose  those  who  speak  dogmatically  on  this  subject.  But  Father 
Noel  would  have  acquitted  me  of  this  charge  better  if  he  had  made  his  testimony 
as  public  as  the  suspicion  he  had  given  rise  to. 

I  glanced  through  this  book,  and  I  found  he  has  a  different  idea  there,  that  he 
puts  in  our  tube  a  matter  close  to  his  first,  but  attributes  the  suspension  of  the 
quicksilver  to  a  quality  he  assigns  to  it  which  he  calls  moving  levity ,  and  not  to 
the  weight  of  the  outside  air,  as  in  his  letter. 

To  make  a  little  survey  of  the  book  in  brief  compass,  the  title  promises  in  the 
first  place  to  demonstrate  the  plenum  by  new  experiments  and  to  confirm  it  by 
mine.  At  the  beginning  of  the  book  Father  Noel  sets  himself  up  as  the  defender 
of  nature,  and  by  an  allegory,  perhaps  a  little  drawn  out,  he  conducts  a  suit-at- 
law  in  which  he  makes  her  complain  of  the  belief  in  the  void  as  of  a  calumny;  and 
without  her  having  imparted  to  him  her  resentment  or  having  charged  him  to 
defend  her,  he  assumes  the  office  of  her  advocate.  And  in  this  capacity  he  asserts 
that  he  will  expose  the  imposture  and  false  depositions  of  the  witnesses  against 
her — this  is  how  he  refers  to  our  experiments — and  promises  to  produce  witness 
for  witness,  that  is,  experiment  for  experiment,  and  to  show  that  ours  have  been 
badly  understood  and  worse  verified.  But  in  the  body  of  the  book,  when  it  is  a 
question  of  carrying  out  these  large  promises,  he  speaks  only  to  doubt;  and  hav¬ 
ing  given  hopes  of  so  high  a  vengeance,  he  but  brings  in  guesses  instead  of  con¬ 
victions.  For  in  the  third  chapter,  when  he  wishes  to  establish  that  the  apparent 
vacuum  is  a  body,  he  simply  says  he  finds  it  much  more  reasonable  to  say  that  it 
is  a  body.  When  it  is  a  question  of  showing  the  mixture  of  the  elements,  he  only 
adds  some  very  weak  things  to  those  he  had  mentioned  in  his  letter.  When  it  is  a 
question  of  showing  that  the  world  is  a  plenum,  he  gives  no  proof.  It  is  on  such 
empty  appearances  he  establishes  his  ether ,  imperceptible  to  sense,  with  the  imag¬ 
inary  levity  he  attributes  to  it. 

What  is  strange  is  that  Father  Noel,  after  having  given  doubts  to  support  his 
view,  confirms  it  by  false  experiments.  However  he  proposes  them  with  such  bold¬ 
ness  that  they  would  be  accepted  as  true  by  everyone  who  has  not  seen  the  oppo¬ 
site;  for  he  says  that  the  eyes  show,  that  all  this  cannot  be  denied,  that  we  see  it 
with  our  eyes  (although  our  eyes  show  us  the  opposite).  Thus  it  is  evident  he  has 
seen  none  of  the  experiments  he  talks  about,  and  it  is  strange  he  should  have  spo¬ 
ken  with  so  much  assurance  of  things  he  did  not  know  and  of  which  he  had  been 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


380 

given  anything  but  a  faithful  account.  For  I  prefer  to  believe  that  he  was  himself 
deceived  and  not  that  he  wanted  to  deceive  others,  and  the  esteem  I  have  for  him 
makes  me  judge  that  he  was  too  credulous  rather  than  lacking  in  sincerity.  Cer¬ 
tainly  he  has  reason  to  complain  of  those  who  told  him  that  a  bellows  full  of  this 
apparent  vacuum,  when  quickly  opened  and  closed,  emits  a  substance  sensible  as 
air;  and  that  when  a  tube  filled  with  quicksilver  and  this  same  vacuum  is  turned 
upside  down,  the  quicksilver  falls  as  slowly  in  the  vacuum  as  in  the  air,  the  vacuum 
retarding  its  natural  motion  as  much  as  the  air,  and  in  short  many  other  things  he 
reports.  For  I  assure  him  on  the  contrary  that  the  air  enters  and  the  quicksilver 
falls  in  this  vacuum  with  the  utmost  impetuosity,  etc. 

Finally,  that  you  may  see  Father  Noel  does  not  understand  the  experiments 
recorded  in  my  printed  statement,  I  draw  your  attention  to  this  point  among 
others:  I  said  in  the  first  experiments  of  mine  he  gave  an  account  of,  "that  a  glass 
syringe  with  a  carefully  fitted  piston  having  been  completely  immersed  in  water 
and  its  opening  closed  by  a  finger  touching  the  bottom  of  the  piston  (thus 
obliging  the  hand  and  arm  to  be  in  the  water),  only  a  moderate  force  is  required 
to  draw  the  piston  up  and  make  it  separate  from  the  finger,  without  any  water  com¬ 
ing  in  (which  the  philosophers  believed  could  not  be  done  with  any  finite  force) ; 
and  thereby  the  finger  is  felt  to  be  strongly  and  painfully  pulled,  and  the  piston 
leaves  an  apparently  empty  space,  into  which  it  does  not  appear  any  body  can 
have  entered,  since  it  is  entirely  surrounded  by  water  which  could  have  had  no 
access  to  it  because  the  opening  had  been  closed;  and  if  the  piston  is  drawn 
higher,  the  apparently  empty  space  becomes  greater,  but  the  finger  is  not  felt  to 
be  more  pulled."  Father  Noel  thought  that  the  words,  is  not  felt  to  be  more  pulled , 
have  the  same  meaning  as  is  no  more  felt  to  be  pulled;  whereas  according  to  all  the 
rules  of  grammar  they  mean  that  the  finger  does  not  feel  a  greater  pull.  And  since 
he  knows  the  experiments  only  through  reading  them,  he  thought  the  finger 
actually  no  longer  felt  any  pull,  which  is  absolutely  false,  for  the  pull  continues 
to  be  felt  just  as  before.  But  Father  Noel’s  hypothesis  is  so  accommodating  that 
he  demonstrates,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  principles,  why  the  finger  no 
longer  feels  any  pull,  although  it  is  absolutely  false  that  it  does  not.  I  think  he  will 
be  able  to  give  as  easily  the  reason  for  the  opposite  by  the  same  principles.  But  I 
do  not  know  what  esteem  the  judicious  will  have  for  his  method  of  demonstra¬ 
tion  if  he  proves  with  equal  force  the  affirmative  and  the  negative  of  the  same 
proposition. 

From  which  you  see,  Sir,  that  Father  Noel  bases  this  invisible  matter  on  false 
experiments  in  order  to  explain  other  experiments  he  has  imperfectly  understood. 
And  so  it  was  right  and  proper  that  he  should  make  use  of  a  matter  we  would  be 
unable  to  see  and  cannot  understand  to  reply  to  experiments  he  has  not  seen  and 
has  not  understood.  When  he  is  better  informed  about  them,  I  do  not  doubt  that 
he  will  change  his  mind,  especially  with  respect  to  his  moving  levity.  Therefore 
the  reply  to  this  book  should  be  postponed  until  Father  Noel  has  corrected  it  and 
has  recognized  the  falsity  of  the  facts  and  the  imposture  of  the  witnesses  he  offers 
in  opposition  and  until  he  no  longer  bases  his  charges  against  the  belief  in  the 
vacuum  on  experiments  badly  understood  and  worse  verified. 

While  writing  these  words  I  have  just  received  a  printed  notice  from  Father 
Noel  which  overthrows  the  greater  part  of  his  book:  he  withdraws  the  moving 
levity  of  the  ether  and  calls  back  the  weight  of  the  outside  air  to  suspend  the  quick- 


CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM  381 

silver.  So  that  I  find  it  rather  hard  to  refute  Father  Noel's  opinions,  since  he  is 
more  prompt  in  changing  them  than  one  can  be  in  replying  to  him;  and  I  begin 
to  see  that  his  conduct  is  very  different  from  mine  because  he  makes  his  opinions 
public  as  fast  as  they  occur  to  him;  but  the  very  fact  that  they  contradict  each 
other  is  sufficient  to  show  their  want  of  solidity,  since  the  power  with  which  he 
disposes  of  this  matter  is  evidence  enough  that  he  is  its  author  and  consequently 
that  it  exists  only  in  his  imagination. 

All  who  resist  truth  suffer  from  a  like  inconstancy  of  thought  and  they  who  fall 
into  such  variableness  are  to  be  suspected  of  denying  truth.  Accordingly  it  is  cu¬ 
rious  to  see  among  the  defenders  of  the  plenum  the  great  number  of  opinions 
clashing  with  each  other;  one  supports  ether  (and  excludes  every  other  substance); 
another,  the  spirits  of  the  liquid  [in  the  tube]  to  the  prejudice  of  ether;  another, 
the  air  contained  in  the  bodies'  pores  (and  banishes  everything  else);  another, 
rarefied  air  void  of  every  other  body.  Finally  there  are  those  who,  not  having 
dared  to  place  the  immensity  of  God  there,  have  chosen  among  men  a  person  so. 
illustrious  by  birth  and  merit  that  his  mind  could  be  placed  there  and  made  to 
fill  the  universe.  So  each  of  them  has  all  the  rest  for  enemies;  and  as  all  conspire 
to  destroy  one  alone,  he  necessarily  succumbs.  But  since  they  only  triumph  over 
each  other,  they  are  all  victorious  without  a  single  one  of  them  being  able  to 
profit  by  his  victory,  because  all  this  advantage  comes  from  their  own  confusion. 
So  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  fight  with  them  to  destroy  them,  since  it  is  enough 
to  abandon  them  to  themselves,  for  they  make  up  a  body  divided  against  itself, 
whose  members  opposed  to  each  other  rend  themselves  within,  whereas  the 
friends  of  the  vacuum  remain  in  a  unity  always  the  same,  which  by  this  very  fact 
is  so  related  to  truth  that  it  should  be  followed  until  truth  appears  to  us  openly. 
For  it  is  not  in  entanglement  and  tumult  that  truth  should  be  sought;  it  cannot 
be  found  apart  from  that  maxim  which  permits  us  to  decide  only  about  evident 
things,  and  which  forbids  us  to  affirm  or  to  deny  those  which  are  not.  This  is  the 
just  mean  and  perfect  balance  that  you  keep  to  with  such  advantage  and  that  I, 
by  a  good  fortune  I  can  never  acknowledge  enough,  was  always  brought  up  in 
with  singular  method  and  more  than  paternal  care. 

There  you  have,  Sir,  the  reasons  that  have  restrained  me,  reasons  I  did  not  think 
I  ought  longer  to  conceal  from  you.  And  although  it  may  seem  that  I  write  this 
rather  for  my  own  interest  than  for  your  curiosity,  I  hope  this  doubt  will  not  go 
so  far  as  yourself,  since  you  know  that  I  have  much  less  uneasiness  about  these 
fantastic  points  of  honor  than  passion  to  converse  with  you,  and  that  I  find  much 
less  charm  in  defending  my  opinions  than  in  assuring  you  that  I  am  with  all  my 
heart,  Sir,  your  very  humble  and  very  obedient  servant, 


Pascal 


ACCOUNT  OF  THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT 
CONCERNING  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  FLUIDS 


Devised  by  M.  Pascal 

To  COMPLETE  THE  TREATISE  PROMISED  BY  HIM  IN  HIS  ABRIDGMENT  ON  THE 
VACUUM  AND  CARRIED  OUT  BY  M.  PERIER  ON  ONE  OF  THE  HIGHEST  MOUNTAINS 
IN  AUVERGNE. 

When  I  published  my  abridgment  under  the  title:  New  experiments  concerning 
the  vacuum ,  etc.,  in  which  I  had  made  use  of  the  maxim  on  the  horror  of  the 
vacuum  because  it  was  universally  accepted  and  because  I  did  not  yet  have  con¬ 
vincing  proofs  to  the  contrary,  I  continued  to  feel  certain  difficulties  which  made 
me  seriously  doubt  the  truth  of  that  maxim;  to  clear  up  these  difficulties  I  thought 
at  that  time  of  the  experiment  here  recorded,  which  would  make  it  possible  for 
me  to  know  with  certainty  what  I  ought  to  believe.  I  have  called  it  the  great 
experiment  on  the  equilibrium  of  fluids  because  it  is  the  most  significant  of  all  the 
experiments  that  can  be  made  on  this  subject  in  that  it  shows  the  equilibrium  of 
air  and  quicksilver,  which  are  the  lightest  and  the  heaviest  of  all  fluids  known  in 
nature.  But  because  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  the  experiment  here  in  Paris, 
because  there  are  only  a  very  few  places  in  France  suited  to  this  purpose,  and 
because  Clermont  in  Auvergne  is  one  of  the  most  convenient,  I  asked  my  brother- 
in-law,  M.  Perier,  councilor  on  the  Board  of  Excise  of  Auvergne,  to  be  at  the 
trouble  of  doing  it  there.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  letter  I  wrote  him  at  that  time 
what  my  difficulties  were  and  just  what  this  experiment  is. 

COPY  OF  THE  LETTER  OF  M.  PASCAL  THE  YOUNGER 
TO  M.  PERIER,  November  15,  1647 
Sir, 

I  would  not  interrupt  the  official  duties  with  which  you  are  constantly  occupied 
in  order  to  discuss  physical  speculations  with  you  if  I  did  not  know  that  they  will 
help  to  refresh  you  in  your  leisure  hours  and  that  whereas  they  would  be  a  burden 
to  others,  you  will  find  amusement  in  them.  I  have  the  less  hesitation  in  doing 
this  as  I  know  the  pleasure  you  take  in  such  conversations.  This  one  will  be  only 
a  continuation  of  those  we  have  had  together  about  the  vacuum.  You  know  what 
the  philosophers  have  thought  on  this  subject:  all  have  held  as  a  maxim  that 
nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  and  almost  all,  going  further,  have  maintained  that  she 
cannot  permit  it  and  that  she  would  destroy  herself  sooner  than  suffer  it.  Thus 
opinions  have  been  divided:  some  have  been  content  to  say  only  that  she  ab¬ 
horred  it,  and  others  have  maintained  she  could  not  suffer  it.  I  tried  in  my  abridg¬ 
ment  of  the  Treatise  on  the  Vacuum  to  destroy  this  latter  opinion,  and  I  think  the 
experiments  I  give  there  are  sufficient  to  make  it  manifestly  clear  that  nature  can 
and  actually  does  suffer  a  space  as  large  as  we  please,  void  of  every  substance 
known  to  us  and  perceptible  to  sense.  I  am  now  trying  to  examine  the  truth  of 
the  former  opinion  and  to  find  experiments  which  will  show  whether  the  effects 

382 


THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT  383 

attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum  should  really  be  attributed  to  it,  or  whether 
they  should  be  attributed  to  the  weight  and  pressure  of  the  air;  for,  to  tell  you 
frankly  what  I  think,  it  is  hard  for  me  to  believe  that  nature,  which  is  not  animate 
or  sensitive,  is  capable  of  horror,  since  the  passions  presuppose  a  soul  capable  of 
feeling  them,  and  I  incline  much  more  to  impute  all  these  effects  to  the  weight 
and  pressure  of  the  air,  because  I  consider  them  only  as  particular  cases  of  a  uni¬ 
versal  proposition  on  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,  which  is  to  constitute  the  larger 
part  of  the  treatise  I  have  promised.  Not  that  I  did  not  have  these  same  thoughts 
at  the  time  I  wrote  my  abridgment;  but  through  lack  of  convincing  experiments 
I  did  not  then  dare  (and  I  do  not  yet  dare)  depart  from  the  maxim  of  the  horror 
of  the  vacuum,  and  I  even  used  it  as  a  maxim  in  my  abridgment,  having  then  no 
further  design  than  to  combat  the  opinion  of  those  who  maintain  that  the  vacuum 
is  absolutely  impossible,  and  that  nature  would  suffer  her  own  destruction  rather 
than  the  least  void  space.  Indeed  I  do  not  consider  it  permissible  for  us  lightly  to 
depart  from  the  maxims  we  hold  from  antiquity  unless  we  are  constrained  by 
proofs  indubitable  and  invincible.  But  in  this  case  I  hold  it  would  be  an  extreme 
weakness  to  have  the  slightest  scruple,  and  that  in  fine  we  should  have  more 
veneration  for  evident  truths  than  obstinate  attachment  to  received  opinions.  I 
could  not  give  you  better  evidence  of  how  circumspect  I  am  before  giving  up 
ancient  maxims  than  to  remind  you  of  the  experiment  I  recently  made  in  your 
presence  with  two  tubes,  one  inside  the  other,  which  demonstrates  a  vacuum  in 
a  vacuum.  You  saw  that  the  quicksilver  in  the  inner  tube  remained  suspended  at 
the  same  height  as  in  the  ordinary  experiment,  when  it  was  counterbalanced  and 
pressed  by  the  weight  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  air,  and  that  on  the  contrary  it 
all  fell  down  without  height  or  suspension  when  because  of  the  surrounding 
vacuum  it  was  no  longer  at  all  pressed  or  counterbalanced  by  any  air,  which  had 
been  removed  on  all  sides.  You  saw  afterwards  that  this  height  or  suspension  of 
the  quicksilver  increased  or  diminished  as  the  pressure  of  the  air  increased  or 
diminished,  and  finally  that  all  the  different  heights  or  suspensions  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  were  always  proportional  to  the  pressure  of  the  air. 

Certainly  after  this  experiment  one  might  well  be  persuaded  that  it  is  not  the 
abhorrence  of  a  vacuum,  as  we  suppose,  which  causes  the  suspension  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  in  the  ordinary  experiment,  but  the  weight  and  pressure  of  the  air  which 
counterbalances  the  weight  of  the  quicksilver.  But  because  all  the  effects  of  this 
last  experiment  with  the  two  tubes,  which  are  explained  so  naturally  by  the  pres¬ 
sure  and  weight  of  the  air  alone,  can  yet  be  explained  with  some  probability  by 
the  abhorrence  of  a  vacuum,  I  hold  to  that  ancient  maxim,  resolved  however  to 
seek  the  complete  clearing  up  of  this  difficulty  by  a  decisive  experiment.  I  have 
thought  of  one  which  can  of  itself  suffice  to  give  us  the  light  we  seek  if  it  can  be 
carried  out  accurately.  It  is  to  perform  the  ordinary  vacuum  experiment  several 
times  on  the  same  day,  in  the  same  tube,  with  the  same  quicksilver,  now  at  the 
bottom  and  now  at  the  top  of  a  mountain  at  least  500  or  600  fathoms  high,  to 
find  out  whether  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  suspended  in  the  tube  will  be  the 
same  or  different  in  the  two  situations.  Doubtless  you  already  see  that  this  ex¬ 
periment  will  decide  the  question,  and  that  if  it  should  happen  that  the  height  of 
the  quicksilver  is  less  at  the  top  than  at  the  bottom  of  the  mountain  (as  I  have 
many  reasons  for  believing  it  will  be,  although  all  who  have  considered  this  mat¬ 
ter  are  against  me),  it  will  follow  necessarily  that  the  weight  and  pressure  of  the 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


384 

air  is  the  only  cause  of  the  quicksilver’s  suspension  and  not  the  horror  of  the 
vacuum,  since  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  there  is  much  more  air  pressing  down  on 
the  foot  of  the  mountain  than  on  its  summit;  whereas  it  could  hardly  be  said  that 
nature  abhors  a  vacuum  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  more  than  at  its  summit. 

But  as  great  things  are  ordinarily  found  to  be  accompanied  by  difficulty,  I 
anticipate  much  of  it  in  the  carrying  out  of  this  plan,  which  requires  that  an 
unusually  high  mountain  be  picked  out  near  a  city  in  which  there  is  a  person 
capable  of  bringing  to  this  test  all  the  necessary  accuracy.  For  if  the  mountain 
were  distant,  it  would  be  difficult  to  carry  to  it  the  vessels,  the  quicksilver,  the 
tubes,  and  many  other  necessary  things,  and  to  undertake  troublesome  journeys 
as  many  times  as  might  be  required  for  finding  on  the  mountain  tops  clear  and 
suitable  weather,  which  is  not  often  met  with  there.  And  since  it  is  as  rare  to  find 
persons  outside  of  Paris  with  such  qualities  as  it  is  to  find  places  satisfying  the 
conditions,  I  counted  myself  happy  on  this  occasion  to  have  fallen  in  with  both, 
since  our  town  of  Clermont  is  at  the  foot  of  the  high  mountain  of  the  Puy  de 
Dome,  and  since  I  hope  that  you  will  grant  me  of  your  goodness  the  favor  of 
being  willing  to  make  the  experiment  yourself.  In  this  assurance  I  have  led  all 
our  natural  philosophers  in  Paris  to  hope  that  the  experiment  will  be  performed, 
and  among  others  the  Rev.  Father  Mersenne,  who  has  already  pledged  himself, 
in  letters  he  has  written  to  Italy,  Poland,  Sweden,  Holland,  etc.,  to  communicate 
the  results  to  the  friends  he  has  acquired  there  by  his  merit.  I  do  not  specify  the 
means  of  carrying  out  the  experiment,  because  I  well  know  that  you  will  omit 
none  of  the  circumstances  necessary  for  doing  it  with  precision. 

Only  I  beg  you  to  do  it  as  soon  as  you  possibly  can  and  to  excuse  the  liberty  I 
am  taking,  which  is  due  to  my  impatience  to  learn  the  outcome  of  the  experiment, 
without  which  I  cannot  complete  the  treatise  I  have  promised  the  public  or  satisfy 
the  desire  of  so  many  persons  who  are  waiting  to  hear  it  and  who  will  be  infinitely 
obliged  to  you.  Not  that  I  wish  to  diminish  my  gratitude  by  the  number  of  those 
who  share  it  with  me,  since  I  want  on  the  contrary  to  participate  in  theirs  and  thus 
remain  so  much  the  more,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  and  very  obedient  servant, 

Pascal 

M.  Perier  received  this  letter  at  Moulins,  where  he  was  kept  by  the  king’s 
business,  so  that  however  great  his  desire  to  perform  the  experiment  promptly 
he  was  unable  to  do  it  until  last  September. 

You  will  see  the  reasons  for  this  delay,  the  account  of  the  experiment,  and  the 
precision  he  brought  to  it,  in  the  following  letter  which  I  had  the  honor  of 
receiving  from  him. 

COPY  OF  THE  LETTER  OF  M.  PERIER  TO  M.  PASCAL 
THE  YOUNGER,  September  22,  1648 
Sir, 

At  last  I  have  made  the  experiment  you  have  so  long  been  desiring.  I  would 
have  given  you  this  satisfaction  sooner;  I  was  prevented,  as  much  by  the  official 
business  I  was  on  in  Bourbonnais  as  because  since  my  arrival  snow  or  mist  has  so 
covered  the  Puy  de  Dome,  on  which  I  was  to  make  the  experiment,  that  even  in 
this  season,  which  is  the  finest  of  the  year  here,  I  had  difficulty  in  finding  a  day  on 
which  it  was  possible  to  see  the  summit  of  this  mountain,  which  is  usually  in  the 


THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT  385 

midst  of  clouds  and  sometimes  above  them  although  at  the  same  time  it  is  fine 
weather  on  the  plain;  so  that  my  own  and  the  season's  convenience  did  not  meet 
until  the  19th  of  this  month.  But  the  success  with  which  I  performed  the  experi¬ 
ment  on  that  day  amply  consoled  me  for  the  petty  annoyance  of  so  many  delays 
I  had  been  unable  to  avoid. 

I  am  sending  you  a  full  and  faithful  account,  wherein  you  will  see  with  what 
precision  and  care  I  performed  the  experiment,  to  which  I  also  added  the  pre¬ 
caution  of  having  for  witnesses  certain  persons  as  learned  as  irreproachable,  that 
the  sincerity  of  their  testimony  might  leave  no  doubt  of  the  certainty  of  the 
experiment. 

Copy  of  the  account  of  the  experiment  by  M.  Perier 

Last  Saturday,  the  19th  of  this  month,  was  very  unsettled;  nevertheless  since 
the  weather  seemed  pretty  good  at  5  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  the  summit  of 
the  Puy  de  Dome  was  fully  visible,  I  decided  to  ascend  the  mountain  to  make  the 
experiment.  To  this  end  I  gave  notice  of  my  intention  to  several  persons  of  con¬ 
dition  in  the  town  of  Clermont  who  had  asked  me  to  let  them  know  the  day  when 
I  would  go  up,  of  whom  some  are  churchmen  and  others  laymen.  Among  the 
churchmen  were  the  Very  Rev.  Father  Bannier,  Minim  of  this  city,  who  has  sev¬ 
eral  times  been  Superior,  and  M.  Mosnier,  Canon  of  the  Cathedral  of  this  city  ; 
and  among  the  laymen,  M.  Laville  and  M.  Begon,  councilors  on  the  Board  of 
Excise,  and  M.  La  Porte,  doctor  of  medicine  and  practitioner  in  the  city,  all  very 
capable  men  not  only  in  their  professions  but  also  in  all  good  learning,  with 
whom  I  was  delighted  to  carry  out  this  fine  project.  Accordingly  on  that  day  at 
8  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  were  all  together  in  the  garden  of  the  Minim  Fathers, 
which  is  almost  the  lowest  place  in  the  town,  where  the  experiment  was  begun  as 
follows: 

First  I  poured  into  a  vessel  sixteen  pounds  of  quicksilver,  which  I  had  rectified 
during  the  three  preceding  days;  and  having  taken  two  glass  tubes  of  the  same 
size,  each  four  feet  long,  hermetically  sealed  at  one  end  and  open  at  the  other, 
I  performed  with  each  of  them  the  ordinary  vacuum  experiment  in  the  above 
mentioned  vessel,  and  having  brought  the  two  tubes  together  and  placed  them 
one  against  the  other  without  lifting  them  out  of  the  vessel,  I  found  that  the 
quicksilver  left  in  each  of  them  was  at  the  same  level,  26  inches,  3^  lines  above 
the  surface  of  the  quicksilver  in  the  vessel.  I  did  the  experiment  in  the  same  place, 
in  the  same  two  tubes,  with  the  same  quicksilver,  and  in  the  same  vessel  two 
more  times;  it  was  always  found  that  the  quicksilver  in  the  two  tubes  was  at  the 
same  level  and  had  the  same  height  as  the  first  time. 

That  done,  I  fixed  one  of  the  tubes  in  its  vessel  as  a  continuous  experiment. 
I  marked  on  the  glass  the  height  of  the  quicksilver,  and  leaving  the  tube  in  the 
same  place  it  had  been,  I  asked  the  Rev.  Father  Chastin,  one  of  the  religious  of 
the  house,  a  man  as  pious  as  he  is  capable,  who  talks  very  well  on  these  matters, 
to  be  at  the  pains  of  observing  from  time  to  time  during  the  whole  day  whether 
any  change  came  about.  And  with  the  other  tube  and  a  part  of  the  same  quick¬ 
silver  I  went  with  the  above-mentioned  gentlemen  to  perform  the  same  experi¬ 
ments  on  the  top  of  the  Puy  de  Dome,  about  500  fathoms  above  the  Minims, 
where  it  was  found  that  there  was  left  in  the  tube  only  23  inches,  2  lines  of  quick¬ 
silver,  whereas  there  had  been  found  at  the  Minims,  in  the  same  tube,  26  inches, 


386  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

3/K  lines,  and  that  thus  there  was  a  difference  of  3  inches,  \  l/2  lines;  which  over¬ 
came  us  all  with  wonder  and  astonishment,  and  so  surprised  us  that  for  our  own 
satisfaction  we  wanted  to  repeat  the  experiment.  This  is  why  I  did  it  five  times 
very  accurately,  at  different  places  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  now  inside 
in  the  little  chapel,  now  outside,  now  in  a  sheltered  spot,  now  exposed  to  the 
wind,  now  in  fine  weather,  now  during  the  rain  and  mists  which  occasionally 
visited  us,  each  time  having  very  carefully  eliminated  all  air  from  the  tube;  the 
quicksilver  was  always  found  to  be  at  the  same  height  of  23  inches,  2  lines,  which 
when  subtracted  from  the  26  inches,  3>2  lines  found  at  the  Minims  makes  the 
difference  of  3  inches,  1  yi  lines.  Which  fully  satisfied  us. 

Afterwards  while  descending  the  mountain  I  repeated  the  same  experiment  on 
the  way,  always  with  the  same  tube,  the  same  quicksilver,  and  the  same  vessel,  at 
a  place  called  Lafon  de  l' Arbre,  much  higher  than  the  Minims  yet  nearer  to  them 
than  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain;  and  there  I  found  that  the  height  of  the 
quicksilver  left  in  the  tube  was  25  inches.  I  did  it  a  second  time  in  the  same  place, 
and  the  said  M.  Mosnier,  mentioned  above,  had  the  curiosity  to  want  to  perform 
the  experiment  himself.  Accordingly  he  did  it  in  this  same  place,  and  the  same 
height  of  25  inches  was  always  found,  which  is  less  than  that  observed  at  the 
Minims  by  1  inch,  3^  lines  and  greater  than  that  we  had  just  observed  on  top  of 
the  Puy  de  Dome  by  1  inch,  10^  lines,  a  circumstance  which  increased  our  satis¬ 
faction  not  a  little,  since  we  saw  that  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  decreased  as 
the  height  of  the  places  increased. 

Finally  on  our  return  to  the  Minims  I  found  the  vessel  I  had  left  as  a  continuous 
experiment  with  its  quicksilver  suspended  at  the  same  height  at  which  I  had  left 
it,  26  inches,  3^  lines,  in  which  height  the  Rev.  Father  Chastin,  who  had  remained 
there  to  observe,  reported  there  had  been  no  change  during  the  entire  day,  al¬ 
though  the  weather  had  been  extremely  variable,  now  clear,  now  rainy,  now  dank 
with  mists,  and  now  windy. 

I  repeated  the  experiment  with  the  tube  I  had  taken  to  the  Puy  de  Dome,  in 
the  same  vessel  with  the  tube  of  the  continuous  experiment;  I  found  the  quick¬ 
silver  was  at  the  same  level  in  both  tubes  and  at  the  same  height  of  26  inches, 
3^2  lines,  as  had  been  found  that  morning  in  this  same  tube  and  as  it  had  re¬ 
mained  the  whole  day  in  the  tube  of  the  continuous  experiment. 

I  repeated  the  experiment  again  for  the  last  time,  not  only  in  the  same  tube  I 
had  used  on  the  Puy  de  Dome,  but  also  with  the  same  quicksilver  and  in  the  same 
vessel  I  had  carried  up  there,  and  I  always  found  the  quicksilver  at  the  same  height 
of  26  inches,  3^2  lines  which  had  been  found  in  the  morning.  And  now  we  were 
completely  confirmed  in  the  certainty  of  the  experiment. 

The  next  day  the  Very  Rev.  Father  Delamare,  priest  of  the  Oratory  and  Canon 
Theologian  of  the  Cathedral,  who  had  been  present  at  what  had  taken  place  on 
the  morning  of  the  preceding  day  in  the  garden  of  the  Minims,  and  to  whom  I 
had  reported  what  had  happened  on  the  Puy  de  Dome,  invited  me  to  perform 
the  same  experiment  at  the  foot  and  on  top  of  the  highest  tower  of  Notre  Dame 
de  Clermont  to  find  out  if  there  would  be  a  difference.  To  satisfy  the  curiosity  of 
a  man  of  such  distinguished  merit,  who  has  given  all  France  proofs  of  his  ability, 
I  performed  on  the  same  day  the  usual  vacuum  experiment  in  a  private  house, 
situated  in  the  most  elevated  part  of  the  city,  6  or  7  fathoms  above  the  garden  of 
the  Minims  and  on  a  level  with  the  foot  of  the  tower.  We  found  the  height  of  the 


THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT  387 

quicksilver  there  was  about  26  inches,  3  lines,  which  is  less  than  that  found  at  the 
Minims  by  about  >2  line. 

Afterwards  I  did  the  experiment  on  top  of  the  tower,  20  fathoms  above  its  foot 
and  about  26  or  27  fathoms  above  the  garden  of  the  Minims;  I  found  the  height 
of  the  quicksilver  to  be  about  26  inches,  1  line,  which  is  less  than  that  found  at 
the  foot  of  the  tower  by  about  2  lines  and  less  than  that  found  at  the  Minims  by 
about  2 yi  lines. 

So  that,  to  repeat  and  to  compare  the  different  elevations  of  the  places  where 
the  experiments  were  performed  with  the  different  heights  of  the  quicksilver  left 
in  the  tubes,  it  is  found: 

That  in  the  experiment  performed  in  the  lowest  of  the  places  the  quicksilver 
remained  at  the  height  of  26  inches,  3 yi  lines. 

In  that  performed  in  a  place  about  7  fathoms  higher  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  was  26  inches,  3  lines. 

In  that  performed  in  a  place  about  27  fathoms  higher  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  was  26  inches,  1  line. 

In  that  performed  in  a  place  about  150  fathoms  higher  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  was  25  inches. 

In  that  performed  in  a  place  about  500  fathoms  higher  the  height  of  the  quick¬ 
silver  was  23  inches,  2  lines. 

And  consequently  it  is  found  that  an  elevation  of  about  7  fathoms  makes  a 
difference  in  the  height  of  the  quicksilver:  ^  line. 

About  27  fathoms:  2^  lines. 

About  150  fathoms:  15^  lines,  i.e.,  1  inch,  3^  lines. 

And  about  500  fathoms:  37^  lines,  i.e.,  3  inches,  1  >2  lines. 

There  you  have  the  true  account  of  all  the  details  of  this  experiment,  which  all 
the  gentlemen  who  were  present  will  sign  whenever  you  wish  them  to. 

For  the  rest,  I  must  tell  you  that  the  heights  of  the  quicksilver  were  very  ac¬ 
curately  measured;  but  those  of  the  places  where  the  experiments  were  performed 
were  much  less  so. 

If  I  had  had  the  leisure  and  the  facilities,  I  would  have  taken  the  altitudes  more 
precisely,  and  I  would  even  have  marked  a  place  on  the  mountain  for  each  100 
fathoms  of  elevation  and  performed  the  experiment  there  and  marked  the  differ¬ 
ences  found  in  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  at  each  of  these  stations,  in  order  to 
give  you  the  exact  difference  due  to  the  first  100  fathoms,  that  due  to  the  second 
100  fathoms,  and  similarly  of  the  rest;  in  this  way  a  table  could  be  drawn  up 
which,  if  anyone  would  go  to  the  trouble  of  carrying  it  further,  might  finally  lead 
to  certain  knowledge  of  the  true  size  of  the  diameter  of  the  whole  sphere  of  the  air. 

I  do  not  give  up  hope  of  sending  you  some  day  these  differences  for  every  100 
fathoms,  as  much  for  our  own  satisfaction  as  for  their  usefulness  to  the  public. 

If  you  find  any  parts  of  this  account  obscure,  I  shall  be  able  to  clear  them  up 
for  you  by  word  of  mouth  in  a  few  days  since  I  am  on  the  point  of  making  a  little 
trip  to  Paris,  where  I  shall  assure  you  that  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  and  very  affectionate  servant, 

Perier 

This  account  having  cleared  up  all  my  difficulties,  I  do  not  conceal  the  ex¬ 
treme  satisfaction  it  gave  me;  and  having  seen  there  that  a  difference  in  elevation 
of  20  fathoms  made  a  difference  in  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  of  2  lines,  and 


388  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

that  a  difference  of  6  or  7  fathoms  made  a  difference  of  about  line,  differences 
which  it  was  easy  for  me  to  test  in  this  city,  I  performed  the  ordinary  vacuum 
experiment  at  the  top  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  Tower  of  Saint-Jacques  de  la  Bou- 
cherie,  whose  height  is  24  or  25  fathoms;  I  found  a  difference  of  more  than  2  lines 
in  the  height  of  the  quicksilver;  and  afterwards  I  performed  the  experiment  in  a 
private  house  90  steps  up,  where  I  found  an  evident  difference  of  line;  results 
which  agree  perfectly  with  what  is  said  in  M.  Perier’s  account. 

All  students  of  nature  can  make  the  test  for  themselves  at  their  leisure. 

Many  consequences  can  be  drawn  from  this  experiment,  such  as: 

A  way  of  knowing  whether  two  places  are  at  the  same  level,  that  is,  equidistant 
from  the  center  of  the  earth,  or  which  of  the  two  has  the  greater  altitude,  however 
far  apart  they  may  be,  even  if  they  should  be  each  other’s  antipodes;  which  would 
be  all  but  impossible  by  any  other  means. 

The  little  certainty  there  is  in  the  thermometer’s  indication  of  degrees  of  heat 
(contrary  to  common  opinion),  and  that  its  water  sometimes  rises  with  increasing 
heat  and  sometimes  falls  with  decreasing  heat,  though  the  thermometer  has 
always  remained  in  the  same  place. 

The  unequal  pressure  of  the  air,  which  at  the  same  degree  of  heat  is  always 
much  greater  in  the  lowest  places. 

All  these  consequences  will  be  unfolded  at  length  in  the  Treatise  on  the  Vacuum , 
along  with  many  others  as  useful  as  they  are  interesting  to  students. 

To  the  Reader 

My  dear  reader,  the  universal  consensus  of  nations  and  the  crowd  of  philoso¬ 
phers  agree  in  establishing  the  principle  that  nature  would  rather  suffer  her  own 
destruction  than  the  least  void  space.  Some  of  the  most  enlightened  minds  have 
adopted  a  more  moderate  principle:  for  although  they  have  believed  that  nature 
abhors  the  vacuum,  they  have  nevertheless  thought  that  this  repugnance  had 
limits,  and  that  with  some  violence  it  could  be  overcome;  but  no  one  has  yet  been 
found  to  advance  the  third  principle:  that  nature  has  no  repugnance  for  the  vacu¬ 
um,  that  she  makes  no  effort  to  avoid  it,  and  that  she  admits  it  without  difficulty 
and  without  resistance.  The  experiments  I  placed  before  you  in  my  abridgment 
do  away,  in  my  opinion,  with  the  first  of  these  principles,  and  I  do  not  see  how 
the  second  can  hold  up  against  the  present  experiment;  so  that  I  no  longer  make 
any  difficulty  about  adopting  the  third:  that  nature  has  no  repugnance  for  the 
vacuum,  that  she  makes  no  effort  to  avoid  it,  that  all  the  effects  that  have  been 
attributed  to  her  horror  have  their  origin  in  the  weight  and  pressure  of  the  air, 
that  it  is  their  sole  and  true  cause,  and  that  through  ignorance  of  it  this  imaginary 
horror  of  the  vacuum  had  been  made  to  order  in  an  attempt  to  account  for  them. 
It  is  not  on  this  occasion  only  that,  when  the  weakness  of  men  has  been  unable 
to  find  the  true  causes,  their  subtlety  has  substituted  imaginary  causes,  to  which 
they  have  given  specious  names  filling  the  ears  and  not  the  mind.  Thus  it  is  said 
that  the  sympathy  and  antipathy  of  natural  bodies  are  efficient  causes,  responsible 
for  many  effects,  as  if  inanimate  bodies  were  capable  of  sympathy  and  antipathy; 
it  is  the  same  with  antiperistasis  and  with  many  other  chimerical  causes,  which 
but  give  a  vain  solace  to  man’s  hunger  to  know  hidden  truths,  and  which,  far 
from  revealing  them,  serve  only  to  cover  up  the  ignorance  of  such  inventors  and 
to  feed  that  of  their  followers. 


THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT 


389 

It  is  not  however  without  regret  that  I  depart  from  opinions  so  generally  re¬ 
ceived;  I  only  do  it  constrained  by  truth,  to  whose  force  I  yield.  I  resisted  these 
new  views  as  long  as  I  had  any  excuse  for  following  the  old;  the  maxims  I  made 
use  of  in  my  abridgment  sufficiently  witness  that.  But  at  last  the  evidence  of 
experiments  forces  me  to  quit  opinions  to  which  respect  for  antiquity  had  held 
me.  Accordingly  I  but  quitted  them  little  by  little,  and  only  gradually  did  I  give 
them  up,  for  from  the  first  of  these  three  principles,  that  nature  has  an  invincible 
horror  of  the  void,  I  passed  to  the  second,  that  she  feels  horror  but  not  invincibly; 
and  thence  I  finally  came  to  believe  in  the  third,  that  nature  has  no  horror  of 
the  void. 

Thus  far  have  I  been  brought  by  this  last  experiment  on  the  equilibrium  of 
fluids,  which  I  would  not  think  I  had  imparted  to  you  in  its  entirety  if  I  did  not 
reveal  my  motives  for  wanting  it  tried;  this  is  why  I  am  publishing  my  letter  of 
last  November  15th,  addressed  to  M.  Perier,  who  undertook  the  labor  of  carrying 
out  the  experiment  with  all  the  accuracy  and  precision  one  could  wish.  It  is  to 
him  alone'that  all  those  who  have  so  long  been  wanting  to  know  the  results  are 
indebted. 

As  by  a  particular  good  fortune  this  universal  desire  had  made  the  experiment 
famous  before  its  appearance,  I  am  sure  it  will  not  become  less  celebrated  after 
having  been  performed,  and  that  it  will  give  as  much  satisfaction  as  the  expecta¬ 
tion  of  it  caused  impatience. 

It  would  not  be  right  to  prolong  this  impatience;  and  that  is  why  I  could  not 
refrain  from  giving  out  the  experiment  in  advance,  against  my  earlier  intention  of 
not  publishing  it  until  the  complete  treatise  (which  I  promised  you  in  my  abridg¬ 
ment),  in  which  I  shall  unfold  the  consequences  I  have  drawn  from  it  and  which 
I  had  put  off  finishing  until  this  last  experiment,  because  it  is  to  complete  my 
demonstrations.  But  since  the  treatise  cannot  appear  at  this  time,  I  have  been 
unwilling  to  withhold  the  experiment  longer,  as  much  to  deserve  more  gratitude 
from  you  for  being  in  haste  as  to  avoid  blame  for  the  wrong  I  should  think  I  was 
doing  you  by  a  longer  delay. 


TREATISES  ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  AND 
ON  THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  MASS  OF  THE  AIR 


Containing  the  explanation  of  the  causes  of  divers  effects  of  nature 

WHICH  HAD  NOT  BEEN  WELL  UNDERSTOOD  UNTIL  NOW  AND  ESPECIALLY  OF  THOSE 
THAT  HAD  BEEN  ATTRIBUTED  TO  THE  HORROR  OF  THE  VACUUM. 

TREATISE  ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS 
Chapter  i.  That  liquids  weigh  in  proportion  to  their  height 

If  we  fasten  to  a  wall  several  vessels,  one  as  in  the  first  figure,  another  inclined 
as  in  the  second,  another  very  wide  as  in  the  third,  another  narrow  as  in  the  fourth, 
another  only  a  little  tube  ending  at  the  bottom  in  a  vessel  which  is  wide  but  has 
almost  no  depth  as  in  the  fifth  figure,  and  if  we  fill  them  all  with  water  up  to  the 
same  height  and  make  openings  of  the  same  size  in  their  bases,  which  we  close 
with  stoppers  to  keep  the  water  in,  experiment  shows  that  the  same  force  is  re¬ 
quired  to  prevent  the  stoppers  from  coming  out,  for  although  the  amount  of 
water  in  each  vessel  is  entirely  different,  its  height  is  the  same  in  all;  and  the 
measure  of  the  force  required  is  the  weight  of  the  water  contained  in  the  first 
vessel,  which  is  uniform  throughout,  for  if  this  water  weighs  ioo  pounds,  a  force 
of  ioo  pounds  will  be  required  to  hold  in  each  of  the  stoppers,  even  that  in  the 
fifth  vessel,  though  the  water  in  it  should  not  weigh  an  ounce. 

To  make  an  exact  test  of  this  we  must  stop  the  opening  of  the  fifth  vessel  with 
a  round  piece  of  wood,  cased  in  tow  like  the  plunger  of  a  pump,  which  fits  the 
opening  and  slides  in  it  with  such  nicety  that  it  does  not  stick  and  yet  keeps  the 
water  in;  and  we  must  attach  to  the  center  of  this  piston  a  cord,  which  is  then 
passed  through  the  small  tube  and  attached  to  one  arm  of  a  balance,  on  the  other 
arm  of  which  we  hang  a  weight  of  ioo  pounds;  we  shall  find  a  perfect  equilibrium 
between  this  ioo  pound  weight  and  the  water  in  the  small  tube,  weighing  an 
ounce;  and  however  little  we  take  away  from  the  ioo  pounds,  the  weight  of  the 
water  will  lower  the  piston,  and  consequently  lower  the  arm  of  the  balance  to 
which  it  is  attached  and  lift  that  from  which  hangs  the  weight  of  a  little  less  than 
ioo  pounds. 

If  the  water  should  freeze  and  the  ice  not  stick  to  the  vessel  (as  in  fact  it 
ordinarily  does  not),  the  other  arm  of  the  balance  will  need  only  an  ounce  to 
counterbalance  the  weight  of  the  ice;  but  if  we  apply  heat  to  the  vessel  so  as  to 
melt  the  ice,  a  weight  of  ioo  pounds  will  be  required  to  counterbalance  the  weight 
of  the  ice  melted  to  water,  although  we  are  supposing  it  to  be  only  an  ounce. 

The  same  thing  would  happen  if  the  openings  we  stop  were  at  the  side  or  even 
at  the  top;  and  it  would  even  be  easier  to  make  the  test  that  way. 

Plate  I,  Figure  VI.  We  must  have  an  entirely  closed  vessel  and  make  two  open¬ 
ings  in  the  top,  one  very  narrow,  the  other  wider,  and  solder  to  each  a  tube  of  the 
same  size  as  the  opening;  and  we  shall  see  that  if  we  put  a  piston  in  the  large  tube 
and  pour  water  in  the  small  tube,  it  will  be  necessary  to  put  a  heavy  weight  on  the 

390 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS 


39 1 


PLATE  I 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


392 

piston  to  prevent  the  weight  of  the  water  in  the  small  tube  from  pushing  it  up, 
just  as  in  the  first  examples  a  weight  of  ioo  pounds  was  required  to  prevent  the 
weight  of  the  water  from  pushing  the  pistons  down,  since  the  opening  was  be¬ 
neath;  and  if  it  were  at  the  side,  an  equal  force  would  be  required  to  prevent  the 
weight  of  the  water  from  pushing  the  piston  toward  that  side. 

And  if  the  tube  filled  with  water  should  be  a  hundred  times  wider  or  a  hundred 
times  narrower,  provided  the  water  were  always  at  the  same  height,  the  same 
weight  would  always  be  required  to  counterbalance  the  water;  and  however  little 
the  weight  is  diminished,  the  water  will  fall  and  cause  the  diminished  weight 
to  rise. 

Rule  for  the  force  required  to  make  the  water  stand 

But  if  we  poured  water  in  the  tube  to  twice  the  height,  twice  the  weight  would 
be  required  on  the  piston  to  counterbalance  the  water;  and  similarly  if  we  made 
the  opening  into  which  the  piston  fits  twice  as  big,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
double  the  force  in  order  to  hold  down  the  double  piston;  whence  we  see  that  the 
force  required  to  prevent  the  water  from  flowing  out  is  proportional  to  the  height 
of  the  water  in  the  tube  and  not  to  the  area  of  its  base;  and  that  the  measure  of 
this  force  is  always  the  weight  of  all  the  water  contained  in  a  column  having  the 
height  of  the  water  in  the  tube  and  the  base  of  the  opening  into  which  the  piston 
fits. 

What  I  have  said  of  water  is  to  be  understood  of  every  other  kind  of  liquid. 

Chapter  2.  Why  liquids  weigh  in  proportion  to  their  height 

It  is  seen  from  all  these  examples  that  a  mere  thread  of  water  can  counterbalance 
a  great  weight;  it  remains  to  show  the  cause  of  this  multiplication  of  force;  that 
is  what  we  shall  do  in  the  following  experiment. 

Plate  I,  Figure  VII.  New  kind  of  machine  to  multiply  forces 

If  a  vessel  full  of  water,  closed  on  all  sides,  has  two  openings,  one  a  hundred 
times  larger  than  the  other,  with  a  piston  carefully  fitted  to  each,  a  man  pressing 
the  small  piston  will  match  the  strength  of  a  hundred  men  pressing  the  piston  in 
the  hundredfold  greater  opening,  and  will  overmaster  ninety-nine. 

And  whatever  be  the  ratio  of  the  openings,  if  the  forces  applied  to  the  pistons 
are  as  the  openings,  there  will  be  equilibrium.  Whence  it  is  apparent  that  a  vessel 
full  of  water  is  a  new  mechanical  principle  and  a  new  machine  for  multiplying 
forces  to  any  amount  desired,  since  a  man  by  this  means  will  be  able  to  lift  any 
burden  proposed. 

And  we  must  find  it  wonderful  to  meet  again  in  this  new  machine  that  fixed 
order  which  is  found  in  all  the  old  machines,  such  as  the  lever,  the  wheel,  the 
endless  screw,  etc.,  which  is  that  the  distance  covered  is  increased  in  the  same 
ratio  as  the  force.  For  it  is  obvious  that  since  one  of  these  openings  is  a  hundred 
times  the  other,  if  the  man  who  pushes  the  small  piston  drove  it  down  one  inch, 
he  would  push  the  other  up  only  the  hundredth  part  of  an  inch;  for  since  this 
pressure  is  transmitted  because  of  the  continuity  of  the  water,  which  joins  the 
two  pistons  amd  makes  it  impossible  for  one  to  move  without  pushing  the  other, 
it  is  obvious  that  when  the  small  piston  moves  one  inch,  the  water  which  it  has 
pushed,  pushing  the  other  piston,  since  it  finds  this  opening  a  hundred  times 
greater,  occupies  only  a  hundredth  part  of  the  height,  so  that  distance  covered  is 
to  distance  covered  as  force  to  force.  Which  can  even  be  taken  as  the  true  cause 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  393 

of  this  effect,  it  being  clear  that  to  move  a  hundred  pounds  of  water  one  inch  is 
the  same  thing  as  to  move  a  pound  of  water  a  hundred  inches,  and  that  thus  when 
a  pound  of  water  is  so  placed  with  respect  to  a  hundred  pounds  of  water  that  the 
hundred  pounds  cannot  move  one  inch  without  making  the  pound  move  a  hun¬ 
dred  inches,  they  must  remain  in  equilibrium,  one  pound  having  as  much  force 
to  make  a  hundred  pounds  move  one  inch  as  a  hundred  pounds  have  to  make  one 
pound  move  a  hundred  inches. 

We  can  also  add  for  greater  clarity  that  the  water  under  these  two  pistons  is 
equally  pressed;  for  if  one  piston  is  a  hundred  times  heavier  than  the  other,  it  is 
also  in  contact  with  a  hundred  times  as  many  parts  of  water,  and  so  each  part  is 
equally  pressed;  therefore  all  must  be  at  rest  because  there  is  not  more  reason  why 
one  part  should  give  way  than  another;  so  that  if  a  vessel  filled  with  water  has 
only  one  opening,  an  inch  in  area,  for  example,  in  which  we  put  a  piston  carrying 
a  weight  of  one  pound,  this  weight  acts  against  all  the  parts  of  the  vessel  generally 
because  of  the  continuity  and  fluidity  of  the  water.  But  to  determine  how  much 
of  this  action  is  felt  by  each  part,  the  rule  is  as  follows:  each  part  an  inch  in  area, 
like  the  opening,  is  acted  against  as  if  pushed  by  the  weight  of  one  pound  (with¬ 
out  counting  the  weight  of  the  water,  which  I  do  not  mention  here  for  I  am 
considering  only  the  weight  of  the  piston),  because  the  pound  weight  presses  the 
piston  in  the  opening,  and  each  part  of  the  vessel,  more  or  less  great,  is  acted 
upon  more  or  less,  exactly  in  proportion  to  its  size,  whether  this  part  is  over 
against  the  opening  or  to  the  side,  near  or  far,  for  the  continuity  and  fluidity  of 
the  water  makes  all  those  things  equal  and  indifferent;  so  that  the  material  of 
which  the  vessel  is  made  must  have  enough  resistance  in  all  its  parts  to  hold  up 
against  all  these  pressures;  if  its  resistance  is  anywhere  less,  it  breaks;  if  it  is 
greater,  the  vessel  supplies  what  is  necessary,  and  the  rest,  on  this  occasion, 
remains  useless;  so  that  if  a  new  opening  is  made  in  the  vessel,  there  will  be 
required  to  keep  the  water  from  spurting  out  a  force  equal  to  the  resistance  this 
part  should  have,  that  is,  a  force  which  is  to  that  of  one  pound  as  this  new  opening 
is  to  the  original  opening. 

Here  is  another  proof  which  only  geometers  will  be  able  to  follow,  and  which 
may  be  passed  over  by  others. 

I  lay  down  as  a  principle  that  a  body  never  moves  by  its  own  weight  without 
downward  displacement  of  its  center  of  gravity.  Whence  I  prove  that  the  two 
pistons  represented  in  Plate  I,  Figure  VII  are  in  equilibrium,  as  follows:  for  their 
common  center  of  gravity  is  at  the  point  which  divides  the  line  joining  their 
individual  centers  of  gravity  in  the  ratio  of  their  weights;  let  them  move  now  if 
possible;  therefore  the  distances  covered  will  be  to  each  other  inversely  as  the 
weights,  as  we  have  shown;  but  if  we  take  their  common  center  of  gravity  in  this 
second  position,  we  shall  find  it  precisely  in  the  same  place  as  before;  for  it  will 
always  be  found  at  the  point  which  divides  the  line  joining  their  individual  cen¬ 
ters  of  gravity  in  the  ratio  of  their  weights;  therefore,  because  of  the  parallelism 
of  the  lines  of  their  motions,  it  will  be  found  at  the  intersection  of  the  two  lines 
joining  the  centers  of  gravity  in  the  two  positions;  therefore  the  common  center 
of  gravity  will  be  at  the  same  point  as  before;  therefore  the  two  pistons,  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  single  body,  have  moved  without  any  lowering  of  the  common  center 
of  gravity,  which  is  against  the  principle;  therefore  they  cannot  move;  therefore 
they  will  be  at  rest,  that  is,  in  equilibrium.  q.e.d. 


394  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

By  this  method  I  have  demonstrated  in  a  little  treatise  on  mechanics  the  reason 
for  all  the  multiplications  of  forces  found  in  all  the  other  mechanical  instruments 
so  far  invented.  For  I  show  in  all  of  them  that  the  unequal  weights  which  are  in 
equilibrium  by  mechanical  advantage  are  so  disposed  by  the  construction  of  the 
machines  that  their  common  center  of  gravity  could  never  descend,  no  matter 
what  positions  they  took;  whence  it  follows  they  must  remain  at  rest,  that  is, 
in  equilibrium. 

Let  us  accept  then  as  certainly  true  that  if  in  a  vessel  filled  with  water  and  having 
openings  there  are  forces  at  these  openings  proportional  to  them,  the  forces  are 
in  equilibrium;  this  is  the  foundation  and  the  reason  of  the  equilibrium  of  liquids, 
of  which  we  are  going  to  give  several  examples. 

By  this  new  device  of  mechanics  we  understand  why  liquids  weigh  according  to  their 
height . 

This  device  of  mechanics  for  multiplying  forces,  when  once  understood,  gives 
the  reason  why  liquids  weigh  in  accordance  with  their  height  and  not  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  their  expanse  in  all  the  effects  we  have  recorded. 

For  it  is  obvious  that  in  Plate  I,  Figure  VI  the  water  in  a  small  tube  counter¬ 
poises  a  piston  carrying  a  hundred  pounds  because  the  vessel  beneath  is  itself  a  ves¬ 
sel  filled  with  water,  having  two  openings,  at  one  of  which  is  the  large  piston  and  at 
the  other  the  water  in  the  tube,  which  is  actually  a  piston  carrying  its  own  weight, 
which  must  counterbalance  the  other  piston  if  their  weights  are  as  the  openings. 

Also  in  Plate  I,  Figure  V  the  water  in  the  fine  tube  is  in  equilibrium  with  a 
weight  of  one  hundred  pounds,  because  the  vessel  at  the  bottom,  which  is  wide 
and  shallow,  is  a  closed  vessel  filled  with  water  having  two  openings,  one  wide, 
at  the  bottom,  where  the  piston  is,  the  other  small,  on  top,  where  the  fine  tube  is, 
whose  water  is  actually  a  piston  carrying  its  own  weight  and  counterbalancing  the 
other  because  the  weights  are  proportional  to  the  openings;  for  it  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence  whether  the  openings  are  opposite  each  other  or  not,  as  has  already  been  said. 

Wherein  we  see  that  the  water  of  these  tubes  does  nothing  that  copper  pistons 
equally  heavy  would  not  do;  since  a  copper  piston  weighing  an  ounce  would  be 
as  much  in  equilibrium  with  the  hundred  pound  weight  as  the  thread  of  water 
weighing  an  ounce;  so  that  the  cause  of  the  equilibrium  of  a  small  weight  with  a 
greater,  as  in  all  these  examples,  is  not  that  these  bodies  weighing  so  little  and 
yet  counterpoising  much  heavier  bodies  are  liquid,  for  that  is  not  common  to  all 
the  examples,  since  those  in  which  little  copper  pistons  counterbalance  such  heavy 
ones  show  the  same  thing;  but  it  is  that  the  substance  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessels 
extending  from  one  opening  to  the  other  is  liquid,  for  that  is  common  to  all  and 
is  the  true  cause  of  the  multiplication. 

Also  in  the  example  of  Plate  I,  Figure  V  if  the  water  in  the  little  tube  should 
freeze  and  that  in  the  wide  vessel  beneath  remained  liquid,  a  hundred  pounds 
would  be  required  to  sustain  the  weight  of  this  ice;  but  if  the  water  in  the  bottom 
freezes,  whether  that  in  the  upper  tube  freezes  or  remains  liquid,  only  an  ounce  is 
required  to  counterbalance  it. 

Whence  it  is  clearly  apparent  that  it  is  the  fluidity  of  the  body  joining  the  two 
openings  which  causes  this  multiplication  of  forces,  because  its  foundation  is, 
as  we  have  already  said,  that  a  vessel  filled  with  water  is  a  mechanical  instrument 
for  multiplying  forces. 

Let  us  pass  to  other  effects  whose  explanation  is  discovered  by  this  machine. 


395 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS 

Chapter  3.  Examples  of  the  equilibrium  of  liquids  with  their  explanation. 

Plate  I,  Figure  VIII.  If  a  vessel  filled  with  water  has  two  openings,  in  each  of 
which  a  tube  has  been  soldered,  and  if  we  pour  water  in  both  up  to  the  same 
height,  it  will  be  in  equilibrium. 

For  since  the  heights  are  the  same,  the  water  will  be  proportional  to  the  surface, 
that  is,  to  the  opening;  therefore  the  water  in  each  tube  is  really  a  piston  whose 
weight  varies  as  the  opening;  therefore  there  will  be  equilibrium  by  the  preceding 
demonstrations. 

Thence  it  is  that  if  we  pour  water  in  one  of  these  tubes  only,  it  will  make  the 
water  in  the  other  rise  until  the  same  height  has  been  reached  in  both,  and  then 
there  will  be  equilibrium;  for  then  they  will  be  two  pistons  whose  weights  are 
proportional  to  the  openings. 

Why  water  rises  as  high  as  its  source. 

This  is  the  reason  why  water  rises  as  high  as  its  source. 

(The  following  experiments  require  that  the  vessel  be  filled  up  to  the  mouth  of 
the  tubes  with  the  heavier  of  the  liquids.) 

But  if  we  put  different  liquids  in  the  tubes,  as  water  in  one  and  quicksilver  in 
the  other,  the  two  liquids  will  be  in  equilibrium  when  their  heights  are  propor¬ 
tional  to  their  weights;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  water  is  fourteen  times  higher 
than  the  quicksilver,  because  quicksilver  as  such  is  fourteen  times  heavier  than 
water,  for  they  will  be  two  pistons,  one  of  water,  the  other  of  quicksilver,  whose 
weights  will  be  proportional  to  the  openings. 

And  even  if  the  tube  filled  with  water  should  be  a  hundred  times  finer  than  the 
tube  filled  with  quicksilver,  this  thread  of  water  would  hold  in  equilibrium  all 
that  great  mass  of  quicksilver,  provided  the  water  were  fourteen  times  higher. 

All  that  I  have  heretofore  said  of  tubes  should  be  understood  of  any  vessel 
whatsoever,  regular  or  not,  for  we  meet  with  the  same  equilibrium;  so  that  if, 
instead  of  the  two  tubes  we  have  represented  at  the  two  openings,  we  should 
attach  two  vessels  also  emptying  into  these  openings,  but  wide  in  some  places, 
narrow  in  others,  and  in  short  entirely  irregular  in  their  whole  length,  and  pour 
liquids  in  them  until  they  had  the  specified  height,  these  liquids  would  be  as 
much  in  equilibrium  in  these  irregular  tubes  as  in  the  uniform  tubes,  because 
liquids  weigh  only  according  to  their  height  and  not  according  to  their  expanse. 

This  could  easily  be  demonstrated  by  inscribing  in  both  vessels  many  regular 
small  tubes;  for  it  would  be  shown  by  what  we  have  demonstrated  that  two  of 
these  inscribed  tubes,  corresponding  to  each  other,  one  in  each  vessel,  are  in 
equilibrium;  therefore  all  those  in  one  vessel  would  be  in  equilibrium  with  all 
those  in  the  other.  Those  who  are  used  to  the  inscriptions  and  circumscriptions 
of  geometry  will  have  no  trouble  in  understanding  this;  and  it  would  be  very 
difficult  to  demonstrate  it  to  others,  at  least  geometrically. 

Plate  I,  Figure  IX.  If  we  place  in  a  river  a  tube  curved  back  at  its  lower  end, 
filled  with  quicksilver,  in  such  a  way  that  its  upper  end  is  always  out  of  the  water, 
the  quicksilver  will  fall  part  way  until  it  has  reached  a  certain  height,  when  it  will 
fall  no  lower,  but  will  remain  suspended  at  this  point,  so  that  its  height  is  the 
fourteenth  part  of  the  height  of  the  water  above  the  recurved  end;  so  that  if  the 
distance  from  the  top  of  the  water  to  the  recurved  end  is  fourteen  feet,  the  quick¬ 
silver  will  fall  until  it  is  only  one  foot  higher  than  the  recurved  end,  at  which 


396  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

height  it  will  remain  suspended;  for  the  weight  of  the  quicksilver  which  weighs 
inside  the  tube  will  be  in  equilibrium  with  the  weight  of  the  water  weighing  out¬ 
side  the  tube,  because  the  heights  of  these  liquids  are  proportional  to  their 
weights,  and  their  areas  do  not  count  for  equilibrium;  for  the  same  reason  it  is 
also  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the  recurved  end  is  wide  or  not  and  whether 
accordingly  little  or  much  water  weighs  upon  it. 

Also  if  we  lower  the  tube,  the  quicksilver  rises,  for  the  weight  of  the  water  is 
greater;  and  if  on  the  contrary  we  raise  it,  the  quicksilver  falls,  for  its  weight  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  water;  and  if  we  incline  the  tube,  the  quicksilver  rises 
until  it  has  again  reached  the  required  height,  which  the  inclining  of  the  tube  had 
diminished,  for  an  inclined  tube  has  less  height  than  a  vertical  tube. 

Plate  I,  Figure  X.  The  same  thing  happens  in  a  plain  tube,  that  is,  not  recurved; 
for  in  such  a  tube  open  at  both  ends,  filled  with  quicksilver  and  plunged  into  a 
river,  provided  that  the  upper  end  emerges  from  the  water,  if  the  lower  end  is 
fourteen  feet  from  the  surface,  the  quicksilver  will  fall  until  what  is  left  has  a 
height  of  only  one  foot;  and  there  it  will  hang  suspended  by  the  weight  of  the 
water;  which  is  easy  to  understand;  for  the  water,  in  contact  with  the  quicksilver 
from  beneath  and  not  from  above,  tries  to  push  it  up,  as  if  it  were  a  piston,  and 
with  so  much  the  greater  force  as  the  water  has  greater  depth;  so  that  since  the 
weight  of  the  quicksilver  makes  the  same  effort  to  fall  that  the  weight  of  the 
water  makes  to  push  it  up,  everything  remains  counterpoised. 

Also  if  the  quicksilver  were  not  there,  it  is  obvious  that  the  water  would  enter 
the  tube  and  rise  to  a  height  of  fourteen  feet,  which  is  that  of  its  level;  therefore, 
the  foot  of  quicksilver  weighing  as  much  as  the  fourteen  feet  of  water  whose 
place  it  takes,  it  is  natural  that  it  keep  the  water  in  the  same  equilibrium  in  which 
the  fourteen  feet  of  water  would  keep  it. 

But  if  the  tube  were  thrust  so  far  down  in  the  water  that  the  upper  end  was 
submerged,  then  the  water  would  enter  the  tube  and  the  quicksilver  would  fall; 
for  the  water  weighing  inside  as  well  as  outside  the  tube,  the  quicksilver  would 
lack  the  necessary  counterpoise  for  its  suspension. 

Chapter  4.  On  the  equilibrium  of  a  liquid  with  a  solid. 

I  am  now  going  to  give  examples  of  the  equilibrium  of  water  with  solid  bodies, 
such  as  a  cylinder  of  solid  copper,  which  can  be  suspended  in  the  water  as  follows. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XI.  A  very  long  tube  is  required,  say  twenty  feet,  which  widens 
at  the  lower  end  like  a  funnel;  if  this  lower  end  is  round  and  has  fitted  into  it  a 
copper  cylinder  so  accurately  turned  that  it  can  enter  and  leave  the  opening  of 
the  funnel,  sliding  back  and  forth  there  without  allowing  any  water  to  escape  and 
thus  acting  as  a  piston,  we  shall  see  that  if  we  put  the  funnel  with  the  cylinder  in 
it  in  a  river,  making  sure  that  the  end  of  the  tube  emerges  from  the  water,  and  if, 
holding  the  tube  with  the  hand,  we  abandon  the  copper  cylinder  to  its  fate,  this 
solid  cylinder  will  not  fall,  but  will  remain  suspended  because  the  water  is  in  con¬ 
tact  with  it  from  beneath  and  not  from  above  (for  it  cannot  get  into  the  tube); 
and  thus  the  water  pushes  it  up  in  the  same  way  it  pushed  the  quicksilver  in  the 
preceding  example,  making  the  same  effort  as  the  weight  of  the  copper  makes  to 
fall;  and  thus  the  opposed  forces  are  in  equilibrium.  To  be  sure,  for  this  result  the 
cylinder  must  be  far  enough  beneath  the  surface  of  the  water  to  give  the  water  the 
depth  necessary  for  counterbalancing  the  copper;  so  that  if  the  cylinder  is  a  foot 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  397 

in  height,  there  must  be  nine  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  water  to  the  bottom  of 
the  cylinder,  because  copper  as  such  has  nine  times  the  weight  of  water;  accord¬ 
ingly  if  the  water  is  too  shallow,  as  would  be  the  case  if  the  tube  were  drawn  up 
toward  the  top  of  the  water,  the  cylinder’s  weight  wins  out  and  it  falls;  but  if  the 
tube  is  thrust  further  down  than  is  required,  say  twenty  feet,  so  far  is  the  cylinder 
from  being  able  to  fall  by  its  own  weight  that  on  the  contrary  we  should  have  to 
employ  a  great  force  to  separate  it  and  pull  it  away  from  the  funnel,  for  the  weight 
of  the  water  pushes  it  up  with  a  force  of  twenty  feet.  But  if  we  pierce  the  tube  and 
the  water,  entering,  weighs  upon  the  cylinder  from  above  as  well  as  from  below, 
then  the  cylinder  will  fall  of  its  own  weight,  like  the  quicksilver  in  the  other 
example,  because  it  no  longer  has  the  counterweight  needed  for  its  suspension. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XII.  If  this  tube  which  we  have  just  described  is  curved  over 
and  a  wooden  cylinder  is  introduced  and  the  whole  is  put  into  water,  but  in  such 
a  way  that  the  upper  end  emerges,  the  wood  will  not  rise,  although  it  is  sur¬ 
rounded  by  water,  but  on  the  contrary  it  will  sink  down  into  the  tube  because  the 
water  is  in  contact  with  it  from  above  and  not  from  below;  for  the  water  cannot 
enter  the  tube,  and  thus  it  pushes  the  cylinder  down  with  all  its  weight  and  not 
at  all  up,  for  it  is  not  in  contact  with  it  from  below. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XIII.  But  if  the  cylinder  were  flush  with  the  water,  that  is,  if 
it  were  only  sunk  in  such  a  way  that  there  was  no  water  above  it  but  also  none  of 
it  above  the  water,  then  it  would  be  pushed  neither  up  nor  down  by  the  weight 
of  the  water,  which  would  be  in  contact  with  it  neither  from  above  nor  from 
below  (since  it  cannot  enter  the  tube),  but  only  on  all  sides;  accordingly  the 
cylinder  would  not  rise  for  nothing  lifts  it,  and  on  the  contrary  it  would  fall,  but 
by  its  own  weight  only. 

But  if  the  lower  end  of  the  tube  were  bent  to  one  side  like  a  crutch  and  a 
cylinder  were  put  in  and  the  whole  immersed,  still  in  such  a  way  that  the  upper 
end  is  out  of  the  water,  the  weight  of  the  water  will  push  the  cylinder  laterally 
into  the  tube,  because  the  water  is  not  in  contact  with  it  on  the  opposite  side, 
and  the  water  will  act  in  this  way  with  so  much  the  more  force  as  it  has  more 
depth. 


Chapter  5.  Of  bodies  entirely  immersed  in  water. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XV.  We  see  from  the  above  that  water  pushes  up  bodies  it  is  in 
contact  with  from  below,  that  it  pushes  down  those  it  is  in  contact  with  from 
above,  and  that  it  pushes  to  one  side  those  it  is  in  contact  with  on  the  opposite 
side;  whence  it  is  easily  concluded  that  when  a  body  is  entirely  immersed  in 
water,  since  the  water  is  in  contact  with  it  from  above,  from  below,  and  on  every 
side,  it  tries  to  push  it  up,  down,  and  sideways  in  every  direction;  but  since  its 
depth  is  the  measure  of  the  force  it  exerts  in  all  these  efforts,  it  is  easy  to  see 
which  of  them  must  prevail. 

For  it  is  apparent  at  once  that  since  the  water  has  the  same  depth  with  respect 
to  all  the  lateral  surfaces,  it  will  push  them  equally;  and  accordingly  the  body 
will  receive  no  lateral  impulsion  in  any  direction,  any  more  than  a  weathervane 
between  two  winds  of  equal  strength.  But  since  the  water  is  deeper  at  the  lower 
surface  of  the  body  than  at  the  upper,  it  is  obvious  that  it  will  push  it  more  up 
than  down,  and  since  the  difference  between  the  two  levels  of  the  water  is  the 
height  of  the  body  itself,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  water  pushes  it  more 


398  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

up  than  down  with  a  force  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  volume  of  water  equal  to 
the  body. 

A  body  in  water  is  counterpoised  by  an  equal  volume  of  water. 

So  that  a  body  in  water  is  carried  there  as  if  in  the  pan  of  a  balance  whose  other 
pan  carried  an  equal  volume  of  water. 

Hence  it  comes  about  that  some  bodies  sink. 

Whence  it  is  apparent  that  if  the  body  is  of  copper  or  some  other  substance 
heavier  than  an  equal  volume  of  water,  it  sinks;  for  its  weight  wins  out  against 
that  counterbalancing  it. 

Others  rise. 

If  the  body  is  of  wood  or  some  other  substance  lighter  than  an  equal  volume  of 
water,  it  rises  with  as  much  force  as  its  weight  is  exceeded  by  the  weight  of  water. 

Others  neither  rise  nor  sink. 

And  if  the  body  has  the  same  weight  as  water,  it  neither  sinks  nor  rises,  like 
wax,  which  stays  in  water  almost  where  it  is  put. 

This  is  the  reason  why  a  well  bucket  is  not  hard  to  pull  up  so  long  as  it  is  in 
the  water,  and  why  we  do  not  feel  its  weight  until  it  begins  to  come  out,  just  as 
a  bucket  filled  with  wax  would  not  be  more  difficult  to  pull  up  while  it  was  in 
the  water;  but  when  they  are  in  the  water,  they  have  a  counterpoise  which  they 
no  longer  have  when  they  have  been  drawn  out,  just  as  a  balance  pan  carrying  a 
hundred  pounds  is  not  hard  to  lift  if  the  other  pan  is  equally  laden. 

Copper  weighs  more  in  air  than  in  water. 

This  is  why  when  copper  is  in  water  we  find  that  it  is  less  heavy  precisely  by 
the  weight  of  a  volume  of  water  equal  to  its  own;  so  that  if  it  weighs  nine  pounds 
in  air,  it  weighs  but  eight  in  water  because  the  equal  volume  of  water  counter¬ 
balancing  it  weighs  a  pound;  and  in  sea  water  it  weighs  less  because  sea  water  is 
almost  one  forty-fifth  heavier. 

Two  bodies  which  are  in  equilibrium  in  air  are  not  in  equilibrium  in  water. 

For  the  same  reason  two  bodies,  one  copper,  the  other  lead,  of  equal  weight 
and  consequently  of  different  volume  (since  the  same  weight  requires  more  cop¬ 
per),  will  be  found  to  balance  each  other  in  the  scales;  but  if  the  scales  are  put 
in  water,  the  equilibrium  is  lost,  for  each  body  being  counterbalanced  by  a  vol¬ 
ume  of  water  equal  to  its  own,  and  the  volume  of  the  copper  being  greater  than 
that  of  the  lead,  the  copper  has  a  greater  counterpoise,  and  accordingly  the  weight 
of  the  lead  is  the  master. 

Nor  even  in  moist  air. 

Thus  two  weights  of  different  material  having  been  perfectly  balanced  with 
the  greatest  precision  to  which  men  can  attain,  if  they  are  in  equilibrium  when 
the  air  is  very  dry,  they  are  no  longer  so  when  the  air  is  moist. 

All  bodies  in  water  are  pushed  up  by  its  weight ,  not  down. 

By  the  same  principle  when  a  man  is  in  water,  so  far  is  the  weight  of  the  water 
from  pushing  him  down  that  on  the  contrary  it  pushes  him  up,  but  he  weighs 
more  than  it;  and  that  is  why  he  nonetheless  goes  down,  but  with  much  less 
violence  than  in  air  because  he  is  counterpoised  by  a  volume  of  water  equal  to 
his  own,  which  weighs  almost  as  much  as  he  does;  and  if  it  weighed  the  same, 
he  would  float.  And  so  by  kicking  the  ground  or  making  the  slightest  effort 
against  the  water,  he  rises  and  floats;  and  in  mud  baths  a  man  could  not  sink, 
and  if  he  is  pushed  down,  he  rises  of  himself. 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  399 

For  the  same  reason  a  man  bathing  in  a  tub  lifts  his  arm  without  effort  as  long 
as  it  is  in  the  water;  but  when  he  thrusts  it  out  of  the  water,  he  feels  that  it  is 
heavy  because  it  is  no  longer  counterbalanced  by  a  volume  of  water  equal  to  its 
own,  as  it  was  in  the  water. 

How  it  is  that  bodies  float. 

Finally  bodies  which  float  on  the  water  weigh  exactly  as  much  as  the  water 
whose  place  they  occupy;  for  the  water,  in  contact  with  them  from  below  and 
not  from  above,  only  pushes  them  up. 

And  this  is  why  a  lead  plate  convex  in  shape  floats,  because  it  occupies  a  large 
place  in  the  water  because  of  this  shape;  whereas  if  it  were  a  solid  mass,  it  would 
never  occupy  more  than  the  place  of  a  volume  of  water  equal  to  the  volume  of 
its  matter,  which  would  not  suffice  to  balance  it. 

Chapter  6.  On  compressible  bodies  in  water. 

It  is  seen  from  everything  I  have  shown  how  water  acts  against  all  bodies  in  it, 
pressing  them  on  every  side;  whence  it  is  easy  to  judge  that  if  a  compressible 
body  is  submerged,  the  water  should  compress  it  inward  toward  the  center;  and 
that  is  exactly  what  it  does,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  following  examples. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XIV.  If  a  bellows  with  a  very  long  tube,  say  twenty  feet,  is 
placed  in  water  in  such  a  way  that  the  nozzle  emerges,  it  will  be  hard  to  open, 
if  the  little  holes  which  are  in  one  of  the  wings  have  been  stopped,  whereas  it 
would  be  opened  without  any  trouble  if  it  were  in  the  air,  because  the  water  com¬ 
presses  it  from  every  side  with  its  weight;  but  if  all  the  necessary  force  is  employed 
and  it  is  opened,  however  little  this  force  is  relaxed,  the  bellows  closes  again  with 
violence  (whereas  it  would  remain  wide  open  if  it  were  in  air)  because  of  the 
weight  of  the  mass  of  water  pressing  against  it.  Also  the  deeper  it  is  in  the  water 
the  more  difficult  it  is  to  open  because  there  is  a  greater  depth  of  water  to  support. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XVI.  Similarly  if  we  put  a  tube  in  the  opening  of  a  balloon  and 
bind  the  balloon  about  the  end  of  the  tube,  which  is  twenty  feet  long,  pouring 
quicksilver  in  the  tube  until  the  balloon  is  full  and  putting  the  entire  apparatus  in 
a  cistern  of  water,  so  that  the  end  of  the  tube  emerges  from  the  water,  we  shall 
see  the  quicksilver  rise  from  the  balloon  into  the  tube,  up  to  a  certain  height, 
because  since  the  weight  of  the  water  presses  the  balloon  from  all  sides,  the  quick¬ 
silver  it  contains,  being  pressed  equally  at  every  point  except  where  the  tube 
enters  (for  the  water  has  no  access  there  since  the  mouth  of  the  tube  is  above  the 
surface  of  the  water),  is  pushed  from  the  places  where  it  is  pressed  toward  the 
place  where  it  is  not  pressed;  and  thus  it  rises  in  the  tube  up  to  a  certain  height 
at  which  it  weighs  as  much  as  the  water  outside  the  tube. 

Wherein  the  same  thing  happens  as  if  we  pressed  the  balloon  between  the 
hands;  for  we  should  without  difficulty  make  the  liquid  in  it  rise  in  the  tube,  and 
it  is  obvious  that  the  surrounding  water  presses  it  in  the  same  way. 

Plate  I,  Figure  XVII.  It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  if  a  man  puts  the  end  of  a 
glass  tube  twenty  feet  long  on  his  thigh,  and  if,  holding  it  there,  he  seats  himself 
in  a  tank  filled  with  water  so  that  the  upper  end  of  the  tube  emerges  from  the 
water,  his  flesh  will  swell  where  the  mouth  of  the  tube  is  and  a  large  and  painful 
tumor  will  be  formed,  as  if  the  flesh  were  sucked  and  drawn  by  a  cupping  glass; 
because  the  weight  of  the  water  compressing  his  body  from  all  sides  except  the 
place  where  the  mouth  of  the  tube  is  (which  the  water  cannot  reach  because  the 


4oo  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

rube,  into  which  it  cannot  enter,  prevents  its  getting  there),  the  flesh  is  pushed 
from  the  places  where  it  is  compressed  to  the  place  where  it  is  not;  and  the  greater 
the  depth  of  water,  the  larger  the  swelling,  and  when  the  water  is  withdrawn,  the 
swelling  goes  down;  and  similarly  if  water  is  poured  into  the  tube,  for  the  weight 
of  the  water  affecting  this  part  of  the  body  as  well  as  the  others,  there  is  no  more 
swelling  there  than  elsewhere. 

This  effect  is  perfectly  conformable  to  the  preceding  one,  for  the  quicksilver 
in  the  one  case  and  the  man’s  flesh  in  the  other,  since  they  are  everywhere  pressed 
except  at  the  mouth  of  the  tube,  are  pushed  into  the  tube  as  much  as  the  force 
of  the  water’s  weight  can  push  them. 

If  we  put  in  the  bottom  of  a  tank  filled  with  water  a  balloon  in  which  the  air  is 
not  under  much  pressure,  we  shall  see  that  it  will  be  noticeably  compressed;  and 
in  proportion  as  the  water  is  removed,  the  balloon  will  gradually  expand,  because 
the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  water  which  is  above  it  presses  it  on  all  sides  toward 
the  center,  until  the  spring  of  this  compressed  air  is  as  strong  as  the  weight  of 
the  water  pressing  the  balloon. 

If  we  put  at  the  bottom  of  the  same  tank  of  water  a  balloon  filled  with  air  at 
high  pressure,  we  shall  not  notice  any  compression;  not  that  the  water  does  not 
press  it;  for  the  contrary  is  apparent  from  the  other  balloon  and  from  the  one 
containing  quicksilver,  from  the  bellows  and  from  all  the  other  examples,  but 
the  water  has  not  enough  force  to  compress  it  noticeably,  because  it  was  already 
very  much  compressed;  just  as  when  a  spring  is  very  stiff,  like  that  of  a  crossbow, 
it  cannot  be  noticeably  bent  by  a  moderate  force  which  would  bend  a  weaker 
spring  perfectly  noticeably. 

We  must  not  be  surprised  that  the  weight  of  the  water  does  not  noticeably 
compress  this  balloon  and  that  nevertheless  we  very  considerably  compress  it 
merely  by  laying  our  finger  on  it,  although  we  press  it  then  with  a  force  less  than 
that  of  water.  The  reason  for  this  difference  is  that  when  the  balloon  is  in  the 
water,  the  water  presses  it  on  all  sides,  whereas  when  we  press  it  with  the  finger, 
it  is  pressed  in  one  place  only;  but  when  we  press  it  with  the  finger  in  one  place 
only,  we  make  a  large  dent  inasmuch  as  the  neighboring  parts  are  not  pressed 
and  thus  easily  accommodate  what  is  expelled  from  the  part  that  is  pressed;  so 
that  since  the  matter  driven  from  the  one  place  that  is  pressed  is  distributed  to 
all  the  rest,  each  place  has  little  to  take  care  of;  and  thus  there  is  a  dent  in  that 
place  which  becomes  very  noticeable  by  comparison  with  all  the  surrounding 
parts,  which  are  without  it. 

But  if  we  succeeded  in  pressing  all  the  other  parts  as  well  as  that  one,  each 
part  giving  back  what  it  had  received  from  the  first,  the  first  would  return  to  its 
original  state  because  the  rest  would  themselves  be  pressed  as  well  as  it;  and  as 
there  would  now  be  only  a  general  compression  of  all  parts  towards  the  center, 
we  should  no  longer  see  a  compression  in  any  particular  place;  and  we  should 
not  be  able  to  judge  of  the  general  compression  except  by  a  comparison  of  the 
two  spaces  occupied  by  the  balloon;  and  as  they  would  differ  very  little,  it  would 
be  impossible  to  notice  it.  Whence  we  see  how  much  difference  there  is  between 
pressing  one  part  only  and  pressing  all  the  parts  generally. 

It  is  the  same  with  a  body  every  part  of  which  is  pressed  save  one;  for  a  swelling 
occurs  there  from  the  emptying,  as  it  were,  of  the  others,  as  could  be  seen  in  the 
example  of  the  man  in  the  water  with  a  tube  on  his  thigh.  Also  if  we  press  the 


EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  401 

same  balloon  between  the  hands,  although  we  try  to  touch  each  of  its  parts, 
there  will  always  be  one  which  escapes  between  the  fingers  and  swells  out  into  a 
tumor;  but  if  it  were  possible  to  press  the  balloon  everywhere  equally,  we  should 
never  be  able  noticeably  to  compress  it,  whatever  effort  we  made,  provided  the 
air  in  the  balloon  were  already  under  considerable  pressure;  this  is  what  happens 
when  it  is  in  the  water,  for  the  water  is  in  contact  with  it  on  all  sides. 

Chapter  7.  Of  animals  in  water .  Why  they  are  not  noticeably  compressed  by 

the  weight  of  the  water 

All  this  reveals  to  us  why  water  does  not  compress  the  animals  in  it,  although 
it  presses  generally  all  bodies  it  surrounds,  as  we  have  shown  by  so  many  exam¬ 
ples.  For  it  is  not  that  the  water  does  not  press  them  but  as  we  have  already  said, 
since  it  is  in  contact  with  them  on  all  sides,  it  can  cause  neither  swelling  nor 
depression  in  any  particular  part  but  only  a  general  condensation  of  all  the  parts 
toward  the  center,  which  would  not  be  noticeable  unless  great  and  which  can 
only  be  extremely  slight  because  flesh  is  very  compact. 

For  if  the  water  were  in  contact  with  a  body  in  one  part  only  or  if  it  were  in 
contact  with  it  in  all  but  one,  provided  the  body  were  at  a  considerable  depth, 
the  result  would  be  very  noticeable,  as  we  have  shown;  but  since  all  parts  are 
equally  pressed,  nothing  is  seen. 

Why  the  weight  of  the  water  is  not  felt . 

It  is  easy  to  pass  from  this  to  the  reason  why  animals  in  water  do  not  feel  its 
weight. 

For  the  pain  we  feel  when  something  presses  us  is  great  if  the  compression  is 
great;  because  the  part  compressed  is  drained  of  blood,  and  the  flesh,  the  nerves, 
and  the  other  parts  composing  it  are  pushed  out  of  their  natural  place,  and  this 
violence  cannot  occur  without  pain.  But  if  the  compression  is  slight,  as  when 
the  skin  is  grazed  by  the  finger  with  such  delicacy  that  the  blood  is  not  driven 
from  the  part  touched  and  that  neither  the  flesh  nor  the  nerves  are  displaced  or  in 
any  way  altered,  there  can  also  be  no  sensible  pain;  and  if  we  are  touched  in 
this  way  in  every  part  of  the  body,  we  should  feel  no  pain  from  so  slight  a 
compression. 

And  this  is  what  happens  to  animals  in  water;  for  the  weight  compresses  them, 
to  be  sure,  but  so  little  that  it  is  by  no  means  noticeable,  for  the  reason  we  have 
given;  so  that  no  part  being  pressed  or  drained  of  blood,  no  nerve  or  vein  or 
fleshy  part  being  displaced  (for  since  the  whole  body  is  equally  pressed,  there  is 
no  more  reason  why  they  should  be  pressed  toward  one  part  than  toward  another) 
and  everything  remaining  in  short  without  change,  everything  should  remain 
without  pain  and  without  awareness. 

And  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  these  animals  do  not  feel  the  weight  of 
the  water  and  that  nevertheless  they  would  certainly  feel  the  weight  of  our  finger 
if  we  only  rested  it  on  them,  although  they  were  thereby  pressed  with  less  force 
than  by  the  water;  for  the  reason  for  this  difference  is  that  when  they  are  in  water, 
they  are  pressed  on  all  sides  generally,  whereas  when  they  are  pressed  with  the 
finger,  they  are  pressed  in  one  place  only.  But  we  have  shown  that  this  difference 
is  the  reason  why  they  are  quite  noticeably  compressed  by  the  tip  of  the  finger 
and  are  not  noticeably  compressed  by  the  weight  of  the  water,  even  if  it  should 
be  increased  a  hundredfold;  and  as  sensation  is  always  proportional  to  compres- 


402  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

sion,  this  difference  is  the  reason  why  animals  feel  the  pressure  of  the  finger  and 
not  the  weight  of  the  water. 

And  thus  the  true  reason  why  animals  in  water  do  not  feel  its  weight  is  that 
they  are  equally  pressed  from  all  sides. 

Also  if  we  put  a  worm  in  dough,  even  though  we  should  press  the  dough  be¬ 
tween  our  hands,  we  could  never  crush  the  worm  or  even  injure  it  or  compress  it, 
because  we  would  be  pressing  it  in  all  its  parts.  The  following  experiment  will  serve 
as  proof.  We  must  have  a  glass  tube,  closed  at  the  lower  end  and  half  filled  with 
water,  into  which  we  put  three  things:  a  little  balloon  half  filled  with  air,  a  second 
balloon  entirely  filled  with  air,  and  a  fly  (for  it  lives  in  lukewarm  water  as  well  as 
in  air);  and  we  must  put  a  piston  into  the  tube  which  will  go  as  far  as  the  water. 
If  we  press  the  piston  with  whatever  force  we  like,  as  by  putting  a  large  number 
of  weights  on  top  of  it,  the  water  thus  pressed  will  press  everything  it  contains; 
accordingly  the  soft  balloon  will  be  quite  noticeably  compressed,  but  the  hard 
balloon  will  be  no  more  compressed  than  if  there  were  nothing  pressing  it,  nor 
the  fly  either,  which  will  feel  no  pain  under  this  great  weight;  for  we  shall  see  it, 
free  and  lively,  walking  along  the  glass  and  even  flying  away  as  soon  as  it  is 
released  from  this  prison. 

No  special  brilliance  is  needed  to  draw  out  of  this  experiment  everything  we 
had  already  demonstrated. 

We  see  the  weight  presses  all  these  bodies  as  much  as  it  can. 

We  see  that  it  compresses  the  soft  balloon;  consequently  it  also  presses  the 
one  beside  it,  for  the  same  reason  holds  for  both.  But  we  see  that  no  compression 
appears. 

Whence  then  comes  this  difference?  Whence  could  it  come  except  from  the 
single  thing  in  which  the  two  balloons  differ,  which  is  that  one  is  filled  with 
compressed  air,  which  has  been  forcibly  pumped  into  it,  whereas  the  other  is 
only  half  full;  and  thus  the  slack  air  which  is  in  one  is  capable  of  great  com¬ 
pression,  but  not  the  air  in  the  other,  because  it  is  very  compact  and  the  water 
which  presses  it,  surrounding  it  on  all  sides,  can  make  no  perceptible  impression 
on  the  balloon,  which  makes  an  arch  against  it  on  all  sides? 

We  also  see  that  the  fly  is  not  compressed.  Why,  except  for  the  same  reason 
the  balloon  filled  with  air  is  not?  And  finally  we  see  it  feels  no  pain  for  the  same 
reason. 

But  if  we  put  dough  instead  of  water  in  the  bottom  of  the  tube,  and  the  balloon 
and  the  fly  in  the  dough,  and  put  the  piston  on  top  and  pressed  it,  the  same  thing 
would  happen. 

Therefore  since  the  condition  of  being  pressed  on  all  sides  makes  it  impossible 
for  the  compression  to  be  either  noticeable  or  painful,  must  we  not  agree  that 
this  is  the  sole  reason  why  the  weight  of  the  water  cannot  be  felt  by  animals  in  it? 

Let  it  no  longer  be  said  then  that  the  reason  is  that  water  does  not  weigh  upon 
itself,  for  it  weighs  everywhere  the  same;  or  that  it  weighs  in  a  different  fashion 
from  solid  bodies,  for  all  weights  are  of  the  same  nature;  and  here  is  a  solid 
weight  that  a  fly  supports  without  feeling  it. 

And  if  anyone  is  still  not  satisfied,  let  the  piston  be  removed  and  let  water  be 
poured  into  the  tube  until  the  water  taking  the  piston’s  place  weighs  as  much  as 
the  piston  itself;  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  fly  will  no  more  feel  the  weight 
of  the  water  than  that  of  the  piston.  Whence  comes  then  this  insensibility  to  so 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  403 

great  a  weight  in  these  two  examples?  Is  it  because  the  weight  is  water?  No,  for 
when  the  weight  is  solid,  there  is  the  same  insensibility.  Let  us  say  then  that  it 
is  only  because  the  fly  is  surrounded  by  water,  for  that  alone  is  common  to  the 
two  examples;  accordingly  it  is  the  true  reason. 

Also  if  it  happened  that  all  the  water  above  the  fly  should  freeze,  provided 
there  was  left  a  little  above  it  unfrozen  and  that  thus  it  was  entirely  surrounded 
by  water,  it  would  no  more  feel  the  weight  of  this  ice  than  it  did  the  weight  of  the 
water  before. 

And  if  all  the  water  in  the  river  should  freeze  except  for  about  a  foot  at  the 
bottom,  the  fish  swimming  there  would  no  more  feel  the  weight  of  that  ice  than 
the  weight  of  the  water  into  which  it  would  later  melt. 

And  thus  animals  in  water  do  not  feel  its  weight,  not  because  it  is  only  water 
that  weighs  down  on  them  but  because  it  is  water  that  surrounds  them. 

TREATISE  ON  THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  MASS  OF  THE  AIR 

Chapter  i.  That  the  mass  of  the  air  has  weight ,  and  that  it  presses 
with  its  weight  all  the  bodies  it  surrounds . 

No  one  denies  today  that  the  air  is  heavy.  We  know  that  a  balloon  weighs  more 
when  inflated  than  when  empty,  which  is  sufficient  proof;  for  if  the  air  were  light, 
the  more  of  it  we  put  in  the  balloon  the  more  levity  the  whole  would  have,  for 
the  whole  would  have  more  than  a  part  would  have;  but  since  on  the  contrary 
the  more  air  we  put  in  the  heavier  the  whole  is,  it  follows  that  each  part  is  itself 
heavy  and  consequently  that  the  air  is  heavy. 

Those  who  want  longer  proofs  have  only  to  look  them  up  in  the  authors  who 
have  expressly  dealt  with  this  matter. 

If  it  be  objected  that  air  is  light  when  it  is  pure  but  that  the  air  which  surrounds 
us  is  not  pure  air  because  it  is  mixed  with  vapors  and  gross  bodies,  and  that  it  is 
only  because  of  these  foreign  bodies  that  it  is  heavy,  I  reply  in  a  word  that  I  do 
not  know  pure  air  and  that  it  might  be  hard  to  find;  but  I  speak  in  this  treatise 
only  of  the  air  as  it  exists  in  the  state  in  which  we  breathe  it,  without  considering 
whether  it  be  composite  or  not;  and  it  is  that  body,  simple  or  composite,  which 
I  call  air  and  of  which  I  say  that  it  is  heavy:  a  fact  which  cannot  be  denied,  and 
that  is  all  I  require  in  what  follows. 

This  principle  laid  down,  I  shall  stop  only  to  draw  certain  consequences. 

1.  Since  each  part  of  the  air  is  heavy,  it  follows  that  the  whole  mass  of  the  air 
(that  is,  the  whole  sphere  of  the  air)  is  heavy;  and  since  the  sphere  of  the  air  is 
not  infinite  in  its  extent,  since  it  has  limits,  so  also  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  all 
the  air  is  not  infinite. 

2.  Just  as  the  mass  of  the  water  of  the  sea  presses  with  its  weight  the  earth 
beneath  it,  and  just  as,  if  it  covered  the  whole  earth  instead  of  a  part  of  it  only, 
it  would  press  with  its  weight  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth;  so  since  the  mass 
of  the  air  covers  the  entire  surface  of  the  earth,  this  weight  presses  its  every  part. 

3.  Just  as  the  bottom  of  a  bucket  containing  water  is  more  pressed  by  the 
weight  of  the  water  when  the  bucket  is  full  than  when  it  is  half  full,  and  is  the 
more  pressed  the  deeper  the  water;  so  high  places  like  mountain  tops  are  not  so 
pressed  by  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  as  are  low  places  like  valleys,  because 
there  is  more  air  above  the  valleys  than  above  the  mountain  tops;  for  all  the  air 


404  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

alongside  the  mountain  weighs  on  the  valley  and  not  on  the  summit,  because 
it  is  above  the  one  and  below  the  other. 

4.  Just  as  bodies  in  water  are  pressed  on  all  sides  by  the  weight  of  the  water 
above,  as  I  have  shown  in  the  Treatise  on  the  equilibrium  of  liquids ,  so  bodies  in  the 
air  are  pressed  on  all  sides  by  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  above. 

5.  As  animals  in  water  do  not  feel  its  weight,  so  for  the  same  reason  we  do 
not  feel  the  weight  of  the  air;  and  as  we  could  not  conclude  that  water  has  no 
weight  from  our  not  feeling  it  when  we  are  immersed  in  it,  so  we  cannot  conclude 
that  air  is  not  heavy  because  we  do  not  feel  it  to  be  so.  We  have  shown  the  reason 
for  this  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids. 

6.  Just  as  if  we  had  got  together  a  great  heap  of  wool  twenty  or  thirty  fathoms 
high,  this  mass  would  be  compressed  by  its  own  weight,  and  the  bottom  part 
would  be  much  more  compressed  than  the  middle  part  or  the  part  near  the  top 
because  it  would  be  pressed  by  a  greater  amount  of  wool;  so  the  mass  of  the 
air,  which  like  wool  is  a  compressible  and  heavy  body,  is  compressed  by  its  own 
weight;  and  the  air  on  the  bottom,  that  is,  in  low-lying  places,  is  much  more 
compressed  than  that  higher  up,  as  on  mountain  tops,  because  it  carries  a  greater 
weight  of  air. 

7.  Just  as  if  we  took  a  handful  of  that  mass  of  wool  from  the  bottom  in  its 
Compressed  state  and  keeping  it  still  compressed  in  the  same  way,  put  it  in  the 
middle  of  the  mass,  it  would  of  itself  increase  in  size  since  it  was  nearer  the  top, 
because  it  would  have  to  carry  the  weight  of  a  lesser  amount  of  wool  there;  so 
if  we  contrived  in  some  way  to  take  air,  as  it  is  down  here  and  compressed  as  it  is, 
to  the  top  of  a  mountain,  it  would  have  to  increase  in  size  of  itself  and  attain  to  the 
condition  of  the  air  surrounding  it  on  the  mountain  top,  because  it  would  carry  a 
lesser  weight  of  air  in  this  place  than  below.  Consequently  if  we  took  a  balloon 
only  half  filled  with  air,  and  not  entirely  inflated  as  they  usually  are,  and  carried 
it  up  a  mountain,  it  should  be  more  inflated  on  the  mountain  top  and  should 
increase  in  size  in  proportion  to  its  being  less  pressed;  and  the  difference  should 
be  perceptible  if  the  weight  of  the  quantity  of  air  alongside  the  mountain  from 
which  it  is  freed  is  considerable  enough  to  cause  a  sensible  effect  and  difference. 

These  consequences  are  so  necessarily  bound  up  with  their  principle  that  the 
one  cannot  be  true  without  the  others  being  equally  so;  and  since  it  is  certain 
that  the  air  reaching  from  the  earth  to  the  top  of  its  sphere  has  weight,  all  our 
conclusions  therefrom  are  equally  true. 

But  however  certain  we  find  these  conclusions,  it  seems  to  me  that  everyone, 
even  though  accepting  them,  would  want  to  see  the  last  consequence  confirmed 
by  experiment,  because  it  contains  both  all  the  rest  and  its  own  principle;  for  it 
is  certain  that  if  we  saw  a  balloon,  as  described  above,  expand  as  it  is  carried 
higher,  we  could  not  possibly  doubt  that  this  expansion  came  from  the  fact  that 
the  air  in  the  balloon  was  more  pressed  below  than  above,  since  there  is  nothing 
else  that  could  cause  it  to  expand,  it  being  even  colder  on  the  mountain  tops  than 
in  the  valleys;  and  this  compression  of  the  air  in  the  balloon  could  have  no  other 
cause  than  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air,  for  the  air  was  taken  as  it  was  in  the 
low  altitude  and  was  not  compressed,  since  the  balloon  was  even  soft  and  only 
half  filled.  Consequently  this  would  absolutely  prove  that  the  air  is  heavy;  that 
the  mass  of  the  air  is  heavy;  that  it  presses  with  its  weight  all  the  bodies  it  sur¬ 
rounds;  that  it  presses  low-lying  places  more  than  high  places;  that  it  is  itself 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  405 

compressed  by  its  own  weight;  that  the  air  is  more  compressed  below  than  above. 
And  since  in  physics  experiments  have  much  more  force  of  persuasion  than  argu¬ 
ments  have,  I  do  not  doubt  that  everyone  would  want  to  see  the  latter  confirmed 
by  the  former. 

But  if  the  experiment  were  made,  I  should  have  this  advantage  that  in  case 
there  occurred  no  difference  in  the  inflation  of  the  balloon  on  the  highest  moun¬ 
tains,  that  would  not  invalidate  my  conclusion,  because  I  could  say  they  are  not 
yet  sufficiently  high  to  cause  a  perceptible  difference;  whereas  if  there  should  be 
a  very  considerable  difference,  as  of  one-eighth  or  one-ninth,  certainly  the  ex¬ 
periment  would  be  decisive  in  my  favor,  and  there  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt 
of  the  truth  of  everything  I  have  established. 

But  I  must  say  at  once  without  further  delay  that  the  test  has  been  made,  and 
successfully,  as  follows. 

Experiment  made  in  two  places ,  differing  in  altitude  by  about  500  fathoms . 

If  we  take  a  balloon  half  filled  with  air,  flaccid  and  soft,  and  carry  it  at  the  end 
of  a  string  up  a  mountain  500  fathoms  high,  it  will  expand  of  itself  as  we  go  up, 
and  when  we  are  at  the  top,  it  will  be  entirely  full  and  rounded  out  as  if  we  had 
blown  in  more  air;  and  as  we  go  down  again,  it  will  little  by  little  lose  its  round¬ 
ness,  passing  through  the  same  degrees,  so  that  when  we  reach  the  bottom,  the 
balloon  will  have  returned  to  its  original  state. 

This  experiment  proves  conclusively  everything  I  have  said  about  the  mass  of 
the  air;  and  it  was  necessary  to  establish  that  firmly,  since  it  is  the  foundation  of 
the  whole  discourse. 

It  only  remains  to  point  out  that  the  mass  of  the  air  is  heavier  at  one  time  than 
at  another,  namely,  when  it  carries  more  vapor  or  is  more  compressed  by  cold. 

Let  us  observe  then,  1.  that  the  mass  of  the  air  is  heavy;  2.  that  its  weight  is 
limited;  3.  that  it  is  heavier  at  one  time  than  at  another;  4.  that  it  is  heavier  in 
certain  places  than  in  others,  as  in  valleys;  5.  that  it  presses  with  its  weight  all  the 
bodies  it  surrounds,  and  presses  the  more  the  heavier  it  is. 

Chapter  2.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  produces  all  the 
effects  hitherto  attributed  to  the  horror  of  a  vacuum. 

This  chapter  is  divided  into  two  sections:  in  the  first  is  an  account  of  the 
principal  effects  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum;  and  in  the  second  it  is 
shown  that  they  come  from  the  weight  of  the  air. 

First  Section.  Account  of  the  effects  attributed  to  the  horror  of  a  vacuum. 

There  are  certain  effects  which  it  is  claimed  nature  produces  because  of  her 
horror  of  a  vacuum.  The  chief  are: 

1.  It  is  hard  to  open  a  bellows  whose  apertures  have  been  carefully  stopped; 
and  if  we  try  to  do  it,  we  feel  resistance  as  if  its  sides  were  glued  together.  And 
the  piston  of  a  sealed  syringe  resists  when  we  try  to  pull  it  up,  as  if  it  were  stuck 
to  the  bottom. 

It  is  claimed  that  this  resistance  comes  from  nature  s  horror  of  the  vacuum  which  would 
be  made  in  the  bellows  if  it  could  be  opened  up;  which  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the 
resistance  ceases  as  soon  as  the  stoppers  are  removed  and  the  air  can  get  in  to  fill  the  bellows 
when  it  is  opened. 


40  6 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


PLATE  II 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  407 

2.  Two  polished  bodies  when  placed  together  are  hard  to  separate  and  seem 
to  adhere. 

Similarly  a  hat  when  put  on  a  table  is  hard  to  snatch  up. 

Similarly  a  piece  of  leather  when  put  on  a  paving  stone  and  suddenly  lifted, 
loosens  and  lifts  up  the  stone. 

It  is  claimed  that  this  adhesion  comes  from  nature  s  horror  of  the  vacuum  which  would 
exist  during  the  time  it  would  take  the  air  to  get  from  the  edges  to  the  center. 

3.  When  a  syringe  is  dipped  in  water,  if  the  piston  is  pulled  up,  the  water 
follows  and  rises  as  if  it  adhered  to  the  piston. 

Similarly  the  water  rises  in  a  suction  pump,  which  is  actually  nothing  but  a 
long  syringe,  and  follows  the  piston  when  it  is  lifted,  as  if  it  adhered  to  it. 

It  is  claimed  that  the  rising  of  the  water  comes  from  nature  s  horror  of  the  vacuum 
which  would  he  made  in  the  place  left  by  the  piston  if  the  water  did  not  rise ,  because  the 
air  cannot  get  in;  which  is  confirmed  by  this ,  that  if  holes  are  made  through  which  the 
air  can  get  in ,  the  water  no  longer  rises. 

In  the  same  way  if  we  put  the  nozzle  of  a  bellows  in  water  and  suddenly  open 
the  bellows,  the  water  rises  to  fill  it  because  the  air  cannot  get  in,  and  especially 
if  we  stop  the  air  holes  in  the  wing. 

Similarly  when  we  put  our  mouth  in  water  and  suck,  we  draw  up  the  water  for 
the  same  reason;  for  the  lungs  are  like  a  bellows,  of  which  the  mouth  would  be 
the  nozzle. 

Similarly  in  breathing  we  draw  in  the  air  as  a  bellows  in  opening  draws  in  the 
air  to  fill  up  its  capacity. 

Similarly  when  we  put  lighted  wicks  in  a  saucer  filled  with  water  and  a  glass 
over  them,  as  the  flame  of  the  wicks  dies  down,  the  water  rises  in  the  glass  be¬ 
cause  the  air  in  the  glass,  which  had  been  rarefied  by  the  flame,  is  now  condensed 
by  the  cold  and  draws  the  water  up  and  makes  it  rise  along  with  itself  as  it 
contracts,  in  order  to  fill  the  place  it  is  leaving;  just  as  the  piston  of  a  syringe 
draws  the  water  up  with  it  when  we  lift  it. 

Similarly  cupping  glasses  draw  the  flesh  and  cause  a  swelling,  because  the  air 
inside  the  glass,  rarefied  by  the  candle  flame,  is  now  condensed  by  the  cold  when 
the  flame  is  extinguished  and  draws  the  flesh  with  it  to  fill  the  place  it  leaves,  as 
it  drew  the  water  in  the  preceding  example. 

4.  If  we  put  a  bottle  filled  with  water  mouth  down  in  a  vessel  filled  with  water, 
the  water  in  the  bottle  remains  suspended  without  falling. 

It  is  claimed  that  the  water  does  not  fall  because  of  nature  s  horror  of  the  vacuum  which 
would  be  made  in  the  place  left  by  the  water  in  falling ,  for  the  air  could  not  get  in;  this 
explanation  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  if  a  hole  is  made  through  which  the  air  can  get 
in ,  all  the  water  falls  immediately . 

We  can  make  the  same  test  with  a  tube,  ten  feet  long  say,  stopped  at  the  upper 
end  and  open  at  the  bottom;  for  if  it  is  filled  with  water  and  the  lower  end  is 
dipped  in  a  vessel  of  water,  all  the  water  in  the  tube  remains  suspended,  whereas 
it  would  fall  at  once  if  the  top  of  the  tube  had  been  opened. 

We  can  do  the  same  thing  with  a  like  tube,  stopped  at  the  top  and  recurved 
at  the  bottom,  without  putting  it  in  a  vessel  of  water  as  was  done  with  the  other 
one;  for  if  it  is  filled  with  water,  this  water  too  will  remain  suspended,  whereas 
if  the  top  were  opened,  the  water  would  at  once  spurt  out  with  violence  from  the 
recurved  end  as  from  a  fountain. 


408  scientific  treatises 

Finally  the  same  thing  can  be  done  with  a  plain  tube,  without  its  being 
recurved,  provided  it  be  very  narrow  at  the  bottom;  for  if  it  is  stopped  at  the  top, 
the  water  will  remain  suspended,  whereas  it  would  fall  with  violence  if  we  opened 
the  upper  end. 

It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  a  cask  filled  with  wine  does  not  give  up  a  drop  of 
it,  though  the  spigot  be  open,  unless  we  make  an  opening  in  the  top  to  admit  air. 

5.  If  we  fill  with  water  a  tube  in  the  shape  of  an  inverted  crescent  (which  is 
ordinarily  called  a  siphon),  and  let  each  leg  dip  in  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  then 
unless  the  two  vessels  are  at  exactly  the  same  level,  all  the  water  in  the  higher 
vessel  will  rise  in  the  leg  dipping  in  it  to  the  top  of  the  siphon  and  will  pass 
through  the  other  leg  into  the  lower  vessel;  so  that  if  water  is  constantly  supplied 
to  the  higher  vessel,  the  flow  will  be  continuous. 

It  is  claimed  that  this  rising  of  the  water  comes  from  nature  s  horror  of  the  vacuum 
which  would  be  made  in  the  siphon  if  the  water  in  the  two  legs  fell  from  each  into  the 
corresponding  vessels ,  as  it  actually  does  fall  when  an  opening  is  made  in  the  top  of  the 
siphon  through  which  the  air  can  get  in. 

There  are  several  other  like  effects  I  omit  because  they  are  all  similar  to  those 
of  which  I  have  spoken  and  because  in  all  there  appears  only  this,  that  all  the 
contiguous  bodies  resist  the  effort  made  to  separate  them  when  air  cannot  get 
in  between  them,  whether  this  effort  comes  from  their  own  weight,  as  in  the  ex¬ 
amples  in  which  water  rises  and  remains  suspended  in  spite  of  its  weight,  or 
whether  it  comes  from  forces  we  use  to  separate  them,  as  in  the  first  examples. 

These  are  the  effects  commonly  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum;  I  am 
going  to  show  that  they  come  from  the  weight  of  the  air. 

Second  Section.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  produces  all  the  effects  that 

have  been  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum. 

If  we  have  clearly  understood  in  the  Treatise  on  the  equilibrium  of  liquids  how 
liquids  act  with  their  weight  against  all  bodies  in  them,  we  shall  have  no  difficulty 
in  understanding  how  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  air,  acting  upon  all  bodies,  pro¬ 
duces  all  the  effects  that  had  been  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  for 
they  are  exactly  alike,  as  we  shall  show  in  each  instance. 

i.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  causes  the  difficulty  in  opening  a  bellows  with 

all  its  apertures  stopped. 

That  it  may  be  understood  how  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  causes  the 
difficulty  we  experience  in  opening  a  bellows  when  the  air  cannot  get  in,  I  shall 
point  out  a  like  resistance  caused  by  the  weight  of  water.  All  that  is  needed  is  to 
recall  what  I  said  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids  (Plate  I,  Figure  XIV),  that  a  bellows 
with  a  tube  of  twenty  feet  or  more,  placed  in  a  tank  of  water  in  such  a  way  that  the 
end  of  the  tube  emerges  from  the  water,  is  hard  to  open,  and  so  much  the  harder 
as  the  water  is  deeper;  which  comes  obviously  from  the  weight  of  the  water 
above,  for  when  there  is  no  water,  the  bellows  opens  very  easily;  and  in  proportion 
as  water  is  poured  in,  the  resistance  increases  and  is  always  equal  to  the  weight  of 
the  water  carried  by  the  bellows,  because  since  the  water  cannot  get  in  because 
the  tube  is  outside,  we  could  not  open  the  bellows  without  lifting  and  holding 
up  the  whole  mass  of  the  water;  for  the  water  displaced  by  opening  the  bellows, 
not  being  able  to  enter  it,  is  forced  to  go  elsewhere  and  thus  to  raise  the  level  of 
the  water,  which  cannot  be  done  without  effort;  whereas  if  the  bellows  were 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR 


409 

broken  and  the  water  could  get  in,  we  could  open  and  close  it  without  resistance 
because  the  water  would  go  in  through  the  breaks  as  fast  as  the  bellows  was 
opened,  and  so  we  could  open  it  without  having  to  lift  up  the  water. 

I  do  not  think  anyone  will  be  tempted  to  say  that  this  resistance  comes  from 
the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  and  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  it  comes  from  the 
weight  of  the  water  alone. 

But  what  I  say  of  water  should  be  understood  of  any  other  fluid;  for  if  we  put 
the  bellows  in  a  tank  filled  with  wine,  we  shall  feel  a  like  resistance  to  opening  it, 
and  likewise  if  we  put  it  in  milk,  in  oil,  in  quicksilver,  and  in  short  in  any  fluid 
whatsoever.  It  is  then  a  general  rule  and  a  necessary  effect  of  the  weight  of  fluids: 
that  if  a  bellows  is  put  in  any  fluid  whatsoever  in  such  a  way  that  it  cannot  get 
into  the  body  of  the  bellows,  the  weight  of  the  fluid  above  prevents  our  opening 
the  bellows  without  feeling  resistance,  because  we  could  not  do  it  without  hold¬ 
ing  up  the  fluid;  and  consequently,  applying  this  general  rule  to  the  particular 
case  of  the  air,  it  will  be  true  that  when  the  air  is  kept  from  entering  a  bellows, 
the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  above  prevents  our  opening  the  bellows  without 
feeling  resistance,  because  we  could  not  open  it  without  lifting  the  whole  mass 
of  the  air;  but  as  soon  as  we  make  an  opening  in  it,  we  open  and  close  it  without 
resistance  because  the  air  can  get  in  and  out,  and  so  when  we  open  the  bellows, 
we  do  not  have  to  lift  the  mass  of  the  air;  which  is  entirely  conformable  to  the 
example  of  the  bellows  in  water. 

Whence  we  see  that  the  difficulty  in  opening  a  sealed  bellows  is  only  a  par¬ 
ticular  case  of  the  general  rule  concerning  the  difficulty  of  opening  a  bellows  in 
any  fluid  whatsoever  when  the  fluid  has  no  access  to  it. 

What  I  have  said  of  this  effect  I  shall  say  of  each  of  the  others,  but  more 
succinctly. 

2.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  the  difficulty  we  experience  in 

separating  two  polished  bodies  when  placed  together. 

That  it  may  be  understood  how  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  causes  the 
resistance  we  feel  when  we  want  to  separate  two  polished  bodies  that  have  been 
placed  together,  I  shall  give  an  example  of  an  altogether  similar  resistance  caused 
by  the  weight  of  the  water,  which  will  leave  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  air 
causes  this  effect. 

We  must  here  again  recall  what  was  set  forth  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids  (Plate  I, 
Figure  XI) : 

That  if  we  put  a  copper  cylinder,  turned  on  a  lathe,  in  the  opening  of  a  funnel, 
also  turned  on  a  lathe,  so  that  they  fit  so  perfectly  that  the  cylinder  easily  enters  and 
slides  back  and  forth  in  the  funnel  but  without  letting  any  water  escape  between, 
and  if  we  put  this  machine  in  a  tank  of  water  in  such  a  way  that  the  stem  of  the 
funnel  emerges  from  the  water  (which  stem  may  have  a  length  of  twenty  feet  if 
necessary);  if  with  the  cylinder  at  a  depth  of  fifteen  feet  in  the  water,  holding  the 
funnel  with  the  hand,  we  let  loose  the  cylinder  and  abandon  it  to  its  fate,  we 
shall  see  that  not  only  will  it  not  fall  although  it  seems  there  is  nothing  to  hold 
it  up,  but  even  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  pull  it  out  of  the  funnel  although  it  is 
in  no  way  stuck  to  it;  whereas  it  would  fall  by  its  own  weight  with  violence  if  it 
were  at  a  depth  of  only  four  feet  in  the  water,  and  still  more  violently  if  it  were 
entirely  outside  the  water.  I  have  also  shown  the  reason  for  this,  which  is  that 
the  water,  in  contact  with  the  cylinder  from  below  and  not  from  above  (for  it 


4io  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

does  not  touch  its  upper  surface  because  the  funnel  keeps  it  from  getting  there), 
pushes  it  from  the  side  it  touches  toward  the  side  it  does  not  touch,  and  thus 
pushes  it  up  and  presses  it  against  the  funnel. 

The  same  thing  should  be  understood  of  every  other  fluid;  and  consequently 
if  two  bodies  are  polished  and  placed  together  and  if  we  hold  the  upper  one  with 
the  hand  and  let  the  other  go,  the  lower  one  remains  suspended  because  the  air 
is  in  contact  with  it  from  beneath  and  not  from  above,  for  it  cannot  get  in  between 
the  two  bodies  and  consequently  it  cannot  reach  the  surfaces  in  contact;  whence 
it  follows  by  a  necessary  effect  of  the  weight  of  all  fluids  in  general  that  the 
weight  of  the  air  must  push  this  body  up  and  press  it  against  the  other,  so  that  if 
we  try  to  separate  them,  we  meet  with  great  resistance;  which  is  entirely  con¬ 
formable  to  the  effect  of  the  weight  of  water. 

Whence  we  see  that  the  difficulty  in  separating  two  polished  bodies  is  only  a 
particular  case  of  the  general  rule  concerning  the  pressure  of  all  fluids  in  general 
when  they  are  in  contact  with  a  body  on  one  of  its  surfaces  and  not  on  the  opposite 
surface. 

3.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  the  rise  of  water  in  syringes 

and  pumps. 

To  explain  how  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  makes  water  rise  in  pumps 
as  the  plunger  is  lifted,  I  shall  show  an  entirely  similar  effect  of  the  weight  of 
water,  which  will  make  the  reason  perfectly  clear  as  follows: 

If  we  fit  a  syringe  with  a  long  piston,  ten  feet  say,  hollow  throughout  its  length, 
with  a  valve  at  the  lower  end  so  arranged  that  it  opens  downward  but  not  upward, 
so  that  the  syringe  is  incapable  of  lifting  water  or  any  liquid  above  the  level  of 
the  liquid  because  the  air  can  enter  it  perfectly  freely  through  the  hollow  piston; 
if  now  we  put  the  opening  of  the  syringe  in  a  vessel  filled  with  quicksilver  and 
the  whole  in  a  tank  of  water  in  such  a  way  that  the  top  of  the  piston  emerges  from 
the  water,  when  we  lift  the  piston,  the  quicksilver  will  rise  and  follow  it  as  if  it 
adhered  to  it;  whereas  it  would  not  rise  at  all  if  there  were  no  water  in  the  tank, 
because  the  air  is  entirely  free  to  enter  the  body  of  the  syringe  through  the  hollow 
piston. 

So  the  fear  of  the  vacuum  is  not  the  cause;  for  if  the  quicksilver  did  not  rise 
to  fill  the  place  left  by  the  piston,  there  would  be  no  vacuum  since  the  air  may 
freely  enter;  but  it  is  only  because  the  mass  of  the  water  weighing  upon  the  quick¬ 
silver  in  the  vessel  and  pressing  it  in  all  its  parts  except  where  the  opening  of 
the  syringe  is  (for  the  water  cannot  reach  there  since  it  is  kept  away  by  the  body 
of  the  syringe  and  by  the  piston),  the  quicksilver,  pressed  in  every  place  but  one, 
is  pushed  by  the  weight  of  the  water  toward  that  one  as  soon  as  the  piston  by 
being  lifted  leaves  it  a  free  place  to  enter,  and  balances  in  the  syringe  the  weight 
of  the  water  which  weighs  on  the  quicksilver  outside. 

But  if  holes  are  made  in  the  syringe  so  the  water  can  get  in,  the  quicksilver  will 
no  longer  rise  because  the  water  enters  and  is  as  much  in  contact  with  the  quick¬ 
silver  at  the  mouth  of  the  syringe  as  elsewhere,  and  thus  since  all  of  it  is  equally 
pressed,  none  of  it  rises.  All  this  was  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  Equilibrium  of 
liquids . 

We  see  in  this  example  how  the  weight  of  the  water  makes  the  quicksilver  rise; 
and  we  could  produce  a  similar  effect  with  the  weight  of  sand  by  removing  the 
water  from  the  tank;  if  instead  of  water  we  pour  in  sand,  the  weight  of  the  sand 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  41 1 

will  make  the  quicksilver  rise  in  the  syringe  because  it  presses,  just  as  the  water 
did,  everywhere  except  at  the  mouth  of  the  syringe,  and  thus  it  pushes  the  quick¬ 
silver  and  forces  it  to  rise  in  the  syringe. 

And  if  we  put  our  hands  on  the  sand  and  press  it,  we  shall  make  the  quicksilver 
rise  higher  inside  the  syringe  and  keep  on  rising  to  a  height  at  which  it  can 
counterpoise  the  pressure  outside. 

The  explanation  of  these  effects  makes  it  very  easy  to  understand  why  the 
weight  of  the  air  causes  water  to  rise  in  ordinary  syringes  as  the  piston  is  drawn 
up;  for  since  the  air  is  in  contact  with  the  water  in  the  vessel  everywhere  except 
at  the  opening  of  the  syringe  (from  which  it  is  kept  away  by  the  syringe  and  the 
piston),  it  is  obvious  that  the  weight  of  the  air,  pressing  the  water  in  every  place 
but  that  one,  must  push  it  thither  and  make  it  rise,  as  the  piston  by  being  lifted 
leaves  room  for  it  to  come  in,  and  counterbalance  within  the  syringe  the  weight 
of  the  air  which  weighs  outside,  for  the  same  reason  and  by  the  same  necessity 
as  the  quicksilver  rose,  pressed  by  the  weight  of  the  water  and  by  the  weight  of 
the  sand,  in  the  example  we  have  just  given. 

It  is  then  obvious  that  the  rising  of  water  in  syringes  is  only  a  particular  case 
of  the  general  rule  that  when  a  fluid  is  pressed  in  every  place  but  one  by  the  weight 
of  some  other  fluid,  this  weight  pushes  it  toward  the  place  where  it  is  not  being 
pressed. 

4.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  causes  water  to  he  suspended  in  tubes  stopped  at 

the  upper  end . 

To  make  it  understood  how  the  weight  of  the  air  holds  water  suspended  in 
tubes  stopped  at  the  upper  end,  I  shall  point  out  an  entirely  similar  example  of  a 
like  suspension  caused  by  the  weight  of  water,  which  will  make  the  reason  per¬ 
fectly  clear. 

And  first  it  may  be  said  at  once  that  this  effect  is  entirely  comprehended  in  the 
preceding;  for  just  as  I  have  shown  that  the  weight  of  the  air  makes  water  rise 
in  syringes  and  holds  it  suspended  there,  so  the  same  weight  of  the  air  holds 
water  suspended  in  a  tube.  That  this  effect  may  not  lack,  any  more  than  the  rest, 
another  entirely  like  it  to  which  it  may  be  compared,  I  shall  say  that  nothing  is 
needed  to  this  end  but  to  remember  what  was  said  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids 
{Plate  I,  Figure  IX),  namely,  that  a  tube  ten  feet  long  or  more,  recurved  at  the 
bottom  and  filled  with  mercury,  having  been  put  in  a  tank  of  water  so  that  the 
upper  end  emerges  from  the  water,  part  of  the  mercury  remains  suspended  inside 
the  tube,  that  is,  at  the  height  where  it  can  counterbalance  the  water  which  weighs 
outside;  and  that  a  like  suspension  takes  place  even  in  a  tube  not  recurved,  simply 
open  at  both  ends,  with  the  upper  end  emerging  from  the  water. 

Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  suspension  does  not  come  from  the  horror  of  a 
vacuum,  but  only  from  this,  that  the  water,  weighing  outside  and  not  inside  the 
tube  and  in  contact  with  the  mercury  on  one  side  and  not  on  the  other,  holds  it 
suspended  by  its  weight  at  a  certain  height;  therefore  if  the  tube  is  pierced  so  that 
the  water  can  get  in,  straightway  all  the  mercury  falls,  because  since  the  water 
is  in  contact  with  it  everywhere  and  acting  within  as  well  as  without,  the  mercury 
no  longer  has  a  counterpoise.  All  this  was  said  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids. 

Since  this  is  a  necessary  effect  of  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,  it  is  not  strange  that 
when  a  tube  is  filled  with  water,  stopped  at  the  top  and  recurved  at  the  bottom, 
the  water  remains  suspended  in  it;  for  the  air,  weighing  on  the  part  of  the  water 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


412 

at  the  recurved  end  and  not  on  the  part  in  the  tube  (since  it  is  prevented  by  the 
stopper),  must  of  necessity  hold  the  water  suspended  inside  to  counterbalance 
its  own  weight  outside,  exactly  as  the  weight  of  the  water  held  the  mercury  in 
equilibrium  in  the  example  we  just  gave. 

And  similarly  when  the  tube  is  not  recurved;  for  because  the  air  is  in  contact 
with  the  water  from  below  and  not  from  above  (since  the  stopper  prevents  con¬ 
tact  there),  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  weight  of  the  air  hold  up  the  water, 
exactly  as  the  water  held  up  the  mercury  in  the  example  just  given,  and  as  the 
water  pushes  up  and  holds  suspended  a  copper  cylinder  it  is  in  contact  with  from 
below  and  not  from  above;  but  if  the  stopper  is  removed,  the  water  falls,  for  the 
air  is  in  contact  with  the  water  below  and  above  and  weighs  inside  and  outside 
the  tube. 

Whence  we  see  that  the  action  of  the  air  in  holding  liquids  suspended  with 
which  it  is  in  contact  on  one  side  and  not  on  the  other  is  a  case  of  the  general 
rule  that  fluids  contained  in  any  kind  of  tube  whatsoever,  immersed  in  another 
fluid  which  presses  them  from  one  side  and  not  from  the  other,  are  suspended  by 
the  equilibrium  of  the  fluids. 

5.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  makes  water  rise  in  siphons. 

To  explain  how  the  weight  of  the  air  makes  water  rise  in  siphons  I  am  going 
to  show  that  the  weight  of  water  makes  quicksilver  rise  in  a  siphon  open  at  the 
top  so  that  it  is  freely  accessible  to  the  air;  whence  we  shall  see  how  the  weight 
of  the  air  produces  this  effect.  This  I  shall  do  as  follows. 

If  one  leg  of  a  siphon  is  about  one  foot  high  and  the  other  about  one  foot, 
one  inch,  and  if  we  make  an  opening  in  the  top  of  the  siphon  in  which  we  insert 
a  tube  twenty  feet  long  and  carefully  soldered  to  the  opening,  and  if,  having 
filled  the  siphon  with  quicksilver,  we  put  each  of  its  legs  in  a  vessel  also  filled 
with  quicksilver  and  the  whole  in  a  tank  of  water,  fifteen  or  sixteen  feet  deep 
in  the  water,  with  the  end  of  the  tube  therefore  out  of  the  water,  then  if  there  is 
any  difference  at  all  in  level  between  the  two  vessels,  say  an  inch,  all  the  quick¬ 
silver  in  the  higher  vessel  will  rise  in  the  siphon  to  the  top  and  will  pass  through 
the  other  leg  into  the  lower  vessel  in  a  continuous  flow;  and  if  we  keep  the  higher 
vessel  supplied  with  quicksilver,  the  flow  will  never  cease;  but  if  we  make  an 
opening  in  the  siphon  through  which  the  water  can  get  in,  immediately  the  quick¬ 
silver  will  fall  from  each  leg  into  the  vessels  and  water  will  take  its  place. 

This  rising  of  quicksilver  does  not  come  from  the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  for 
the  air  has  perfectly  free  access  to  the  siphon;  accordingly  if  we  emptied  the  tank 
of  water,  the  quicksilver  would  fall  from  each  leg  into  the  corresponding  vessel, 
and  the  air  would  take  its  place,  coming  in  through  the  open  tube. 

It  is  then  obvious  that  the  weight  of  the  water  causes  the  quicksilver  to  rise, 
because  the  water  weighs  upon  the  quicksilver  in  the  vessels  and  not  upon  that 
in  the  siphon;  and  for  this  reason  the  water  by  its  weight  forces  the  quicksilver 
to  rise  and  to  flow  as  it  does;  but  as  soon  as  the  siphon  has  been  pierced  and  the 
water  can  enter,  it  no  longer  makes  the  quicksilver  rise,  because  it  weighs  inside 
as  well  as  outside  the  siphon. 

But  for  the  same  reason  and  by  the  same  necessity  as  the  water  thus  makes  the 
quicksilver  rise  in  a  siphon  when  it  weighs  on  the  vessels  and  has  no  access  to  the 
interior  of  the  siphon,  so  also  the  weight  of  the  air  makes  water  rise  in  ordinary 
siphons,  because  it  weighs  on  the  vessels  in  which  the  legs  of  the  siphon  dip  and 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  413 

has  no  access  to  the  body  of  the  siphon,  which  is  entirely  closed;  and  as  soon  as 
an  opening  is  made  in  the  siphon,  the  water  no  longer  rises,  but  on  the  contrary 
falls  into  each  vessel,  and  air  takes  its  place  because  then  the  air  weighs  inside  as 
well  as  outside  the  siphon. 

It  is  obvious  that  this  last  effect  is  only  a  case  of  the  general  rule,  and  that  if 
we  really  understand  why  the  weight  of  the  water  makes  the  quicksilver  rise  in 
the  example  we  gave,  we  shall  see  at  the  same  time  why  the  weight  of  the  air 
makes  water  rise  in  ordinary  siphons;  this  is  the  reason  it  must  be  made  perfectly 
clear  why  the  weight  of  the  water  produces  this  effect,  and  why  it  is  the  higher 
vessel  which  empties  into  the  lower  vessel  rather  than  the  other  way  around. 

To  this  end  it  must  be  observed  that,  the  water  weighing  on  the  quicksilver 
in  each  of  the  vessels  and  not  at  all  on  that  in  the  legs  of  the  siphon  dipping  in 
the  vessels,  the  quicksilver  in  the  vessels  is  urged  by  the  weight  of  the  water  to 
rise  in  each  leg  of  the  siphon  all  the  way  up  and  still  higher,  if  that  were  possible, 
because  the  water  is  sixteen  feet  deep  and  the  siphon  is  only  one  foot  high,  and 
one  foot  of  quicksilver  is  equal  in  weight  to  only  fourteen  feet  of  water;  whence 
it  is  seen  that  the  weight  of  the  water  pushes  the  quicksilver  in  each  leg  all  the 
way  up  and  still  has  some  force  left;  whence  the  quicksilver  in  each  leg  being 
pushed  up  by  the  weight  of  the  water,  they  contend  at  the  top  of  the  siphon, 
pushing  each  other,  so  that  the  one  having  the  greater  force  must  prevail. 

Now  that  will  be  easy  to  calculate;  for  it  is  clear  that  since  the  water  has  greater 
depth  above  the  vessel  which  is  an  inch  lower,  it  pushes  up  the  quicksilver  in  the 
longer  leg  more  forcibly  than  that  in  the  other  leg  by  the  force  which  an  inch 
of  depth  gives  it;  whence  it  seems  at  first  the  result  should  be  that  the  quicksilver 
should  be  pushed  from  the  longer  leg  into  the  shorter;  but  we  must  consider 
that  the  weight  of  the  quicksilver  in  each  leg  resists  the  effort  made  by  the  water 
to  push  it  up,  but  they  do  not  resist  equally,  for  since  the  quicksilver  of  the  long 
leg  has  an  inch  more  of  height,  it  resists  more  forcibly  by  the  force  given  it  by 
the  height  of  one  inch;  therefore  the  mercury  in  the  longer  leg  is  more  pushed 
up  by  the  weight  of  the  water  by  the  force  of  an  inch  of  water,  but  it  is  more 
pushed  down  by  its  own  weight  by  the  force  of  an  inch  of  quicksilver;  but  an 
inch  of  quicksilver  weighs  more  than  an  inch  of  water;  therefore  the  quicksilver 
in  the  shorter  leg  is  pushed  up  with  more  force,  and  consequently  it  must  rise 
and  continue  to  rise  as  long  as  there  is  any  quicksilver  in  the  vessel  in  which 
it  dips. 

Whence  it  is  apparent  that  the  reason  why  the  higher  vessel  empties  into  the 
lower  is  that  quicksilver  is  a  heavier  liquid  than  water.  The  opposite  would  happen 
if  the  siphon  were  filled  with  oil  and  the  whole  were  in  the  same  tank  of  water, 
for  then  the  oil  in  the  lower  vessel  would  rise  and  flow  through  the  top  of  the 
siphon  into  the  higher  vessel  for  the  same  reasons  just  given;  for  the  water  still 
pushing  the  oil  in  the  lower  vessel  with  more  force  because  it  has  an  inch  more 
of  depth  and  the  oil  in  the  long  leg  resisting  and  weighing  more  by  its  extra  inch 
of  height,  since  an  inch  of  oil  weighs  less  than  an  inch  of  water,  the  oil  in  the 
long  leg  would  be  pushed  up  with  more  force  than  the  oil  in  the  other  leg,  and 
consequently  it  would  flow  and  would  pass  from  the  lower  vessel  to  the  higher 
vessel. 

And  finally  if  the  siphon  were  filled  with  a  liquid  which  had  the  same  weight 
as  the  water  in  the  tank,  then  neither  would  the  water  in  the  higher  vessel  pass 


4i4  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

into  the  other  vessel  nor  that  in  the  lower  pass  into  the  higher,  but  everything 
would  remain  at  rest,  for  by  calculating  all  the  forces  we  shall  see  that  they  are 
all  equal. 

That  is  what  had  to  be  firmly  grasped  if  we  were  to  have  a  thorough  under¬ 
standing  of  why  liquids  rise  in  siphons;  after  which  it  is  too  easy  to  see  why  the 
weight  of  the  air  makes  water  rise  in  ordinary  siphons  and  pass  from  the  higher 
vessel  into  the  lower  for  us  to  give  more  time  to  it,  since  it  is  only  a  case  of  the 
general  rule  we  have  just  given. 

6.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  causes  the  swelling  of  the  flesh  when  a  cupping 

glass  is  applied. 

To  explain  how  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  makes  the  flesh  swell  where 
a  cupping  glass  is  applied,  I  shall  cite  an  entirely  similar  effect  caused  by  the 
weight  of  water,  which  will  leave  no  doubt  in  the  mind. 

It  is  the  effect  recorded  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids  {Plate  I,  Figure  XVII), 
where  I  showed  that  a  man  applying  to  his  thigh  the  end  of  a  glass  tube  twenty 
feet  long  and  seating  himself  in  this  condition  at  the  bottom  of  a  tank  of  water 
in  such  a  way  that  the  upper  end  of  the  tube  emerges  from  the  water,  his  flesh  swells 
at  the  opening  of  the  tube  as  if  there  were  suction  in  that  place. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  this  swelling  does  not  come  from  the  horror  of  the  vac¬ 
uum,  for  the  tube  is  completely  open  and  the  swelling  would  not  occur  if  there 
were  only  a  little  water  in  the  tank;  and  it  is  altogether  certain  that  it  comes  from 
the  weight  of  the  water  only,  because  the  water,  pressing  the  flesh  everywhere 
except  at  the  entrance  of  the  tube  (for  it  finds  no  access  there),  drives  the  blood 
and  the  flesh  there  to  make  the  swelling. 

And  what  I  say  of  the  weight  of  the  water  is  to  be  understood  of  the  weight 
of  any  other  liquid;  for  if  our  man  seats  himself  in  a  tank  of  oil,  the  same  thing 
will  happen  as  long  as  that  liquid  is  in  contact  with  every  part  of  his  body  but  one. 
But  if  the  tube  is  removed,  the  swelling  goes  down  because  the  water  now  exert¬ 
ing  its  action  upon  that  part  as  well  as  on  the  others,  there  will  be  no  more  effect 
there  than  elsewhere. 

This  being  understood,  we  shall  see  that  when  we  put  a  candle  on  the  flesh 
and  a  cupping  glass  over  it,  as  soon  as  the  flame  is  extinguished,  the  flesh  nec¬ 
essarily  swells;  for  the  air  in  the  cupping  glass,  which  was  highly  rarefied  by  the 
flame,  having  become  condensed  by  the  cold  following  upon  the  extinction  of 
the  flame,  the  weight  of  the  air  is  in  contact  with  the  body  everywhere  except 
beneath  the  cupping  glass  (for  there  is  no  access  there);  and  consequently  the 
flesh  must  swell  there,  and  the  weight  of  the  air  must  drive  the  adjacent  blood 
and  flesh,  which  it  presses,  into  that  part  which  it  does  not  press,  for  the  same 
reason  and  by  the  same  necessity  that  the  weight  of  the  water  did  in  the  example 
I  gave,  when  it  was  in  contact  with  the  body  in  every  place  but  one;  whence  it 
is  apparent  that  the  behavior  of  the  cupping  glass  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the 
general  rule  concerning  the  action  of  all  fluids  upon  a  body  with  all  parts  of 
which  they  are  in  contact  save  one. 

7.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  the  attraction  that  takes  place 

in  suction. 

Only  a  word  is  now  required  to  explain  why  when  we  apply  our  mouth  to 
water  and  suck,  the  water  comes  in;  for  we  know  that  the  weight  of  the  air  presses 
the  water  everywhere  except  where  the  mouth  is,  for  it  is  in  contact  with  it  every- 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  415 

where  except  there;  and  thence  it  is  that  when  the  respiratory  muscles,  lifting  the 
chest,  enlarge  the  capacity  of  the  interior  of  the  body,  the  air  inside,  having 
more  space  to  fill  than  before,  has  less  force  to  prevent  the  water  from  entering 
the  mouth  than  the  air  outside,  which  weighs  on  the  water  everywhere  except  in 
this  one  place,  has  force  to  make  it  enter. 

That  is  the  cause  of  this  attraction,  which  differs  in  no  respect  from  the  attrac¬ 
tion  of  syringes. 

8.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  the  drawing  of  milk  by  infants 

from  their  nurses  breasts . 

Similarly  a  baby  with  its  lips  about  the  nipple  of  its  nurse’s  breast,  when  it 
sucks,  draws  in  milk,  because  the  breast  is  pressed  on  all  sides  by  the  weight  of 
the  surrounding  air  except  in  the  part  which  is  in  the  child’s  mouth;  and  that  is 
why  as  soon  as  the  respiratory  muscles  make  more  room  in  the  child’s  body, 
as  has  just  been  said,  and  nothing  is  in  contact  with  the  nipple  of  the  breast  but 
the  air  inside,  the  air  outside,  which  has  more  force  and  compresses  the  breast, 
pushes  the  milk  through  this  opening  where  there  is  less  resistance;  which  is  as 
necessary  and  as  natural  as  for  the  milk  to  come  out  when  the  nipple  is  pressed 
between  the  hands. 

9.  That  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  the  drawing  in  of  air  in  breathing . 

And  for  the  same  reason  when  we  breathe,  air  enters  the  lungs,  because  when 

the  lungs  open  and  the  nose  and  all  the  passages  are  free  and  open,  the  air  which 
is  in  contact  with  these  passages,  pushed  by  the  weight  of  all  its  mass,  enters 
and  falls  by  the  natural  and  necessary  action  of  its  weight;  which  is  so  under¬ 
standable,  so  easy,  and  so  simple  that  it  is  strange  recourse  should  have  been  had 
to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  to  occult  qualities,  and  to  causes  so  remote  and  so 
chimerical,  to  find  a  reason,  since  it  is  as  natural  for  air  to  enter  and  to  fall  in  this 
way  into  the  lungs  when  they  open  as  for  wine  to  fall  into  a  bottle  when  it  is 
poured  in. 

This  is  the  way  in  which  the  weight  of  the  air  produces  all  the  effects  hitherto 
attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum.  I  have  explained  the  chief  of  them;  if  any 
remain,  it  is  so  easy  to  understand  them  after  these  that  I  should  think  I  was  being 
both  superfluous  and  tedious  if  I  sought  out  others  to  treat  in  detail;  and  it  may 
even  be  said  they  had  all  been  seen  already,  as  in  their  source,  in  the  preceding 
treatise,  since  all  these  effects  are  only  particular  cases  of  the  general  rule  concern¬ 
ing  the  equilibrium  of  fluids. 

Chapter  3.  That  as  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  limited , 
so  the  effects  it  produces  are  limited. 

Since  the  weight  of  the  air  produces  all  the  effects  hitherto  attributed  to  the 
horror  of  the  vacuum,  it  should  be  the  case  that  since  this  weight  is  not  infinite 
but  has  limits,  its  effects  too  should  be  limited;  which  is  confirmed  by  experiment, 
as  what  follows  will  show. 

As  soon  as  we  raise  the  piston  of  a  suction  pump  or  of  a  syringe,  the  water 
follows,  and  if  we  continue  to  raise  it,  the  water  will  keep  on  following,  but  not 
to  any  height  whatsoever,  for  there  is  a  certain  point  it  does  not  pass,  which  is 
approximately  at  the  height  of  thirty-one  feet;  so  that  as  long  as  we  only  raise  the 
piston  to  this  height,  the  water  rises  and  remains  always  in  contact  with  the  pis¬ 
ton,  but  as  soon  as  we  raise  the  piston  higher,  it  no  longer  draws  the  water  with 


4i 6  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

it,  but  the  water  remains  motionless  and  suspended  at  that  height  without  rising 
further,  and  to  whatever  height  we  raise  the  piston  beyond,  the  water  lets  it  go 
without  following  it. 

The  cause  of  which  is  that  the  mass  of  the  air  weighs  approximately  as  much 
as  water  at  a  depth  of  thirty-one  feet;  so  that  as  it  makes  the  water  rise  in  the 
syringe  because  it  weighs  outside  and  not  inside,  in  order  to  counterbalance 
the  water  it  makes  it  rise  to  the  height  at  which  it  has  the  same  weight  as  it¬ 
self,  and  then  the  water  in  the  syringe  and  the  air  outside  weighing  equally,  the 
whole  is  in  equilibrium,  just  as  water  and  quicksilver  are  in  equilibrium  when 
their  heights  are  to  each  other  [reciprocally]  as  their  weights,  as  we  have  so 
often  shown  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids;  and  as  the  water  rose  only  for  the 
reason  that  the  weight  of  the  air  forced  it  to,  when  it  has  arrived  at  that  height  at 
which  the  weight  of  the  air  can  no  longer  make  it  rise,  no  other  cause  moving 
it,  it  remains  at  that  point. 

And  whatever  the  size  of  the  pump,  the  water  always  rises  to  the  same  height, 
because  liquids  do  not  weigh  according  to  their  bulk  but  according  to  their 
height,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids. 

But  if  we  draw  up  quicksilver  in  a  syringe,  it  will  rise  to  a  height  of  two  feet, 
three  inches,  and  five  lines,  which  is  precisely  the  height  at  which  it  weighs  as 
much  as  thirty-one  feet  of  water,  because  it  will  weigh  as  much  then  as  the  mass 
of  the  air. 

And  if  we  draw  up  oil  in  a  pump,  it  will  rise  to  about  thirty-four  feet  and  no 
more;  because  it  weighs  as  much  at  this  height  as  water  at  thirty-one  feet,  and 
consequently  as  much  as  the  air;  and  similarly  with  all  other  liquids. 

A  tube  stopped  at  the  top  and  open  at  the  bottom,  having  been  filled  with 
water,  if  it  has  any  length  we  please  less  than  thirty-one  feet,  all  the  water  will 
remain  suspended  in  it;  because  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  capable  of 
holding  it  there. 

But  if  it  is  longer  than  thirty-one  feet,  the  water  will  fall  part  way,  that  is, 
until  it  has  a  height  of  only  thirty-one  feet;  and  then  it  will  remain  suspended 
at  this  height  without  falling  lower,  just  as  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids  we  saw 
that  the  quicksilver  in  a  tube  placed  in  a  tank  of  water  fell  part  way  until  it  came 
to  rest  at  the  height  at  which  it  weighed  as  much  as  the  water. 

But  if  we  were  to  put  in  the  tube  quicksilver  instead  of  water,  the  quicksilver 
would  fall  until  it  came  to  rest  at  the  height  of  two  feet,  three  inches,  and  five 
lines,  which  exactly  corresponds  to  thirty-one  feet  of  water. 

And  if  we  slant  a  little  these  tubes  in  which  water  and  quicksilver  remain  sus¬ 
pended,  these  liquids  will  rise  until  they  have  returned  to  their  former  height, 
which  was  diminished  by  the  slanting,  because  the  weight  of  the  air  prevails  as 
long  as  they  are  below  that  height  and  is  in  equilibrium  when  they  have  reached 
it;  which  is  exactly  like  what  is  recorded  in  the  Treatise  on  the  equilibrium  of  liquids 
of  a  tube  of  quicksilver  immersed  in  a  tank  of  water;  and  if  the  tube  is  straight¬ 
ened,  the  liquids  fall  again,  always  to  return  to  the  same  height. 

Thus  in  a  siphon  all  the  water  in  the  higher  vessel  rises  and  passes  into  the 
lower  vessel  as  long  as  the  leg  of  the  siphon  dipping  in  it  is  of  any  length  we 
please  less  than  thirty-one  feet;  because,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  weight  of 
the  air  is  quite  capable  of  lifting  water  to  this  height  and  holding  it  suspended 
there;  but  as  soon  as  the  leg  dipping  in  the  higher  vessel  exceeds  this  length,  the 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  4*7 

siphon  no  longer  works  (that  is,  the  water  in  the  higher  vessel  no  longer  rises  to 
the  top  of  the  siphon  to  pass  into  the  other  vessel,  because  the  weight  of  the  air 
cannot  lift  it  higher  than  thirty-one  feet);  so  that  the  water  divides  at  the  top  of 
the  siphon  and  falls  in  each  leg  into  the  corresponding  vessel  until  it  comes  to 
rest  at  the  height  of  thirty-one  feet  above  each  vessel,  and  remains  suspended  at 
this  height  by  the  weight  of  the  air  which  counterbalances  it. 

If  we  slant  the  siphon  a  little,  the  water  will  rise  in  both  legs  until  it  has  again 
reached  the  height  which  the  slanting  had  diminished;  and  if  we  slant  it  until 
the  top  of  the  siphon  has  an  elevation  of  only  thirty-one  feet  above  the  surface 
of  the  higher  vessel,  the  water  in  the  leg  dipping  in  that  vessel  will  be  at  the  top 
of  the  siphon,  so  that  it  will  fall  into  the  other  leg;  and  thus  the  water  in  the 
higher  vessel  always  taking  its  place,  there  will  be  a  continuous  flow,  but  in  a 
thin  trickle  only;  and  if  we  slant  the  siphon  more,  the  water  will  flow  at  the  full 
capacity  of  the  tube. 

The  same  thing  must  be  understood  of  all  other  liquids,  allowance  being  made 
for  the  ratio  of  their  weights. 

Thus  if  we  try  to  open  a  bellows  as  long  as  we  do  not  use  more  than  a  certain 
amount  of  force,  we  shall  be  unable  to  do  it;  but  if  we  pass  that  point,  we  shall 
open  it.  Now  the  required  force  is  as  follows:  if  the  wings  of  the  bellows  are  a 
foot  in  diameter,  there  will  be  needed  to  open  it  a  force  able  to  lift  a  vessel  filled 
with  water  one  foot  in  diameter,  like  the  wings,  and  thirty-one  feet  high,  which 
is  the  height  to  which  water  rises  in  a  pump.  If  the  wings  are  only  six  inches  in 
diameter,  there  will  be  needed  to  open  the  bellows  a  force  equal  to  the  weight 
of  the  water  in  a  vessel  six  inches  in  diameter  and  thirty-one  feet  high,  and  sim¬ 
ilarly  of  the  rest;  so  that  by  hanging  to  one  of  the  wings  a  weight  equal  to  that 
of  the  water  just  specified  we  shall  open  the  bellows,  and  a  lesser  weight  could 
not  do  it,  because  the  weight  of  the  air  pressing  it  is  exactly  equal  to  that  of 
thirty-one  feet  of  water. 

The  same  weight  will  raise  the  piston  of  a  sealed  syringe,  and  the  same  weight 
will  separate  two  polished  bodies  placed  together;  so  that  if  they  are  an  inch  in 
diameter,  by  applying  to  them  a  force  equal  to  the  weight  of  thirty-one  feet  of 
water  one  inch  in  diameter  we  shall  separate  them. 

Chapter  4.  That  as  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  increases  when  it  is  more  laden 

with  moisture  and  diminishes  when  it  is  less  laden ,  so  the  effects  it  produces  increase 

and  diminish  proportionally. 

Since  the  weight  of  the  air  causes  all  the  effects  we  are  considering  and  since 
that  weight  is  not  always  the  same  for  the  same  place  but  constantly  varies  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  humidity,  its  effects  should  not  be  always  uniform  but  on  the  contrary 
constantly  variable;  this  is  confirmed  by  experiment,  which  shows  that  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  thirty-one  feet  of  water,  which  we  gave  to  serve  as  an  example,  is  not  a 
precise  measure  always  accurate;  for  water  does  not  rise  in  pumps  exactly  to  this 
height  and  always  remain  suspended  there;  on  the  contrary  sometimes  it  rises  to 
thirty-one  and  a  half  feet,  then  returns  to  thirty-one  feet,  then  falls  again  three 
inches  more,  then  suddenly  rises  a  foot,  following  the  variations  of  the  air,  and 
ail  that  with  the  same  freakishness  with  which  the  air  passes  from  murky  to  clear. 

And  experiment  shows  that  the  same  pump  lifts  water  higher  at  one  time  than 
at  another  by  one  foot,  eight  inches.  So  that  a  pump,  and  for  the  same  reason  a 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


418 

siphon,  can  be  made  of  such  a  height  that  at  one  time  they  will  work  and  at 
another  time  they  will  not,  according  as  the  air  is  more  or  less  laden  with  moisture 
or  for  some  other  reason  weighs  more  or  less;  which  would  make  a  rather  interest¬ 
ing  experiment  and  not  too  hard  if  we  used  quicksilver  instead  of  water,  for  in 
that  way  such  long  tubes  would  not  be  needed. 

Hence  we  are  to  understand  that  water  remains  suspended  in  tubes  at  a  lesser 
height  at  one  time  than  at  another  and  that  a  bellows  is  easier  to  open  at  one 
time  than  at  another  precisely  in  the  same  ratio,  and  similarly  with  the  other 
effects;  for  what  is  said  of  one  applies  exactly  to  all  the  rest,  each  in  accordance 
with  its  own  nature. 

Chapter  5.  That  since  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  greater  over  low  places 

than  over  high  places ,  so  the  effects  produced  by  it  there  are  proportionately  greater. 

Since  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  produces  all  the  effects  we  are  consider¬ 
ing  and  since  that  mass  is  not  the  same  over  every  place  on  the  earth  because  it  is 
greater  over  the  lower  places,  the  effects  should  be  different  there  too;  as  indeed 
experiment  confirms,  showing  that  the  measure  of  thirty-one  feet  I  had  taken  as 
an  example  is  not  the  height  to  which  water  rises  in  pumps  everywhere  in  the 
world;  for  it  rises  to  different  heights  in  all  places  not  at  the  same  level  (the  lower 
the  altitude  the  higher  the  water  rises  and  the  higher  the  altitude  the  lower  the 
water  rises);  so  that  by  experiments  made  in  places  differing  in  altitude  by  five 
or  six  hundred  fathoms  a  difference  of  four  feet,  three  inches  has  been  found,  so 
that  the  same  pump  which  lifts  water  in  one  place  to  a  height  of  thirty  feet,  four 
inches  lifts  it,  under  the  same  atmospheric  conditions,  in  another  place  some  five 
hundred  fathoms  higher  only  to  a  height  of  twenty-six  feet,  one  inch,  which 
constitutes  a  difference  of  one-sixth. 

The  same  thing  should  be  understood  of  all  the  other  effects,  each  in  its  own 
fashion;  that  is  to  say,  for  example,  that  two  polished  bodies  are  more  difficult 
to  separate  in  a  valley  than  on  a  mountain  top,  and  so  on. 

But  as  five  hundred  fathoms  of  altitude  cause  four  feet,  three  inches  difference 
in  the  height  of  the  water,  lesser  altitudes  make  proportionately  lesser  differences; 
one  hundred  fathoms  about  ten  inches,  twenty  fathoms  about  two  inches,  and 
so  on. 

The  best  instrument  for  observing  such  variations  is  a  glass  tube,  stopped  at 
the  top,  recurved  at  the  bottom,  three  or  four  feet  long,  to  which  a  strip  of  paper 
has  been  pasted,  divided  into  inches  and  lines;  for  if  we  fill  it  with  quicksilver, 
we  shall  see  that  part  of  the  quicksilver  will  fall  and  part  of  it  will  remain  sus¬ 
pended,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  notice  exactly  the  point  at  which  it  will  be 
suspended;  and  it  will  be  easy  to  observe  the  variations  which  will  take  place 
there  because  of  the  varying  humidity  following  upon  changes  in  the  weather, 
and  those  which  will  take  place  through  the  tube’s  being  carried  to  a  higher  al¬ 
titude;  for  leaving  it  in  the  same  place,  we  shall  see  that  as  the  weather  changes 
the  quicksilver  will  rise  and  fall,  and  we  shall  see  that  it  will  vary  from  one  time 
to  another  by  one  inch,  six  lines,  which  correspond  exactly  to  one  foot,  eight 
inches  of  water,  which  I  gave  in  another  chapter  for  the  difference  caused  by 
changes  in  weather. 

And  carrying  the  tube  from  the  foot  of  a  mountain  to  the  summit,  we  shall 
see  that  when  we  have  gone  up  ten  fathoms  the  quicksilver  will  have  fallen  close 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  419 

to  a  line,  when  we  have  gone  up  twenty  fathoms  it  will  have  fallen  two  lines, 
when  we  have  gone  up  a  hundred  fathoms  it  will  have  fallen  nine  lines.  And  as 
we  go  down,  the  quicksilver  will  rise  again  by  the  same  amounts. 

All  this  was  tested  on  the  Puy  de  Dome  in  Auvergne,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
account  of  that  experiment;  and  these  measurements  of  quicksilver  correspond 
exactly  to  those  we  have  just  given  of  water. 

The  same  thing  is  to  be  understood  with  respect  to  the  difficulty  in  opening  a 
bellows,  and  of  the  rest. 

Wherein  we  see  that  exactly  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  effects  produced 
by  the  weight  of  the  air  as  in  those  produced  by  the  weight  of  water;  for  we  saw 
that  a  bellows  immersed  in  water  and  hard  to  open  because  of  the  weight  of  the 
water,  is  the  less  so  the  nearer  we  bring  it  to  the  surface;  and  that  the  quicksilver 
in  a  tube  immersed  in  water  remains  suspended  at  a  greater  or  lesser  height  accord¬ 
ing  as  it  is  more  or  less  deep  in  the  water;  and  all  these  effects,  whether  of  the 
weight  of  the  air  or  of  that  of  water,  are  such  necessary  consequences  of  the 
equilibrium  of  fluids  that  there  is  nothing  clearer  in  the  world. 

Chapter  6.  That  as  the  effects  of  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  increase  or 

diminish  according  as  that  weight  increases  or  diminishes ,  they  would  cease  en¬ 
tirely  if  we  were  above  the  air  or  in  a  place  where  there  were  none. 

Having  now  seen  that  the  effects  hitherto  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vac¬ 
uum  but  actually  due  to  the  weight  of  the  air  always  depend  Upon  its  quantity 
and  that  as  it  increases,  they  increase  and  as  it  diminishes,  they  diminish;  and 
that  for  this  reason  we  see  in  the  tube  filled  with  quicksilver  the  quicksilver  re¬ 
mains  suspended  at  a  height  so  much  the  lower  as  the  tube  is  carried  to  a  higher 
altitude,  because  less  air  is  left  above  it,  just  as  the  quicksilver  in  a  tube  immersed 
in  water  falls  as  the  tube  is  lifted  toward  the  surface  of  the  water,  because  less 
water  is  left  to  counterbalance  it;  we  may  conclude  with  assurance  that  if  we 
carried  the  tube  to  the  top  of  the  extreme  limit  of  the  air  and  lifted  it  entirely  out 
of  the  air’s  sphere,  the  quicksilver  would  fall  entirely  since  there  would  no  longer 
be  any  air  to  counterbalance  it,  just  as  the  quicksilver  in  the  tube  immersed  in 
water  falls  entirely  when  we  draw  the  tube  entirely  out  of  the  water. 

The  same  thing  would  happen  if  we  could  remove  all  the  air  from  the  room 
in  which  the  experiment  was  made;  for  if  there  were  no  longer  any  air  weighing 
upon  the  recurved  end  of  the  tube,  we  must  believe  that  the  quicksilver  would 
fall,  no  longer  having  a  counterpoise. 

But  because  both  of  these  experiments  are  impossible,  since  we  cannot  go 
above  the  air  and  since  we  could  not  live  in  a  room  entirely  emptied  of  air,  it  is 
sufficient  to  remove  the  air,  not  from  the  entire  room,  but  only  from  about  the 
tube’s  recurved  end  to  keep  the  air  away  from  it,  in  order  to  see  if  all  the  quick¬ 
silver  will  fall  when  there  is  no  longer  any  air  to  counterbalance  it;  and  this  can 
easily  be  done  as  follows: 

We  must  have  a  tube  recurved  at  the  bottom,  closed  at  the  end  A  and  open 
at  the  end  B,  and  another  tube,  straight  throughout,  open  at  both  ends,  M  and 
N,  but  with  the  end  M  inserted  and  soldered  into  the  recurved  end  of  the  other 
tube,  as  in  the  figure. 

We  must  stop  B ,  which  is  the  opening  of  the  recurved  end  of  the  first  tube, 
with  the  finger  or  otherwise,  as  with  a  pig’s  bladder,  and  invert  the  whole  tube 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


420 

(that  is  to  say,  the  two  tubes,  which  actually  make  only 
one,  since  they  open  into  each  other),  fill  it  with  quick¬ 
silver  and  then  put  the  end  A  at  the  top  again  and  the 
end  N  in  a  basin  of  quicksilver;  what  will  happen  is 
that  the  quicksilver  of  the  upper  tube  will  fall  in  its 
entirety  and  all  of  it  will  be  caught  in  the  curved  end, 
unless  a  part  of  it  flows  into  the  lower  tube  by  the  open¬ 
ing  at  M;  but  only  part  of  the  quicksilver  in  the  lower 
tube  will  fall  and  part  of  it  will  remain  suspended  at  a 
height  of  from  twenty-six  to  twenty-seven  inches, 
according  to  the  place  and  time  of  the  experiment.  Now 
the  reason  for  this  difference  is  that  the  air  weighs  upon 
the  quicksilver  in  the  basin  at  the  bottom  of  the  lower 
tube,  and  accordingly  it  holds  the  quicksilver  inside 
suspended  and  in  equilibrium;  but  it  does  not  weigh  on 
the  quicksilver  at  the  recurved  end  of  the  upper  tube 
(for  the  finger  or  the  pig’s  bladder  closing  it  keeps  the 
air  out) ;  so  that  as  there  is  no  air  weighing  on  this  part, 
the  quicksilver  in  the  tube  is  free  to  fall  since  nothing 
holds  it  up  and  opposes  its  falling. 

But  since  nothing  is  lost  in  nature,  if  the  quicksilver 
in  the  curved  end  does  not  feel  the  weight  of  the  air 
because  the  finger  stopping  the  opening  keeps  it  away,  the  finger  itself,  by  com¬ 
pensation,  suffers  much  pain,  for  it  endures  all  the  weight  of  the  air  pressing 
down  from  above  and  nothing  holds  it  up  from  below;  therefore  it  feels  itself 
pressed  against  the  glass  and,  as  it  were,  drawn  ands  ucked  inside  the  tube,  and  a 
swelling  forms,  as  if  under  a  cupping  glass,  because  the  weight  of  the  air  press¬ 
ing  our  finger,  our  hand,  and  our  whole  body  everywhere  except  at  the  end  of 
the  finger  (where  it  has  no  access),  that  part  swells  and  feels  pain  for  the  reason 
just  given. 

And  if  we  remove  our  finger  from  the  opening,  the  quicksilver  in  the  recurved 
end  will  suddenly  rise  in  the  tube  to  a  height  of  from  twenty-six  to  twenty-seven 
inches,  because  the  air  suddenly  falling  on  the  quicksilver  will  immediately  lift 
it  to  the  height  capable  of  counterbalancing  it,  and  even,  because  of  the  violence 
of  its  fall,  it  lifts  the  quicksilver  a  little  beyond  the  limit;  but  the  quicksilver  will 
afterwards  fall  a  little  lower  and  then  it  will  rise  again,  and  after  some  goings  and 
comings,  as  of  a  weight  suspended  at  the  end  of  a  string,  it  will  come  to  rest 
at  a  certain  height,  at  which  it  exactly  counterbalances  the  air. 

Whence  we  see  that  when  the  air  does  not  weigh  on  the  quicksilver  at  the 
recurved  end,  all  the  quicksilver  in  the  tube  falls,  and  that  consequently  if  we 
had  taken  the  tube  to  a  place  where  there  was  no  air  or,  if  possible,  beyond  the 
air  s  sphere,  all  the  quicksilver  would  fall. 

Conclusion  of  the  last  three  chapters. 

Whence  it  may  be  concluded  that  as  the  weight  of  the  air  is  great,  small,  or 
null,  so  the  height  to  which  water  rises  in  the  pump  is  great,  small,  or  null,  and 
that  the  height  is  always  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  weight,  as  effect  to  cause. 

The  same  thing  must  be  understood  with  respect  to  the  difficulty  of  opening 
a  sealed  bellows,  and  so  on. 


Ha 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR 


421 


Chapter  7.  How  far  water  rises  in  pumps  everywhere  on  the  earth. 

From  everything  we  know  it  follows  that  there  are  as  many  different  measures 
of  the  height  to  which  water  rises  in  pumps  as  there  are  different  conditions  of 
place  and  weather  for  taking  the  measurement;  and  that  thus  if  we  are  asked  to 
what  height  suction  pumps  lift  water  in  general,  we  could  not  give  an  exact 
answer  to  the  question,  or  even  to  this  other:  to  what  height  pumps  lift  water  at 
Paris,  unless  the  state  of  the  air  is  also  specified,  since  they  lift  water  higher  when 
the  air  is  more  laden  with  moisture;  but  it  is  quite  possible  to  say  to  what  height 
pumps  lift  water  at  Paris  when  the  air  is  most  laden,  for  everything  is  specified. 
But  without  stopping  at  the  different  heights  to  which  water  is  lifted  in  each 
place  according  as  the  air  is  more  or  less  laden,  I  shall  take  the  height  of  the 
water  when  the  air  carries  its  mean  burden  of  moisture  as  the  natural  height  of 
that  place,  because  it  is  midway  between  the  two  extremes  and  by  knowing  that 
measurement  we  shall  know  the  other  two,  because  we  have  only  to  add  or  sub¬ 
tract  ten  inches.  Accordingly  I  shall  give  the  height  to  which  water  rises  every¬ 
where  in  the  world,  whatever  the  altitude,  when  the  air  has  its  average  moisture. 

But  first  it  must  be  understood  that  in  all  pumps  at  the  same  altitude  water 
rises  to  exactly  the  same  height  (I  always  mean  in  the  same  state  of  the  atmos¬ 
phere),  for  since  the  air  has  the  same  height  there  and  consequently  the  same 
weight,  the  weight  produces  like  effects. 

And  that  is  why  I  shall  first  give  the  height  to  which  water  is  raised  in  places 
at  sea  level,  because  the  sea  is  all  exactly  at  the  same  level  (that  is  to  say,  equally 
distant  at  all  points  from  the  center  of  the  earth),  for  liquids  cannot  otherwise 
come  to  rest  since  the  higher  parts  would  flow  down;  and  so  the  height  to  which 
we  find  water  rises  in  pumps  at  any  place  whatever  on  the  coast  will  be  common 
to  all  places  in  the  world  on  the  coast,  and  it  will  be  easy  to  infer  from  that  the 
height  to  which  water  will  rise  in  places  higher  or  lower  by  ten,  twenty,  one 
hundred,  two  hundred,  or  five  hundred  fathoms,  since  we  have  given  the  differ¬ 
ences  caused  by  such  differences  in  altitude. 

At  sea  level  suction  pumps  lift  water  to  the  height  of  approximately  thirty-one 
feet,  two  inches  (that  is,  when  the  air  has  its  average  moisture). 

This  is  the  measure  common  to  all  places  in  the  world  at  sea  level;  whence  it 
follows  that  a  siphon  lifts  water  in  those  places  as  long  as  its  shorter  leg  is  less 
than  thirty-one  feet,  two  inches,  and  that  a  sealed  bellows  is  opened  by  the  weight 
of  water  having  that  height  and  the  width  of  its  wings;  which  is  in  conformity 
with  the  general  rule.  It  is  easy  to  know  from  this  to  what  height  water  is  raised 
by  pumps  in  places  ten  fathoms  higher;  for  since  I  have  said  that  ten  fathoms  of 
altitude  cause  a  decrease  of  one  inch  in  the  height  to  which  water  rises,  it  follows 
that  at  those  places  the  water  rises  only  to  thirty-one  feet,  one  inch. 

And  in  the  same  way  we  find  that  in  places  twenty  fathoms  above  sea  level 
water  rises  to  only  thirty-one  feet. 

In  those  one  hundred  fathoms  above  sea  level  water  rises  to  only  thirty  feet, 
four  inches. 

In  those  with  an  altitude  of  two  hundred  fathoms  water  rises  to  twenty-nine 
feet,  six  inches. 

In  those  with  an  altitude  of  about  five  hundred  fathoms  water  rises  to  almost 
twenty-seven  feet. 


422  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

Similarly  we  could  make  observations  for  the  rest.  And  for  places  lower  than 
sea  level  we  shall  find  in  the  same  way  the  heights  to  which  the  water  rises  by 
adding,  instead  of  subtracting,  the  differences  caused  by  these  differences  in 
altitude. 


Consequences 

1.  From  all  this  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a  pump  never  lifts  water  at  Paris  to  thirty- 
two  feet  and  never  lifts  it  to  less  than  twenty-nine  and  a  half  feet. 

2.  We  also  see  that  a  siphon  whose  short  leg  is  thirty-two  feet  long  never 
works  at  Paris. 

3.  That  a  siphon  whose  short  leg  is  twenty-nine  feet  long  or  less  always  works 
at  Paris. 

4.  That  at  Paris  a  siphon  whose  short  leg  is  exactly  thirty-one  feet  long  some¬ 
times  works  and  sometimes  does  not  work,  depending  on  the  humidity  of  the  air. 

5.  That  a  siphon  with  a  short  leg  twenty-nine  feet  long  always  works  at  Paris 
and  never  works  in  a  higher  place,  such  as  Clermont  in  Auvergne. 

6.  That  a  siphon  ten  feet  high  works  everywhere  in  the  world,  for  there  is  no 
mountain  high  enough  to  keep  it  from  working;  and  that  a  siphon  fifty  feet  long 
works  nowhere  in  the  world,  for  there  is  no  cave  deep  enough  to  make  a  sufficient 
depth  of  air  to  raise  water  thus  high. 

7.  That  water  rises  in  the  pumps  at  Dieppe,  when  the  air  has  its  average  mois¬ 
ture,  to  thirty-one  feet,  two  inches,  as  I  have  said,  and  when  the  air  is  most  laden 
to  thirty-two  feet;  that  it  rises  in  pumps  on  mountains  five  hundred  fathoms 
above  the  sea,  when  the  air  has  its  mean  burden  of  moisture,  to  twenty-six  feet, 
eleven  inches,  and  when  it  is  least  laden  to  twenty-six  feet,  one  inch;  so  that  there 
is  a  difference  between  this  height  and  that  occurring  at  Dieppe  when  the  air  is 
most  laden  of  five  feet,  eleven  inches,  which  is  almost  one-fourth  of  the  height 
occurring  on  mountains. 

8.  Just  as  we  see  that  in  all  places  at  the  same  level  water  rises  to  the  same 
height  and  that  it  rises  less  in  those  of  greater  elevation,  so,  conversely,  if  we  see 
that  water  rises  to  the  same  height  in  two  different  places,  we  can  conclude  they 
have  the  same  altitude,  and  if  it  does  not  rise  to  the  same  height,  we  can  judge 
by  the  difference  how  much  higher  one  place  is  than  the  other;  which  is  a  way 
of  finding  the  altitudes  of  places,  however  far  apart,  quite  exactly  and  very  easily; 
since  instead  of  using  a  suction  pump,  which  would  be  hard  to  make  thus  long, 
we  need  only  take  a  tube  three  or  four  feet  in  length,  filled  with  quicksilver  and 
stopped  at  the  top,  such  as  we  have  often  spoken  of,  and  see  at  what  height  the 
quicksilver  remains  suspended,  for  its  height  corresponds  perfectly  to  the  height 
to  which  water  rises  in  pumps. 

9.  We  also  see  from  this  that  the  degrees  of  heat  are  not  accurately  marked  in 
the  best  thermometers;  since  all  the  different  heights  at  which  the  water  remains 
suspended  have  always  been  attributed  to  the  rarefaction  or  condensation  of  the 
air  inside  the  tube,  but  we  learn  from  these  experiments  that  changes  in  the  out¬ 
side  air,  that  is,  in  the  mass  of  the  air,  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  them. 

I  pass  over  a  large  number  of  other  consequences  which  follow  from  this  new 
knowledge,  as  for  example  the  means  it  gives  us  of  finding  out  the  exact  extent 
of  the  air’s  sphere  and  of  the  vapors  called  the  atmosphere;  since  by  taking  exact 
observations  for  every  hundred  fathoms  and  noting  the  differences  caused  by  the 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  423 

first  hundred,  by  the  second  hundred,  and  by  all  the  remaining  hundreds  we 
would  be  able  to  determine  accurately  the  entire  height  of  the  air.  But  I  leave  all 
that  to  devote  myself  to  what  is  essential  to  the  subject. 

Chapter  8.  How  much  each  place  in  the  world  is  pressed  by  the  weight 
of  the  mass  of  the  air . 

We  learn  from  these  experiments  that  since  the  weight  of  the  air  and  the  weight 
of  the  water  in  pumps  are  in  equilibrium,  they  weigh  exactly  the  same,  and  that 
by  thus  knowing  the  height  to  which  water  rises  everywhere  in  the  world  we 
know  at  the  same  time  how  much  each  place  is  pressed  by  the  weight  of  the  air 
above  it,  and  consequently: 

That  places  beside  the  sea  are  pressed  by  the  weight  of  the  air  above  them,  up 
to  the  top  of  its  sphere,  exactly  as  much  as  if  instead  of  this  air  there  were  sub¬ 
stituted  a  column  of  water  thirty-one  feet,  two  inches  in  height. 

Places  with  an  altitude  of  ten  fathoms  as  much  as  if  they  carried  thirty-one  feet, 
one  inch  of  water. 

Places  with  an  altitude  of  five  hundred  fathoms  as  much  as  if  they  carried 
twenty-six  feet,  eleven  inches  of  water,  and  similarly  of  the  rest. 

Chapter  9.  How  much  the  entire  mass  of  all  the  air  in  the  world  weighs. 

We  learn  from  these  experiments  that  the  air  at  sea  level  has  the  same  weight 
as  water  at  a  height  of  thirty-one  feet,  two  inches;  but  because  the  air  weighs  less 
on  places  above  sea  level  and  therefore  does  not  weigh  the  same  on  all  places  on 
the  earth,  and  even  weighs  everywhere  differently,  we  cannot  calculate  a  fixed 
measure  which  will  show  how  much  all  places  in  the  world,  reduced  to  an  average 
altitude,  are  pressed  by  the  air;  but  we  can  arrive  at  a  measure  by  conjecture 
approaching  very  closely  to  the  true  measure,  as  for  example  we  may  assume  that 
all  places  on  the  earth  in  general,  reduced  to  an  average  altitude  and  considered  as 
equally  pressed  by  the  air,  are  as  much  pressed  as  if  they  carried  thirty-one  feet  of 
water;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  error  in  this  assumption  is  not  half  a  foot  of  water. 

Now  we  have  seen  that  the  air  over  mountains  five  hundred  fathoms  high 
weighs  as  much  as  water  at  the  height  of  twenty-six  feet,  eleven  inches. 

And  consequently  all  the  air  from  sea  level  to  the  mountain  tops  five  hundred 
fathoms  high  weighs  as  much  as  water  at  the  height  of  four  feet,  one  inch,  and 
since  that  is  about  one-seventh  of  the  entire  height,  it  is  obvious  that  the  air 
lying  between  the  sea  and  these  mountains  is  about  one-seventh  of  the  entire 
mass  of  the  air. 

We  learn  from  these  same  experiments  that  the  heavy  vapors  in  the  air,  when 
it  is  most  charged  with  them,  weigh  as  much  as  water  at  a  height  of  one  foot, 
eight  inches,  since  to  counterbalance  themselves,  they  raise  the  water  in  the  pumps 
to  this  height  above  the  height  at  which  the  water  already  counterbalanced  the 
weight  of  the  air;  so  that  if  all  the  vapors  above  a  region  were  reduced  to  water, 
as  happens  when  they  are  converted  to  rain,  they  could  produce  only  one  foot, 
eight  inches  of  water  over  that  region.  And  if  storms  sometimes  occur  in  which 
the  rainfall  comes  to  a  greater  height,  it  is  because  the  wind  carries  vapor  there 
from  neighboring  regions. 

We  also  see  from  this  that  if  the  whole  sphere  of  the  air  were  pressed  and 
compressed  against  the  earth  by  a  force  which,  pushing  it  from  above,  reduced 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


424 

it  to  the  smallest  possible  compass  below  and  reduced  it  to  water,  it  would  then 
have  a  height  of  only  thirty-one  feet. 

And  consequently  that  we  must  consider  the  whole  mass  of  the  air,  in  its  pres¬ 
ent  free  state,  as  if  it  had  formerly  been  like  a  mass  of  water  thirty-one  feet  deep 
about  the  entire  earth,  which  should  have  been  extremely  rarefied  and  dilated  and 
converted  into  this  state  we  call  air,  in  which  it  occupies  more  space,  to  be  sure, 
but  keeps  exactly  the  same  weight  as  thirty-one  feet  of  water. 

And  as  there  would  be  nothing  easier  than  to  calculate  how  many  pounds  all 
the  water  surrounding  the  earth  to  a  height  of  thirty-one  feet  would  weigh  and  as 
a  child  who  knows  addition  and  subtraction  could  do  it,  we  should  find  by  the 
same  calculation  how  many  pounds  all  the  air  there  is  weighs,  since  it  is  the  same 
thing;  and  if  we  work  it  out,  we  shall  find  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is 
approximately  eight  millions  of  millions  of  millions  of  pounds. 

I  wanted  to  give  myself  this  pleasure,  and  this  is  how  I  did  the  reckoning. 

I  supposed  that  the  diameter  of  a  circle  is  to  its  circumference  as  7  is  to  22. 

I  supposed  that  when  the  diameter  of  a  sphere  is  multiplied  by  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  its  great  circle,  the  product  is  the  area  of  the  spherical  surface. 

We  know  that  the  circumference  of  the  earth  has  been  divided  into  360  degrees. 
This  division  was  arbitrary,  for  it  could  have  been  divided  into  more  or  less  than 
360,  if  desired,  as  could  also  the  celestial  circles. 

It  has  been  found  that  each  of  the  degrees  contains  50,000  fathoms. 

Leagues  in  the  neighborhood  of  Paris  are  2,500  fathoms,  and  consequently 
there  are  20  leagues  to  a  degree;  some  count  25,  but  they  also  give  only  2,000 
fathoms  to  the  league,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing. 

Each  fathom  has  6  feet. 

A  cubic  foot  of  water  weighs  72  pounds. 

Whereupon  it  is  very  easy  to  make  the  desired  calculation. 

For  since  the  great  circle,  or  circumference,  of  the  earth  is  360  degrees, 

The  distance  around  it  is,  therefore,  7,200  leagues. 

And  by  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the  diameter  its  diameter  will  be 
2,291  leagues. 

Therefore  multiplying  the  diameter  of  the  earth  by  the  circumference  of  its 
great  circle,  we  shall  find  that  its  spherical  surface  has  16,495,200  square  leagues. 

That  is  to  say  103,095,000,000,000  square  fathoms. 

That  is  to  say  3,711,420,000,000,000  square  feet. 

And  since  a  cubic  foot  of  water  weighs  72  pounds 

It  follows  that  a  prism  of  water  with  a  base  of  1  square  foot  and  3 1  feet  high 
weighs  2,232  pounds. 

Therefore  if  the  earth  were  covered  with  water  to  a  height  of  thirty-one  feet, 
there  would  be  as  many  prisms  of  water  thirty-one  feet  high  as  there  are  square 
feet  in  its  surface  (I  know  full  well  they  would  not  be  prisms  but  sectors  of  a 
sphere,  and  I  purposely  neglect  to  be  precise). 

And  consequently  the  earth  would  carry  as  many  units  of  water,  each  weighing 
2,232  pounds,  as  it  has  square  feet  in  its  surface. 

Therefore  all  this  mass  of  water  would  weigh  8, 283, 889,440,000,000,000  pounds. 

Therefore  the  mass  of  all  the  air  there  is  has  this  same  weight  of 
8,238,889,440,000,000,000  pounds. 

That  is  to  say,  eight  million  million  million,  two  hundred  eighty-three  thou- 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  425 

sand  eight  hundred  eighty-nine  million  million,  four  hundred  forty  thousand 
million  pounds. 

Conclusion  of  the  two  preceding  treatises 

I  have  recorded  in  general  in  the  preceding  treatises  all  the  effects  which  it  has 
hitherto  been  believed  nature  produces  to  avoid  a  vacuum;  wherein  I  have  shown 
it  is  absolutely  false  that  they  occur  for  this  imaginary  reason.  And  I  have  dem¬ 
onstrated  on  the  contrary  by  arguments  and  experiments  absolutely  convincing 
that  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  their  true  and  only  cause.  So  that  it  is 
now  certain  there  is  no  effect  in  the  whole  of  nature  produced  by  her  to  avoid 
a  vacuum. 

After  that  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show  that  nature  does  not  abhor  a  vacuum, 
for  this  way  of  speaking  is  improper,  since  created  nature,  which  is  here  in  ques¬ 
tion,  being  inanimate  is  not  capable  of  passion;  accordingly  such  speech  is  meta¬ 
phorical,  and  nothing  more  is  meant  by  it  than  that  nature  makes  the  same  efforts 
to  avoid  the  vacuum  that  she  would  make  if  she  abhorred  it;  so  that  in  the 
opinion  of  those  who  speak  in  this  fashion  it  is  the  same  thing  to  say  that  nature 
abhors  a  vacuum  and  to  say  that  nature  makes  great  efforts  to  prevent  a  vacuum. 
Therefore,  since  I  have  shown  she  does  nothing  to  avoid  the  vacuum,  it  follows 
that  she  does  not  abhor  it,  for  to  go  on  with  the  same  figure,  as  we  say  of  a  man 
that  he  is  indifferent  to  a  thing  if  we  never  observe  in  any  of  his  actions  a  move¬ 
ment  of  desire  or  aversion  for  this  thing,  so  we  must  say  of  nature  that  she  is 
perfectly  indifferent  to  the  vacuum  since  we  never  see  her  doing  anything  either 
to  seek  it  or  to  avoid  it  (I  always  mean  by  the  word  vacuum  a  space  empty  of  all 
bodies  perceptible  to  sense). 

It  is  perfectly  true  (and  this  is  what  led  the  ancients  astray)  that  water  rises  in 
a  pump  when  there  is  no  opening  for  the  air  to  get  in  and  there  would  therefore 
be  a  vacuum  if  the  water  did  not  follow  the  plunger,  and  also  that  water  no 
longer  rises  as  soon  as  there  are  cracks  through  which  the  air  can  enter  to  fill  the 
pump;  whence  it  seems  the  water  rises  only  to  prevent  a  vacuum  since  it  rises 
only  when  there  would  be  a  vacuum. 

It  is  certain  likewise  that  a  bellows  is  hard  to  open  when  its  apertures  are  so 
carefully  stopped  that  the  air  cannot  get  in  and  that  therefore  if  it  were  opened, 
there  would  be  a  vacuum,  whereas  this  resistance  ceases  when  the  air  can  enter  to 
fill  the  bellows,  so  that  resistance  is  met  only  when  there  would  be  a  vacuum; 
whence  it  seems  that  resistance  occurs  only  from  fear  of  a  vacuum. 

Finally  it  is  certain  that  all  bodies  in  general  make  great  efforts  to  follow  each 
other  and  to  keep  united  whenever  there  would  be  a  vacuum  between  them  if 
they  were  separated,  and  never  otherwise;  and  that  is  why  the  conclusion  has 
been  drawn  that  their  adhesion  comes  from  the  fear  of  the  vacuum. 

But  to  show  the  weakness  of  this  inference  I  shall  make  use  of  the  following 
example:  when  a  bellows  is  in  the  water  in  the  way  I  have  often  described  so  that 
the  tip  of  the  tube,  which  I  suppose  to  be  twenty  feet  long,  is  out  of  the  water 
and  exposed  to  the  air  and  the  apertures  which  are  in  one  of  the  wings  are  care¬ 
fully  stopped  to  keep  the  water  out,  we  know  that  the  bellows  is  opened  with 
difficulty,  and  with  the  greater  difficulty  the  more  water  there  is  above  it,  and 
that  if  we  remove  the  stoppers  from  the  airholes  and  the  water  is  free  to  come  in, 
the  resistance  ceases. 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


426 

If  we  wanted  to  argue  in  the  same  way  about  this  effect  as  about  the  others, 
we  should  say:  when  the  apertures  are  stopped  and  therefore,  if  the  bellows  were 
opened,  air  would  come  in  by  the  tube,  it  is  opened  with  difficulty,  and  when  the 
water  can  get  in  to  fill  the  bellows  instead  of  air,  the  resistance  ceases.  Therefore 
since  the  bellows  resists  when  air  would  enter  and  not  otherwise,  the  resistance 
comes  from  its  horror  of  the  air. 

Everybody  would  laugh  at  this  inference  because  there  can  be  another  cause 
for  the  bellows’  resistance.  And  indeed  it  is  obvious  that  we  could  not  open  it 
without  raising  the  water  since  the  water  we  would  displace  in  opening  it  could 
not  enter  the  body  of  the  bellows,  and  therefore  it  would  have  to  find  room  for 
itself  elsewhere  and  would  have  to  raise  the  whole  mass,  and  that  is  what  causes 
the  resistance;  which  does  not  occur  when  the  bellows  has  apertures  through 
which  the  water  may  enter,  for  then,  whether  we  open  or  close  the  bellows,  the 
water  neither  rises  nor  falls,  because  the  water  displaced  enters  the  bellows  as  fast 
as  it  is  displaced;  accordingly  the  bellows  is  opened  without  resistance. 

That  is  perfectly  clear,  and  consequently  we  must  consider  that  the  bellows 
cannot  be  opened  without  two  things  happening:  one,  that  air  certainly  does 
enter,  the  other,  that  the  mass  of  the  water  is  lifted;  and  it  is  the  latter  which 
causes  the  resistance  and  the  former  is  quite  unrelated  to  it,  although  it  takes 
place  at  the  same  time. 

Let  us  speak  in  the  same  way  about  the  difficulty  experienced  in  opening  in  the 
air  a  bellows  with  all  its  apertures  stopped;  if  it  were  forcibly  opened,  two  things 
would  happen:  one,  that  there  certainly  would  be  a  vacuum,  the  other,  that  it 
would  be  necessary  to  lift  and  hold  up  the  whole  mass  of  the  air;  and  it  is  the 
latter  which  causes  the  resistance  encountered  and  the  former  has  nothing  to  do 
with  it;  accordingly  the  resistance  increases  and  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the 
weight  of  the  air,  as  I  have  shown. 

The  same  thing  must  be  understood  of  the  resistance  encountered  in  separating 
all  bodies  between  which  there  would  be  a  vacuum;  for  the  air  cannot  get  in, 
otherwise  there  would  not  be  a  vacuum.  And  so  we  could  not  separate  them  with¬ 
out  lifting  and  holding  up  the  entire  mass  of  the  air,  and  that  is  what  causes 
the  resistance. 

There  you  have  the  true  cause  of  the  adhesion  of  bodies  between  which  there 
would  be  a  vacuum,  which  we  have  remained  so  long  without  knowing  because 
we  have  remained  so  long  in  false  opinions,  from  which  we  have  only  gradually 
emerged;  so  that  there  have  been  three  different  periods  in  which  different  views 
have  been  held. 

There  were  three  errors  in  the  world  which  absolutely  prevented  our  knowing 
the  true  cause  of  the  adhesion  of  bodies. 

The  first  error  is  that  almost  from  the  beginning  the  air  was  believed  to  have 
levity,  because  the  ancient  authors  said  so  and  because  those  whose  profession 
it  is  to  believe  them  followed  them  blindly  and  would  have  remained  eternally  of 
that  opinion  if  abler  persons  had  not  freed  them  from  it  by  the  force  of  experi¬ 
ment;  so  that  it  was  not  possible  to  think  the  weight  of  the  air  was  the  cause 
of  the  adhesion  of  bodies  when  the  air  was  thought  not  to  have  any  weight. 

The  second  error  is  that  it  was  imagined  that  the  elements  do  not  weigh  when 
in  themselves,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  we  do  not  feel  the  weight  of  water 
when  we  are  in  it  and  that  a  bucket  of  water  is  easy  to  lift  as  long  as  it  is  still  there 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  427 

and  only  begins  to  make  its  weight  felt  when  it  leaves  the  water;  as  if  these  effects 
could  come  from  no  other  cause  or  rather  as  if  this  cause  were  not  out  of  the 
question,  there  being  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  water  we  draw  in  a  bucket  has 
weight  when  it  is  taken  out  of  the  water  and  no  longer  has  any  when  it  is  poured 
back  in,  that  it  loses  its  weight  when  confounded  with  the  rest  and  regains  it 
when  it  quits  the  level  of  the  water.  Strange  ways  that  men  seek  to  conceal  their 
ignorance!  Because  they  could  not  understand  why  we  do  not  feel  the  weight  of 
the  water  and  were  unwilling  to  admit  it,  they  said  it  has  no  weight  in  water,  to 
satisfy  their  vanity  by  the  overthrow  of  truth,  and  in  this  way  it  became  an  ac¬ 
cepted  opinion;  and  that  is  why  as  long  as  men  clung  to  this  fancy  it  was  im¬ 
possible  to  believe  that  the  weight  of  the  air  was  the  cause  of  these  effects;  since 
even  if  they  had  known  that  the  air  is  heavy,  they  would  still  have  said  that  it  does 
not  weigh  when  in  itself,  and  therefore  they  would  not  have  believed  that  it 
produced  any  effect  by  its  weight. 

This  is  why  I  showed  in  the  Equilibrium  of  liquids  that  water  weighs  when  in 
itself  as  much  as  when  outside,  and  I  explained  there  why  in  spite  of  that  weight 
a  bucket  is  easy  to  lift  in  water  and  why  we  do  not  feel  its  weight;  and  in  the 
Treatise  on  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  I  showed  the  same  thing  with  respect  to 
the  air  in  order  to  clear  up  all  doubts. 

The  third  error  is  of  a  different  sort;  it  is  not  with  respect  to  the  air,  but  has  to 
do  with  the  effects  they  attributed  to  the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  about  which  they 
had  completely  false  ideas. 

For  they  imagined  that  a  pump  lifts  water  not  only  to  ten  or  twenty  feet,  which 
is  perfectly  true,  but  even  to  fifty,  a  hundred,  a  thousand,  and  to  any  height 
desired,  without  limit. 

They  also  believed  that  it  is  not  only  hard  to  separate  two  polished  bodies 
placed  together,  but  absolutely  impossible,  that  an  angel  could  not  do  it,  nor 
any  created  force,  with  a  hundred  exaggerations  too  idle  to  mention;  and  similarly 
of  the  rest. 

This  is  an  error  of  fact  so  ancient  that  we  do  not  know  its  origin;  even  Heron, 
one  of  the  first  and  most  excellent  authors  to  write  on  the  raising  of  water,  ex¬ 
pressly  states,  as  a  thing  that  may  not  be  doubted,  that  the  water  of  a  river  can  be 
carried  over  a  mountain  to  be  poured  into  the  valley  on  the  other  side,  provided 
it  be  a  little  lower,  by  means  of  a  siphon  placed  on  the  summit  with  its  legs  ex¬ 
tending  down  the  sides,  one  in  the  river,  the  other  in  the  next  valley;  and  he 
asserts  that  the  water  will  rise  from  the  river  to  the  mountain  to  redescend  into  the 
other  valley,  whatever  the  height  of  the  mountain. 

All  those  who  have  written  of  these  matters  have  said  the  same  thing;  and  even 
all  our  fountain  builders  still  claim  today  that  they  can  make  suction  pumps 
which  will  raise  water  sixty  feet,  if  desired. 

Not  that  either  Heron  or  these  authors  or  these  artisans,  and  still  less  the  phi¬ 
losophers,  carried  their  experiments  very  far,  for  if  they  had  tried  to  raise  water 
only  forty  feet,  they  would  have  found  it  impossible;  but  they  had  seen  suction 
pumps  and  siphons  six  feet,  ten  feet,  twelve  feet  long,  which  did  not  fail  to  work, 
and  they  had  never  seen  the  water  fail  to  rise  in  all  the  experiments  they  had 
happened  to  make.  So  that  they  did  not  imagine  there  was  a  certain  point  beyond 
which  it  would  be  otherwise.  They  thought  they  were  dealing  with  a  necessity  of 
nature,  whose  order  could  not  be  changed;  and  since  they  believed  the  water  rose 


428  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

because  of  an  invincible  horror  of  the  vacuum,  they  were  sure  it  would  continue 
to  rise,  as  it  had  begun,  without  ever  ceasing;  and  in  this  way  inferring  from 
what  they  did  see  to  what  they  did  not  see,  they  gave  out  both  as  equally  true. 

And  it  was  believed  with  such  certainty  that  the  philosophers  have  made  of  it 
one  of  the  chief  principles  of  their  science  and  the  foundation  of  their  treatises 
on  the  vacuum.  It  is  laid  down  every  day  in  the  classroom  and  everywhere  in  the 
world,  and  as  far  back  as  our  written  records  go  all  men  have  held  to  this  opinion, 
without  anyone's  ever  having  opposed  it  until  now. 

Perhaps  this  example  will  open  the  eyes  of  those  who  dare  not  think  an  opinion 
doubtful  if  it  has  from  all  time  been  universally  accepted  by  all  men,  since  simple 
artisans  have  been  capable  of  convicting  of  error  all  the  great  men  called  philos¬ 
ophers.  For  Galileo  declares  in  his  Dialogues 1  that  he  learned  from  the  Italian 
fountain  makers  that  pumps  lift  water  only  to  a  certain  height,  after  which  he 
tested  it  himself;  and  others  afterwards  made  the  experiment  in  Italy,  and  since 
then  in  France  with  quicksilver,  more  conveniently,  but  only  showing  the  same 
thing  in  several  different  ways. 

Before  this  was  known,  it  could  not  be  demonstrated  that  the  weight  of  the 
air  was  what  raised  water  in  pumps,  for  that  weight,  since  it  is  limited,  could  not 
produce  an  infinite  effect. 

But  all  these  experiments  did  not  suffice  to  show  that  the  air  produces  these 
effects,  because  although  they  freed  us  from  one  error,  they  left  us  in  another. 
For  certainly  it  was  learned  from  all  these  experiments  that  water  rises  only  to  a 
certain  height,  but  it  was  not  learned  that  water  rose  higher  in  places  of  lower 
altitude.  It  was  thought  on  the  contrary  that  it  always  rose  to  the  same  height, 
that  is  was  everywhere  invariable;  and  since  the  weight  of  the  air  never  occurred 
to  anyone,  it  was  imagined  that  the  nature  of  the  pump  is  such  that  it  lifts  water 
to  a  certain  limited  height  and  no  further.  Accordingly  Galileo  considered  it  as 
the  pump's  natural  height,  and  called  it  la  altessa  limitatissima  [the  fixed  elevation]. 

How  then  could  it  have  been  imagined  that  this  height  was  variable  according 
to  the  variety  of  places?  Certainly  that  was  not  likely;  and  yet  this  last  error  made 
it  still  impossible  to  prove  that  the  weight  of  the  air  is  the  cause  of  these  effects, 
for  since  that  weight  is  greater  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain  than  at  the  top,  it  is 
manifest  that  the  effects  will  be  proportionately  greater  there. 

That  is  why  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  we  could  arrive  at  the  proof  only 
by  making  the  experiment  in  two  places  differing  from  each  other  in  altitude  by 
four  or  five  hundred  fathoms.  And  I  selected  for  this  purpose  the  Puy  de  Dome 
in  Auvergne  for  the  reason  I  gave  in  a  little  pamphlet  I  had  printed  as  early  as 
the  year  1648,  as  soon  as  the  experiment  had  been  successfully  made. 

This  experiment,  having  revealed  that  water  rises  in  pumps  to  quite  different 
heights  according  to  the  variety  of  place  and  weather  and  that  its  height  is  always 
proportional  to  the  weight  of  the  air,  perfected  our  knowledge  of  these  effects; 
it  put  all  doubts  to  rest;  it  showed  their  true  cause;  it  established  that  it  is  not  the 
horror  of  the  vacuum;  and  in  short  it  supplied  all  the  illumination  anyone  could 
wish  on  this  subject. 

Let  it  be  explained  now,  if  possible,  otherwise  than  by  the  weight  of  the  air 
why  suction  pumps  lift  water  less  high  by  one-quarter  on  the  Puy  de  Dome  in 
Auvergne  than  at  Dieppe. 

*See  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  pp.  137-8 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  THE  AIR  429 

Why  the  same  siphon  lifts  water  and  transfers  it  at  Dieppe  and  not  at  Paris. 

Why  two  polished  bodies  placed  together  are  more  easily  pulled  apart  on  a 
belfry  than  in  the  street. 

Why  a  bellows  with  all  its  apertures  stopped  is  easier  to  open  on  top  of  a  house 
than  in  the  yard. 

Why,  when  the  air  is  more  laden  with  moisture,  the  piston  of  a  sealed  syringe 
is  harder  to  draw  up. 

Finally  why  all  these  effects  are  always  proportional  to  the  weight  of  the  air, 
as  effect  to  cause. 

Does  nature  abhor  a  vacuum  more  on  mountains  than  in  valleys,  more  in  wet 
weather  than  in  clear  weather?  Does  she  not  hate  it  equally  on  a  belfry,  in  an  attic, 
and  in  the  yard? 

Let  all  the  disciples  of  Aristotle  bring  together  all  the  strongest  arguments 
there  are  in  the  writings  of  their  master  and  of  his  commentators  to  account  for 
these  things  by  the  horror  of  the  vacuum,  if  they  can;  if  not,  let  them  recognize 
that  experiments  are  the  true  masters  to  follow  in  physics,  that  the  experiment 
made  on  the  mountains  overturned  the  universal  belief  everywhere  held  that  na¬ 
ture  abhors  a  vacuum  and  opened  up  this  knowledge  which  can  nevermore  be 
forgotten,  that  nature  has  no  horror  of  the  vacuum,  that  she  does  nothing  to 
avoid  it,  and  that  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  the  air  is  the  true  cause  of  all  the 
effects  hitherto  attributed  to  that  imaginary  cause. 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION 

{On  the  Geometrical  Mind) 

i.  We  may  have  three  main  objects  in  the  study  of  truth:  first,  to  find  it  when 
we  are  seeking  it;  second,  to  demonstrate  it  after  we  have  found  it;  third,  to 
distinguish  it  from  error  by  examining  it. 

I  shall  not  speak  of  the  first;  I  shall  deal  especially  with  the  second,  which 
includes  the  third.  For  if  we  know  how  to  prove  the  truth,  we  shall  know  at  the 
same  time  how  to  distinguish  it  from  error,  since  by  examining  whether  the  proof 
we  give  conforms  to  the  rules  we  know  we  shall  find  out  whether  the  truth  has 
been  exactly  demonstrated. 

Geometry,  which  excels  in  all  three  of  these  ways,  has  expounded  the  art  of 
finding  unknown  truths.  This  art,  which  is  called  analysis,  would  be  useless  to 
discuss  after  all  the  excellent  books  that  have  been  written  about  it. 

The  art  of  demonstrating  truths  already  found  and  of  making  them  so  clear 
that  their  proofs  cannot  be  refuted  is  the  only  art  I  wish  to  give.  To  that  end  I 
have  only  to  expound  the  method  used  by  geometry,  which  geometry  itself 
teaches  perfectly  by  example  without  ever  putting  it  into  words.  And  because 
this  art  consists  of  two  main  parts,  the  proving  of  each  proposition  individually 
and  the  arranging  of  all  the  propositions  in  the  best  order,  my  treatise  will  have 
two  sections,  of  which  one  will  contain  the  rules  of  geometrical  demonstrations, 
that  is,  scientific  and  perfect  demonstrations,  and  the  other  will  contain  the  rules 
of  geometrical  order,  that  is,  scientific  and  complete  order;  so  that  the  two  sec¬ 
tions  taken  together  will  include  everything  necessary  for  guiding  the  reason  in 
proving  truths  and  in  distinguishing  them  from  errors.  My  intention  is  to  give 
these  rules  in  their  entirety. 

Section  i.  Concerning  the  method  of  geometrical  demonstrations , 
that  is ,  scientific  and  perfect  demonstrations 

I  can  give  no  clearer  idea  of  the  procedure  we  should  follow  to  make  our 
demonstrations  convincing  than  by  expounding  the  method  observed  in 
geometry. 

But  first  I  must  give  the  idea  of  a  method  still  more  eminent  and  complete, 
but  a  method  to  which  man  could  never  attain.  For  what  goes  beyond  geometry 
goes  beyond  man.  Nevertheless  I  must  say  something  about  it  although  it  is 
impossible  to  put  it  into  practice. 

This  true  method,  which  would  produce  demonstrations  of  supreme  excellence 
if  it  were  possible  to  attain  to  it,  would  consist  of  two  main  rules :  to  use  no  term 
of  which  we  had  not  already  clearly  explained  the  meaning,  and  never  to  put 
forward  any  proposition  unless  demonstrated  by  truths  already  known;  that  is, 
in  a  word,  to  define  all  the  terms  and  to  prove  all  the  propositions.  But  to  follow 
the  very  order  I  am  expounding  I  must  state  what  I  understand  by  definition. 

Geometry  recognizes  only  those  definitions  which  logicians  call  nominal,  im- 

430 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  431 

positions  of  a  name,  that  is,  on  things  clearly  designated  by  terms  perfectly  well 
known.  I  speak  of  such  definitions  only. 

Their  usefulness  and  function  is  to  clarify  discourse  and  to  make  it  more  con¬ 
cise  by  expressing  by  the  name  we  impose  what  would  otherwise  require  several 
terms,  in  such  a  way  however  that  the  name  imposed  remains  deprived  of  every 
other  meaning,  if  it  has  any,  keeping  only  that  one  to  which  it  has  been  uniquely 
assigned.  For  example,  if  we  need  to  distinguish  among  the  numbers  those  which 
can  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  from  those  which  cannot,  in  order  to  avoid 
the  frequent  repetition  of  this  condition  we  give  it  a  name  as  follows:  I  call  every 
number  that  can  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  an  even  number. 

This  is  a  geometrical  definition,  because  after  a  thing,  in  this  case  every  number 
that  can  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  has  been  clearly  pointed  out,  it  is  given 
a  name  emptied  of  all  other  meaning,  if  it  has  any,  that  it  may  take  the  meaning 
of  the  thing  pointed  out. 

Whence  it  is  evident  that  there  is  great  freedom  of  definition  and  that  defini¬ 
tions  are  never  subject  to  contradiction,  for  nothing  is  more  permissible  than  to 
give  whatever  name  we  please  to  a  thing  we  have  clearly  pointed  out.  Only  we 
must  be  careful  not  to  take  advantage  of  our  freedom  to  impose  names  by  giving 
the  same  name  to  two  different  things. 

Not  that  it  is  inadmissible  to  do  so  if  we  avoid  confusion  by  not  extending  the 
consequences  of  one  to  the  other. 

But  if  we  fall  into  this  vice,  we  can  apply  to  it  a  most  sure  and  infallible  remedy, 
which  is  to  substitute  in  the  mind  the  definition  in  place  of  the  thing  defined  and 
always  to  have  such  an  awareness  of  the  definition  that  every  time  we  speak,  for 
example,  of  an  even  number,  we  mean  precisely  a  number  that  can  be  divided 
into  two  equal  parts,  and  that  we  understand  these  two  things  as  being  so  in¬ 
separably  joined  in  thought  that  as  soon  as  one  of  them  occurs  in  discourse  the 
mind  at  once  attaches  the  other  to  it.  For  geometers  and  all  those  who  proceed 
scientifically  impose  names  on  things  only  for  concision  of  discourse  and  not  to 
impoverish  or  alter  the  idea  of  the  subjects  of  discourse.  And  they  expect  the 
mind  always  to  supplement  with  the  whole  definition  the  short  terms,  which  they 
use  only  to  avoid  the  confusion  caused  by  a  multitude  of  words. 

Nothing  acts  more  quickly  and  more  effectively  against  the  surprise  attacks 
of  captious  sophists  than  this  method,  which  we  must  always  have  ready  for  use, 
and  which  alone  suffices  to  banish  every  kind  of  difficulty  and  equivocation. 

With  these  things  well  understood,  I  return  to  my  account  of  the  true  order, 
which  consists,  as  I  was  saying,  in  defining  everything  and  in  proving  everything. 

Certainly  this  method  would  be  beautiful,  but  it  is  absolutely  impossible.  For 
it  is  evident  that  the  first  terms  we  wished  to  define  would  presuppose  others  for 
their  explication,  and  that  similarly  the  first  propositions  we  wished  to  prove 
would  suppose  others  that  preceded  them.  And  thus  it  is  clear  we  should  never 
arrive  at  the  first  propositions. 

Accordingly,  as  we  proceed  ever  further  with  our  investigations,  we  come  of 
necessity  to  primitive  words  which  can  no  longer  be  defined  and  to  principles  so 
clear  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  find  others  more  clear  for  their  demonstration. 
Whence  it  is  apparent  that  men  are  naturally  and  inevitably  powerless  to  deal  with 
any  science  whatsoever  in  an  absolutely  perfect  order. 

But  it  does  not  follow  that  we  should  abandon  every  kind  of  order.  For  there 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


432 

is  one,  the  order  of  geometry,  which  is  indeed  inferior  in  that  it  is  less  convincing 
but  not  in  that  it  is  less  certain.  It  does  not  define  everything  and  does  not  prove 
everything,  and  in  this  it  yields  to  the  perfect  order.  But  it  assumes  only  things 
clear  and  invariant  by  the  natural  light,  and  that  is  why  it  is  perfectly  true,  nature 
supporting  it  in  default  of  discourse.  This  order,  the  most  perfect  possessed  by 
man,  does  not  consist  either  in  defining  everything  and  proving  everything  or  in 
defining  nothing  and  proving  nothing;  but  it  consists  in  holding  to  the  mean  of 
not  defining  things  clear  and  understood  by  all  men  and  defining  all  the  rest,  of 
not  proving  all  the  things  known  by  men  and  proving  all  the  rest.  They  sin 
equally  against  this  order  who  undertake  to  define  everything  and  prove  every¬ 
thing  and  who  fail  to  define  and  prove  those  things  which  are  not  self-evident. 

This  is  perfectly  illustrated  by  geometry.  It  does  not  define  space,  time,  motion, 
number,  equality,  or  their  like,  which  are  very  numerous,  because  these  terms 
point  out  so  naturally  the  things  they  signify  to  those  who  understand  the  lan¬ 
guage  that  whatever  clarification  we  might  want  to  give  would  contribute  more 
obscurity  than  instruction.  For  nothing  is  more  ineffectual  than  the  discourse  of 
those  who  try  to  define  these  primitive  words.  What  need  is  there,  for  example, 
to  explain  what  we  mean  by  the  word  marit  Are  we  not  sufficiently  aware  of  what 
the  thing  is  we  wish  to  designate  by  this  term?  And  what  help  did  Plato  think  he 
was  giving  us  by  saying  that  man  was  a  two-legged  animal  without  feathers?  As 
if  the  idea  of  man  I  naturally  have  and  cannot  express  were  not  clearer  and  more 
certain  than  that  given  me  by  his  useless  and  even  ridiculous  explanation,  since  a 
man  by  losing  his  two  legs  does  not  lose  his  humanity  and  a  capon  by  losing  his 
feathers  does  not  take  on  humanity. 

There  are  even  those  who  go  to  the  absurdity  of  explaining  a  word  by  the 
word  itself.  I  know  of  some  who  have  defined  light  in  this  way:  'Tight  is  a  lumi¬ 
nary  motion  of  luminous  bodies,”  as  if  we  could  understand  the  words  luminary 
and  luminous  without  understanding  the  word  light  [lumiere\. 

We  cannot  undertake  to  define  being  without  falling  into  this  absurdity,  for 
we  cannot  define  any  word  without  beginning  with  these  words  it  is ,  either  ex¬ 
plicitly  or  implicitly.  Therefore  to  define  being  we  would  have  to  say  it  is ,  and 
thus  use  the  word  defined  in  the  definition. 

It  is  sufficiently  clear  from  this  that  there  are  words  incapable  of  definition. 
And  if  nature  had  not  made  up  for  this  defect  by  giving  a  like  idea  to  all  men, 
all  our  expressions  would  be  confused;  whereas  we  make  use  of  them  with  the 
same  assurance  and  the  same  certainty  we  should  have  if  they  had  been  explained 
in  a  perfectly  unambiguous  way,  because  nature  itself  has  given  us,  without 
words,  a  clearer  understanding  of  them  than  we  gain  through  art  with  all  our 
explanations. 

Not  that  all  men  have  the  same  idea  of  the  essence  of  those  things  I  say  it  is 
impossible  and  useless  to  define. 

For,  to  take  an  example,  time  is  of  this  kind.  Who  can  define  it?  And  why  try, 
since  all  men  know  what  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  time,  without  further  desig¬ 
nation?  There  are  nonetheless  many  different  opinions  as  to  the  essence  of  time. 
Some  say  that  it  is  the  motion  of  a  created  thing;  others,  the  measure  of  motion, 
etc.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  nature  of  these  things  that  I  say  is  known  by  all;  it  is 
simply  the  relation  between  the  name  and  the  thing,  so  that  at  the  expression 
time  everyone  considers  the  same  object  (which  is  sufficient  to  make  it  unnecessary 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  433 

to  define  this  term)  although  afterwards,  looking  into  the  nature  of  time,  we  may 
come  to  have  different  opinions  when  we  have  set  ourselves  to  thinking  about  it. 
For  definitions  are  made  only  to  point  out  the  things  named  and  not  to  reveal 
their  nature. 

Not  that  we  may  not  call  by  the  name  time  the  motion  of  a  created  thing,  for, 
as  I  was  just  saying,  in  nothing  is  there  more  freedom  than  in  definitions.  But  as 
a  result  of  this  definition  there  will  be  two  things  called  by  the  name  time:  one  is 
what  everybody  naturally  understands  by  this  word  and  what  all  who  speak  our 
language  name  with  this  term;  the  other  will  be  the  motion  of  a  created  thing, 
for  this  too  will  be  called  by  that  name  in  accordance  with  the  new  definition. 
We  shall  have,  therefore,  to  avoid  ambiguity  and  to  keep  the  consequences  sepa¬ 
rate.  For  it  will  not  follow  that  what  we  naturally  understand  by  the  word  time 
is  in  fact  the  motion  of  a  created  thing.  We  were  free  to  give  these  two  things  the 
same  name,  but  we  shall  not  therefore  be  free  to  make  them  coincide  in  nature 
as  well  as  in  name. 

Thus  if  the  proposition  is  put  forward:  "Time  is  the  motion  of  a  created  thing," 
we  must  ask  what  is  meant  by  the  word  time ,  whether,  that  is,  it  keeps  its  usual 
and  commonly  accepted  meaning  or  whether  it  has  been  emptied  of  that  meaning 
to  receive  for  this  occasion,  as  its  meaning,  the  motion  of  a  created  thing.  If  it 
has  been  deprived  of  all  other  meaning,  the  statement  cannot  be  contradicted, 
and  it  will  be  an  arbitrary  definition  with  the  result,  as  I  have  said,  that  there  will 
be  two  things  having  the  same  name.  But  if  it  has  been  allowed  to  keep  its  usual 
meaning  and  nevertheless  it  is  maintained  that  what  this  word  means  is  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  a  created  thing,  the  statement  can  be  contradicted.  It  is  no  longer  an 
arbitrary  definition  ;  it  is  a  proposition  requiring  proof  unless  it  is  evident  of  itself, 
in  which  case  it  will  be  a  principle  and  an  axiom  but  never  a  definition,  because 
in  this  statement  it  is  not  understood  that  the  word  time  signifies  the  same  thing 
as  the  words,  the  motion  of  a  created  thing, ,  but  it  is  understood  that  what  is  meant 
by  the  term  time  is  this  supposed  motion. 

If  I  had  not  known  how  necessary  it  is  that  this  should  be  perfectly  understood 
and  how,  in  familiar  speech  as  in  that  of  science,  occasions  like  the  one  I  have 
given  as  an  example  constantly  arise,  I  should  not  have  lingered  over  it.  But  it 
seems  to  me,  from  my  experience  of  the  confusion  of  disputes,  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  go  too  thoroughly  into  that  exactness  of  mind  for  the  sake  of  which  I 
am  writing  this  whole  treatise  more  than  for  the  subject  I  deal  with  in  it. 

For  how  many  people  are  there  who  think  they  have  defined  time  when 
they  have  said  that  it  is  the  measure  of  motion,  leaving  it  meanwhile  its  usual 
meaning! 

And  yet  they  have  made  a  proposition  and  not  a  definition.  How  many  are 
there  likewise  who  think  they  have  defined  motion  when  they  have  said:  Motus 
nec  simpliciter  actus  nec  mera  potentia  est ,  sed  actus  entis  in  potential  And  nevertheless 
if  they  let  the  word  motion  keep  its  usual  meaning,  as  they  do,  it  is  not  a  definition 
but  a  proposition;  and  in  this  way  confounding  the  definitions  they  call  nominal, 
which  are  the  true  definitions,  arbitrary,  permissible,  and  geometrical,  with  those 
they  call  real,  which  are  really  propositions  by  no  means  arbitrary  but  subject  to 
contradiction,  they  take  the  liberty  of  making  the  latter  as  well  as  the  former;  and 
each  defining  the  same  things  in  his  own  fashion  by  a  freedom  which  is  as  for¬ 
bidden  in  this  kind  of  definition  as  it  is  permitted  in  the  first,  they  mix  up  every- 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


434 

thing,  and  losing  all  order  and  all  light,  they  lose  themselves  and  wander  in  a 
maze  of  difficulties  inexplicable. 

We  shall  never  get  into  such  trouble  if  we  follow  the  order  of  geometry.  That 
wise  science  is  very  far  from  defining  such  primitive  words  as  space,  time,  motion, 
equality,  majority,  decrease,  all,  and  those  others  which  the  generality  of  men 
understand  without  explanation.  But  with  the  exception  of  these  the  remaining 
terms  used  by  geometry  are  so  clarified  and  defined  that  we  have  no  need  of  a  dic¬ 
tionary  to  understand  any  one  of  them,  so  that  in  a  word  all  these  terms  are 
perfectly  intelligible  either  by  the  natural  light  or  by  the  definitions  given. 

This  is  the  way  geometry  avoids  all  those  vices  which  may  be  encountered  in 
connection  with  the  first  point,  which  is  to  define  only  those  things  that  need  to 
be  defined.  It  observes  the  same  conduct  with  respect  to  the  second  point,  which 
is  to  prove  those  propositions  that  are  not  evident.  For  when  geometry  has  reached 
the  first  truths  that  can  be  known,  it  stops  there  and  requires  that  they  be  granted 
since  it  has  nothing  clearer  to  prove  them  with;  so  that  all  the  propositions  of 
geometry  are  perfectly  demonstrated  either  by  the  natural  light  or  by  proofs. 

Whence  it  is  that  if  this  science  does  not  define  and  demonstrate  everything, 
it  is  only  because  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  do  so.  But  since  nature  supplies  every¬ 
thing  not  given  by  the  science,  the  order  of  that  science,  though  it  does  not  give 
a  superhuman  perfection,  has  all  the  perfection  men  are  capable  of.  It  seemed  to 
me  fitting  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  treatise  to  give  this.  .  .  . 

Perhaps  it  will  be  thought  strange  that  geometry  cannot  define  any  of  the 
things  that  are  its  principal  objects;  for  it  can  define  neither  motion  nor  numbers 
nor  space,  and  yet  these  are  the  three  things  it  particularly  considers  and  in 
accordance  with  whose  investigation  it  takes  the  three  different  names  of  me¬ 
chanics,  arithmetic,  geometry,  this  last  word  belonging  both  to  the  genus  and 
to  the  species. 

But  we  shall  feel  no  surprise  if  we  observe  that,  this  admirable  science  concern¬ 
ing  itself  only  with  the  simplest  things,  the  very  quality  which  makes  them 
worthy  of  being  its  objects  makes  them  incapable  of  definition;  so  that  the  lack 
of  definition  is  rather  a  perfection  than  a  defect  because  it  does  not  come  from 
their  obscurity  but  on  the  contrary  from  their  extreme  evidence,  which  is  such 
that  although  it  is  not  so  convincing  as  a  demonstration,  it  is  fully  as  certain. 
Geometry  supposes  then  that  we  know  what  thing  is  meant  by  the  words:  motion , 
number ,  space ;  and  without  stopping  uselessly  to  define  them  it  penetrates  their 
nature  and  lays  bare  their  marvelous  properties. 

These  three  things,  which  comprise  the  entire  universe,  in  accordance  with 
the  words:  Deus  fecit  omnia  in  pondere ,  in  numero  et  mensura,  are  reciprocally  and 
necessarily  related.  For  we  cannot  imagine  a  motion  without  something  which 
moves,  and  this  thing  being  one,  that  unity  is  the  origin  of  all  number.  Finally, 
since  motion  is  impossible  without  space,  we  see  that  these  three  things  are 
contained  in  the  first.  Even  time  is  included  there  too,  for  motion  and  time  are 
correlative  (fast  and  slow,  which  differentiate  motion,  having  a  necessary  reference 
to  time). 

Thus  there  are  properties  common  to  everything,  the  knowledge  of  which 
opens  the  mind  to  the  greatest  marvels  of  nature. 

The  most  important  is  constituted  by  the  two  infinites  which  are  found  every¬ 
where,  the  infinitely  great  and  the  infinitely  small. 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  435 

For  however  fast  a  motion  may  be,  we  can  conceive  a  faster,  and  make  that 
still  faster,  and  thus  forever  to  infinity  without  ever  reaching  a  motion  so  fast 
that  we  can  no  longer  add  to  it.  And  on  the  contrary,  however  slow  a  motion 
may  be,  we  can  make  it  slower,  and  that  still  slower,  and  so  to  infinity  without 
ever  reaching  such  a  degree  of  slowness  that  we  cannot  still  descend  to  an  infinity 
of  lower  degrees  without  falling  into  rest. 

Similarly,  however  great  a  number  may  be,  we  can  conceive  a  greater,  and 
again  a  greater  than  that,  and  so  to  infinity  without  ever  reaching  one  which  can 
no  longer  be  increased.  And  on  the  contrary,  however  small  a  number  may  be, 
such  as  1  / 100  or  1/ 10.000,  we  can  still  conceive  a  smaller,  and  keep  on  to  infinity 
without  reaching  zero  or  nothing. 

However  great  a  space  may  be,  we  can  conceive  a  greater,  and  again  a  still 
greater,  and  so  to  infinity  without  ever  reaching  one  which  can  no  longer  be 
increased.  And  on  the  contrary,  however  small  a  space  may  be,  we  can  still  con¬ 
sider  a  smaller,  and  keep  on  to  infinity  without  ever  reaching  an  indivisible  space 
which  no  longer  has  any  extension. 

It  is  the  same  with  time.  We  can  always  conceive  a  greater  without  a  last,  and 
a  lesser  without  reaching  an  instant,  a  pure  nothing  of  duration. 

Which  is  saying,  in  a  word,  that  whatever  motion,  whatever  number,  whatever 
space,  whatever  time  we  take,  there  is  always  a  greater  and  a  lesser,  so  that  they 
all  keep  between  nothing  and  infinity,  being  always  infinitely  distant  from  these 
extremes. 

None  of  these  truths  can  be  demonstrated,  and  yet  they  are  the  foundations 
and  the  principles  of  geometry.  But  since  the  cause  that  makes  them  incapable 
of  demonstration  is  not  their  obscurity  but  on  the  contrary  their  extreme  evidence, 
this  lack  of  proof  is  not  a  defect  but  rather  a  perfection. 

Whence  we  see  that  geometry  can  neither  define  its  objects  nor  prove  its  prin¬ 
ciples,  but  for  the  sole  and  favorable  reason  that  both  have  by  nature  an  extreme 
clarity,  which  is  more  powerfully  convincing  to  reason  than  any  discourse. 

For  what  is  more  evident  than  this  truth,  that  any  number  whatsoever  can  be 
increased?  Can  it  not  be  doubled?  That  the  speed  of  a  motion  can  be  doubled, 
and  that  a  space  likewise  can  be  doubled?  And  also  who  can  doubt  that  any 
number  whatsoever  can  be  divided  in  half,  and  its  half  again  divided  in  half?  For 
could  that  half  be  nothing?  And  how  could  these  two  halves,  which  would  be 
two  zeros,  make  a  number?  In  the  same  way  cannot  the  speed  of  a  motion,  how¬ 
ever  slow,  be  cut  down  by  half  so  that  it  will  traverse  the  same  space  in  double 
the  time;  and  how  could  it  be  that  these  two  half-speeds,  which  would  be  two 
rests,  should  together  make  the  first  speed?  Finally  cannot  a  space,  however  small, 
be  cut  in  two,  and  its  halves  again  cut?  And  how  could  it  be  that  these  halves 
should  be  indivisible  without  any  extension,  these  halves  which  joined  together 
made  the  first  extension? 

Man  has  no  natural  knowledge  prior  to  this  knowledge  and  surpassing  it  in 
clarity.  Nevertheless,  that  there  may  be  an  example  of  everything,  we  find  minds 
excellent  in  every  other  respect  shocked  by  these  infinites  and  in  no  way  able  to 
accept  them. 

I  have  never  known  a  man  who  thought  a  space  could  not  be  increased.  But 
I  have  come  across  some,  and  very  clever  too,  who  maintained  that  a  space  could 
be  divided  into  two  indivisible  parts,  whatever  absurdity  might  be  involved.  I 


436  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

tried  hard  to  find  the  cause  of  this  darkness  in  them,  and  I  discovered  there  was 
only  one  main  cause,  which  is  that  they  could  not  conceive  an  infinitely  divisible 
content,  whence  they  conclude  that  it  is  not  infinitely  divisible. 

It  is  a  disease  natural  to  man  to  believe  that  he  possesses  the  truth  directly,  and 
this  is  the  reason  he  is  always  inclined  to  deny  whatever  he  cannot  understand. 
Whereas  in  fact  he  naturally  knows  nothing  but  error  and  should  accept  as  true 
only  those  things  whose  contradictory  appears  to  him  to  be  false.  Consequently, 
whenever  a  proposition  is  inconceivable,  we  must  suspend  our  judgment  and  not 
deny  it  for  that  reason,  but  examine  its  contradictory;  and  if  we  find  this  mani¬ 
festly  false,  we  may  boldly  affirm  the  original  statement,  however  incompre¬ 
hensible  it  is.  Let  us  apply  this  rule  to  our  subject. 

There  is  no  geometer  who  does  not  believe  that  space  is  infinitely  divisible. 
One  can  no  more  be  a  geometer  without  this  principle  than  one  can  be  a  man 
without  a  soul.  And  yet  there  is  no  geometer  who  understands  an  infinite  division. 
We  are  sure  of  that  truth  only  for  the  reason,  certainly  sufficient,  that  we  perfectly 
grasp  the  falsity  of  the  statement  that  by  dividing  a  space  we  can  reach  an 
indivisible  part,  a  part,  that  is,  having  no  extension. 

For  what  is  more  absurd  than  to  maintain  that  by  continuing  to  divide  a  space 
we  finally  arrive  at  a  division  such  that  when  we  divide  it  in  half,  each  of  the 
halves  remains  indivisible  and  without  any  extension  at  all,  and  that  thus  these 
two  nothings  of  extension  should  together  make  an  extension?  For  I  should  like 
to  ask  those  who  have  this  idea  whether  they  distinctly  conceive  of  two  indivisibles 
as  touching.  If  they  touch  everywhere,  they  are  only  one  self-same  thing;  and 
therefore  the  two  together  are  indivisible.  If  they  do  not  touch  everywhere,  they 
touch  only  in  part;  therefore  they  have  parts;  therefore  they  are  not  indivisible. 
But  if  they  confess,  as  indeed  they  do  when  we  press  them,  that  their  proposition 
is  as  inconceivable  as  the  other,  let  them  recognize  that  it  is  not  by  our  capacity 
to  conceive  these  things  that  we  should  judge  of  their  truth,  since  though  the 
two  contradictories  are  both  inconceivable,  it  is  nevertheless  necessarily  certain 
that  one  of  the  two  is  true. 

But  to  these  imaginary  difficulties,  related  only  to  our  weakness,  let  them 
oppose  these  natural  insights  and  solid  truths:  if  it  were  true  that  space  is  com¬ 
posed  of  a  certain  finite  number  of  indivisibles,  it  would  follow  that  of  two  spaces, 
each  a  square  (that  is  to  say,  having  all  its  sides  equal  and  similar)  but  one  double 
the  other,  one  would  contain  a  number  of  these  indivisibles  double  the  number 
of  the  other.  Let  them  keep  this  consequence  well  in  mind,  and  then  let  them 
practise  making  squares  out  of  points  until  they  have  found  two  of  which  one 
has  double  the  points  of  the  other,  and  then  I  shall  make  all  the  geometers  in  the 
world  give  place  to  them.  But  if  this  is  naturally  impossible,  that  is,  if  there  is  an 
invincible  impossibility  in  making  squares  out  of  points  of  which  one  shall  have 
double  the  points  of  the  other,  as  I  would  demonstrate  in  this  very  place  if  it 
were  worth  the  time,  let  them  draw  the  conclusion. 

And  to  comfort  them  in  certain  difficulties  they  would  find,  as  in  conceiving 
a  space  having  an  infinity  of  divisibles  (in  view  of  its  being  traversed  in  so  short 
a  time,  during  which  time  that  infinity  of  divisibles  would  have  been  traversed), 
we  must  warn  them  that  they  must  not  compare  things  so  disproportionate  to 
each  other  as  are  the  infinity  of  divisibles  and  the  short  time  in  which  they  are 
traversed,  but  that  they  should  compare  the  whole  of  space  with  the  whole  of 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  437 

time,  and  the  infinite  divisibles  of  space  with  the  infinite  instants  of  time;  and 
thus  they  will  find  we  traverse  an  infinity  of  divisibles  in  an  infinity  of  instants, 
and  a  little  space  in  a  little  time,  and  in  this  there  is  no  longer  the  disproportion 
that  had  overwhelmed  them. 

Finally,  if  it  seems  strange  to  them  that  a  small  space  should  have  as  many  parts 
as  a  large  space,  let  them  also  understand  that  they  are  proportionately  smaller, 
and  let  them  look  at  the  heavens  through  a  little  pane  of  glass  that  they  may 
grow  familiar  with  this  knowledge  by  seeing  each  part  of  the  sky  in  each  part  of 
the  glass.  But  if  they  cannot  comprehend  that  parts  so  small  as  to  be  imperceptible 
to  us  can  be  divided  into  as  many  parts  as  can  the  heavens,  there  is  no  better 
remedy  than  to  have  them  look  at  these  delicate  points  through  glasses  which 
magnify  each  of  them  into  a  prodigious  mass.  Whence  they  will  easily  conceive 
that  with  the  aid  of  another  lens  still  more  skilfully  cut  these  points  could  be 
magnified  to  equal  that  firmament  whose  extent  they  wonder  at.  And  thus  these 
objects  now  appearing  to  them  as  very  easily  divisible,  let  them  remember  that 
nature  is  infinitely  more  powerful  that  art.  For  who  has  told  them  in  fine  that 
these  lenses  have  changed  the  natural  size  of  the  objects  or  whether  they  have 
not  on  the  contrary  reestablished  their  true  size,  changed  and  shrunk  by  the  shape 
of  our  eye  as  by  glasses  that  make  smaller? 

It  is  a  nuisance  to  stop  for  these  trifles,  but  there  are  times  for  being  childish. 

It  is  enough  to  say  to  heads  that  are  clear  in  this  matter  that  two  nothings  of 
extension  cannot  make  an  extension.  But  because  there  are  some  who  claim  to 
escape  from  the  light  of  this  truth  by  the  wonderful  reply  that  two  nothings  of 
extension  can  just  as  well  make  an  extension  as  two  units,  neither  of  which  is  a 
number,  can  when  brought  together  make  a  number,  we  must  reply  to  them  that 
they  could  in  the  same  way  object  that  20,000  men  make  an  army  although  no 
one  of  them  is  an  army,  that  1,000  houses  make  a  city  though  no  one  of  them  is 
a  city,  or  that  the  parts  make  the  whole  though  no  one  of  them  is  the  whole,  or, 
to  stay  within  the  comparison  of  numbers,  that  two  dyads  make  a  tetrad  and  ten 
decades  a  century  though  a  dyad  is  not  a  tetrad  and  a  decade  is  not  a  century. 
But  it  is  muddleheaded  to  confuse  by  comparisons  so  unequal  the  unchanging 
nature  of  things  with  their  names,  which  are  free,  arbitrary,  and  dependent  upon 
the  caprice  of  those  who  gave  them.  For  it  is  clear  that  to  facilitate  discourse  we 
have  given  the  name  of  army  to  20,000  men,  that  of  city  to  several  houses,  that  of 
decade  to  ten  units,  and  that  from  this  freedom  arise  the  names  unit,  dyad ,  tetrad , 
decade ,  century ,  different  by  the  dictates  of  fancy,  although  the  things  referred  to 
are  actually  of  the  same  kind  by  their  invariable  nature  and  are  all  related  to  each 
other  in  such  a  way  that  they  differ  only  by  more  and  less  in  spite  of  the  fact  that, 
because  of  their  names,  a  dyad  is  not  a  tetrad,  nor  a  house  a  city  any  more  than  a 
city  is  a  house.  But  again  although  a  house  is  not  a  city,  it  is  not  nevertheless 
a  nothing  of  a  city.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  not  being  a  thing  and 
being  a  nothing  of  it. 

For  in  order  that  we  may  understand  the  matter  thoroughly,  we  must  know 
that  the  only  reason  why  the  unit  is  not  in  the  class  of  numbers  is  that  Euclid  and 
the  first  writers  on  arithmetic,  having  several  properties  to  give  belonging  to  all 
numbers  but  the  unit,  in  order  to  avoid  repeating  that  such  and  such  a  condition 
obtains  for  all  numbers  but  the  unit,  excluded  the  unit  from  the  meaning  of  the 
word  number  in  accordance  with  the  freedom  we  have  already  mentioned  of  mak- 


438  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

ing  arbitrary  definitions.  Also  if  they  had  wanted  to,  they  would  have  excluded 
the  dyad  and  the  triad  as  well,  and  anything  else  they  pleased  (for  we  are  the 
masters,  provided  we  give  warning);  as  on  the  other  hand  the  unit  takes  its  place, 
if  we  choose,  among  the  numbers,  and  the  fractions  too.  And  in  fact  in  general 
propositions  we  are  obliged  to  consider  them  there  to  avoid  saying  each  time: 
"In  every  number  and  in  the  unit  and  in  fractions  such  and  such  a  property  is 
found."  It  is  in  this  indefinite  sense  I  have  taken  number  in  all  my  writings  about 
it.  But  the  same  Euclid  who  took  away  the  name  of  number  from  the  unit,  which 
was  his  privilege,  to  make  it  clear  nevertheless  that  the  unit  is  not  nothing  but 
is  on  the  contrary  of  the  same  kind,  thus  defines  homogeneous  magnitudes: 
"Magnitudes,"  he  says,  "are  said  to  be  of  the  same  kind  when  one  by  being  mul¬ 
tiplied  can  be  made  to  exceed  the  other."  Consequently,  since  the  unit  can  by 
being  multiplied  be  made  to  exceed  any  number  whatsoever,  it  is  of  the  same 
kind  as  numbers  precisely  by  its  essence  and  unchanging  nature,  according  to 
the  same  Euclid  who  would  not  have  it  called  a  number. 

An  indivisible  with  respect  to  an  extension  is  a  different  matter;  for  not  only 
does  it  differ  in  name,  which  is  arbitrary,  but  it  differs  in  kind  by  the  above  defi¬ 
nition,  since  an  indivisible  multiplied  as  many  times  as  we  please  is  so  far  from 
being  able  to  exceed  an  extension  that  it  can  never  make  anything  but  a  single, 
unique  indivisible,  which  is  natural  and  necessary,  as  has  already  been  shown. 
And  since  this  last  proof  is  based  on  the  definition  of  these  two  things,  indivisible 
and  extension,  we  shall  go  on  with  the  demonstration  and  complete  it. 

An  indivisible  is  that  which  is  without  parts,  and  extension  is  that  which  has 
distinct  separate  parts. 

On  the  basis  of  these  definitions  I  say  that  two  indivisibles  when  joined  do 
not  make  an  extension.  For  when  they  are  joined  each  touches  the  other  in  a 
part;  and  thus  the  parts  by  which  they  are  touching  are  not  separate,  since  other¬ 
wise  they  would  not  be  touching.  However  by  definition  they  have  no  other 
parts;  therefore  they  have  no  separate  parts;  therefore  they  are  not  an  extension, 
by  the  definition  which  calls  for  separation  of  parts.  The  same  thing  can  be  shown 
by  the  same  argument  for  all  the  other  indivisibles  joined  to  these.  And  therefore 
an  indivisible,  multiplied  as  many  times  as  we  please,  will  never  make  an  extension. 
It  is  not  then  of  the  same  kind  as  extension,  by  the  definition  of  the  same  kind. 

That  is  how  we  demonstrate  that  indivisibles  are  not  of  the  same  kind  as 
extension.  Hence  it  is  that  two  units  can  indeed  make  a  number  since  they  are  of 
the  same  kind,  and  that  two  indivisibles  do  not  make  an  extension  since  they  are 
not  of  the  same  kind.  And  therefore  we  see  how  little  reason  there  is  to  compare 
the  relation  between  the  unit  and  numbers  to  that  between  indivisibles  and 
extension. 

But  if  we  wish  to  find  in  numbers  a  comparison  that  will  justly  represent  what 
we  are  considering  in  extension,  we  must  take  the  relation  of  zero  to  the  numbers, 
for  zero  is  not  of  the  same  kind  as  numbers  because  it  cannot  by  being  multiplied 
be  made  to  exceed  them;  so  that  zero  is  a  true  indivisible  of  number  just  as  the 
indivisible  is  a  true  zero  of  extension.  And  we  shall  find  a  like  relation  between 
rest  and  motion,  and  between  an  instant  and  time;  for  they  are  all  heterogeneous 
with  respect  to  magnitude  because  though  infinitely  multiplied  they  can  never 
make  anything  but  indivisibles  of  extension,  and  for  the  same  reason.  And  thus 
we  shall  find  a  perfect  correspondence  between  these  things;  for  all  these  magni- 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  439 

tudes  are  infinitely  divisible  without  ever  being  reduced  to  their  indivisibles,  so 
that  all  of  them  keep  the  middle  ground  between  infinity  and  nothing. 

Thus  wonderfully  has  nature  related  these  things,  and  such  are  the  two  mar¬ 
velous  infinites  she  has  set  before  man,  not  for  his  mind’s  grasp  but  for  its  wonder; 
and  to  close  our  consideration  of  them  with  a  last  remark,  I  shall  add  that  these 
two  infinites,  although  infinitely  different,  are  nevertheless  related  to  each  other 
in  such  a  way  that  the  knowledge  of  one  necessarily  leads  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  other. 

For  in  numbers,  from  the  fact  that  they  can  always  be  increased,  it  follows 
absolutely  that  they  can  always  be  decreased,  and  that  clearly.  For  if  we  can 
multiply  a  number  up  to  100,000  times,  say,  we  can  also  take  a  hundred  thou¬ 
sandth  part  of  it  by  dividing  it  by  the  same  number  we  multiply  it  with,  and  thus 
every  term  of  increase  will  become  a  term  of  division  by  changing  the  integer  into 
a  fraction.  So  that  infinite  increase  includes  necessarily  infinite  division. 

In  space  too  we  find  the  same  relation  between  these  two  opposed  infinites. 
That  is  to  say,  from  the  fact  that  a  space  can  be  infinitely  extended,  it  follows 
that  it  can  be  infinitely  diminished,  as  is  apparent  from  the  following  example: 
if  we  watch  through  a  window  a  ship  moving  straight  away  from  us,  it  is  clear 
that  the  place  in  the  glass  where  we  see  any  fixed  point  we  please  on  the  ship  will 
keep  rising  by  a  continuous  motion  as  the  ship  moves  away.  Therefore  if  the 
ship  continues  its  course  to  infinity,  the  point  will  continue  to  rise,  and  yet  it 
will  never  reach  the  foot  of  the  horizontal  line  drawn  from  the  eye  to  the  glass, 
so  that  it  will  get  closer  and  closer  without  ever  reaching  it,  incessantly  dividing 
the  space  which  remains  under  the  horizontal  point  without  ever  reaching  it. 
Whence  we  see  that  from  the  infinite  extent  of  the  vessel’s  course  there  follows 
as  a  necessary  consequence  the  infinite  and  infinitely  small  division  of  the  little 
space  remaining  below  the  horizontal  point. 

Those  who  will  not  be  satisfied  with  these  reasons  and  continue  in  the  belief 
that  space  is  not  infinitely  divisible  can  never  aspire  to  geometrical  demonstra¬ 
tions,  and  although  they  may  be  enlightened  in  other  things,  they  will  have  very 
little  light  in  these,  for  it  is  easy  to  be  a  very  clever  man  though  a  bad  geometer. 
But  those  who  clearly  see  these  truths  can  admire  the  greatness  and  the  power  of 
nature  in  that  double  infinity  which  surrounds  us  on  every  side,  and  learn  by  the 
consideration  of  such  marvels  to  know  themselves,  seeing  themselves  placed 
between  an  infinity  and  a  nothing  of  extension,  between  an  infinity  and  a  nothing 
of  number,  between  an  infinity  and  a  nothing  of  motion,  between  an  infinity  and 
a  nothing  of  time.  Whereupon  we  can  learn  to  assess  ourselves  at  our  just  value 
and  to  make  reflections  worth  more  than  all  the  rest  of  geometry  itself. 

I  felt  obliged  to  consider  at  such  length  this  double  infinity  for  the  sake  of 
those  who,  though  they  do  not  understand  it  at  first,  can  be  persuaded  of  it.  And 
although  there  are  many  who  have  light  enough  to  do  without  this  treatise,  it 
may  nevertheless  be  that,  necessary  to  some,  it  will  not  be  entirely  useless  to 
the  rest. 


Section  II.  Concerning  the  art  of  persuasion 
The  art  of  persuasion  has  a  necessary  relation  to  the  way  in  which  men  agree 
to  what  we  put  before  them  and  to  the  circumstances  of  the  things  we  want  them 
to  believe. 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


440 

We  all  know  that  opinions  are  admitted  into  the  soul  through  two  entrances, 
which  are  its  two  chief  powers,  understanding  and  will.  The  more  natural  en¬ 
trance  is  the  understanding,  for  we  should  never  agree  to  anything  but  demon¬ 
strated  truths,  but  the  more  usual  entrance,  although  against  nature,  is  the  will; 
for  all  men  whatsoever  are  almost  always  led  into  belief  not  because  a  thing  is 
proved  but  because  it  is  pleasing.  This  way  is  low,  unworthy,  and  foreign  to  our 
nature.  Therefore  everybody  disavows  it.  Each  of  us  professes  to  give  his  belief 
and  even  his  love  only  where  he  knows  it  is  deserved. 

I  am  not  speaking  here  of  divine  truths,  which  I  am  far  from  bringing  under 
the  art  of  persuasion,  for  they  are  infinitely  above  nature.  God  alone  can  put 
them  into  the  soul,  and  in  whatever  way  He  pleases.  I  know  He  has  willed  they 
should  enter  into  the  mind  from  the  heart  and  not  into  the  heart  from  the  mind, 
that  He  might  make  humble  that  proud  power  of  reason,  which  claims  the  right 
to  be  judge  over  the  things  chosen  by  the  will,  and  that  He  might  cure  the 
infirmity  of  that  will,  which  is  all  corruption  from  its  unclean  loves.  Whence  it 
comes  about  that,  whereas  in  speaking  of  human  things  we  say  they  must  be 
known  before  they  can  be  loved  (which  has  passed  into  a  proverb),  the  saints  on 
the  contrary  say  in  speaking  of  divine  things  that  they  must  be  loved  in  order 
to  be  known,  and  that  we  enter  into  truth  only  through  charity,  out  of  which 
they  have  made  one  of  their  most  useful  maxims. 

Whereby  it  is  apparent  that  God  established  this  order  above  nature  and  en¬ 
tirely  opposed  to  the  order  which  should  be  natural  to  men  in  natural  things. 
Nevertheless  they  have  corrupted  this  order  by  dealing  with  profane  things  as 
they  ought  to  deal  with  sacred  things,  because  actually  we  believe  almost  nothing 
unless  it  pleases  us.  And  this  is  why  we  are  so  loath  to  accept  the  truths  of  the 
Christian  religion,  which  is  entirely  opposed  to  our  pleasures.  "Tell  us  agreeable 
things  and  we  will  listen  to  you,"  the  Jews  said  to  Moses;  as  if  agreeableness 
should  govern  belief!  And  it  is  to  punish  this  disorder  by  an  order  conformable 
to  it  that  God  sheds  His  light  into  our  minds  only  after  having  tamed  the  rebel¬ 
liousness  of  the  will  by  a  heavenly  sweetness  which  charms  and  seduces  it. 

I  speak  then  only  of  truths  within  our  reach,  and  it  is  of  them  that  I  say  the 
mind  and  the  heart  are  the  gates,  as  it  were,  through  which  they  are  received  into 
the  soul;  but  very  few  enter  through  the  mind,  whereas  they  are  brought  in  in 
crowds  through  the  rash  caprices  of  the  will  without  the  counsel  of  reason. 

These  powers  have  each  their  principles  and  prime  motives  of  action. 

Those  of  the  mind  are  natural  and  universally  known  truths,  such  as  the  whole 
is  greater  than  the  part,  besides  many  particular  axioms  accepted  by  some  and 
not  by  others,  which,  though  false,  when  once  admitted,  are  as  powerful  to  gain 
belief  as  are  the  truest. 

The  principles  of  the  will  are  certain  desires  natural  and  common  to  all  men, 
such  as  the  desire  to  be  happy,  which  it  is  impossible  for  anyone  not  to  have, 
besides  many  particular  objects  which  each  pursues  for  the  sake  of  happiness  and 
which,  although  actually  pernicious,  because  they  are  capable  of  pleasing  us,  are 
as  strong  to  move  the  will  as  if  they  constituted  its  true  happiness. 

So  much  for  the  powers  which  induce  our  consent. 

But  as  for  the  qualities  of  the  things  we  are  to  persuade  men  of,  they  differ 
widely. 

Some  are  drawn  as  necessary  conclusions  from  common  principles  and  ac- 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  441 

cepted  truths.  Of  these  it  is  possible  to  persuade  without  fail,  for  by  showing 
their  relation  to  principles  that  have  been  granted  it  is  inevitably  necessary  that 
we  convince,  and  it  is  impossible  for  them  not  to  be  received  into  the  soul  from 
the  moment  we  have  been  able  to  join  them  to  those  truths  already  admitted 
there. 

There  are  others  which  are  bound  up  with  the  objects  of  our  satisfaction;  and 
these  too  are  received  with  certainty.  For  as  soon  as  the  soul  is  made  to  see  that  a 
thing  can  bring  her  to  what  she  sovereignly  loves,  it  is  inevitable  that  she  embrace 
it  with  joy. 

But  those  which  have  a  double  bond,  with  admitted  truths  and  with  the  heart’s 
desires,  are  so  certain  of  their  effect  that  there  is  nothing  more  certain  in  nature. 
As  on  the  other  hand  whatever  is  related  neither  to  our  beliefs  nor  to  our  pleasures 
is  importunate  to  us,  false,  and  completely  foreign. 

In  all  these  cases  there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  there  are  others  where  the  things 
we  wish  to  persuade  of  are  firmly  based  on  known  truths,  but  at  the  same  time 
are  opposed  to  the  pleasures  which  touch  us  most  nearly.  And  these  are  in  great 
danger  of  illustrating  by  an  experience  which  is  all  too  common  what  I  said  at 
the  beginning:  that  this  imperious  soul,  whose  boast  was  to  act  only  by  reason, 
follows  by  a  rash  and  shameful  choice  the  desires  of  a  corrupt  will,  whatever 
resistance  the  too  enlightened  mind  may  offer. 

It  is  then  that  truth  and  pleasure  hang  doubtfully  in  the  balance,  and  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  one  and  the  feeling  of  the  other  engage  in  a  struggle  whose  outcome  is 
most  uncertain  since,  to  judge  of  it,  we  should  have  to  know  all  that  takes  place 
in  the  innermost  part  of  a  man,  which  the  man  himself  almost  never  knows. 

Hence  it  is  apparent  that,  no  matter  what  we  wish  to  persuade  of,  we  must 
consider  the  person  concerned,  whose  mind  and  heart  we  must  know,  what  prin¬ 
ciples  he  admits,  what  things  he  loves,  and  then  observe  in  the  thing  in  question 
what  relations  it  has  to  these  admitted  principles  or  to  these  objects  of  delight. 
So  that  the  art  of  persuasion  consists  as  much  in  knowing  how  to  please  as  in 
knowing  how  to  convince,  so  much  more  do  men  follow  caprice  than  reason. 

Now  of  these  two,  the  art  of  convincing  and  the  art  of  pleasing,  I  shall  confine 
myself  here  to  the  rules  of  the  first,  and  to  them  only  in  the  case  where  the  prin¬ 
ciples  have  been  granted  and  are  held  to  unwaveringly;  otherwise  I  do  not  know 
whether  there  would  be  an  art  for  adjusting  the  proofs  to  the  inconstancy  of  our 
caprices. 

But  the  art  of  pleasing  is  incomparably  more  difficult,  more  subtle,  more  use¬ 
ful,  and  more  wonderful,  and  therefore  if  I  do  not  deal  with  it,  it  is  because  I  am 
not  able.  Indeed  I  feel  myself  so  unequal  to  its  regulation  that  I  believe  it  to  be 
a  thing  impossible. 

Not  that  I  do  not  believe  there  are  as  certain  rules  for  pleasing  as  for  demon¬ 
strating,  and  that  whoever  should  be  able  perfectly  to  know  and  to  practise  them 
would  be  as  certain  to  succeed  in  making  himself  loved  by  kings  and  by  every 
kind  of  person  as  in  demonstrating  the  elements  of  geometry  to  those  who  have 
imagination  enough  to  grasp  the  hypotheses.  But  I  consider,  and  it  is  perhaps 
my  weakness  that  leads  me  to  think  so,  that  it  is  impossible  to  lay  hold  of  the 
rules.  At  least  I  am  sure  that  if  anyone  can,  I  know  the  persons,  and  that  no  one 
else  has  such  clear  and  abundant  light  in  this  matter. 

The  reason  for  this  extreme  difficulty  comes  from  the  fact  that  the  principles 


442  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

of  pleasure  are  not  firm  and  stable.  They  are  different  in  all  men,  and  they  vary 
to  such  an  extent  in  each  individual  that  there  is  no  man  who  differs  more  from 
another  man  than  from  himself  at  different  times.  A  man  has  other  pleasures  than 
a  woman  has;  a  rich  man  and  a  poor  man  have  different  pleasures;  a  prince,  a 
warrior,  a  merchant,  a  citizen,  a  peasant,  the  old,  the  young,  the  well,  the  sick, 
all  vary  in  this  respect;  the  slightest  accidents  change  them. 

However  there  is  an  art,  the  one  I  am  going  to  expound,  showing  how  truths 
are  related  to  their  principles,  both  of  truth  and  of  pleasure,  provided  the  prin¬ 
ciples  we  have  once  admitted  remain  constant  and  are  never  denied. 

But  since  there  are  few  principles  of  this  kind  and  since  outside  of  geometry, 
which  considers  only  very  simple  figures,  there  are  almost  no  truths  we  always 
agree  upon,  and  still  fewer  objects  of  pleasure  we  do  not  every  hour  change  our 
mind  about,  I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  possible  to  give  fixed  rules  for  making 
discourse  conform  to  the  inconstancy  of  our  caprices. 

The  art  which  I  call  the  art  of  persuading,  and  which  is  simply  the  management 
of  perfect  scientific  proofs,  consists  of  three  essential  parts:  defining  by  clear 
definitions  the  terms  to  be  used;  laying  down  evident  principles  or  axioms  to 
prove  the  matter  in  question;  always  mentally  substituting  in  the  demonstration, 
in  place  of  the  things  defined,  their  definitions. 

The  reason  for  this  method  is  apparent,  since  it  would  be  useless  to  put  forward 
something  capable  of  proof  and  to  undertake  its  demonstration  if  we  had  not 
first  clearly  defined  all  unintelligible  terms;  and  since  likewise  the  demonstration 
must  be  preceded  by  the  granting  of  the  evident  principles  required  for  the  dem¬ 
onstration,  for  if  we  do  not  make  sure  of  the  foundation,  we  can  have  no  assur¬ 
ance  of  the  building;  and  since  finally  while  demonstrating  we  must  mentally 
substitute  the  definition  in  place  of  the  things  defined,  for  otherwise  we  could 
be  led  astray  by  the  different  meanings  encountered  in  the  terms.  It  is  easy  to  see 
that  if  we  observe  this  method  we  are  sure  to  convince,  since,  with  all  the  terms 
so  defined  that  they  are  understood  and  entirely  free  from  ambiguity  and  with 
the  principles  granted,  if  in  the  demonstration  we  always  substitute  in  thought 
the  definitions  in  place  of  the  things  defined,  the  invincible  force  of  the  conclu¬ 
sions  cannot  fail  of  its  full  effect. 

Accordingly  no  demonstration  satisfying  these  conditions  can  ever  have  met 
with  a  shadow  of  doubt,  and  never  can  those  demonstrations  failing  to  satisfy 
them  have  any  force. 

It  is  very  important,  therefore,  to  understand  and  to  appropriate  them,  and 
that  is  why,  that  they  may  be  more  easily  grasped  and  more  accessible,  I  shall 
give  them  all  in  these  few  rules  which  include  everything  necessary  for  the  per¬ 
fection  of  definitions,  of  axioms,  and  of  demonstrations,  and  consequently  of  the 
entire  method  of  geometrical  proofs  of  the  art  of  persuasion. 

Rules  for  definitions,  i.  Do  not  attempt  to  define  any  of  those  things  so  well 
known  in  themselves  that  we  have  no  clearer  terms  to  explain  them  by. 

2.  Do  not  leave  undefined  any  terms  that  are  at  all  obscure  or  ambiguous. 

3.  Use  in  the  definition  of  terms  only  words  perfectly  well  known  or  already 
explained. 

Rules  for  axioms.  1.  Do  not  fail  to  ask  that  each  of  the  necessary  principles  be 
granted,  however  clear  and  evident  it  may  be. 

2.  Ask  only  that  perfectly  self-evident  things  be  granted  as  axioms. 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  443 

Rules  for  demonstrations .  1.  Do  not  attempt  to  demonstrate  any  of  those  things 
so  self-evident  that  we  have  nothing  clearer  to  prove  them  by, 

2.  Prove  all  propositions  that  are  at  all  obscure,  and  use  for  their  proof  only 
axioms  that  are  perfectly  evident  or  propositions  already  granted  or  demonstrated. 

3.  Always  substitute  mentally  the  definitions  in  place  of  the  things  defined,  so 
you  will  not  be  led  astray  by  the  equivocation  of  terms  whose  meanings  have 
been  restricted  by  the  definitions. 

These  are  the  eight  rules  which  contain  the  precepts  for  firm  and  abiding 
proofs,  three  of  which  are  not  absolutely  necessary  and  can  be  neglected  without 
error.  It  is  even  difficult  and  impossible,  as  it  were,  always  to  observe  them  ex¬ 
actly,  although  for  the  sake  of  perfection  we  should  do  so  to  the  best  of  our 
ability.  These  three  are  those  which  come  first  in  each  of  the  divisions: 

For  the  definitions.  Do  not  define  any  of  the  terms  that  are  perfectly  well  known. 

For  the  axioms.  Do  not  fail  to  ask  that  all  the  perfectly  evident  and  simple 
axioms  be  granted. 

For  the  demonstrations.  Do  not  demonstrate  anything  very  well  known  in  itself. 

For  it  is  undoubtedly  not  a  great  fault  to  define  and  very  clearly  to  explain 
things  which  are  most  clear  in  themselves,  nor  to  fail  to  ask  in  advance  that 
axioms  be  granted  which  no  one  can  refuse  to  grant  when  the  necessity  for  their 
use  arises,  nor  finally  to  prove  propositions  which  would  be  granted  without  proof. 

But  the  five  other  rules  are  absolutely  necessary,  and  we  cannot  dispense  with 
them  without  an  essential  defect  and  frequently  even  error.  That  is  why  I  shall 
repeat  them  here  in  detail. 

Necessary  rules  for  definitions.  Do  not  leave  undefined  any  terms  at  all  obscure  or 
ambiguous.  Use  in  definitions  only  terms  perfectly  well  known  or  already  ex¬ 
plained. 

Necessary  rule  for  axioms.  Ask  only  that  evident  things  be  granted  as  axioms. 

Necessary  rules  for  demonstrations.  Prove  all  propositions,  using  for  their  proof 
only  axioms  that  are  perfectly  self-evident  or  propositions  already  demonstrated 
or  granted.  Never  get  caught  in  the  ambiguity  of  terms  by  failing  to  substitute 
in  thought  the  definitions  which  restrict  or  explain  them. 

These  five  rules  comprise  everything  necessary  for  making  proofs  convincing, 
unchanging,  and  in  a  word,  geometrical;  and  the  eight  together  make  them  still 
more  perfect. 

I  pass  now  to  the  order  in  which  propositions  should  be  arranged  if  they  are 
to  have  the  right  geometrical  sequence. 

After  having  established  .  .  . 

These  are  the  rules  of  the  art  of  persuasion,  which  are  contained  in  these  two 
principles:  Define  all  the  names  imposed;  prove  everything,  substituting  in 
thought  the  definitions  in  place  of  the  things  defined. 

Whereupon  it  seems  to  me  in  order  to  anticipate  three  chief  objections  that 
can  be  made:  first,  that  this  method  is  not  at  all  new;  second,  that  it  is  very  easy 
to  learn  without  there  being  any  necessity  of  studying  the  elements  of  geometry, 
since  it  consists  of  these  two  rules  that  are  known  as  soon  as  read;  and  third, 
that  it  is  pretty  useless  since  its  use  is  almost  confined  to  the  objects  of  geometry 
alone. 

It  must  then  be  shown  that  there  is  nothing  so  little  known,  nothing  harder  to 
practise,  and  nothing  more  useful  and  more  universal. 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


444 

As  for  the  first  objection,  which  is  that  these  rules — everything  must  be  defined 
and  everything  proved — are  common  knowledge  in  the  world  and  that  the  logi¬ 
cians  themselves  have  included  them  among  the  precepts  of  their  art,  I  only  wish 
it  were  true  and  so  well  known  that  I  should  not  have  had  the  labor  of  seeking 
with  such  care  for  the  source  of  all  the  defects  of  reasoning,  which  are  really 
common.  But  this  is  so  little  the  case  that  with  the  single  exception  of  geometers, 
who  are  so  few  in  number  as  to  be  unique  among  a  whole  people  and  over  a  long 
period  of  time,  we  find  no  one  who  knows  these  rules.  It  will  be  easy  to  make 
this  clear  to  those  who  have  grasped  perfectly  the  little  I  have  said  about  them; 
but  if  they  have  not  perfectly  understood  that,  I  admit  they  will  have  nothing  to 
learn  in  this  matter.  But  if  these  rules  have  found  a  way  into  their  minds  and  have 
made  a  strong  enough  impression  to  take  root  and  flourish  there,  they  will  feel 
how  great  a  difference  there  is  between  what  is  said  in  this  place  and  such  approx¬ 
imations  to  it  as  some  logicians  may  have  made  by  chance  here  and  there  in 
their  works. 

Discerning  minds  know  how  much  difference  there  is  between  two  similar 
remarks,  depending  upon  the  place  and  accompanying  circumstances.  Will  anyone 
really  believe  that  two  persons  who  have  read  and  learned  by  heart  the  same  book 
know  it  equally  well,  if  one  understands  it  in  such  a  way  that  he  knows  all  its 
principles,  the  force  of  its  conclusions,  the  replies  to  the  objections  that  can  be 
made,  and  the  entire  organization  of  the  work,  whereas  in  the  other  the  book 
is  dead  words  and  seeds  which,  though  the  same  as  those  that  produced  such 
fertile  trees,  have  remained  dry  and  unfruitful  in  the  sterile  mind  which  received 
them  in  vain? 

Not  all  those  who  say  the  same  things  possess  them  in  the  same  way.  And  that 
is  why  the  incomparable  author  of  the  Art  of  Conversation 1  is  at  such  pains  to 
make  it  clear  that  we  must  not  judge  a  man’s  capacity  by  the  excellence  of  an 
observation  we  have  heard  him  make.  Instead  of  carrying  over  to  the  speaker  our 
admiration  of  the  speech,  we  should,  he  says,  penetrate  the  mind  it  comes  from, 
try  and  find  if  he  speaks  by  memory  or  by  a  happy  chance,  listen  coldly  and 
scornfully  to  see  if  he  will  resent  our  not  having  for  what  he  says  the  esteem  it 
deserves;  we  shall  find  more  often  than  not  that  he  will  disavow  it  on  the  spot 
and  that,  led  away  from  a  thought  whose  worth  he  does  not  know,  he  will  fall 
into  another  thoroughly  common  and  ridiculous.  We  must  then  fathom  how 
that  thought  is  lodged  in  its  author;  how,  whence,  and  to  what  extent  he  has 
made  it  his  own;  otherwise  the  judgment,  acting  in  haste,  will  be  judged  rash. 

I  should  like  to  ask  fair-minded  persons  if  this  principle:  "Matter  is  naturally 
and  invincibly  incapable  of  thought,"  and  this  other:  "I  think,  therefore  I  am," 
are  actually  the  same  in  the  mind  of  Descartes  and  in  the  mind  of  St.  Augustine, 
who  said  the  same  thing  1 200  years  before. 

Certainly  I  am  very  far  from  saying  that  Descartes  is  not  its  true  author,  even 
if  he  should  have  learned  it  only  from  the  reading  of  that  great  saint;  for  I  know 
how  much  difference  there  is  between  making  a  statement  off  hand,  without 
considering  it  more  fully  and  at  length,  and  seeing  in  that  statement  an  admirable 
succession  of  consequences,  which  proves  that  matter  is  distinct  from  mind,  and 
making  out  of  it  a  firm  and  consistently  held  principle  of  a  whole  physics,  as  it 
was  the  intention  of  Descartes  to  do.  For  without  examining  whether  he  was 

1Montaigne,  Essays ,  III,  8. 


ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION  445 

successful  in  carrying  out  his  intention,  I  assume  that  he  was,  and  it  is  on  this 
assumption  that  I  say  the  statement  in  his  writings  is  as  different  from  the  same 
statement  in  those  others  who  have  made  it  in  passing  as  a  man  full  of  life  and 
force  is  different  from  a  dead  man. 

One  man  will  say  a  thing  off  hand  without  understanding  its  excellence  where 
another  will  see  a  wonderful  succession  of  consequences  which  make  us  say 
boldly  that  it  is  no  longer  the  same  observation,  and  that  he  no  more  owes  it  to 
him  from  whom  he  learned  it  than  a  splendid  tree  belongs  to  some  one  who 
scattered  the  seed,  thoughtlessly  and  without  knowing  what  it  was,  in  a  rich  soil 
which  derived  this  profit  from  the  seed  by  its  own  fertility. 

The  same  thoughts  sometimes  shoot  up  in  another  quite  otherwise  than  in 
their  author,  unfertile  in  their  native  field,  abundant  when  transplanted.  But  it 
happens  much  more  often  that  a  good  mind  itself  makes  its  own  thoughts  bear 
all  the  fruit  they  are  capable  of,  and  that  afterwards  others,  having  heard  them 
praised,  borrow  them  and  deck  themselves  out  with  them,  but  without  knowing 
their  worth  ;  and  it  is  then  that  the  difference  of  the  same  observation  in  different 
mouths  is  most  apparent. 

It  is  in  this  fashion  that  logicians  may  have  borrowed  the  rules  of  geometry 
without  understanding  their  force,  and  thus  it  does  not  follow  from  their  happen¬ 
ing  to  include  them  among  the  rules  proper  to  logic  that  they  have  entered  into 
the  spirit  of  geometry;  and  unless  they  give  me  other  indications  of  it  than  the 
passing  mention  of  these  rules,  I  shall  be  very  far  from  putting  them  on  the  level 
of  that  science,  which  teaches  the  true  method  for  the  conduct  of  reason.  But  on 
the  contrary  I  shall  be  very  much  inclined  to  exclude  them,  and  almost  without 
hope  of  return.  For  to  have  mentioned  these  rules  in  passing  without  noticing 
that  everything  is  contained  in  them,  and  instead  of  following  their  light  to 
wander  aimlessly  in  useless  investigations,  running  after  what  they  offer  and  can¬ 
not  give,  is  certainly  to  show  oneself  as  hardly  clearsighted  and  as  having  failed 
to  follow  the  light  because  one  had  not  seen  it. 

The  method  of  avoiding  error  is  sought  by  everyone.  The  logicians  profess 
to  guide  us  to  it,  only  the  geometers  reach  it,  and  outside  of  their  science  and  its 
imitators  there  are  no  true  demonstrations.  The  entire  art  is  contained  in  these 
precepts  we  have  given,  they  alone  are  sufficient,  they  alone  prove;  all  other  rules 
are  useless  or  harmful.  This  is  what  I  have  learned  from  a  long  experience  of  all 
kinds  of  books  and  men. 

Wherefore  I  judge  those  who  say  that  geometers  give  them  nothing  new  by 
these  rules  because  they  actually  had  them  but  mixed  up  with  a  lot  of  others, 
useless  or  false,  from  which  they  could  not  separate  them  out,  I  judge  them,  I 
say,  as  I  do  those  who,  seeking  a  diamond  of  great  price  among  many  that  are 
false,  which  they  however  could  not  tell  from  it,  should  boast,  holding  them  all 
together,  that  they  possess  the  diamond  as  truly  as  he  who,  without  stopping  at 
the  worthless  mass,  puts  his  hand  on  the  choice  stone  they  are  seeking  and  for 
which  they  did  not  throw  away  all  the  rest. 

The  defect  of  false  reasoning  is  a  malady  which  is  cured  by  these  two  remedies. 
Another  has  been  compounded  of  many  useless  herbs  among  which  the  good  are 
mingled  but  remain  without  effect  because  of  the  bad  qualities  of  the  mixture. 

To  uncover  all  the  sophisms  and  equivocations  of  captious  arguments  they 
have  invented  barbarous  names  which  astonish  those  who  hear  them;  and  whereas 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


446 

all  the  windings  of  this  tangled  knot  can  be  straightened  out  only  by  pulling  one 
of  the  ends  designated  by  the  geometers,  they  have  noted  a  monstrous  number 
of  others  in  which  these  are  included,  without  their  knowing  which  are  the  right 
ones. 

And  thus  those  who  point  out  to  us  a  number  of  different  roads,  which  they 
say  will  take  us  where  we  want  to  go,  although  only  two  of  them  lead  there,  must 
be  able  to  give  them  a  particular  mark.  It  will  be  said  that  geometry,  which  in¬ 
dicates  the  roads  with  certainty,  only  gives  what  had  already  been  given  by  the 
others,  because  they  actually  gave  the  same  thing  and  more,  without  its  being 
seen  that  this  present  lost  its  value  by  its  very  abundance  and  that  by  adding 
they  took  away. 

Nothing  is  more  common  than  good  things;  the  only  question  is  how  to  dis¬ 
cern  them;  it  is  certain  that  all  of  them  are  natural  and  within  our  reach  and  even 
known  by  every  one.  But  we  do  not  know  how  to  distinguish  them.  This  is 
universal.  It  is  not  in  things  extraordinary  and  strange  that  excellence  of  any 
kind  is  found.  We  reach  up  for  it,  and  we  are  further  away;  more  often  than  not 
we  must  stoop.  The  best  books  are  those  whose  readers  think  they  could  have 
written  them.  Nature,  which  alone  is  good,  is  familiar  and  common  throughout. 

I  have  no  doubt  then  that  these  rules,  because  they  are  the  true  ones,  should 
be  simple,  naive,  natural,  as  they  are.  It  is  not  barbara  and  baralipton  which  form 
the  reason.  We  must  not  force  the  mind  to  fly  too  high.  Strained  and  painful 
behavior  fills  it  with  foolish  presumption  by  giving  it  an  elevation  foreign  to  it 
and  an  empty  and  ridiculous  inflation  instead  of  solid  and  vigorous  nourishment. 
And  one  of  the  main  reasons  which  keep  those  who  are  beginning  these  studies 
out  of  the  true  road  they  ought  to  follow  is  the  notion  they  get  at  the  start  that 
the  good  things  are  inaccessible  because  they  bear  the  names:  great,  high,  exalted, 
sublime.  That  spoils  everything.  I  should  like  to  call  them  humble,  common, 
familiar.  These  names  suit  them  better.  I  hate  those  inflated  words.  .  .  . 


TREATISE  ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 


Definitions 

I  call  arithmetical  triangle  a  figure  constructed  as  follows: 

From  any  point,  G,  I  draw  two  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other,  GV,  Gf,  in 
each  of  which  I  take  as  many  equal  and  contiguous  parts  as  I  please,  beginning 
with  G,  which  I  number  i,  2,  3,  4,  etc.,  and  these  numbers  are  the  exponents  of 
the  sections  of  the  lines. 

Next  I  connect  the  points  of  the  first  section  in  each  of  the  two  lines  by  another 
line,  which  is  the  base  of  the  resulting  triangle. 

In  the  same  way  I  connect  the  two  points  of  the  second  section  by  another  line, 
making  a  second  triangle  of  which  it  is  the  base. 


2 

I 

2 

J 

4 

£ 

7 

L  ft 

<5 

10 

I 

\ G  X 

X  \ 

E 

X 

V 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

2 

9/ 

X 

X 

y 

X 

X 

V 

s 

/ 

X 

X 

X 

/> 

J 

x 

X 

X 

w/ 

/,0 

y 

X 

/ 

X 

X 

4 

x 

¥ 

A 

f  X 

X 

V/ 

/X 

X 

X 

X 

r 

x 

M  / 

/ 

X 

X 

X 

Parallel  Rows 

6 

x 

X 

/ 

X 

J 

/ 

% 

© 

7 

x 

X 

X 

z84 

<3 

T 

8 

/ 

X 

X 

§ 

9 

/ 

/ 

10 

/ 

$ 

And  in  this  way  connecting  all  the  points  of  section  with  the  same  exponent, 
I  construct  as  many  triangles  and  bases  as  there  are  exponents. 

Through  each  of  the  points  of  section  and  parallel  to  the  sides  I  draw  lines 
whose  intersections  make  little  squares  which  I  call  cells. 

Cells  between  two  parallels  drawn  from  left  to  right  are  called  cells  of  the  same 
parallel  row ,  as,  for  example,  cells  G ,  <7,  7 r,  etc.,  or  0,  0,  6 ,  etc. 

Those  between  two  lines  drawn  from  top  to  bottom  are  called  cells  of  the  same 
perpendicular  row ,  as,  for  example,  cells  G,  0,  A ,  D,  etc.,  or  <7,  0,  B ,  etc. 

447 


448  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

Those  cut  diagonally  by  the  same  base  are  called  cells  of  the  same  base ,  as,  for 
example,  D,  B ,  6 ,  X,  ord,  p,  7t. 

Cells  of  the  same  base  equidistant  from  its  extremities  are  called  reciprocals ,  as, 
for  example,  E,  R  and  F,  0,  because  the  parallel  exponent  of  one  is  the  same  as 
the  perpendicular  exponent  of  the  other,  as  is  apparent  in  the  above  example, 
where  E  is  in  the  second  perpendicular  row  and  in  the  fourth  parallel  row  and  its 
reciprocal,  Ry  is  in  the  second  parallel  row  and  in  the  fourth  perpendicular  row, 
reciprocally.  It  is  very  easy  to  demonstrate  that  cells  with  exponents  reciprocally 
the  same  are  in  the  same  base  and  are  equidistant  from  its  extremities. 

It  is  also  very  easy  to  demonstrate  that  the  perpendicular  exponent  of  any  cell 
when  added  to  its  parallel  exponent  exceeds  by  unity  the  exponent  of  its  base. 

For  example,  cell  F  is  in  the  third  perpendicular  row  and  in  the  fourth  parallel 
row  and  in  the  sixth  base,  and  the  exponents  of  rows  3  and  4,  added  together, 
exceed  by  unity  the  exponent  of  base  6,  a  property  which  follows  from  the  fact 
that  the  two  sides  of  the  triangle  have  the  same  number  of  parts;  but  this  is 
understood  rather  than  demonstrated. 

Of  the  same  kind  is  the  observation  that  each  base  has  one  more  cell  than  the 
preceding  base,  and  that  each  has  as  many  cells  as  its  exponent  has  units;  thus 
the  second  base,  <j>ay  has  two  cells,  the  third,  Apir,  has  three,  etc. 

Now  the  numbers  assigned  to  each  cell  are  found  by  the  following  method: 

The  number  of  the  first  cell,  which  is  at  the  right  angle,  is  arbitrary;  but  that 
number  having  been  assigned,  all  the  rest  are  determined,  and  for  this  reason  it 
is  called  the  generator  of  the  triangle.  Each  of  the  others  is  specified  by  a  single 
rule  as  follows: 

The  number  of  each  cell  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  numbers  of  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  and  parallel  cells  immediately  preceding.  Thus  cell  F,  that  is,  the  number  of 
cell  F,  equals  the  sum  of  cell  C  and  cell  F,  and  similarly  with  the  rest. 

Whence  several  consequences  are  drawn.  The  most  important  follow,  wherein 
I  consider  triangles  generated  by  unity,  but  what  is  said  of  them  will  hold  for 
all  others. 


First  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  all  the  cells  of  the  first  parallel  row  and  of  the  first 
perpendicular  row  are  the  same  as  the  generating  cell. 

For  by  definition  each  cell  of  the  triangle  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  immediately 
preceding  perpendicular  and  parallel  cells.  But  the  cells  of  the  first  parallel  row 
have  no  preceding  perpendicular  cells,  and  those  of  the  first  perpendicular  row 
have  no  preceding  parallel  cells;  therefore  they  are  all  equal  to  each  other  and 
consequently  to  the  generating  number. 

Thus  0  =  G+ o,  that  is,  </>  =  G, 

A  =  (j>- l-o,  that  is,  </>, 

<7  =  7T  =  <7  +  0, 

And  similarly  of  the  rest. 


Second  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  each  cell  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the  cells  of  the 
preceding  parallel  row  from  its  own  perpendicular  row  to  the  first ,  inclusive. 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  449 

Let  any  cell,  co,  be  taken.  I  say  that  it  is  equal  to  which  are  the 

cells  of  the  next  higher  parallel  row  from  the  perpendicular  row  of  co  to  the  first 
perpendicular  row. 

This  is  evident  if  we  simply  consider  a  cell  as  the  sum  of  its  component  cells. 
For  co  equals  R  +  C 

6+B 

7+A 

</>> 

for  A  and  0  are  equal  to  each  other  by  the  preceding  consequence. 

Therefore  co  =  R+0+^+</>. 

Third  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  each  cell  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the  cells  of  the 
preceding  perpendicular  row  from  its  own  parallel  row  to  the  first ,  inclusive. 

Let  any  cell,  C,  be  taken.  I  say  that  it  is  equal  to  B+i/'+o-,  which  are  the  cells 
of  the  preceding  perpendicular  row  from  the  parallel  row  of  cell  C  to  the  first 
parallel  row. 

This  is  also  apparent,  as  above,  simply  by  the  interpretation  of  cells. 

For  C=B+6 


<r, 


for  7 r  =  a  by  the  first  consequence. 
Therefore  C  =  B+P+a. 


Fourth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  each  cell  exceeds  by  unity  the  sum  of  all  the  cells  within 
its  parallel  and  perpendicular  rows ,  exclusive. 

Let  any  cell,  £,  be  taken.  I  say  that  £  —  G  =  R+6+p+<l>-\-\  +  Tr+a  +  G,  which 
are  all  the  numbers  between  row  £c oCBA  and  row  £5)z,  exclusive. 

This  is  also  apparent  by  interpretation. 

For  £  =  X+R+co 

7 r +  0  +  C 

a+p+B 

Cr-\-(f)-{-  A 

G. 

Therefore  !;=\-{-R-\-'n‘~\~0  ~\~G~\~P~\~G-\-<f)-\-G. 

N.B.  I  have  written  in  the  enunciation  each  cell  exceeds  by  unity  because  the 
generator  is  unity.  If  it  were  some  other  number,  the  enunciation  should  read: 
each  cell  exceeds  by  the  generating  number. 


450 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


Fifth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  each  cell  is  equal  to  its  reciprocal. 

For  in  the  second  base,  0<r,  it  is  evident  that  the  two  reciprocal  cells,  </>,  <r,  are 
equal  to  each  other  and  to  G. 

In  the  third  base,  A,  p>  7r,  it  is  also  obvious  that  the  reciprocals,  7r,  A,  are  equal 
to  each  other  and  to  G. 

In  the  fourth  base  it  is  obvious  that  the  extremes,  D,  X,  are  again  equal  to  each 
other  and  to  G. 

And  those  between,  £,  0 ,  are  obviously  equal  since  B  =  A-\-p  and  0  =  7r+i p. 
But  Tr-j-p  =  A-\-p  by  what  has  just  been  shown.  Therefore,  etc. 

Similarly  it  can  be  shown  for  all  the  other  bases  that  reciprocals  are  equal, 
because  the  extremes  are  always  equal  to  G  and  the  rest  can  always  be  considered 
as  the  sum  of  cells  in  the  preceding  base  which  are  themselves  reciprocals. 

Sixth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  corresponding  cells  of  parallel  and 
perpendicular  rows  having  the  same  exponents  are  equal. 

For  they  are  made  up  of  reciprocal  cells. 

Thus  the  second  perpendicular  row,  crpBEMQ,  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  sec¬ 
ond  parallel  row,  ppdRSN. 

Seventh  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  each  base 
is  double  that  of  the  preceding  base. 

Let  any  base,  DB6\ ,  be  taken.  I  say  that  the  sum  of  its  cells  is  double  the  sum 
of  the  cells  of  the  preceding  base,  Apn. 


For  the  extremes .  D,  X, 

are  equal  to  the  extremes .  A ,  7t, 

and  each  of  the  rest .  B ,  0, 

is  equal  to  two  cells  of  the  other  base .  A-{-p,  ^+7r, 


Therefore  D+X+B+0  =  2^  +  2i/'+27r. 

The  same  thing  is  demonstrated  in  the  same  way  of  all  other  bases. 

Eighth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  each  base  is  a  number  of  the 
double  progression  beginning  with  unity  whose  exponent  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
base. 

For  the  first  base  is  unity. 

The  second  is  double  the  first;  therefore  it  is  2. 

The  third  is  double  the  second;  therefore  it  is  4. 

And  so  on  to  infinity. 

N.B.  If  the  generator  were  not  unity  but  some  other  number,  such  as  3,  the 
same  thing  would  be  true.  But  we  should  have  to  take  not  the  numbers  of  the 
double  progression  beginning  with  unity,  that  is,  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  etc.,  but  those  of 
the  double  progression  beginning  with  the  generator  3,  that  is,  3,  6,  12,  24,  48,  etc. 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 


45i 


Ninth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  each  base  exceeds  by  unity 
the  sum  of  all  the  preceding  bases 

For  this  is  a  property  of  the  double  progression. 

N.B.  If  the  generator  were  other  than  unity,  we  should  have  to  say:  each  base 
exceeds  by  the  generator . 


Tenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  sum  of  any  number  of  contiguous  cells  of  any  base , 
beginning  at  an  extremity ,  is  equal  to  the  same  number  of  cells  of  the  preceding 
base  together  with  the  same  number  except  one. 

Let  there  be  taken  the  sum  of  any  number  of  cells  of  base  D\,  for  example 
the  first  three,  D+£-{-0. 

I  say  it  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  first  three  of  the  preceding  base,  A+P+tt, 
together  with  the  first  two  of  the  same  base,  A+p. 

For  D, 

are  equal  to  A ,  A-\-p,  t/'+tt, 

Therefore  D+E+0  =  2A  +  2P +7r. 

Definition 

I  call  cells  of  the  bisector  those  diagonally  cut  by  the  bisector  of  the  right  angle, 
such  as  cells  G ,  p,  C,  p,  etc. 

Eleventh  Consequence 

Each  cell  of  the  bisector  is  double  the  preceding  cell 
in  its  parallel  or  perpendicular  row. 

Let  any  cell  of  the  bisector,  C,  be  taken.  I  say  it  is  double  0  and  also  double  B. 
For  C  =  0+E,  and  d  =  B  by  the  fifth  consequence. 

N.B.  All  the  preceding  consequences  are  statements  of  equalities  found  in  the 
arithmetical  triangle.  We  now  proceed  to  the  statements  of  proportions,  of  which 
the  following  proposition  is  the  foundation. 

Twelfth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle ,  of  two  contiguous  cells  in  the  same  base  the  upper  is 
to  the  lower  as  the  number  of  cells  from  the  upper  to  the  top  of  the  base  is  to  the 
number  of  cells  from  the  lower  to  the  bottom  of  the  base ,  inclusive. 

Let  any  two  contiguous  cells  of  the  same  base,  E,  C,  be  taken.  I  say  that 
E  :  C  : :  2  :  3 

the  lower  the  upper  because  there  are  two  because  there  are  three 

cells  from  E  to  the  bot-  cells  from  C  to  the  top, 
tom,  namely  E,  H,  namely  C,  R,  p. 

Although  this  proposition  has  an  infinity  of  cases,  I  shall  demonstrate  it  very 
briefly  by  supposing  two  lemmas: 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


452 

The  first,  which  is  self-evident,  that  this  proportion  is  found  in  the  second 
base,  for  it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  </> :  cr : :  1:1; 

The  second,  that  if  this  proportion  is  found  in  any  base,  it  will  necessarily  be 
found  in  the  following  base. 

Whence  it  is  apparent  that  it  is  necessarily  in  all  the  bases.  For  it  is  in  the 
second  base  by  the  first  lemma;  therefore  by  the  second  lemma  it  is  in  the  third 
base,  therefore  in  the  fourth,  and  to  infinity. 

It  is  only  necessary  therefore  to  demonstrate  the  second  lemma  as  follows: 
If  this  proportion  is  found  in  any  base,  as,  for  example,  in  the  fourth,  DX,  that  is, 
if  D:B: :  1:3,  and  B:6: :  2:2,  and  6:  X: :  3 : 1,  etc.,  I  say  the  same  proportion  will 
be  found  in  the  following  base,  H/x,  and  that,  for  example,  E:C :  *.2:3. 

For  D:B: :  1:3,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  D+F :  B : :  1  +  3 : 3 

E  :  B : :  4:3 

Similarly  B:  8: :  2:2,  by  hypothesis 

Therefore  B-\-6:B:  12+2:2 

C  :  B :  :  4 : 2 

But  B  :E::  3:4 

Therefore,  by  compounding  the  ratios,  C:E:  '.3:2.  q.e.d. 

The  proof  is  the  same  for  all  other  bases,  since  it  requires  only  that  the  pro¬ 
portion  be  found  in  the  preceding  base,  and  that  each  cell  be  equal  to  the  cell 
before  it  together  with  the  cell  above  it,  which  is  everywhere  the  case. 

Thirteenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle ,  of  two  contiguous  cells  in  the  same  perpendicular  row 

the  lower  is  to  the  upper  as  the  exponent  of  the  base  of  the  upper  is  to  the  exponent 

of  its  parallel  row. 

Let  any  two  cells  in  the  same  perpendicular  row,  F,  C,  be  taken.  I  say  that 


F 

the  lower 


C 

the  upper 


the  exponent  of  the 
base  of  C 


For  E:C:  :  2:3 
Therefore  E+C:C:  ^+3:3 

F  :  C: 


the  exponent  of  the 
parallel  row  of  C. 


5  :3 

Fourteenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle ,  of  two  contiguous  cells  in  the  same  parallel  row  the 
greater  is  to  the  lesser  as  the  exponent  of  the  base  of  the  lesser  is  to  the  exponent  of 
its  perpendicular  row. 

Let  two  cells  in  the  same  parallel  row,  F,  F,  be  taken.  I  say  that 
F  :  E  ::  5  :  2 

The  greater  the  lesser  the  exponent  of  the  the  exponent  of  the 

base  of  E  perpendicular  row  of  E 

For  E:C:  12:5 
Therefore  F+C:£:  12+3:2 


F  :E:  :  5  :2 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 


453 


Fifteenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  any  parallel  row  is  to  the  last 
cell  of  the  row  as  the  exponent  of  the  triangle  is  to  the  exponent  of  the  row. 

Let  any  triangle,  for  example  the  fourth,  GDX,  be  taken.  I  say  that  whatever 
row  we  take,  say  the  second  parallel,  the  sum  of  its  cells,  0+0+0:  0:  14:2.  For 
^>+0+0=C,  and  C:0:  :4*.2,  by  the  thirteenth  consequence. 

Sixteenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  any  parallel  row  is  to  the  next  lower  row  as  the  ex¬ 
ponent  of  the  lower  row  is  to  the  number  of  its  cells. 

Let  any  triangle,  for  example  the  fifth,  fiGH ,  be  taken.  I  say  that  whatever  row 
we  take,  say  the  third,  the  sum  of  its  cells  is  to  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  fourth 
row,  that  is  A-\-B-\-C  is  to  D+E  as  4,  the  exponent  of  the  fourth  row,  is  to  2, 
which  is  the  number  of  its  cells,  for  it  has  2. 

For  A+B+C=F ,  and  D+E=M. 

But  F:M:  14:2,  by  the  twelfth  consequence. 

N.B.  This  proposition  could  also  be  enunciated  as  follows: 

Each  parallel  row  is  to  the  next  lower  row  as  the  exponent  of  the  lower  row  is  to  the 
difference  between  the  exponent  of  the  triangle  and  the  exponent  of  the  upper  row. 

For  the  difference  between  the  exponent  of  a  triangle  and  the  exponent  of  one 
of  its  rows  is  always  equal  to  the  number  of  cells  in  the  next  lower  row. 

Seventeenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  any  cell  together  with  all  those  of  its  perpendicular  row 
is  to  the  same  cell  together  with  all  those  of  its  parallel  row  as  the  number  of 
perpendicular  cells  taken  is  to  the  number  of  parallel  cells  taken . 

Let  any  cell,  B ,  be  taken.  I  say  that  B+p+aiB+A:  13:2. 

I  say  3  because  three  cells  are  added  together  in  the  antecedent,  and  2  because 
there  are  two  in  the  consequent. 

For  E+0+<r=C,  by  the  third  consequence,  and  B+A  =  E ,  by  the  second 
consequence. 

But  C:E:  13:2,  by  the  twelfth  consequence. 

Eighteenth  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  two  parallel  rows  equidistant  from  the  extremities 
are  to  each  other  as  the  number  of  their  cells . 

Let  there  be  taken  any  triangle,  GV£,  and  two  of  its  rows  equidistant  from  the 
extremities,  such  as  the  sixth,  P+Q,  and  the  second,  0+0+0+P+S+N.  I  say 
that  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  one  is  to  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  other  as  the 
number  of  the  cells  of  one  is  to  the  number  of  cells  of  the  other. 

For  by  the  sixth  consequence  the  second  parallel  row,  000RSN ,  is  the  same 
as  the  second  perpendicular  row,  <7 pBEMQ,  of  which  we  have  just  demonstrated 
this  proportion. 


454  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

N.B.  This  proposition  can  be  enunciated  as  follows: 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  two  parallel  rows  whose  exponents  taken  together  exceed 
by  unity  the  exponent  of  the  triangle  are  to  each  other  as  their  exponents  reciprocally. 

For  this  is  the  same  thing  as  what  has  just  been  enunciated. 

Last  Consequence 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle ,  of  two  contiguous  cells  in  the  bisector  the  lower  is  to 
four  times  the  higher  as  the  exponent  of  the  base  of  the  higher  is  to  a  number  exceed¬ 
ing  it  by  unity. 

Let  two  cells  of  the  bisector,  p,  C ,  be  taken.  I  say  that  p:4C:  15  (the  exponent 
of  the  base  of  C)  :6. 

For  p—  2o)f  and  C=  20;  therefore  40=  2C. 

Therefore  46:  C: :  2 : 1. 

But  p:4C:  :  co : 4 or  in  the  ratio  compounded  of  co:C  and  C:  46 

by  the  preceding  consequences .  5:3  1:2 

or  3:6 


Therefore  p :4c:  15:6.  ’  q.e.d. 

N.B.  I  pass  over  many  other  proportions  that  this  triangle  could  be  made  to 
yield,  because  every  one  can  easily  discover  them  for  himself  and  because  those 
who  are  willing  to  devote  themselves  to  the  task  will  perhaps  find  more  admirable 
ones  than  any  I  could  give.  I  end  therefore  with  the  following  problem,  which 
completes  the  treatise: 

Problem 

Given  the  perpendicular  and  parallel  exponents  of  a  cell ,  to  find  its  number  without 
making  use  of  the  arithmetical  triangle. 

Let  it  be  proposed,  for  example,  to  find  the  number  of  cell  £  of  the  fifth  per¬ 
pendicular  and  of  the  third  parallel  row. 

All  the  numbers  which  precede  the  perpendicular  exponent,  5,  having  been 
taken,  namely  1,  2,  3,  4,  let  there  be  taken  the  same  number  of  natural  numbers, 
beginning  with  the  parallel  exponent,  3,  namely  3,  4,  5,  6. 

Let  the  first  numbers  be  multiplied  together  and  let  the  product  be  24.  Let 
the  second  numbers  be  multiplied  together  and  let  the  product  be  360,  which, 
divided  by  the  first  product,  24.  gives  as  quotient  15,  which  is  the  number  sought. 

For  £  is  to  the  first  cell  of  its  base,  V,  in  the  ratio  compounded  of  all  the  ratios 
of  the  cells  between,  that  is  to  say,  £:F 
in  the  ratio  compounded  of  £:p,  p:K ’,  K:Q ,  Q:V 
or  by  the  twelfth  consequence  3:4  4:3  5:2  6:1 

Therefore  £:K::3*4*5*6::4*3*2-i. 

But  V  is  unity;  therefore  £  is  the  quotient  of  the  division  of  the  product  of 
3-4-  5 -6  by  the  product  of  4- 3-2-1. 

N.B.  If  the  generator  were  not  unity,  we  should  have  had  to  multiply  the 
quotient  by  the  generator. 

VARIOUS  USES  OF  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 
WHOSE  GENERATOR  IS  UNITY 

Having  given  the  proportions  obtaining  between  the  cells  and  the  rows  of  arithmetical 
triangleSy  I  turn  in  the  following  treatises  to  various  uses  of  those  triangles  whose  generator 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  455 

is  unity.  But  I  leave  out  many  more  than  I  include;  it  is  extraordinary  how  fertile  in 
properties  this  triangle  is.  Everyone  can  try  his  hand.  I  only  call  your  attention  here  to  the 
fact  that  in  everything  that  follows  I  am  speaking  exclusively  of  arithmetical  triangles 
whose  generator  is  unity. 

USE  OF  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 
FOR  THE  ORDERS  OF  NUMBERS 

The  numbers  of  the  different  progressions  have  been  considered  in  arithmetic; 
those  of  the  different  powers  and  of  the  different  degrees  have  also  been  con¬ 
sidered;  but  those  of  which  I  am  speaking  have  not,  it  seems  to  me,  been  suffi¬ 
ciently  investigated,  although  they  are  extremely  useful.  They  do  not  even  have 
a  name;  therefore  I  have  been  obliged  to  give  them  one.  Because  progression , 
degree ,  and  power  are  already  in  use,  I  adopt  the  name  order. 

I  call  therefore  numbers  of  the  first  order  the  units, 

1,  1,  1,  1,  1,  etc. 

I  call  numbers  of  the  second  order  the  natural  numbers  which  are  formed  by 
addition  of  the  units, 

1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  etc. 

I  call  numbers  of  the  third  order ,  known  as  triangular  numbers,  those  which  are 
formed  by  addition  of  the  natural  numbers, 

1,  3,  6,  10,  etc. 

That  is,  the  second  triangular  number,  3,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  first  two 
natural  numbers,  which  are  1,  2;  the  third  triangular  number,  6,  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  first  three  natural  numbers,  1,  2,  3,  etc. 

I  call  numbers  of  the  fourth  order ,  known  as  pyramidal  numbers,  those  which  are 
formed  by  addition  of  the  triangular  numbers, 

1,  4,  10,  20,  etc. 

I  call  numbers  of  the  fifth  order  those  which  are  formed  by  addition  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  numbers.  Since  there  is  no  fixed  name  for  them,  they  might  be  called 
triangulo-triangular  numbers: 

1,  5>  *5>  35>  etc. 

I  call  numbers  of  the  sixth  order  those  which  are  formed  by  addition  of  the 
preceding  numbers, 

1,  6,  21,  56,  126,  252,  etc. 

And  so  on  to  infinity,  1,  7,  28,  84,  etc. 

1,  8,  36,  120,  etc. 

Now  if  we  make  a  table  of  all  the  orders  of  numbers  in  which  we  indicate  the 
exponents  of  the  orders  at  the  side  and  the  roots  at  the  top,  as  follows: 

Roots 


12345  etc. 


Units . Order  1  1  1 

Natural  numbers . Order  2  1  2 

Triangular  numbers . Order  3  13 

Pyramidal  numbers . Order  4  14 

etc. 

we  shall  find  this  table  equivalent  to  the  arithmetical  triangle. 

The  first  order  of  numbers  will  be  the  same  as  the  first  parallel  row  of  the 
triangle. 


1  1  1  etc. 

3  4  5  etc. 

6  10  15  etc. 
10  20  35  etc. 


456  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

The  second  order  of  numbers  will  be  the  same  as  the  second  parallel  row,  and 
so  on  to  infinity. 

For  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  the  first  row  is  wholly  made  up  of  units,  and 
the  first  order  of  numbers  is  also  made  up  of  units. 

Also  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  each  cell,  say  F,  is  equal  to  the  cell  above 
together  with  all  the  preceding  cells  in  that  parallel,  that  is,  C+B+A ,  as  was 
proved  in  the  second  consequence  of  the  treatise  on  this  triangle.  And  we  find 
the  same  thing  in  each  order  of  numbers.  For  example,  the  third  pyramidal  num¬ 
ber,  io,  is  equal  to  the  first  three  triangular  numbers,  i,  3,  6,  since  it  is  formed  by 
their  addition. 

Whence  it  is  plainly  seen  that  the  parallel  rows  of  the  triangle  are  nothing  but 
the  orders  of  numbers,  and  that  the  exponents  of  the  parallel  rows  are  the  same 
as  the  exponents  of  the  orders,  and  that  the  exponents  of  the  perpendicular  rows 
are  the  same  as  the  roots.  Thus,  for  example,  the  number  21,  which  in  the  arith¬ 
metical  triangle  is  in  the  third  parallel  row  and  in  the  sixth  perpendicular  row, 
when  considered  with  respect  to  the  orders  of  numbers,  is  of  the  third  order  and 
the  sixth  of  its  order,  or  of  the  sixth  root. 

Which  makes  it  clear  that  everything  we  have  said  of  the  rows  and  cells  of  the 
arithmetical  triangle  applies  exactly  to  the  orders  of  numbers,  and  that  the  same 
equalities  and  the  same  proportions  we  pointed  out  in  the  former  will  also  be 
found  in  the  latter.  We  need  only  change  the  enunciations  by  substituting  the 
terms  which  apply  to  the  orders  of  numbers,  such  as  root  and  order,  for  those 
which  applied  to  the  arithmetical  triangle,  such  as  parallel  and  perpendicular  rows. 
I  shall  devote  a  separate  little  treatise  to  the  subject;  a  few  examples  given  there 
will  make  it  easy  to  see  what  all  the  rest  would  be. 

USE  OF  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  FOR  COMBINATIONS 

The  word  combination  has  been  used  in  several  different  senses,  so  that  to  avoid 
ambiguity  I  am  obliged  to  say  how  I  understand  it. 

When  of  many  things  we  may  choose  a  certain  number,  all  the  ways  of  taking 
as  many  as  we  are  allowed  out  of  all  those  offered  to  our  choice  are  here  called 
the  different  combinations. 

For  example,  if  of  four  things  expressed  by  the  four  letters,  A ,  B ,  C,  D,  we  are 
permitted  to  take,  say  any  two,  all  the  different  ways  of  taking  two  out  of  the 
four  put  before  us  are  called  combinations. 

Thus  we  shall  find  by  experience  that  there  are  six  different  ways  of  choosing 
two  out  of  four;  for  we  can  take  A  and  B>  or  A  and  C,  or  A  and  D,  or  B  and  C, 
or  B  and  D,  or  C  and  D. 

I  do  not  count  A  and  A  as  one  of  the  ways  of  taking  two;  for  they  are  not 
different  things,  they  are  only  one  thing  repeated. 

Nor  do  I  count  A  and  B  and  B  and  A  as  two  different  ways;  for  in  both  ways 
we  take  only  the  same  two  things  but  in  a  different  order,  and  I  am  not  concerned 
with  the  order;  so  that  I  could  make  myself  understood  at  once  by  those  who 
are  used  to  considering  combinations,  simply  by  saying  that  I  speak  only  of 
combinations  made  without  changing  the  order. 

We  shall  also  find  by  experience  that  there  are  four  ways  of  taking  three  things 
out  of  four;  for  we  can  take  ABC  or  ABD  or  ACD  or  BCD. 

Finally  we  shall  find  that  we  can  take  four  out  of  four  in  one  way  only,  ABCD. 


457 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 

I  shall  speak  therefore  in  the  following  terms: 

1  in  4  can  be  combined  4  times. 

2  in  4  can  be  combined  6  times. 

3  in  4  can  be  combined  4  times. 

4  in  4  can  be  combined  1  time. 

Or: 

the  number  of  combinations  of  1  in  4  is  4. 
the  number  of  combinations  of  2  in  4  is  6. 
the  number  of  combinations  of  3  in  4  is  4. 
the  number  of  combinations  of  4  in  4  is  1. 

But  the  sum  of  all  the  combinations  in  general  that  can  be  made  in  4  is  15, 
because  the  number  of  combinations  of  1  in  4,  of  2  in  4,  of  3  in  4.  of  4  in  4, 
when  joined  together,  is  15. 

After  this  explanation  I  shall  give  the  following  consequences  in  the  form  of 
lemmas: 


Lemma  i. 

There  are  no  combinations  of  a  number  in  a  smaller  number;  for  example ,  4  cannot 
be  combined  in  2. 


Lemma  2. 

There  is  1  combination  of  1  in  1 . 

There  is  1  combination  of  2  in  2. 

There  is  1  combination  of  3  in  3. 

And  in  general  there  is  only  one  combination  of  a  number  in  an  equal  number. 

Lemma  3. 

There  is  1  combination  of  1  in  1. 

There  are  2  combinations  of  1  in  2. 

There  are  3  combinations  of  1  in  3. 

And  in  general  there  are  as  many  combinations  of  1  in  any  number  as  there  are  units 
in  the  number. 


Lemma  4. 

If  there  are  four  numbers ,  the  first  of  which  is  arbitrary ,  the  second  exceeding  the  first 
by  unity ,  the  third  any  number  not  smaller  than  the  second,  the  fourth  exceeding  the  third 
by  unity,  the  number  of  combinations  of  the  first  in  the  third  together  with  the  number  of 
combinations  of  the  second  in  the  third  is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  the  second 
in  the  fourth. 

Let  there  be  four  numbers  as  specified: 

The  first,  arbitrary,  for  example,  1 . 

The  second,  exceeding  the  first  by  unity,  2. 

The  third,  not  smaller  than  the  second,  for  example,  3. 

The  fourth,  exceeding  the  third  by  unity,  4. 

I  say  that  the  number  of  combinations  of  1  in  3  together  with  the  number  of 
combinations  of  2  in  3  is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  2  in  4. 

Let  there  be  taken  any  three  letters,  B,  C,  D. 

Let  there  be  taken  the  same  three  letters  together  with  another,  A,  B,  C,  D. 


458  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

Let  us  take,  in  accordance  with  the  proposition,  all  the  combinations  of  one 
letter  in  the  three,  B,  C,  D.  There  will  be  3,  namely,  B ,  C,  D. 

Let  us  take  in  the  same  three  letters  all  the  combinations  of  two.  There  will  be 
3,  namely,  BC,  BD ,  CD. 

Finally  let  us  take  in  the  four  letters,  A ,  B,  C,  D,  all  the  combinations  of  two. 
There  will  be  6,  namely,  AB,  AC ,  AD ,  BC ,  BD,  CD. 

We  must  demonstrate  that  the  number  of  combinations  of  1  in  3  and  of  2  in  3 
is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  2  in  4. 

The  demonstration  is  easy  for  the  combinations  of  2  in  4  are  made  up  of  the 
combinations  of  1  in  3  and  of  2  in  3. 

That  this  may  be  seen,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that  among  the  combinations 
of  2  in  4,  namely,  AB,  AC,  AD,  BC,  BD,  CD,  some  have  the  letter  A  and  some 
do  not. 

Those  not  having  it  are  BC,  BD,  CD,  which  consequently  are  made  up  of  two 
of  the  three  letters,  B,  C,  D;  therefore  they  are  the  combinations  of  2  in  the  three 
letters,  B,  C,  D.  Therefore  the  combinations  of  2  in  the  three  letters,  B,  C,  D, 
constitute  a  part  of  the  combinations  of  2  in  the  four  letters,  A,  B,  C,  D,  since 
they  are  made  up  of  those  not  having  A. 

Now  if  from  the  combinations  of  2  in  4  having  A,  namely,  AB,  AC,  AD,  we 
take  away  A,  there  will  remain  one  letter  only  of  the  three,  B,  C,  D,  namely, 
B,  C,  D,  which  are  precisely  the  combinations  of  one  letter  in  the  three  letters, 
B,  C,  D.  Therefore  if  to  each  of  the  combinations  of  one  letter  in  the  three  letters, 
B,  C,  D,  we  add  the  letter  A,  thus  having  AB,  AC,  AD,  we  shall  make  the  com¬ 
binations  of  2  in  4  having  A.  Therefore  the  combinations  of  1  in  3  constitute 
a  part  of  the  combinations  of  2  in  4. 

Whence  it  is  seen  that  the  combinations  of  2  in  4  are  made  up  of  the  com¬ 
binations  of  2  in  3  and  of  1  in  3,  and  therefore  that  the  number  of  the  combina¬ 
tions  of  2  in  4  is  equal  to  that  of  2  in  3  and  of  1  in  3. 

We  can  show  the  same  thing  in  all  the  other  examples,  as: 

The  number  of  combinations  of  29  in  40 
and  the  number  of  combinations  of  30  in  40 
are  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  30  in  41. 

Also  the  number  of  combinations  of  15  in  55 
and  the  number  of  combinations  of  16  in  55 
are  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  16  in  56 

and  so  on  to  infinity.  Q.E.D. 

Proposition  i 

In  every  arithmetical  triangle  the  sum  of  any  parallel  row  of  cells  is  equal  to  the 

number  of  combinations  of  the  exponent  of  the  row  in  the  exponent  of  the  triangle. 

Let  any  triangle,  for  example,  the  fourth,  GD\,  be  taken.  I  say  that  the  sum  of 
the  cells  of  any  row,  for  example,  the  second,  is  equal  to  the  number 

of  combinations  of  2,  the  exponent  of  the  second  row,  in  4,  the  exponent  of 
the  triangle. 

Similarly  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  fifth  row  of  the  eighth  triangle  is  equal 
to  the  number  of  combinations  of  5  in  8,  etc. 

Although  there  is  an  infinity  of  cases,  the  demonstration  can  be  briefly  given 
by  means  of  the  two  following  lemmas: 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  459 

The  first,  which  is  self-evident,  that  this  equality  is  found  in  the  first  triangle 
since  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  its  only  row,  namely  G  or  unity,  is  equal  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  combinations  of  1,  the  exponent  of  the  row,  in  1,  the  exponent  of  the 
triangle; 

The  second,  that  if  an  arithmetical  triangle  is  found  which  has  this  equality, 
namely,  that  whatever  row  we  take,  the  sum  of  the  cells  is  equal  to  the  number 
of  combinations  of  the  exponent  of  the  row  in  the  exponent  of  the  triangle,  I  say 
that  the  following  triangle  will  have  the  same  property. 

Whence  it  follows  that  all  the  arithmetical  triangles  have  this  equality.  For  the 
first  has  it  by  the  first  lemma,  and  it  is  even  still  evident  in  the  second;  therefore 
by  the  second  lemma  the  next  triangle  will  have  it  too,  and  consequently  the 
next,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 

All  that  is  necessary  then  is  to  demonstrate  the  second  lemma. 

Let  any  triangle  be  taken,  for  example,  the  third,  in  which  we  suppose  this 
equality,  namely,  that  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  first  row,  GH-0-+  7r,  is  equal  to 
the  number  of  combinations  of  1  in  3,  and  that  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  second 
row,  </>+ p,  is  equal  to  the  combinations  of  2  in  3,  and  that  the  sum  of  the  cells 
of  the  third  row,  A ,  is  equal  to  the  combinations  of  3  in  3;  I  say  that  the  fourth 
triangle  will  have  the  same  equality,  and  that,  for  example,  the  sum  of  the  cells 
of  the  second  row,  is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  2  in  4. 

For  0+^+0  =  +  0 

G- b  cr— |—  7r 

By  hypothesis  or  the  number  of  +  or  the  number  of 

combinations  of  combinations  of 

2  in  3.  1  in  3. 

'v _ v _ ✓ 

By  the  fourth  lemma  or  the  number  of  combinations  of  2  in  4. 

The  same  demonstration  applies  to  all  other  cases.  Q.E.D. 

Proposition  2 

The  number  of  any  cell  is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  a  number  less  by 

unity  than  its  parallel  exponent  in  a  number  less  by  unity  than  the  exponent  of 

its  base. 

Let  any  cell  be  taken,  say  F  in  the  fourth  parallel  row  and  in  the  sixth  base. 

I  say  that  it  is  equal  to  the  number  of  combinations  of  3  in  5,  less  by  unity  than 
4  and  6,  for  it  is  equal  to  the  cells  A-\-B~FC.  Therefore  by  the  preceding  propo¬ 
sition,  etc. 

Problem  i,  Proposition  3 

Two  numbers  having  been  set  out ,  to  find  by  the  arithmetical  triangle 
how  many  combinations  there  are  of  one  in  the  other. 

Let  the  numbers  set  out  be  4,  6.  We  must  find  how  many  combinations  there 
are  of  4  in  6. 

First  way.  Take  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  fourth  row  in  the  sixth  triangle; 
it  will  satisfy  the  problem. 

Second  way.  Take  the  fifth  cell  of  the  seventh  base,  because  the  numbers,  5,  7, 
exceed  by  unity  the  given  numbers,  4,  6;  the  number  of  this  cell  is  the  required 
number. 


460 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


Conclusion 

It  is  easy  to  see  from  the  relation  between  the  cells  and  the  rows  of  the  arith¬ 
metical  triangle  and  combinations  that  everything  proved  of  the  former  applies 
to  the  latter  analogously,  as  I  shall  show  in  few  words  in  a  little  treatise  I  have 
written  on  combinations. 

USE  OF  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 

To  determine  how  the  stakes  should  be  divided  between  two  players 
playing  for  a  set  of  games 

To  understand  the  rules  of  divisions  the  first  thing  to  consider  is  that  the  money 
staked  by  the  players  on  the  game  no  longer  belongs  to  them,  for  they  have 
given  up  its  ownership.  But  they  have  received  in  return  the  right  to  expect  what¬ 
ever  chance  may  give  them,  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  agreed  upon  at 
the  beginning. 

But  since  the  law  by  which  they  are  playing  is  voluntary,  they  can  break  it  at 
will;  and  therefore  at  any  stage  of  the  game  they  can  stop,  and  reversing  their 
procedure  at  the  beginning,  give  up  their  expectations  from  chance  and  each 
return  to  the  ownership  of  something.  In  this  event  the  determination  of  what 
is  to  belong  to  them  should  be  so  related  to  what  they  had  a  right  to  hope  from 
fortune  that  each  of  them  thinks  it  comes  to  exactly  the  same  thing  to  take  what 
is  assigned  to  him  or  to  continue  to  run  the  risks  of  the  game;  this  just  distribu¬ 
tion  is  called  the  division  (of  the  stakes). 

The  first  principle  leading  to  a  knowledge  of  how  divisions  should  be  made 
is  as  follows: 

If  the  position  of  a  player  is  such  that  whatever  happens  a  certain  sum  is  to 
belong  to  him  whether  he  wins  or  loses  and  chance  cannot  take  it  from  him, 
he  should  not  divide  it  but  take  the  whole  of  it  as  having  been  assured  to  him. 
Since  the  division  should  vary  as  the  chances  and  since  there  is  no  chance  of 
losing,  he  should  withdraw  the  entire  sum  without  division. 

The  second  principle  is  as  follows:  If  the  position  of  two  players  is  such  that 
if  one  wins,  a  certain  sum  will  belong  to  him,  and  if  he  loses,  it  will  belong  to 
the  other;  if  the  game  is  a  game  of  pure  chance  and  if  there  are  as  many  chances 
for  one  as  for  the  other  and  consequently  no  more  reason  why  one  should  win 
than  the  other,  if  they  want  to  separate  without  playing  and  take  what  legitimately 
belongs  to  them,  they  should  divide  equally  the  sum  ventured  and  each  take 
his  half. 

FIRST  COROLLARY 

If  two  players  are  playing  a  game  of  pure  chance  on  condition  that  if  the  first  player 
wins ,  a  certain  sum  will  be  hisy  and  if  he  loses ,  a  smaller  sum  will  be  hisy  and  if  they 
wish  to  separate  without  playing  and  each  take  what  belongs  to  him ,  the  division  is  that 
the  first  player  take  what  would  be  his  if  he  lost  together  with  half  the  difference  between 
that  and  what  would  be  his  if  he  won. 

For  example,  if  two  players  are  playing  on  condition  that  if  the  first  wins,  he 
will  get  8  pistoles,  and  if  he  loses,  2,  I  say  the  division  is  that  he  take  the  2  to¬ 
gether  with  half  the  difference  between  8  and  2,  that  is,  3,  for  the  difference  is  6, 
half  of  which  is  3. 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  461 

For  by  hypothesis  if  he  wins,  he  gets  8,  that  is,  6+2,  and  if  he  loses,  2;  therefore 
2  belong  to  him  in  either  case  and  consequently  by  the  first  principle  he  should 
not  divide  them  but  take  them  both.  But  as  for  the  other  6,  they  depend  on 
fortune,  so  that  if  it  favors  him,  they  are  his,  if  not,  they  belong  to  his  opponent; 
and  by  hypothesis  there  is  no  more  reason  for  their  going  to  one  than  to  the 
other.  Therefore  they  should  divide  them  evenly  and  each  take  his  half,  which 
is  what  I  had  proposed. 

Therefore,  to  say  the  same  thing  in  other  words,  he  gets  his  share  as  loser 
together  with  half  the  difference  between  his  shares  as  loser  and  as  winner. 

And  consequently  if,  when  he  loses,  A  is  his,  and  when  he  wins,  A-\-B ,  the 
division  is  that  he  get  A-\-ViB. 

SECOND  COROLLARY 

If  two  players  are  playing  in  the  same  condition  as  stated  above ,  I  say  that  the  division 
can  be  made  as  follows ,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing:  that  the  winner  s  and  the  loser  s 
shares  be  put  together  and  that  the  first  player  take  half  of  this  sum;  that  is ,  that  2  and  8 
be  added  together  to  make  10,  half  of  which ,  5,  will  belong  to  the  first  player. 

For  half  of  the  sum  of  two  numbers  is  always  the  same  as  the  smaller  together 
with  half  of  their  difference. 

Which  is  demonstrated  as  follows: 

Let  A  be  the  loser’s  share  and  A-\-B  the  winner’s  share.  I  say  the  division  is 
made  by  adding  these  two  numbers,  which  make  A-\-A-\-B,  and  giving  half  to 
the  first  player,  which  is  ViA + ViA + V2B.  For  this  sum  is  equal  to  A-\-ViB,  which 
has  been  proved  to  be  the  just  distribution. 

These  foundations  having  been  laid,  we  shall  proceed  with  ease  to  determine 
the  division  between  two  players  who  are  playing  for  a  set  of  any  number  of 
games,  whatever  their  actual  status;  that  is,  what  the  division  should  be  when 
they  are  playing  for  a  set  of  two  games  with  a  score  of  1  to  o,  or  for  a  set  of  three 
games  with  a  score  of  1  to  o  or  2  to  o  or  2  to  1;  and  in  general  whatever  the 
number  of  games  in  the  set  and  whatever  the  score  of  the  players. 

The  first  observation  to  make  is  that  two  players  who  are  playing  for  a  set  of 
two  games  with  a  score  of  1  to  o  are  in  the  same  position  as  two  others  who  are 
playing  for  a  set  of  three  games  with  a  score  of  2  to  1.  For  both  couples  have  this 
in  common  that  in  order  to  win,  one  player  needs  only  one  game  and  the  other, 
two.  And  therein  consist  the  odds,  which  should  determine  divisions;  so  that 
strictly  only  the  number  of  games  left  for  each  to  win  should  be  considered  and 
not  the  number  won,  since,  as  we  have  already  said,  two  players  playing  for  a  set 
of  two  games  with  a  score  of  1  to  o  have  the  same  status  as  two  players  playing 
for  a  set  of  twelve  games  with  a  score  of  n  to  10. 

The  question  must  accordingly  be  put  as  follows: 

Given  two  players  each  of  whom  lacks  a  certain  number  of  games  to  complete 
the  set,  to  make  the  division. 

I  shall  give  the  method  here,  which  I  shall  carry  out  only  in  two  or  three 
examples,  which  will  be  so  easy  to  go  on  with  that  there  will  be  no  need  of 
more. 

For  the  sake  of  completeness  I  shall  start  with  the  first  example,  which  it  is 
perhaps  inappropriate  to  mention  because  it  is  too  clear.  I  do  so,  however,  to 
begin  with  the  beginning. 


462 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


FIRST  CASE 

If  one  of  the  players  has  the  required  number  of  games  and  the  other  has  not ,  the  whole 
sum  belongs  to  the  first  player;  for  he  has  won  it ,  since  he  lacks  none  of  the  games  in  which 
he  was  to  win  it. 


SECOND  CASE 

If  one  of  the  players  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  one ,  they  should  divide  the  money 
equally  and  each  take  his  half  as  is  evident  by  the  second  principle.  It  is  the  same  if  one 
lacks  two  games  and  the  other  two ,  and  whatever  number  of  games  one  lacks  if  the  other 
lacks  as  many. 


THIRD  CASE 

If  one  player  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  two ,  the  division  is  determined  as  follows: 

Let  us  consider  what  would  belong  to  the  first  player  (who  lacks  only  one 
game)  if  he  should  win  the  next  game,  and  then  what  would  belong  to  him  if 
he  lost. 

It  is  obvious  that  if  the  player  who  lacks  only  one  game  wins  the  game  to  be 
played,  he  will  not  lack  any;  therefore  the  entire  sum  will  belong  to  him  by  the 
first  case.  But  on  the  contrary  if  the  player  who  lacks  two  games  wins  the  one 
to  be  played,  he  will  only  lack  one;  therefore  each  will  be  in  the  position  of 
lacking  one  game.  Therefore  they  should  divide  the  money  equally  by  the  second 
case. 

Therefore  if  the  first  wins  this  game,  the  entire  sum  will  belong  to  him,  and  if 
he  loses  it,  half  will  be  his;  therefore  if  they  wish  to  separate  without  playing 
the  game,  34  will  belong  to  him  by  the  second  corollary. 

And  if  we  give  an  example  of  the  sum  they  are  playing  for,  the  matter  will  be 
much  clearer. 

Let  us  say  8  pistoles;  therefore  the  first  player,  if  he  wins,  should  have  it  all, 
that  is,  8  pistoles,  and  if  he  loses,  half,  that  is  4;  therefore  in  case  of  division  half 
of  8+4,  that  is,  6  pistoles  out  of  8,  belong  to  him;  for  8+4=  12,  half  of  which  is  6. 

FOURTH  CASE 

If  one  of  the  players  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  three ,  the  division  will  be  found 
similarly  by  investigating  what  belongs  to  the  first  player  if  he  wins  and  if  he  loses. 

If  he  wins,  he  will  have  all  his  games  and  consequently  all  the  money,  which  is, 
for  example,  8. 

If  the  first  player  loses,  the  second  player  who  lacked  three  games  will  now 
lack  only  two.  Therefore  their  status  will  be  that  the  first  player  lacks  one  game 
and  the  second  player  two;  consequently  by  the  preceding  case  6  pistoles  will 
belong  to  the  first. 

Therefore  if  he  wins,  he  should  have  8,  and  if  he  loses,  6;  therefore  in  case  of 
division  half  of  these  two  sums  belongs  to  him,  that  is,  7;  for  6+8=14,  half 
of  which  is  7. 


FIFTH  CASE 

If  one  of  the  players  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  four ,  the  method  is  the  same. 

The  first,  if  he  wins,  wins  the  entire  sum,  which  is,  for  example,  8;  if  he  loses, 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  463 

he  lacks  one  game  to  the  other's  three;  therefore  7  pistoles  out  of  8  belong  to 
him.  Therefore  in  case  of  division  half  of  8  plus  half  of  7  belong  to  him,  that 
is,  7V2. 


SIXTH  CASE 

Similarly  if  one  player  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  five ,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 

SEVENTH  CASE 

The  same  method  applies  if  the  first  player  lacks  two  games  and  the  second  three ,  for 
we  must  always  examine  the  results  of  winning  and  of  losing. 

If  the  first  player  wins,  he  will  lack  one  game  to  the  second  player’s  three; 
therefore  by  the  fourth  case  7  out  of  8  will  belong  to  him. 

If  he  loses,  both  players  will  lack  two  games;  therefore  by  the  second  case 
half,  that  is,  4,  belongs  to  each.  Therefore  the  first  player  will  have  7  if  he  wins 
and  4  if  he  loses;  therefore  in  case  of  division  he  will  get  half  of  the  two  together, 
that  is,  5V2. 

In  this  way  we  shall  determine  the  divisions  for  every  kind  of  situation  by 
always  taking  what  belongs  to  the  first  player  if  he  wins  and  what  belongs  to  him 
if  he  loses  and  assigning  to  him  in  case  of  division  half  of  these  two  sums. 

This  is  one  method  of  determining  divisions. 

There  are  two  others,  one  by  the  arithmetical  triangle  and  the  other  by  com¬ 
binations. 

METHOD  FOR  DIVIDING  THE  STAKES  BETWEEN  TWO  PLAYERS 
WHO  ARE  PLAYING  FOR  A  SET  OF  GAMES  BY  MEANS  OF  THE 
ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 

Before  giving  the  method  we  must  demonstrate  the  following  lemma: 

Lemma 

If  two  players  are  playing  a  game  of  pure  chance  on  condition  that  if  the  first  player 
wins ,  there  will  belong  to  him  some  part  of  the  sum  they  are  playing  for ,  expressed  by  a 
fraction ,  and  that  if  he  loses ,  there  will  belong  to  him  a  smaller  part  of  the  same  sum , 
expressed  by  another  fraction ;  if  they  wish  to  separate  without  playing ,  the  division  will 
be  determined  as  follows:  If  the  two  fractions  are  not  of  the  same  denomination ,  let  them 
be  reduced  to  a  common  denominator.  Let  a  fraction  be  taken  whose  numerator  is  the  sum 
of  the  two  numerators  and  whose  denominator  is  double  the  common  denominator.  This 
fraction  expresses  the  part  of  the  sum  at  stake  belonging  to  the  first  player. 

For  example,  let  z/$  of  the  stakes  belong  to  him  if  he  wins  and  j/5  if  he  loses. 
I  say  that  what  belongs  to  him  in  case  of  division  will  be  found  by  taking  the 
sum  of  the  numerators,  which  is  4,  and  double  the  denominator,  which  is  10, 
and  out  of  them  making  the  fraction  a/[q. 

For  by  what  was  demonstrated  in  the  second  corollary  we  had  to  add  the  cases 
of  winning  and  losing  and  take  half  the  sum.  Now  the  sum  of  the  two  fractions 
z/i  and  j/5  is  ^5,  which  is  obtained  by  adding  the  numerators,  and  half  the  sum  is 
got  by  doubling  the  denominator,  and  thus  we  have  ylo.  q.e.d. 

Now  these  rules  are  general  and  without  exception,  whatever  comes  from  win¬ 
ning  or  losing;  for  if,  for  example,  Vi  belongs  to  a  player  if  he  wins  and  nothing 
if  he  loses,  by  reducing  the  two  fractions  to  the  same  denominator,  we  shall  have 


464  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

Vi  if  he  wins  and  %  if  he  loses;  therefore  in  case  of  division  the  required  fraction 
is  *4,  whose  numerator  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  other  two  and  whose  denom¬ 
inator  is  double  theirs. 

Similarly  if  the  entire  sum  belongs  to  a  player  if  he  wins  and  l/z  if  he  loses, 
reducing  the  fractions  to  a  common  denominator,  we  shall  have  if  he  wins 
and  ]A  if  he  loses;  therefore  in  case  of  division  ^6  belongs  to  him. 

Similarly  if  the  entire  sum  belongs  to  a  player  if  he  wins  and  nothing  if  he 
loses,  the  division  will  obviously  be  Vi\  for  winning  gives  ]/\  and  losing  y[\ 
therefore  the  division  is  Vi. 

And  similarly  for  all  possible  cases. 


Problem  i,  Proposition  i 

Given  two  players  each  of  whom  lacks  a  certain  number  of  games  to  complete  the 
set ,  to  find  by  the  arithmetical  triangle  what  the  division  should  be  (if  they  wish 
to  separate  without  playing)  in  the  light  of  the  games  each  lacks. 

Let  there  be  taken  in  the  triangle  the  base  which  has  as  many  cells  as  the  two 
players  together  lack  games;  then  let  there  be  taken  in  this  base  as  many  con¬ 
tiguous  cells  beginning  with  the  first  as  the  first  player  lacks  games,  and  let  the 
sum  of  their  numbers  be  taken.  Therefore  there  remain  as  many  cells  as  the  second 
player  lacks  games.  Again  let  the  sum  of  their  numbers  be  taken.  These  sums  are 
to  each  other  as  the  odds  of  the  players  reciprocally,  so  that  if  the  sum  at  stake  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  numbers  of  all  the  cells  of  the  base,  there  will  belong  to 
each  player  that  part  of  it  contained  in  as  many  cells  as  the  other  lacks  games. 
And  if  they  are  playing  for  other  stakes,  their  shares  will  be  proportional. 

For  example,  let  there  be  two  players,  one  of  whom  lacks  two  games  and  the 
other  four,  to  find  the  division. 

Let  there  be  added  together  the  two  numbers,  2  and  4,  and  let  their  sum  be  6. 
let  the  sixth  base  of  the  arithmetical  triangle  be  taken,  Pd ,  in  which  there  are 
consequently  six  cells,  P,  Af ,  F,  co,  S,  6.  Let  there  be  taken  as  many  cells  beginning 
with  the  first,  P,  as  the  first  player  lacks  games,  that  is  to  say,  the  first  two,  P,  Af . 
Therefore  there  remain  as  many  cells  as  the  second  player  lacks  games,  that  is, 
four,  F,  co,  S,  d. 

I  say  that  the  odds  of  the  first  player  are  to  the  odds  of  the  second  player  as 
F+co+S+S  is  to  P+Af,  which  is  to  say  that  if  the  sum  at  stake  is  equal  to 
P+  Af+F+co+S+  5,  the  sum  of  the  four  cells,  5+S+co+F,  belongs  to  the  player 
who  lacks  two  games,  the  sum  of  the  two  cells,  P+Af,  to  the  player  who  lacks 
four  games.  And  if  they  are  playing  for  other  stakes,  their  shares  will  be  pro¬ 
portional. 

And  to  speak  generally,  whatever  the  sum  at  stake,  the  share  of  the  first  player 

is  expressed  by  the  fraction  ^  of  which  the  numerator  is  the 

r  1  P+M+F+u+S+d 

sum  of  the  second  player’s  four  cells  and  the  denominator  the  sum  of  all  the  cells. 

P+Af 

And  the  share  of  the  second  player  is  expressed  by  the  fraction  p_|_  ^ 

of  which  the  numerator  is  the  sum  of  the  first  player's  two  cells  and  the  denom¬ 
inator  again  the  sum  of  all  the  cells. 

And  if  one  player  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  five,  the  share  of  the  first 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  465 


player  is  the  sum  of  the  first  five  cells,  |—  yVf  — jP— f—  co  — f- 5^,  and  the  share  of  the 

second  player  is  cell  8. 

And  if  one  player  lacks  six  games,  and  the  other  two,  the  division  will  be  found 
in  the  eighth  base,  in  which  the  first  six  cells  contain  the  share  of  the  player  who 
lacks  two  games  and  the  other  two  the  share  of  the  player  who  lacks  six,  and  so 
on  to  infinity. 

Although  this  proposition  has  an  infinity  of  cases,  I  shall  nevertheless  demon¬ 
strate  it  in  a  few  words  by  means  of  two  lemmas. 

The  first  lemma  is  that  the  second  base  contains  the  divisions  of  the  players 
who  lack  two  games  in  all. 

The  second  lemma  is  that  if  any  base  contains  the  divisions  of  those  lacking 
as  many  games  as  the  base  has  cells,  the  next  base  will  do  the  same,  that  is,  it  too 
will  contain  the  divisions  of  the  players  lacking  as  many  games  as  the  base 
has  cells. 

From  which  I  conclude,  in  a  word,  that  all  the  bases  of  the  arithmetical  triangle 
have  this  property;  for  the  second  base  has  it  by  the  first  lemma;  therefore  by  the 
second  lemma  the  third  base  has  it  too,  and  consequently  the  fourth,  and  so  on 
to  infinity.  Q.E.D. 

We  have  then  only  to  demonstrate  these  2  lemmas. 

The  first  is  self-evident;  for  if  each  player  lacks  one  game,  it  is  evident  that 
their  positions  are  to  each  other  as  </>  to  <7,  that  is,  as  1  to  1,  and  that  the  share  of 

each  is  expressed  by  the  fraction  which  is  V2. 

The  second  lemma  is  demonstrated  as  follows: 

If  any  base,  such  as  the  fourth,  DX,  contains  the  divisions  of  those  lacking  four 
games,  that  is  to  say  that  if  the  first  player  lacks  one  and  the  second  three,  the 


share  of  the  stakes  belonging  to  the  first  is  expressed  by  the  fraction  j  -, 

U-\-  d-\-  cH“X 

which  has  as  denominator  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  base  and  as  numerator  the 

first  three  cells;  and  that  if  both  players  lack  two  games,  the  fraction  belonging 

D-\-  j B  ° 

to  the  first  is  and  that  if  the  first  player  lacks  three  games  and  the 


second  one,  the  fraction  of  the  first  is 


D 

D+B+6+X 


etc. 


I  say  that  the  fifth  base  also  contains  the  divisions  of  those  lacking  five  games, 
and  that  if,  for  example,  the  first  player  lacks  two  games  and  the  second  player 
three,  the  share  of  the  stakes  belonging  to  the  first  is  expressed  by  the  fraction 
H+E+C 
H+E+C+R+p 


For  to  know  what  belongs  to  two  players  each  of  whom  is  lacking  in  games, 
we  must  take  the  fraction  which  would  belong  to  the  first  player  if  he  won  and 
that  which  would  belong  to  him  if  he  lost,  and  if  they  are  not  of  the  same  de¬ 
nomination,  reduce  them  to  a  common  denominator,  then  form  a  fraction  of 
which  the  numerator  is  the  sum  of  the  two  others  and  the  denominator  double 
the  other,  by  the  preliminary  lemma. 

Let  us  examine  then  the  fraction  which  would  belong  to  the  first  player  if  he 
won  and  if  he  lost. 

If  the  first  player,  who  lacks  two  games,  wins  the  one  to  be  played,  he  will 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


466 

lack  only  one  and  the  second  player  will  still  lack  three;  therefore  they  will  lack 
four  games  in  all;  therefore  by  hypothesis  their  division  is  found  in  the  fourth 

D~\~  B-\~  6 

base,  and  the  share  of  the  first  will  be  the  fraction  . 

U-\r  D-\r6+A 

If  on  the  contrary  the  first  player  loses,  he  will  still  lack  two  games  and  the 
second  player  will  also  lack  only  two;  therefore  by  hypothesis  the  fraction  of  the 

£)_|_  Q 

first  will  be  ,  D  ,  ,  .  Therefore  in  case  of  division  the  fraction  of  the  first 

U-\-  u-\-  t7~r  A 

,  .11L  D+B+6+D+B  u  .  H+E+C 

player  will  be  — — — r  that  is  ^  n  ,  ,  , — .  Q.E.D. 

r  J  2D+2B+20+2X  H+E+C+R+fx 

This  is  also  demonstrated  in  the  same  way  of  all  the  other  bases,  because  the 

foundation  of  this  proof  is  that  a  base  is  always  double  the  preceding  base  by 

the  seventh  consequence  and  that  by  the  tenth  consequence  any  number  of  cells 

of  the  same  base  is  equal  to  the  same  number  of  cells  of  the  preceding  base 

(which  is  always  the  numerator  of  the  player’s  fraction  if  he  wins)  together  with 

the  same  cells  lacking  one  (which  is  the  numerator  of  the  player’s  fraction  if  he 

loses);  which  being  everywhere  true  in  general,  the  demonstration  is  always 

possible  and  universal. 


Problem  2,  Proposition  2 

Given  two  players  each  of  whom  stakes  the  same  sum  on  a  given  number  of  games, 
to  find  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  the  part  of  the  loser  s  money  that  the  last  game 
is  worth  to  the  winner. 


For  example,  let  two  players  each  stake  three  pistoles  on  four  games;  we 
want  to  find  what  part  of  the  loser’s  3  pistoles  the  last  game  is  worth  to  the 
winner. 

Let  there  be  taken  the  fraction  of  which  the  numerator  is  unity  and  the  de¬ 
nominator  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  fourth  base,  since  the  set  has  four  games; 
I  say  that  this  fraction  is  the  value  of  the  last  game  in  terms  of  the  loser’s  money. 

For  if  when  two  players  are  playing  for  a  set  of  four  games,  one  has  three 
games  to  his  credit  and  thus  lacks  one  game  and  the  other  lacks  four,  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  the  share  of  the  first  player  for  winning  his  first  three  games 

is  expressed  by  the  fraction  -  ^ ,  which  has  as  denominator  the  sum 

of  the  cells  of  the  fifth  base  and  as  numerator  its  first  four  cells;  therefore  there 

remains  of  the  entire  sum  of  the  two  stakes  only  the  fraction  — — , 

1  H+E+C+R+fx 

which  would  belong  to  the  player  who  already  has  the  first  three  games  if  he 
won  the  last;  the  value  of  this  last  in  terms  of  the  whole  stakes  is 
ju  u  ^  unity 

H+E+C+R+ii  r  at  1S  2D+2B+20+2X' 

But  since  the  entire  amount  of  the  stakes  is  2D+2B+20+2A,  the  amount  of 
each  stake  is  D+B+0+X;  therefore  the  value  of  the  last  game  in  terms  of  the 

-,  double  the  preceding  fraction, 


loser’s  stake  only  is  the  fraction  , 

D-\-u-\-  0-j-X 

having  as  numerator  unity  and  as  denominator  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  fourth 
base.  Q.E.D. 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 


467 


Problem  3,  Proposition  3 

Given  two  players  each  of  whom  stakes  the  same  amount  on  a  given  number  of  games , 
to  find  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  the  part  of  the  losers  money  represented  by  the 
value  of  the  first  game. 

For  example,  let  two  players  each  stake  3  pistoles  on  four  games;  we  want  to 
find  what  part  of  the  loser’s  stake  the  first  game  is  worth  to  the  winner. 

Let  there  be  added  to  the  number  4  the  number  3,  less  than  it  by  unity,  and 
let  the  sum  be  7.  Let  there  be  taken  the  fraction  which  has  as  denominator  the 
cells  of  the  seventh  base  and  as  numerator  the  cell  of  the  base  cut  by  the  bisector, 


that  is,  the  fraction 


-.  I  say  that  this  fraction  satisfies  the 


V+Q+K+p+H+N+f 

problem. 

For  if  when  two  players  are  playing  for  a  set  of  four  games  the  first  player  has 
one  game  to  his  credit,  he  will  have  three  more  to  win  and  the  second  player  will 
have  four.  Therefore  the  first  player’s  share  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  stakes 


V+Q+K+p 


-,  which  has  as  denominator  all  the  cells 


is  ,1k  fraction  V+s+K+p+{+N+j, 

of  the  seventh  base  and  as  numerator  its  first  four  cells. 

Therefore  V-\-Q-\-K-\-p  belongs  to  him  out  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  two 
stakes,  expressed  by  F+Q+K+p+  £+N+f ;  but  since  this  latter  amount  is 
the  sum  of  the  two  stakes,  he  had  himself  staked  half  of  it,  namely  F+Q+JC+V^p 
(for  F+Q+K=f+N+£). 

Therefore  he  has  Vip ,  that  is,  o>,  more  than  he  had  at  the  beginning  of  the  game; 
therefore  he  has  won  a  portion  of  the  total  amount  of  the  two  stakes  expressed 

-.  Therefore  he  has  won  a  portion  of 


c 0 


by  the  fraction 

the  loser’s  stake  double  the  above,  namely,  a  portion  expressed  by  the  fraction 
_ P _ 

V+Q+K+p+fi+N+f 

Therefore  winning  the  first  game  has  given  the  player  that  fraction,  which  is 
accordingly  its  value. 


Corollary 

Therefore  the  part  of  the  loser  s  stake  constituting  the  value  of  the  first  game  out  of  two 
is  expressed  by  the  fraction  Vi. 

For  to  determine  this  value  in  accordance  with  the  rule  just  given  we  must  take 
the  fraction  which  has  as  denominator  the  cells  of  the  third  base  (because  the 
number  of  games  in  the  set  is  2  and  the  number  less  by  unity  is  1,  which  taken 
together  make  3),  and  as  numerator  the  cell  in  the  base  cut  by  the  bisector;  there¬ 
fore  we  shall  have  the  fraction  — ,  %  , — . 

A+P+t 

But  the  number  of  cell  p  is  2,  and  the  numbers  of  cells  Ay  p ,  ir  are  1,  2,  1; 

therefore  we  have  the  fraction  — — — ,  that  is,  V2. 

1  +  2+1 

Therefore  winning  the  first  game  has  given  the  player  that  fraction,  which  is 
accordingly  its  value.  q.e.d. 


468 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


Problem  4,  Proposition  4 

Given  two  players  each  of  whom  stakes  the  same  sum  on  a  given  number  of  games , 
to  find  by  the  arithmetical  triangle  the  value  of  the  second  game  in  terms  of  the 
loser  s  stake. 


Let  the  number  of  games  in  the  set  be  four;  we  must  find  the  value  of  the 
second  game  in  terms  of  the  loser’s  stake. 

Let  the  value  of  the  first  game  be  found  by  the  preceding  problem.  I  say  that 
the  value  of  the  second  game  is  the  same. 

For  when  two  players  are  playing  for  four  games  if  one  of  them  has  two  to  his 


credit,  the  fraction  belonging  to  him  is 


P+M+F+u 


7,  which  has  as  de- 


P+M+F+u+S+d' 
nominator  the  sum  of  the  cells  of  the  sixth  base  and  as  numerator  the  sum  of  the 

P+Af+F+co+S+5’ that  1S’  half  of  the 


first  four.  But  he  had  staked  the  fraction 


whole  amount.  Therefore  his  winnings  are  the  fraction  , - , 

6  P+M+F+cc+S+5 ’ 


which  is  the  same  as 


_ P _ . 

v+Q+K+p+a+N+r 


therefore  he  has  won  out  of  half 


the  whole  amount,  that  is,  the  loser’s  stake,  the  fraction  -Ty  ,  ^  ,  77-7 - : - , 

v+q+k+p+h+n+  r 

double  the  preceding  fraction. 

Therefore  winning  the  first  two  games  gave  him  this  fraction  of  the  loser’s 
money,  which  is  double  what  the  first  game  gave  him  by  the  preceding  problem. 
Therefore  the  second  game  gave  him  as  much  as  the  first. 


Conclusion 

We  easily  conclude  from  the  relation  of  the  arithmetical  triangle  to  the  divisions 
which  should  be  made  between  two  players  that  the  proportions  between  cells 
given  in  the  Treatise  on  the  Triangle  have  consequences  extending  to  the  value 
of  divisions,  very  easy  to  draw,  about  which  I  have  written  a  little  treatise 
dealing  with  divisions,  which  explains  why  and  how  further  extensions  can  be 
made. 


USE  OF  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 
TO  FIND  THE  POWERS  OF  BINOMIALS 

If  it  is  proposed  to  find  any  power,  such  as  the  fourth,  of  a  binomial  of  which 
the  first  term  is  A  and  the  second  unity,  that  is,  if  we  want  to  find  the  fourth 
power  of  A+i,  we  must  take  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  the  fifth  base,  that  is, 
the  base  whose  exponent  5  is  greater  by  unity  than  4,  the  exponent  of  the  pro¬ 
posed  power.  The  cells  of  the  fifth  base  are  1,  4,  6,  4,  1,  of  which  we  must  take 
the  first  number,  1,  as  the  coefficient  of  A  in  the  proposed  power,  that  is,  of  A4; 
next  we  must  take  the  second  number  of  the  base,  that  is,  4,  as  the  coefficient 
of  A  in  the  next  lower  power,  that  is,  of  A3,  and  take  the  following  number  of 
the  base,  namely  6,  as  the  coefficient  of  A  in  the  next  lower  power,  that  is,  of  A 2, 
and  take  the  following  number  of  the  base,  that  is  4,  as  the  coefficient  of  A  in  the 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  469 


next  lower  power,  that  is,  of  A ,  and  take  the  last  number  of  the  base,  1,  as  it  is. 
Thus  we  shall  have  iA4+4A3+6A2+4A+  1,  which  will  be  the  fourth  power  of  the 
binomial  A+ 1.  So  that  if  A  (which  represents  any  number)  is  unity  and  therefore 
the  binomial  A+ 1  is  the  dyad,  the  power  1  yl4+ 4^ 3+6/l2+ 4^+1  will  be 


1  •  i4+4-  i3+6*  i2+4*  i  +  i,  that  is, 

once  the  fourth  power  of  unity  (A),  that  is .  1 

four  times  the  cube  of  1,  that  is .  4 

six  times  the  square  of  1,  that  is .  6 

four  times  unity,  that  is .  4 

plus  unity . _i 

which  added  together  make . 16 

And  the  fourth  power  of  2  is  in  fact  16. 


If  A  is  another  number,  such  as  4,  and  consequently  the  binomial  A+i  is  5, 
then  its  fourth  power  will  still  be,  in  accordance  with  the  above  method, 

iA4+4A3+6A2+4A+i, 

which  now  signifies 

1  *44+4‘43+6-42+4-4+i, 


that  is, 

once  the  fourth  power  of  4,  namely . 256 

four  times  the  cube  of  4 . 256 

six  times  the  square  of  4 .  96 

four  times  the  root  4 .  16 

plus  unity .  1 


the  sum  of  which . 625 

is  the  fourth  power  of  5,  as  is  indeed  the  case. 

And  similarly  for  all  other  examples. 

If  we  want  to  find  the  same  power  of  the  binomial  ^1+2,  we  must  again  take 
iA4+4A3+6A2+4A+i, 

and  then  write  the  four  numbers,  2,  4,  8,  16,  which  are  the  first  four  powers  of  2, 
under  the  numbers  4,  6,  4,  1,  that  is,  under  each  of  the  numbers  of  the  base, 
beginning  with  the  second,  as  follows: 

iA4+4A3+6A2+4A+i 
2  4  8  16 

and  multiply  the  corresponding  numbers  by  each  other 

iA4+4A3+  6A2+  4  A+  1 
2  4  8  16 

as  follows  i/14+8^3+24^2+32^+  16 

Thus  we  shall  have  the  fourth  power  of  the  binomial  A+2;  so  that  if  A  is 
unity,  the  fourth  power  will  be 

once  the  fourth  power  of  unity  (A) .  1 

eight  times  the  cube  of  1 .  8 


24‘  l2 . 24 

321 . 32 

plus . 16 

of  which  the  sum . 81 


will  be  the  fourth  power  of  3,  as  in  fact  it  is. 


o  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

And  if  A  is  2,  then  A+  2  will  be  4,  and  its  fourth  power  will  be 


once  the  fourth  power  of  A ,  or  2,  namely  16 

8-23 . .  64 

24*  22 .  96 

32*2 .  64 

plus  the  fourth  power  of  2 .  16 

whose  sum . 256 

will  be  the  fourth  power  of  4. 

Similarly  we  shall  find  the  fourth  power  of  A~t~ 3, 
putting  down  in  the  same  way  A4+4A3+6A2+4A+i 
and  underneath,  the  numbers  3  9  27  81 


yd4+I2^3+54^2+I08yd  +  8l 

which  are  the  first  4  powers  of  3;  multiplying  the  corresponding  numbers,  we  shall 
find  the  fourth  power  of  A-\- 3. 

And  so  on  to  infinity.  If  instead  of  the  fourth  power  we  want  the  fifth  power, 
we  must  take  the  sixth  base  and  proceed  as  I  have  indicated  in  the  case  of  the 
fifth,  and  similarly  for  all  the  other  powers. 

We  shall  find  in  the  same  way  the  powers  of  the  differences  A—  1,  A—  2,  etc. 
The  method  is  exactly  the  same  except  for  the  signs;  the  signs  +  and  —  succeed 
each  other  in  alternation,  the  sign  +  always  coming  first. 

Thus  the  fourth  power  of  A  —  1  will  be  found  as  follows:  the  fourth  power  of 
A+i  is  by  the  preceding  rule,  A4+4A3+6A2+4A+ 1.  Therefore  changing  the 
signs  as  indicated,  we  shall  have  A4— 4A3-\-6A2—  4A+ 1.  Also  the  cube  of  A  — 2 
will  be  found  in  the  same  way.  For  the  cube  of  A-\- 2  by  the  preceding  rule  is 
A3+6A2+i2A+8.  Therefore  the  cube  of  A  —  2  will  be  found  by  changing  the 
signs:  A3— 6A2+\2A  —  8.  And  so  on  to  infinity. 

I  do  not  demonstrate  these  things,  because  others  have  already  dealt  with  them, 
as  for  example,  Herigogne;  besides  they  are  evident  in  themselves. 

TREATISE  ON  THE  ORDERS  OF  NUMBERS 

I  assume  that  the  reader  has  read  my  treatise  on  the  arithmetical  triangle  and 
its  use  for  the  orders  of  numbers;  if  not,  I  refer  to  it  those  who  wish  to  read  what 
follows,  which  is  simply  a  continuation  of  it. 

I  defined  what  I  mean  by  the  orders  of  numbers  there,  and  I  shall  not  repeat 
the  definition. 

I  also  showed  there  that  the  arithmetical  triangle  is  nothing  but  the  table  of 
the  orders  of  numbers;  as  a  result  of  which  it  is  evident  that  all  the  properties 
given  in  the  arithmetical  triangle  concerning  the  relations  between  cells  and  be¬ 
tween  rows  have  their  analogues  in  the  orders  of  numbers,  so  that  if  we  possess 
even  a  little  the  art  of  applying  the  properties  of  one  to  the  other,  there  is  no 
proposition  in  the  treatise  on  the  triangle  which  does  not  have  its  consequence 
for  the  different  orders.  And  they  can  be  found  with  such  ease  and  in  such  abun¬ 
dance  that  I  am  far  from  wishing  to  write  them  all  out  explicitly.  I  should  prefer 
leaving  everything  to  the  reader  since  it  is  all  so  easy.  But  to  avoid  both  these 
extremes  I  shall  just  give  a  few  examples  which  will  open  the  way  to  finding  all 
the  others. 

For  example,  from  what  was  said  in  one  of  the  consequences  of  the  Treatise  on 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  471 

the  Triangle ,  namely,  that  each  cell  is  equal  to  the  immediately  preceding  parallel 
and  perpendicular  cells,  I  derive  the  following  proposition  for  the  orders  of 
numbers: 

Proposition  i 

A  number  of  any  order  whatsoever  is  equal  to  the  number  preceding  it  in  its  own  order 
together  with  the  number  corresponding  to  it  in  the  preceding  order.  Consequently  the 
fourth ,  for  example ,  of  the  numbers  of  the  fourth  order  is  equal  to  the  third  number  of 
the  fourth  order  together  with  the  fourth  number  of  the  third  order.  Also  the  fifth  number 
of  the  fifth  order  is  equal  to  the  fourth  number  of  the  fifth  order  together  with  the  fifth 
number  of  the  fourth  order ,  etc. 

Another  example.  From  its  having  been  shown  in  the  triangle  that  each  cell  is 
equal  to  the  parallel  cell  preceding  it  together  with  all  the  perpendicular  cells 
preceding  this  parallel  cell,  for  example,  F=E+B+\p+a,  I  derive  the  following 
proposition: 

Proposition  2 

A  number  of  whatsoever  order  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  numbers  whose  root  is  less  than 
its  own  by  unity  of  its  own  and  all  preceding  orders ,  and  consequently  the  fourth  number 
of  the  fourth  order ,  for  example ,  is  equal  to  the  third  number  of  the  fourth  order  plus 
the  third  number  of  the  third  order  plus  the  third  natural  number  plus  the  third  number 
of  the  units ,  that  is ,  unity. 

Whence  we  can  now  draw  other  consequences,  such  as  the  following,  which 
I  give  to  open  the  way  to  other  similar  ones: 

Proposition  3 

Every  number ,  whatever  its  cell ,  is  made  up  of  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  orders 
from  its  own  to  the  first ,  inclusive ,  each  of  the  numbers  representing  one  of  the  orders. 
Thus  a  number  of  the  fifth  order  is  composed  of  another  number  of  the  fifth  order ,  a 
number  of  the  fourth  order ,  a  number  of  the  third  order ,  a  natural  number  and  unity. 

If  we  want  to  use  this  proposition  for  a  problem,  we  can  enunciate  it  as 
follows : 

Proposition  4,  Problem 

Given  a  number  of  any  order ,  to  find  a  number  in  each  order  from  the  first  to  its  owny 
inclusive ,  whose  sum  is  equal  to  the  given  number. 

The  solution  is  easy.  We  must  take  in  all  these  orders  the  numbers  whose  root 
is  less  by  unity  than  that  of  the  given  number. 

Another  example.  From  the  fact  that  reciprocal  cells  are  equal,  it  follows : 

Proposition  5 

That  two  numbers  of  different  orders  are  equal  if  the  root  of  one  is  the  same  number  as  the 
exponent  of  the  other.  Consequently  the  third  number  of  the  fourth  order  is  equal  to  the 
fourth  number  of  the  third  order.  The  fifth  number  of  the  eighth  order  is  the  same  as  the 
eighth  number  of  the  fifth  order. 

We  would  never  come  to  an  end.  For  example: 

Proposition  6 

All  the  fourth  numbers  of  all  the  orders  are  the  same  as  all  the  numbers  of  the  fourth 
order ,  etc. 


472  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

Because  the  parallel  and  perpendicular  rows  having  the  same  exponent  are 
composed  of  equivalent  cells. 

By  this  method  we  shall  find  a  wonderful  correspondence  in  everything  else, 
as,  for  example,  the  following: 

Proposition  7 

A  number  of  whatever  order  is  to  the  next  greater  in  the  same  order  as  the  root  of  the 
lesser  is  to  itself  together  with  the  exponent  of  the  order  diminished  by  unity. 

Which  follows  from  the  fourteenth  consequence  of  the  triangle,  where  it  is 
shown  that  each  cell  is  to  the  immediately  preceding  parallel  cell  as  the  exponent 
of  the  base  of  the  preceding  cell  is  to  the  exponent  of  its  perpendicular  row. 

In  order  that  no  part  of  the  method  by  which  these  correspondences  are  found 
remain  hidden,  I  shall  make  the  relationship  explicit.  It  is  a  little  more  difficult 
here  than  above,  because  we  see  no  relationship  between  the  base  of  the  triangles 
and  the  orders  of  numbers.  This  is  the  way  to  find  it:  For  the  exponent  of  the  base 
in  the  fourteenth  consequence  we  must  substitute  the  exponent  of  the  parallel  row 
together  with  the  exponent  of  the  perpendicular  row  diminished  by  unity.  Which  gives 
the  same  number  and  with  this  advantage  that  we  know  the  relation  there  is 
between  these  exponents  and  the  orders  of  numbers;  for  we  know  that  in  this 
new  language  we  must  say:  the  exponent  of  the  order  together  with  the  root  diminished 
by  unity.  I  say  all  this  that  the  method  of  making  and  facilitating  these  reductions 
may  be  available. 

Thus  we  shall  find  that: 


Proposition  8 

A  number  of  whatever  order  is  to  the  corresponding  number  of  the  following  order  as 
the  exponent  of  the  order  of  the  lesser  number  is  to  itself  together  with  the  common  root 
diminished  by  unity. 

This  is  the  thirteenth  consequence  of  the  triangle.  Thus  again  we  shall  find 
that: 


Proposition  9 

A  number  of  whatever  order  is  to  the  number  of  the  preceding  order  whose  root  is 
greater  than  its  own  by  unity  as  the  root  of  the  first  number  is  to  the  exponent  of  the  order 
of  the  second. 

This  is  only  the  twelfth  consequence  of  the  arithmetical  triangle. 

I  omit  many  other  propositions,  each  of  which  as  well  as  each  of  those  I  have 
just  given  can  still  be  greatly  increased  by  different  enunciations,  for  instead  of 
expressing  these  proportions  as  I  have  by  saying  that  a  number  is  to  another  as  a 
third  is  to  a  fourth ,  may  we  not  say  that  the  rectangle  of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  that 
of  the  means ,  and  thus  multiply  the  propositions,  and  not  without  utility,  for 
looked  at  from  another  side  they  open  up  other  prospects? 

For  example,  if  we  wish  to  express  this  last  proposition  in  another  way,  we  can 
enunciate  it  as  follows: 


Proposition  10 

A  number  of  whatever  order  when  multiplied  by  the  preceding  root  is  equal  to  the 
exponent  of  its  order  multiplied  by  the  preceding  number  of  the  following  order. 


ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE  473 

And  because  when  four  numbers  are  proportional,  the  rectangle  of  the  extremes 
or  of  the  means,  when  divided  by  one  of  the  other  two  gives  as  quotient  the 
remaining  number,  we  can  state  the  proposition  as  follows: 

Proposition  h 

A  number  of  whatever  order ,  when  multiplied  by  the  preceding  root  and  divided  by 
the  exponent  of  its  order ,  gives  as  quotient  the  preceding  number  of  the  following  order. 

The  ways  of  saying  the  same  thing  are  infinite.  I  cite  an  illustrious  example 
and  one  that  does  me  much  honor.  This  very  proposition  that  I  have  just  been 
turning  about  in  several  of  its  aspects  occurred  to  our  celebrated  councilor  of 
Toulouse,  M.  de  Fermat,  and  the  wonderful  thing  is  that  without  either  of  us 
having  given  the  other  any  slightest  hint  of  what  we  were  doing,  he  was  writing 
in  his  province  what  I  was  discovering  at  Paris,  and  at  the  very  hour,  as  our  letters 
written  and  received  at  the  same  time  bear  witness.  Happy  to  have  concurred  on 
this  occasion  as  on  others  in  a  really  extraordinary  way  with  so  great  and  admir¬ 
able  a  man,  who  in  all  the  investigations  of  the  highest  reaches  of  geometry  is  at 
the  peak  of  excellence,  as  his  works,  which  our  long  prayers  have  at  last  obtained 
from  him,  will  soon  make  known  to  all  the  geometers  of  Europe,  who  are  waiting 
for  them!  His  way  of  taking  the  proposition  is  as  follows: 

In  the  series  of  natural  numbers  beginning  with  unity  the  product  of  any  number  multi¬ 
plied  by  the  next  higher  is  double  the  same  number  of  the  third  order. 

The  product  of  any  number  multiplied  by  the  next  higher  number  of  the  third  order 
is  triple  the  same  number  of  the  fourth  order. 

The  product  of  any  number  multiplied  by  the  next  higher  number  of  the  fourth  order 
is  quadruple  the  same  number  of  the  fifth  order;  and  so  on  to  infinity  by  a  general  and 
uniform  method. 

See  how  enunciations  can  be  varied!  Since  what  I  show  for  this  proposition  is 
to  be  understood  of  the  rest,  I  shall  not  dwell  longer  on  this  convenient  method 
but  leave  it  to  each  to  exercise  his  genius  in  these  investigations  which  should 
claim  all  the  study  of  mathematicians.  For  if  we  cannot  turn  propositions  in  every 
direction  and  if  we  make  use  only  of  the  first  glimpse  we  had,  we  shall  never  get 
very  far.  It  is  these  different  roads  that  open  up  new  consequences  and  by  enun¬ 
ciations  suited  to  the  subject  bind  together  propositions  which  seemed  to  be 
unrelated  in  the  terms  in  which  they  were  originally  conceived.  I  shall  then  go  on 
with  this  subject  in  the  usual  geometrical  way,  and  what  I  say  will  amount  to  a 
new  treatise  on  the  orders  of  numbers.  I  shall  even  present  it  in  Latin  because 
I  happen  to  have  written  it  in  that  language  at  the  time  of  discovery. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  ON  THE 
THEORY  OF  PROBABILITIES 


LETTER  FROM  FERMAT  TO  PASCAL 

[1654] 

Sir, 

If  I  undertake  to  bring  up  a  given  face  with  a  single  die  in  eight  throws  and  if 
we  agree  after  the  money  has  been  staked  that  I  shall  not  take  my  first  throw, 
I  am  entitled  by  my  principle  to  withdraw  from  the  game  i  of  the  whole  sum 
as  compensation  for  having  given  up  the  said  first  throw. 

But  if  we  again  agree  after  that  that  I  shall  not  take  my  second  throw,  I  am 
entitled  to  withdraw  as  indemnity  i  of  what  is  left,  which  is  of  the  whole. 

And  if  after  that  we  agree  that  I  shall  not  take  my  third  throw,  my  indemnity 
is  i  of  what  is  left,  which  is  of  the  whole. 

And  if  after  that  we  again  agree  that  I  shall  not  take  my  fourth  throw,  I  should 
withdraw  -g-  of  what  is  left,  which  is  tWf  of  the  whole,  and  I  agree  with  you  that 
this  is  the  value  of  the  fourth  throw  on  the  assumption  that  I  have  already  been 
compensated  for  the  preceding  throws.  But  what  you  ask  me  to  consider  in  the 
last  example  of  your  letter  is  (I  use  your  own  words) :  if  I  undertake  to  bring  up 
a  six  in  eight  throws  and  have  taken  three  without  doing  it,  if  my  fellow  player 
asks  me  to  give  up  my  fourth  throw  but  wants  to  compensate  me  for  losing  my 
chance,  iWe  of  the  whole  stakes  will  belong  to  me. 

But  this,  according  to  my  principle,  is  not  so.  For  in  this  case  since  the  player 
got  nothing  from  his  first  three  throws  and  the  whole  stakes  are  still  in  the  game, 
if  he  agrees  not  to  take  his  fourth  throw,  he  should  have  as  indemnity  i  of  the 
whole. 

And  if  he  had  thrown  four  times  without  bringing  up  the  assigned  face  and  it 
should  be  agreed  he  would  not  take  his  fifth  throw,  he  should  still  have  as  in¬ 
demnity  i  of  the  whole.  For  as  long  as  the  stakes  remain  unchanged,  it  not  only 
follows  from  principle  but  it  is  also  common  sense  that  the  odds  are  the  same 
for  every  throw. 

I  beg  you  then  to  let  me  know  if  we  are  at  one  on  the  principle,  as  I  believe 
we  are,  and  if  we  differ  only  in  its  application. 

I  am,  etc. 

Fermat 


LETTER  FROM  PASCAL  TO  FERMAT 

July  29,  1654 
Sir, 

I  too  am  overcome  by  impatience  and,  although  I  am  still  confined  to  my  bed, 
I  can’t  resist  letting  you  know  that  I  received  yesterday  evening  from  M.  de 
Carcavi  your  letter  on  divisions  (of  stakes),  which  I  admire  more  than  I  can  tell 
you.  I  haven’t  time  to  write  at  length,  but  in  a  word  your  determination  of  the 

474 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  475 

divisions  both  for  the  dice  and  for  the  games  is  perfectly  correct;  which  gives  me 
great  satisfaction,  for  now  I  can  no  longer  doubt  the  truth  of  my  results  after 
finding  myself  in  such  wonderful  agreement  with  you. 

I  admire  your  method  for  the  games  much  more  than  for  the  dice.  I  had  known 
several  persons  to  discover  the  method  for  the  dice,  such  as  the  Chevalier  de 
Mere,  who  first  brought  me  these  questions,  and  also  M.  de  Roberval.  But  M.  de 
Mere  had  never  been  able  to  find  the  right  value  of  the  games  nor  a  way  of  getting 
there,  so  that  I  found  myself  alone  in  the  knowledge  of  this  proportion. 

Your  method  is  very  reliable  and  is  the  first  that  occurred  to  me  in  this  investi¬ 
gation,  but  because  of  the  labor  involved  in  using  combinations  I  have  found 
an  abridgment  of  it,  or  rather  a  different  method  much  shorter  and  simpler,  which 
I  should  like  to  be  able  to  tell  you  about  here  in  a  few  words.  For  I  should  like 
henceforth  to  open  my  heart  to  you  if  possible,  so  great  is  my  pleasure  in  our 
agreement.  I  see  indeed  that  truth  is  the  same  at  Toulouse  and  at  Paris. 

This  is  about  the  way  I  find  the  value  of  each  game  when  two  players  are  play¬ 
ing,  for  example,  for  three  games  and  each  has  staked  32  pistoles  on  the  play: 

Let  us  suppose  one  player  has  two  games  and  the  other  one.  They  now  play  a 
game  of  which  the  necessary  consequence  is  that  if  the  first  player  wins  it,  he 
wins  all  the  money  at  stake,  namely,  64  pistoles,  and  if  the  second  player  wins  it, 
the  score  is  two  to  two.  Consequently  if  they  wish  to  separate,  each  should  with¬ 
draw  his  own  stake,  namely,  32  pistoles. 

Consider  then,  Sir,  that  if  the  first  player  wins,  64  pistoles  belong  to  him;  if  he 
loses,  32.  Therefore  if  they  wish  not  to  venture  this  game  and  to  separate  without 
playing  it,  the  first  player  should  say:  "I  am  sure  of  having  32  pistoles,  for  even 
if  I  lose,  I  get  them.  But  as  for  the  other  32,  perhaps  they  will  be  mine,  perhaps 
yours;  the  odds  are  even.  Let  us  share  these  32  pistoles  equally  therefore,  and 
give  me  in  addition  my  own  32,  which  are  mine  in  either  case.”  He  will  have  48 
pistoles  then  and  the  second  player  will  have  16. 

Let  us  suppose  now  that  one  player  has  two  games  and  the  other  player  none, 
and  they  are  beginning  a  game  with  the  following  consequences:  if  the  first 
player  wins  it,  he  takes  all  the  money,  64  pistoles;  if  the  second  player  wins  it, 
they  are  back  at  the  preceding  case,  where  one  player  has  two  games  and  the 
other  one. 

But  we  have  already  shown  that  in  this  case  48  pistoles  belong  to  the  player 
who  has  two  games.  Therefore  if  they  wish  not  to  play  this  game,  he  should  say: 
"If  I  win,  I  shall  win  the  entire  sum,  which  is  64;  if  I  lose,  48  will  legitimately 
be  mine.  Therefore  give  me  the  48  which  are  mine  even  if  I  lose,  and  let  us  share 
equally  the  other  16,  since  you  have  as  much  chance  of  winning  them  as  I  have.” 
Thus  he  will  have  48  and  8,  that  is,  56  pistoles. 

Finally  let  us  suppose  that  one  player  has  only  one  game  and  the  other  none. 
Clearly,  Sir,  if  they  begin  a  new  game,  it  follows  that  if  the  first  player  wins  it, 
he  will  have  two  games  to  his  credit,  and  consequently  by  the  preceding  case 
56  pistoles  will  belong  to  him;  if  he  loses,  each  has  a  game,  and  therefore  32 
pistoles  belong  to  him.  Therefore  he  should  say:  ”If  you  want  not  to  play  this 
game,  give  me  32  pistoles,  which  are  mine  in  either  case,  and  let  us  share  the  rest 
of  the  56  equally.  From  56  take  32  and  24  are  left;  divide  24  in  half,  you  take  12 
and  I  take  12,  which  with  32  make  44.” 

Now  in  this  way  you  see  by  simple  subtraction  that  for  the  first  game  12  pistoles 


476  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

of  the  loser’s  stake  belong  to  the  winner,  for  the  second  game  another  12,  and 
for  the  last  game  8. 

Now,  no  longer  to  make  a  mystery  of  it,  since  you  see  the  whole  thing  perfectly 
clearly  and  I  was  being  mysterious  about  it  only  to  find  out  if  I  was  not  mistaken, 
the  value  (I  mean  value  in  terms  of  the  loser’s  money  only)  of  the  last  game  of 
two  is  double  that  of  the  last  game  of  three  and  four  times  that  of  the  last  game 
of  four  and  eight  times  that  of  the  last  game  of  five,  etc. 

But  the  proportion  of  the  first  games  is  not  so  easy  to  find.  This  then  is  the 
way  it  is,  for  I  don’t  want  to  hide  anything,  and  here  is  the  problem  I  was  making 
so  much  of,  for  indeed  I  am  very  much  pleased  with  it: 

Given  any  number  of  games,  to  find  the  value  of  the  first. 

Let  the  given  number  of  games  be,  for  example,  8.  Take  the  first  eight  even 
numbers  and  the  first  eight  odd  numbers,  namely:  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 
1,  3,  5,  7,  9,  11,  13,  15. 

Multiply  the  even  numbers  as  follows:  the  first  by  the  second,  the  product  by 
the  third,  the  product  by  the  fourth,  the  product  by  the  fifth,  etc.  Multiply  the 
odd  numbers  in  the  same  way:  the  first  by  the  second,  the  product  by  the  third, 
etc. 

The  last  product  of  the  even  numbers  is  the  denominator  and  the  last  product 
of  the  odd  numbers  is  the  numerator  of  the  fraction  expressing  the  value  of  the 
first  game  of  eight;  that  is,  if  each  player  stakes  the  number  of  pistoles  expressed 
by  the  product  of  the  even  numbers,  the  number  of  the  loser’s  pistoles  belonging 
to  the  winner  will  be  expressed  by  the  product  of  the  odd  numbers. 

Which  is  demonstrated,  but  with  much  labor,  by  combinations  used  in  the 
way  you  thought  of;  I  have  not  been  able  to  demonstrate  it  in  that  other  way  I 
was  just  telling  you  about,  but  only  by  the  method  of  combinations.  Here  are 
the  preliminary  propositions,  which  are  simply  arithmetical  propositions  about 
combinations,  of  which  I  have  found  some  rather  nice  properties. 

If  in  any  number  of  letters,  for  example,  8:  A,  F,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G ,  H,  you  take 
all  the  possible  combinations  of  4  letters  and  then  all  the  possible  combinations 
of  5  letters  and  then  of  6,  of  7,  and  of  8,  and  thus  you  take  all  the  possible  com¬ 
binations  from  the  number  which  is  half  the  whole  up  to  the  whole,  I  say  that  if 
you  add  together  half  the  combinations  of  4  and  all  the  higher  combinations, 
the  sum  will  be  the  number  of  the  quaternary  progression  beginning  with  the 
dyad  which  corresponds  to  half  the  number  of  letters. 

For  example,  and  I’ll  write  it  in  Latin,  for  French  is  no  good  here: 

If  in  as  many  letters  as  you  please,  for  example,  8:  A,  F,  C,  D,  F,  F,  G,  H,  all 
combinations  of  4,  5,  6,  etc.,  up  to  8  are  taken,  I  say  that  if  you  add  together 
half  the  combinations  of  4,  namely  35  (half  70),  all  the  combinations  of  5, 
namely  56,  all  the  combinations  of  6,  namely  28,  all  the  combinations  of  7, 
namely  8,  and  all  the  combinations  of  8,  namely  1,  you  have  the  fourth  number 
of  the  quaternary  progression  beginning  with  2 :  I  say  fourth  number  because  4 
is  half  of  8. 

For  the  numbers  of  the  quaternary  progression  beginning  with  2  are:  2,  8,  32, 
128,  512,  etc.,  of  which  2  is  the  first,  8  the  second,  32  the  third,  and  128  the  fourth, 
which  128  is  equal  to  35,  half  the  combinations  of  4  letters,  +56,  the  com¬ 
binations  of  5  letters,  +28,  the  combinations  of  6  letters,  +8,  the  combinations 
of  7  letters,  +1,  the  combination  of  8  letters. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  477 

This  is  the  first  proposition,  which  is  purely  arithmetical;  the  second  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  doctrine  of  divisions  and  is  as  follows: 

First  it  must  be  stated  that  if  one  game  out  of  5  has  been  won,  for  example, 
and  therefore  4  are  lacking,  the  set  will  have  to  be  decided  in  8  games,  which 
is  double  4. 

The  value  of  the  first  game  of  5  in  terms  of  the  loser’s  money  is  the  fraction 
which  has  as  numerator  half  the  combinations  of  4  in  8  (I  take  4  because  it  is  equal 
to  the  number  of  games  lacking  and  8  because  it  is  double  4)  and  as  denominator 
the  numerator  together  with  all  the  higher  combinations. 

Thus  if  I  have  one  game  out  of  5,  fW  of  my  fellow  player’s  money  belongs  to 
me;  that  is,  if  he  has  staked  128  pistoles,  I  take  35  and  leave  him  the  rest,  93. 

But  the  fraction  fVs  is  the  same  as  iff,  of  which  the  denominator  is  the  product 
of  the  even  numbers  and  the  numerator  is  the  product  of  the  odd  numbers. 

You  will  undoubtedly  see  all  this  very  well  if  you  take  the  trouble  to  consider 
it  at  all.  That  is  why  I  think  there  is  no  use  saying  anything  more  about  it.  How¬ 
ever,  I  am  sending  you  one  of  my  old  tables  (p.  479);  I  haven’t  time  to  copy  it.  I 
shall  make  another  one.  You  will  see  there  as  always  that  the  value  of  the  first  game 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  second,  which  is  easily  found  by  combinations. 

You  will  also  see  that  the  numbers  of  the  first  line  always  increase;  similarly 
those  of  the  second  line  and  those  of  the  third  line. 

But  afterwards  those  of  the  fourth  line  decrease,  those  of  the  fifth,  etc.,  which 
is  strange. 

I  haven’t  time  to  send  you  the  demonstration  of  a  difficulty  which  caused 
M  .  .  .  great  astonishment,  for  he  is  very  intelligent,  but  he  is  not  a  geometer 
(which  is,  as  you  know,  a  great  defect);  he  does  not  even  understand  how  a 
mathematical  line  can  be  infinitely  divisible  and  thinks  he  knows  very  well  that 
it  is  composed  of  a  finite  number  of  points.  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  that 
out  of  his  head;  if  you  could  do  it,  we  would  make  him  perfect. 

He  told  me  then  that  he  had  found  something  wrong  with  numbers  for  the 
following  reason: 

If  we  undertake  to  throw  a  six  with  one  die,  the  odds  for  succeeding  in  4 
throws  are  as  671  to  625. 

If  we  undertake  to  throw  a  double  six  with  two  dice,  the  odds  are  against 
success  in  24  throws. 

And  yet  24:36  (which  is  the  number  of  faces  of  the  two  dice)  1:4:6  (which 
is  the  number  of  faces  of  one  die). 

This  was  so  great  a  scandal  to  him  that  he  openly  proclaimed  propositions 
were  doubtful  and  arithmetic  self-contradictory.  But  with  your  principles  you 
will  easily  see  the  explanation. 

I  shall  put  down  in  order  everything  I  have  done  with  this  when  I  have  com¬ 
pleted  the  geometrical  treatises  on  which  I  have  been  working  for  some  time  now. 

I  have  also  written  some  arithmetical  treatises,  in  connection  with  which  I  beg 
you  to  send  me  your  opinion  on  the  following  demonstration. 

I  assume  the  well-known  lemma  that  twice  the  sum  of  as  many  numbers  as  we 
please  of  the  continuous  progression  beginning  with  unity,  such  as  1,  2,  3,  4,  is 
equal  to  the  last,  4,  multiplied  by  the  next  greater,  5,  that  is,  that  twice  the  sum 
of  the  numbers  contained  in  A  is  equal  to  the  product  of  A  and  (^4+i). 

Now  I  come  to  my  proposition: 


478  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


The  difference  of  any  two  successive  cubes  exceeds  by  unity  six  times  all  the 
numbers  contained  in  the  root  of  the  smaller  cube. 

Let  there  be  two  roots,  R,  S,  differing  by  unity: 

I  say  R3—S3—  i  is  equal  to  six  times  the  sum  of  the  numbers  contained  in  S. 
For  let  S  be  called  A\  therefore  R  is 

A-\- 1. 

Therefore  the  cube  of  root  R,  or  A+ 1,  is 

A3+3A2+5A+i3. 

But  the  cube  of  S ,  or  A,  is 

A3; 

and  their  difference  is 

3^2+3^+ 13, 

that  is 


R3-S3; 

therefore  if  we  subtract  unity, 

3^2+3^  =  R3— S3-i. 

But  twice  the  sum  of  the  numbers  contained  in  yl  or  5  is  equal  by  the  lemma  to 
A(A-\- 1),  that  is,  A2-\-A\ 

therefore  six  times  the  sum  of  the  numbers  contained  in  A  is  equal  to 

3H2+3H. 

But 


i)A2+3>A  =  R3—S3—  i;  therefore 

R3 — S3 —  i  is  equal  to  six  times  the  sum  of  the  numbers  contained  in  A  or  S. 


Q.E.D. 

No  one  has  objected  to  my  demonstration,  but  I  have  been  told  that  no  objec¬ 
tion  was  made  because  everyone  now  is  used  to  this  method.  But  I  claim  that 
without  any  favor  to  me  this  demonstration  should  be  accepted  as  excellent  in 
kind.  However  I  await  your  opinion  with  full  submission. 

All  my  arithmetical  demonstrations  are  of  this  kind.  Here  are  two  more  diffi¬ 
culties. 

I  have  demonstrated  a  proposition  in  plane  geometry  by  making  use  of  the 
cube  of  a  line  compared  to  the  cube  of  another  line.  I  claim  that  this  is  purely 
geometrical  and  in  accordance  with  the  strictest  standards. 

Also  I  have  solved  the  problem: 

Of  four  planes,  four  points,  and  four  spheres,  any  four  (of  the  twelve)  being 
given,  to  find  a  sphere  which,  touching  the  given  spheres,  passes  through  the 
given  points  and  leaves  on  the  planes  parts  of  spheres  in  which  given  angles  can 
be  inscribed,  and  this  problem: 

Of  three  circles,  three  points,  and  three  lines,  any  three  (of  the  nine)  being 
given,  to  find  a  circle  which,  touching  the  circles  and  the  points,  leaves  on  the 
lines  an  arc  in  which  a  given  angle  can  be  inscribed. 

I  found  a  complete  solution  for  these  problems,  using  in  the  construction 
only  circles  and  straight  lines;  but  in  the  demonstration  I  make  use  of  conic 
sections,  of  parabolas  or  hyperbolas.  However  I  claim  that  since  the  construction 
is  plane,  my  solution  is  plane  and  should  be  accepted  as  such. 

It  is  a  poor  return  for  the  honor  you  do  me  in  suffering  my  letters,  to  take  up 
so  much  of  your  time.  I  never  think  I  am  going  to  write  more  than  a  word  or  two, 
and  so  I  don’t  tell  you  what  I  have  most  at  heart,  which  is  that  the  more  I  know 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  479 

you,  the  more  I  admire  and  honor  you,  and  that  if  you  knew  my  feelings  in  this 
respect,  you  would  give  a  place  in  your  friendship  to  him  who  is,  etc. 

Pascal 

TABLE  REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  PRECEDING  LETTER 


If  each  player  stakes  256  on 


player 

6 

Games 

5 

Games 

4 

Games 

3 

Games 

2 

Games 

1 

Game 

=§ 

i  st  Game 

63 

70 

80 

96 

128 

256 

2nd  Game 

63 

70 

80 

9  6 

128 

s — 

yd  Game 

56 

60 

64 

64 

4th  Game 

42 

40 

32 

VO  » 

!0  ~§ 
<N 

5th  Game 

24 

16 

~s 

6th  Game 

8 

If  each  player  stakes  25  6  on 

player 

6 

Games 

5 

Games 

4 

Games 

3 

Games 

2 

Games 

1 

Game 

% 

1st  Game 

63 

70 

80 

9  6 

128 

256 

1st  2  Games 

126 

140 

l60 

192 

256 

^  * 

■s 

1st  3  Games 

182 

200 

224 

256 

1st  4  Games 

224 

240 

256 

vo  | 

<N  ^5 

1st  3  Games 

248 

256 

■s 

1st  6  Games 

256 

LETTER  FROM  PASCAL  TO  FERMAT 

August  24,  1654 
Sir, 

I  was  not  able  to  put  before  you  in  their  entirety  my  views  on  the  subject  of 
divisions  among  several  players  by  the  last  mail;  I  am  even  somewhat  reluctant 
to  do  so  for  fear  that  that  wonderful  agreement  between  us  which  was  so  dear 
to  me  may  begin  to  fail  here,  for  I  am  afraid  that  we  have  different  opinions  on 
this  subject.  I  want  to  put  my  whole  argument  before  you,  and  you  will  do  me 
the  favor  of  correcting  me  if  I  am  in  error,  or  of  supporting  me  if  I  have  struck 
it  right.  I  really  ask  this  in  all  sincerity  for  I  shall  only  feel  sure  of  my  view  when 
you  are  on  my  side. 


480  scientific  treatises 

When  there  are  only  two  players,  your  method,  which  uses  combinations,  is 
very  reliable;  but  when  there  are  three  players,  I  think  I  have  proof  that  it  is  not 
accurate,  unless  you  go  about  it  in  some  other  way  I  do  not  understand.  But  the 
method  I  explained  to  you  and  which  I  use  everywhere  is  applicable  to  all  imagin¬ 
able  conditions  of  every  kind  of  division,  whereas  the  method  of  combinations 
(which  I  use  only  in  certain  cases  where  it  is  shorter  than  the  general  method) 
is  good  only  for  those  occasions  and  not  for  all. 

I  am  sure  I  shall  succeed  in  making  myself  understood,  but  it  will  take  a  few 
words  on  my  part  and  a  little  patience  on  yours. 

This  is  your  procedure  when  there  are  two  players: 

If  the  situation  of  two  players  playing  for  several  games  is  such  that  the  first 
player  lacks  two  games  and  the  second  player  three,  to  find  the  division  we  must 
(you  say)  see  in  how  many  games  the  play  will  have  to  be  decided. 

It  is  easy  to  reckon  that  it  will  be  in  four  games,  whence  you  conclude  we  must 
see  how  many  combinations  there  are  of  four  games  between  two  players  and 
see  in  how  many  combinations  the  first  player  would  win  and  in  how  many  the 
second,  and  divide  the  money  in  that  ratio.  I  should  have  had  difficulty  in  follow¬ 
ing  that  statement  if  I  hadn’t  already  known  what  it  meant  by  my  own  work; 
and  of  course  you  had  written  it  with  that  in  mind.  To  see  how  many  times  four 
games  combine  between  two  players  then,  we  must  imagine  that  they  play  with 
a  die  having  two  faces  (since  they  are  only  two),  as  in  heads  and  tails,  and  that 
they  throw  four  of  these  dice  (because  they  are  playing  four  games);  and  now 
we  must  see  in  how  many  different  ways  these  dice  can  fall.  That  is  easily  reck¬ 
oned:  they  can  fall  in  sixteen  ways,  since  sixteen  is  the  second  power  of  four, 
that  is  the  square.  For  let  us  imagine  one  of  the  faces  marked  with  a ,  favorable 
to  the  first  player,  and  the  other  with  b ,  favorable  to  the  second  player;  therefore 
the  four  dice  can  fall  in  any  one  of  the  sixteen  ways  indicated:  aaaa  .  .  .  bbbb . 

And  because  the  first  player  lacks  two  games,  all  the  casts  with  two  as  give 
him  the  set;  therefore  there  are  n  for  him.  And  because  the 
second  player  lacks  three  games,  all  the  casts  with  three  b's 
can  give  him  the  set;  therefore  there  are  5.  Therefore  they 
must  share  the  sum  in  the  ratio  of  n  to  5. 

This  is  your  method  when  there  are  two  players.  Where¬ 
upon  you  say  that  if  there  are  more,  it  will  not  be  difficult 
to  determine  the  divisions  by  the  same  method. 

Here,  dear  Sir,  I  must  tell  you  that  this  division  for  two 
players,  based  on  combinations,  is  perfectly  accurate  and 
satisfactory,  but  that  if  there  are  more  than  two  players,  it 
will  not  always  be  accurate;  and  I  shall  tell  you  the  reason 
for  this  difference. 

I  communicated  your  method  to  our  friends,  whereupon 
M.  de  Roberval  raised  the  following  objection: 

That  it  is  an  error  to  base  the  method  of  determining  the 
division  on  the  supposition  that  four  games  would  be  played, 
since  when  one  player  lacks  two  games  and  the  other  player 
three,  it  is  not  necessarily  true  that  four  games  would  be 
played,  but  it  is  possible  that  only  two  or  three  would  be 
played  or  to  be  sure  perhaps  four; 


aaaa 

I 

a  a  a  b 

I 

a  a  b  a 

I 

a  a  b  b 

I 

a  b  a  a 

I 

a  b  a  b 

I 

abba 

I 

a  b  b  b 

2 

b  a  a  a 

I 

b  a  a  b 

I 

baba 

I 

b  a  b  b 

2 

b  b  a  a 

I 

b  b  a  b 

2 

b  b  b  a 

2 

bbbb 

2 

CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  481 

And  that  he  did  not  see  therefore  why  it  should  be  claimed  that  the  just  division 
would  be  made  on  the  fictitious  condition  that  four  games  would  be  played, 
since  the  natural  condition  of  play  is  that  the  players  stop  as  soon  as  one  of  them 
has  won,  and  that  at  least  if  this  division  was  not  erroneous,  it  had  not  been 
demonstrated,  so  that  he  had  some  suspicion  we  were  guilty  of  a  paralogism. 

I  replied  that  I  did  not  rely  so  much  on  the  method  of  combinations,  which 
is  really  not  in  its  proper  place  here,  as  on  my  other  universal  method,  which 
deals  with  all  cases  and  carries  its  demonstration  with  it,  and  which  gives  exactly 
the  same  division  as  the  method  of  combinations.  Moreover  I  demonstrated  for 
him  the  correctness  of  the  division  between  two  players  by  combinations  as 
follows : 

Isn’t  it  true  that  if  two  players  of  whom  one  lacks  two  games  and  the  other 
three,  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis,  now  freely  agree  to  play  four  games, 
that  is,  to  throw  the  four  dice  with  two  faces  all  at  once,  isn’t  it  true,  I  say,  that 
if  they  decided  to  play  the  four  games,  the  division  should  be  as  we  said,  in 
accordance  with  the  number  of  casts  favorable  to  each? 

He  agreed,  and  indeed  this  can  be  demonstrated;  but  he  denied  the  case  was 
the  same  when  there  was  no  commitment  to  play  the  four  games.  Thereupon 
I  spoke  as  follows: 

Isn’t  it  evident  that  the  same  players,  not  committed  to  playing  the  four  games 
but  wishing  to  stop  as  soon  as  one  should  have  reached  his  number,  can  without 
advantage  or  disadvantage  commit  themselves  to  playing  all  four  games,  and 
that  this  agreement  does  not  change  their  situation  in  any  respect?  For  if  the  first 
player  wins  the  first  two  games  of  the  four  and  therefore  has  won  the  set,  will  he 
refuse  to  play  two  more  games  in  view  of  the  fact  that  if  he  wins  them,  he  has  not 
won  better,  and  if  he  loses  them,  he  has  not  won  less,  for  these  two  games  that 
the  second  player  has  won  are  not  enough  for  him  since  he  lacks  three,  and  thus 
four  games  are  not  enough  to  make  it  possible  for  both  of  them  to  get  the  number 
they  lack? 

Certainly  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  is  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference  to  both 
whether  they  play  on  the  condition  natural  to  their  game,  which  is  to  stop  as 
soon  as  one  has  his  number,  or  whether  they  play  all  four  games.  Therefore  since 
there  is  nothing  to  choose  between  these  two  conditions,  the  division  should  be 
exactly  the  same  in  both.  But  it  is  just  when  they  have  to  play  four  games,  as  I 
have  shown;  therefore  it  is  just  in  the  other  case  as  well. 

That  is  how  I  demonstrated  it,  and  you  will  notice  that  the  demonstration  is 
based  on  the  equality  of  the  two  conditions,  actual  and  fictitious,  with  respect 
to  two  players,  and  on  the  fact  that  the  same  player  will  always  win  in  both,  and 
if  one  player  wins  or  loses  in  one  case,  he  will  win  or  lose  in  the  other  and  two 
will  never  have  the  required  number  of  games. 

Let  us  now  consider  three  players  in  the  same  way  and  suppose  that  the  first 
player  lacks  one  game,  the  second  and  third  each  two.  To  determine  the  division, 
following  the  same  method  of  combinations,  we  must  first  find  out  how  many 
games  will  decide  the  play,  as  we  did  when  there  were  two  players.  It  will  be 
three,  for  they  could  not  play  three  games  without  there  being  necessarily  a 
decision. 

We  must  now  see  how  many  combinations  there  are  of  3  games  among  three 
players  and  how  many  are  favorable  to  the  first,  second,  and  third  player,  respec- 


SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 


482 

tively,  and  in  accordance  with  this  proportion  dis¬ 
tribute  the  money  just  as  before  on  the  hypothesis  of 
two  players. 

As  for  seeing  how  many  combinations  there  are  in 
all,  that  is  easy:  it  is  the  third  power  of  3,  that  is,  its 
cube,  27.  For  if  we  throw  three  dice  together  (since 
three  games  must  be  played)  each  of  which  has  three 
faces  (since  there  are  three  players),  one  marked  with 
an  a ,  favorable  to  the  first  player,  another  with  a  b  for 
the  second  player,  and  the  other  with  a  c  for  the  third 
player,  it  is  obvious  that  these  three  dice  thrown  to¬ 
gether  can  fall  in  27  different  ways,  namely: 

But  the  first  player  lacks  only  one  game;  therefore 
all  the  casts  with  an  a  are  for  him;  therefore  he  has  19. 

The  second  player  lacks  two  games;  therefore  all  the 
casts  with  two  b’s  are  for  him;  therefore  he  has  7. 

The  third  player  lacks  two  games;  therefore  all  the 
casts  with  two  c  s  are  for  him;  therefore  he  has  7. 

If  we  then  concluded  that  the  shares  of  the  players 
should  be  proportional  to  19,  7,  7,  our  error  would  be 
too  gross,  and  I  am  far  from  thinking  you  capable  of 
it.  For  some  casts  are  favorable  to  the  first  and  to  the 
second  at  the  same  time,  such  as  abb ,  for  the  first 
player  finds  the  a  he  needs  there  and  the  second  player 
the  two  b's  he  needs;  similarly  acc  is  for  both  the  first 
and  the  third. 

Therefore  we  must  not  count  those  casts  favorable 
to  two  players  as  worth  the  whole  sum  to  each,  but 
only  half  the  sum.  For  if  acc  were  thrown,  the  first  and 
the  third  would  have  equal  rights  to  the  sum,  each 
having  the  required  number  of  games;  therefore  they 
would  share  the  money  equally.  But  if  aab  is  thrown, 
the  first  alone  wins.  The  reckoning  should  therefore 
be  made  as  follows: 

There  are  13  throws  which  give  the  entire  sum  to  the  first  player,  6  which  give 
him  half  and  8  which  give  him  nothing.  Therefore  if  the  whole  sum  is  a  pistole, 
there  are  13  casts  which  are  each  worth  a  pistole  to  him,  6  which  are  each  worth 
half  a  pistole,  and  8  worth  nothing. 

Therefore  in  case  of  division  we  must  multiply 


13  by  one  pistole,  which  makes . 13 

6  by  half  a  pistole,  which  makes .  3 

8  by  o,  which  makes .  o 

Sum  27  Sum  16 


and  divide  the  sum  of  the  values,  16,  by  the  sum  of  the  casts,  27,  which  gives  the 
fraction  if,  which  is  what  belongs  to  the  first  player  in  case  of  division,  namely 
16  pistoles  out  of  27. 

The  divisions  of  the  second  and  third  players  will  be  found  in  the  same 
way: 


a 

a 

a 

1 

a 

a 

b 

1 

a 

a 

c 

1 

a 

b 

a 

1 

a 

b 

b 

1 

2 

a 

b 

c 

1 

a 

c 

a 

1 

a 

c 

b 

1 

a 

c 

c 

1 

3 

b 

a 

a 

1 

b 

a 

b 

1 

2 

b 

a 

c 

1 

b 

b 

a 

1 

2 

b 

b 

b 

2 

b 

b 

c 

2 

b 

c 

a 

1 

b 

c 

b 

2 

b 

c 

c 

3 

c 

a 

a 

1 

c 

a 

b 

1 

c 

a 

c 

1 

3 

c 

b 

a 

1 

c 

b 

b 

2 

c 

b 

c 

3 

c 

c 

a 

1 

3 

c 

c 

b 

3 

c 

c 

c 

3 

CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  483 


There  are  4  casts  worth  1  pistole: 

multiply . 4 

There  are  3  casts  worth  Vi  pistole: 

multiply . 1V2 

And  20  casts  worth  nothing . o 

Sum  27  Sum  5V2 


Therefore  5V2  pistoles  out  of  27  belong  to  the  second  player,  and  as  many  to 
the  third  player,  and  these  three  sums,  5V2,  5V2,  and  16,  added  together,  make 
the  27. 

This,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  way  divisions  should  be  determined  by  combina¬ 
tions  in  accordance  with  your  method  unless  you  have  a  different  method  here 
which  I  must  not  know.  But  unless  I  am  mistaken,  this  is  not  the  right  division. 

The  reason  is  that  a  false  supposition  is  made,  namely,  that  three  games  are 
necessarily  played,  whereas  the  natural  condition  of  that  play  is  that  no  more 
games  are  played  as  soon  as  one  of  the  players  has  reached  the  required  number. 

Not  that  it  can’t  happen  that  3  games  are  played;  but  it  can  also  happen  that 
only  one  or  two  are  played.  There  is  nothing  necessary  about  it. 

But  how  is  it,  someone  will  ask,  that  it  is  not  permissible  in  this  case  to  make 
the  same  fictitious  supposition  as  in  the  case  of  two  players?  The  reason  is: 

In  the  actual  condition  of  these  three  players  there  is  only  one  who  can  win, 
for  the  condition  is  that  as  soon  as  one  wins,  the  play  stops.  But  in  the  fictitious 
condition  two  players  can  both  reach  the  required  number  of  games:  namely,  if 
the  first  player  wins  the  one  he  lacks  and  one  of  the  others  the  two  he  lacks;  for 
they  will  have  played  only  three  games.  Whereas  when  there  were  only  two 
players,  the  fictitious  and  the  actual  conditions  were  the  same  in  all  respects  so 
far  as  the  odds  of  the  players  were  concerned;  and  that  is  what  makes  so  great  a 
difference  between  the  two  conditions. 

But  if  the  players  in  the  situation  supposed  (that  is,  one  player  lacking  one 
game  and  the  other  two  players  each  lacking  two  games)  now  freely  agree  to  the 
condition  that  they  will  play  all  three  games  and  that  if  anyone  is  alone  in  winning 
the  required  number  of  games,  he  will  take  the  entire  sum,  and  that  if  two  win 
the  required  number,  they  will  share  the  stakes  equally,  in  this  case  the  division 
should  be  as  I  just  said:  the  first  should  have  16,  the  second  5 Vi,  the  third  5V2, 
out  of  the  27  pistoles,  and  that  requires  no  demonstration  if  we  suppose  the 
condition  to  be  as  stated. 

But  if  they  play  simply  on  condition  not  that  three  games  will  necessarily  be 
played  but  that  only  as  many  will  be  played  as  are  needed  to  give  one  of  them 
the  required  number  and  that  then  the  play  stop  without  giving  one  of  the  others 
a  chance  to  get  the  required  number  too,  then  17  pistoles  of  the  27  belong  to  the 
first  player  and  5  to  the  second  and  to  the  third,  each. 

This  is  shown  by  my  general  method,  which  also  determines  that  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  situation  the  first  player  should  have  16,  the  second  and  the  third  5V2  each, 
without  the  use  of  combinations,  for  this  method  is  universal  and  always  possible. 

There  you  have,  Sir,  my  thoughts  on  this  subject,  in  which  the  only  advantage 
I  have  over  you  is  that  I  have  reflected  much  more  about  it.  But  that  is  a  small 
matter  where  you  are  concerned,  since  your  first  insights  go  deeper  than  my  long 
efforts. 

The  reason  I  expound  my  views  to  you  is  to  get  a  judgment  from  you  on 


484  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

them.  I  think  I  must  have  convinced  you  that  the  method  of  combinations  is 
good  for  two  players  accidentally,  as  it  is  also  sometimes  for  three  players,  as 
when  two  each  lack  one  game  and  the  other  player  lacks  two,  because  in  this  case 
the  number  of  games  in  which  the  set  must  be  completed  does  not  permit  its 
being  won  by  two  players.  But  the  method  is  not  general  and  is  generally  good 
only  for  the  case  in  which  the  players  are  committed  to  a  fixed  number  of  games 
regardless  of  the  score. 

So  that,  since  you  did  not  know  my  method  when  you  set  me  the  problem  of 
dividing  the  stakes  among  several  players,  but  only  the  method  of  combinations, 
I  am  afraid  we  may  have  different  opinions  on  this  matter. 

I  beg  you  to  let  me  know  how  you  go  about  finding  this  division.  I  shall 
receive  your  answer  with  respect  and  joy,  even  if  your  opinion  is  at  variance  with 
mine.  I  am,  etc. 

Pascal 


LETTER  FROM  FERMAT  TO  PASCAL 

Toulouse,  August  29,  i654 
Sir, 

Our  double  thrusts  still  keep  up,  and  like  you  I  am  struck  with  admiration 
that  our  ideas  fit  so  perfectly  it  seems  as  if  they  have  taken  the  same  road  and 
covered  the  same  distance.  Your  recent  treatises  on  the  arithmetical  triangle  and 
its  application  are  a  real  proof  of  it,  and  if  my  calculation  is  right,  your  twelfth 
consequence  was  being  carried  with  the  mail  from  Paris  to  Toulouse  while  my 
proposition  on  figural  numbers,  which  is  actually  the  same,  was  on  its  way  from 
Toulouse  to  Paris. 

I  am  not  afraid  of  going  astray  as  long  as  I  fall  in  with  you  in  this  way,  and  I 
am  convinced  that  the  true  method  of  avoiding  error  is  to  find  oneself  in  agree¬ 
ment  with  you.  But  if  I  said  more,  it  would  smack  of  compliment,  and  we  have 
banished  that  enemy  of  easy  and  agreeable  conversations. 

It  is  my  turn  now  to  tell  you  some  of  my  discoveries  in  arithmetic,  but  I  am 
so  busy  with  the  end  of  Parliament  that  I  venture  to  hope  you  will  be  kind  enough 
to  grant  me  a  deserved  and  as  it  were  necessary  respite. 

Nevertheless  I  shall  answer  your  question  about  the  three  players  who  are  play¬ 
ing  for  two  games.  When  the  first  player  has  a  game  and  the  others  do  not,  your 
first  solution  is  right,  and  the  shares  of  the  stakes  should  be  to  each  other  as  17, 
5,  and  5;  the  reason  for  which  is  obvious  and  comes  as  always  from  the  same 
principle,  it  being  clear  at  once  by  combinations  that  17  of  the  27  equal  chances 
are  for  the  first  player  and  only  5  for  each  of  the  other  two. 

As  for  the  rest,  there  is  nothing  that  I  shall  not  communicate  to  you  in  the 
future  in  all  sincerity.  Consider  meanwhile,  if  you  find  it  convenient,  the  following 
proposition: 

The  squares  of  the  powers  of  2,  increased  by  unity,  are  always  primes. 

The  square  of  2,  increased  by  unity,  is  5,  which  is  a  prime. 

The  square  of  the  square,  16,  increased  by  unity,  is  17,  a  prime. 

The  square  of  16  is  256  which,  increased  by  unity,  is  257,  a  prime. 

The  square  of  256  is  65,536  which,  increased  by  unity,  is  65,537,  a  prime.  And 
so  on  to  infinity. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  485 

I  will  answer  to  you  for  the  truth  of  this  property,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  prove, 
and  I  confess  that  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find  a  complete  demonstration. 
I  wouldn’t  ask  you  to  work  at  it  if  I  had  been  successful. 

With  this  proposition  we  can  find  numbers  which  are  in  a  given  ratio  to  their 
aliquot  parts,  in  connection  with  which  I  have  made  some  important  discoveries. 
We  shall  speak  of  them  another  time. 

I  am,  etc. 

Fermat 


LETTER  FROM  FERMAT  TO  PASCAL 

[September  25,  1654] 
Sir, 

Do  not  be  afraid  that  our  concordance  is  at  an  end.  You  have  yourself  con¬ 
firmed  it  while  thinking  to  destroy  it,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  in  answering  M.  de 
Roberval  for  yourself  you  have  also  answered  for  me. 

I  take  the  example  of  the  three  players,  of  whom  the  first  lacks  one  game  and 
each  of  the  other  two  lacks  two  games,  which  is  the  case  you  urge  against  me. 
I  find  only  17  combinations  there  for  the  first  player  and  5  for  each  of  the  others; 
for  when  you  say  that  the  combination  acc  is  favorable  to  the  first  player  and  to 
the  third  player,  it  seems  that  you  are  no  longer  remembering  that  everything 
which  happens  after  one  of  the  players  has  won  is  of  no  use.  Since  this  com¬ 
bination  has  given  the  set  to  the  first  player  with  the  first  game,  what  difference 
does  it  make  that  the  third  player  wins  two  games  afterwards  when,  if  he  won 
thirty,  they  would  all  be  superfluous? 

Which  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  you  very  well  observed,  this  fiction  of  extend¬ 
ing  the  play  to  a  certain  number  of  games  serves  only  to  facilitate  the  rule  and 
(in  my  opinion)  to  make  all  the  chances  equal  or,  more  intelligibly,  to  reduce  all 
the  fractions  to  a  common  denominator. 

And  to  remove  all  possible  doubt,  if  in  the  case  before  us  you  extend  the  fiction 
to  four  games  instead  of  three,  there  will  be  not  merely  27  combinations  but  81, 
and  we  must  see  how  many  combinations  will  give  the  first  player  one  game 
before  either  one  of  the  other  two  players  has  two  games  and  how  many  will 
give  each  of  the  others  two  games  before  the  first  player  has  one.  You  will  find 
that  the  combinations  favorable  to  the  first  player  will  be  5 1  and  those  favorable 
to  each  of  the  other  two  15,  which  comes  to  the  same  ratio. 

And  if  you  take  five  games  or  any  other  number  you  please,  you  always  find  3 
numbers  proportional  to  17,  5,  5. 

And  so  I  have  a  right  to  say  that  the  combination  acc  is  only  for  the  first  player 
and  not  for  the  third,  and  that  cca  is  only  for  the  third  player  and  not  for  the  first, 
and  that  consequently  my  rule  of  combinations  is  the  same  for  three  players  as 
for  two,  and  generally  for  every  number. 

You  could  already  see  by  my  preceding  letter  that  I  did  not  hesitate  over  the 
true  solution  of  the  question  of  three  players,  for  which  I  sent  you  the  three 
decisive  numbers,  17,  5,  5.  But  since  M.  de  Roberval  will  perhaps  be  very  glad 
to  see  a  solution  that  makes  no  use  of  fiction,  and  since  it  can  sometimes  shorten 
the  labor  in  many  cases,  here  it  is  in  the  example  before  us: 

The  first  player  can  win  either  in  a  single  game  or  in  two  or  in  three. 

If  he  wins  in  a  single  game,  he  must  bring  up  on  the  first  throw  the  favorable 


48 6  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISES 

face  of  a  die  having  three  faces.  A  single  die  gives  3  chances.  This  player  then 
has  of  the  chances  if  only  one  game  is  played. 

If  two  games  are  played,  he  can  win  in  two  ways,  either  when  the  second  player 
wins  the  first  game  and  he  wins  the  second,  or  when  the  third  player  wins  the 
first  game  and  he  the  second.  But  two  dice  give  9  chances.  This  player  then  has 
-§  of  the  chances  when  two  games  are  played. 

If  three  games  are  played  he  can  win  in  only  two  ways,  either  when  the  second 
player  wins  the  first  game,  the  third  player  the  second  game,  and  he  the  third, 
or  when  the  third  player  wins  the  first  game,  the  second  the  second,  and  he  the 
third;  for  if  either  the  second  player  or  the  third  player  won  the  first  two  games, 
he  and  not  the  first  player  would  win  the  set.  But  three  dice  give  27  chances. 
Therefore  the  first  player  has  2V  of  the  chances  when  three  games  are  played. 

The  sum  of  the  chances  which  give  the  set  to  the  first  player  is  consequently 
i+f-|-22-7,  which  makes  iy  in  all. 

The  rule  works  and  is  general  for  all  cases,  so  that  without  recourse  to  fiction 
the  actual  combinations  in  each  number  of  games  give  a  solution  and  make  clear 
what  I  said  at  the  start,  that  extension  to  a  given  number  of  games  is  nothing 
but  the  reduction  of  different  fractions  to  a  common  denominator.  There  you 
have  in  a  few  words  the  whole  mystery,  which  will  undoubtedly  restore  our  good 
understanding,  since  neither  of  us  is  looking  for  anything  but  reason  and  truth. 

I  hope  to  send  you  at  Martinmas  a  summary  of  everything  considerable  I  have 
discovered  about  numbers.  You  will  excuse  me  for  being  concise  and  speaking 
to  be  understood  only  by  a  man  who  gets  everything  at  a  word. 

The  most  important  thing  you  will  find  there  concerns  the  proposition  that 
every  number  is  composed  of  one,  two,  or  three  triangles,  of  one,  two,  three,  or 
four  squares,  of  one,  two,  three,  four,  or  five  pentagons,  of  one,  two,  three,  four, 
five,  or  six  hexagons,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 

Before  it  can  be  demonstrated,  we  must  first  demonstrate  that  every  prime 
number  which  exceeds  by  unity  a  multiple  of  four  is  composed  of  two  squares, 
such  as  5,  13,  17,  29,  37,  etc. 

Given  a  prime  number  of  this  kind,  such  as  53,  to  find  by  a  general  rule  the 
two  squares  composing  it. 

Every  prime  number  which  exceeds  by  unity  a  multiple  of  3  is  composed  of  a 
square  and  the  triple  of  another  square,  such  as  7,  13,  19,  31,  37,  etc. 

Every  prime  number  which  exceeds  by  1  or  by  3  a  multiple  of  8  is  composed 
of  a  square  and  the  double  of  another  square,  such  as  n,  17,  19,  41,  43,  etc. 

There  is  no  triangular  number  whose  area  is  equal  to  a  square  number. 

This  will  be  followed  by  the  discovery  of  many  propositions  which  Bachet 
confesses  not  to  have  known  and  which  are  not  found  in  Diophantus. 

I  am  convinced  that  as  soon  as  you  are  familiar  with  my  method  of  demonstrat¬ 
ing  this  kind  of  proposition,  you  will  be  delighted  with  it  and  will  find  it  the 
means  of  making  many  new  discoveries,  for  it  is  necessary,  as  you  know,  multi 
pertranseant  ut  augeatur  scientia } 

If  I  have  time,  we  shall  then  talk  about  magic  numbers  and  I  shall  recall  my 
old  cases  on  this  subject. 

I  am  with  all  my  heart,  Sir,  your,  etc. 

Fermat 

JMany  should  go  over  the  ground  that  science  be  increased. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT 


487 


I  desire  the  health  of  M.  de  Carcavi  as  my  own,  and  I  am  all  his. 

September  25 

I  am  writing  to  you  from  the  country,  a  circumstance  which  may  delay  my 
answers  during  the  vacation. 

LETTER  FROM  PASCAL  TO  FERMAT 

[October  27,  1654] 
Sir, 

Your  last  letter  has  given  me  perfect  satisfaction.  I  admire  your  method  of 
making  divisions,  the  more  so  that  I  understand  it  very  well.  It  is  wholly  yours, 
has  nothing  in  common  with  mine,  and  easily  arrives  at  the  same  end.  Our  good 
understanding  is  restored. 

But,  my  dear  Sir,  if  I  have  concurred  with  you  in  this,  look  elsewhere  for  some¬ 
one  to  follow  you  in  your  discoveries  in  arithmetic,  the  enunciations  of  which 
you  have  been  kind  enough  to  send  me.  For  my  own  part,  I  confess  they  go 
much  beyond  me.  I  am  only  capable  of  admiring  them,  and  I  humbly  beg  you  to 
devote  your  first  leisure  to  their  completion.  All  our  friends  saw  them  last  Satur¬ 
day  and  gave  them  their  wholehearted  esteem.  It  is  not  easy  to  have  to  wait  for 
things  so  beautiful  and  so  much  to  be  wished  for.  Please  therefore  give  your 
attention  to  them  and  be  assured  that  I  am,  etc. 

Pascal 


ARCHBISHIP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL 


5000  Mitty  Avenue 
San  Jose,  CA  85129-1897 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


^=a^=s^ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


7^^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


archbishop  mitty  library 


T  24900 


