^  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  g 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


*  ^ 

16.  PTOLEMY 

4.  HOMER 

COPERNICU 

5.  AESCHYLUS 

KEPLER 

SOPHOCLES 

17.  PLOTINUS 

EURIPIDES 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

^7^ 

ARISTOPHANES 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


— 

E 

E 


E 

K.  »■ 


S^ 


GREAT  BOOKS  OP  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  M 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 


48.  MELVILLE 


49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 


53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 


54.  FREUD 

USRARY 


JgpW  COiiEGE  OF  CALIFORI^ffiray-^' 


Valencia  street 
SXN  FRANaSCO.  CA 
I41S)  €26.1694 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2009 


http://www.archive.org/details/mathematicalprinOOnewt 


! 


1 


c 


\ 


:# 


t 


ir- 


I 


d 


-.j 


> 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  ED/TOR  IN  CHIEF 


H- 

NEWTON 

HUYGENS 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


1^  ■  I  I  I  I  Pill  >  I  iKt  »# »»»'f  >»♦»»»»»  t  f  f  |i|f <itt 

fe^f' ,  'Wrtiia  ««iWTiK  j^iO[4 


«KAi>QO  V».V  ;i«AM  ,T.H^£tto^.W}o^ajpiuiM«  s;)KSJI4UD 

40oa«tJM  ‘3A3tM  4  ,’!  ^  A^T\v.*\itwO^  W 

' .  ■  _  .  ^fC..  '*■?■’  'v** 


MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 
OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY 

OPTICS 

BT  SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON 

TREATISE  ON  LIGHT 

BY  CHRISTIAAN  HUYGENS 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  -  LONDON  •  TORONTO  •  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  •  TOKYO  •  MANILA 


Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy, 
translated  by  Andrew  Motte  and  revised  by  Florian  Cajori, 
is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  the  University  op  California  Press, 
Copyright,  1934,  by  The  Regents  of  The  University  of  California. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 

publisher. 

© 

1952 

BY  EncyclopjBdia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Nineteenth  Printing,  1971 
Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopaidia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10341 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


Mathematical  Principles 

of  Natural  Philosophy,  page  1 

By  Sir  Isaac  Newton 

Translated  by  Andrew  Motte 
Revised  by  Florian  Cajori 

Optics,  page  377 
By  Sir  Isaac  Newton 


Treatise  on  Light,  page  551 
By  Christiaan  Huygens 
Translated  by  Silvanus  P.  Thompson 


,  V  „*||g|SP'W 

E^'  ^  ♦fcftt’ .  t  V ' 


C’4i,'s.st4, 

■»  *«  *:■■  s  iT^ 


B2 


1  ‘  >■  'V«lSI|K  Ijf  . ' 


‘  ",  M-.9  * 


...  sf‘-'* 


f::'.^'.  ,.v  „ 

;-^ ,  i.  >*■  y  ...  Mm-  ■! 
V*  '  'V  ,t  ■■ 


arm'moo  jAflaviao 

iDff  f^llNML44^ 


aopf/tfyi  liS  xQ. 

'■  %■  V  2i^>  &A?r,^Yn  0'P''''C H  i  c:  AO O. 


Ififi  Ifef^bfiOTT 

ihtjmu!/ 

'  --  *»  »«  f|.»*  M  li« 

fC  f  n  >|i^..MrV|l^  ^ 

^iKr.  «#  b  ¥#‘n|P|ilr4M|  te 

,w  *,i<4A  li*n.'.  JM'.  g 

Pf,#irii,^''  '-.»-rt<i(»J|HBj|,'V.  'D^yb^r 


.’w  1 


#■  '■ 


MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 
OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  1642-1 727 


Newton  was  born  at  Woolsthorpe,  Lincoln¬ 
shire,  on  Christmas  Day,  1642.  His  father,  a 
small  farmer,  died  a  few  months  before  his 
birth,  and  when  in  1645  his  mother  married 
the  rector  of  North  Witham,  Newton  was  left 
with  his  maternal  grandmother  at  Wools¬ 
thorpe.  After  having  acquired  the  rudiments 
of  education  at  small  schools  close  by,  Newton 
was  sent  at  the  age  of  twelve  to  the  grammar 
school  at  Grantham,  where  he  lived  in  the 
house  of  an  apothecary.  By  his  own  account, 
Newton  was  at  first  an  indifferent  scholar  until 
a  successful  fight  "with  another  boy  aroused  a 
spirit  of  emulation  and  led  to  his  becoming 
first  in  the  school.  He  displayed  very  early  a 
taste  and  aptitude  for  mechanical  contrivances; 
he  made  windmills,  water-clocks,  kites,  and 
sun-dials,  and  he  is  said  to  have  invented  a 
four-wheel  carriage  which  was  to  be  moved  by 
the  rider. 

After  the  death  of  her  second  husband  in 
1656,  Newton’s  mother  returned  to  Wools¬ 
thorpe  and  removed  her  eldest  son  from  school 
so  that  he  might  prepare  himself  to  manage 
the  farm.  But  it  was  soon  evident  that  his  in¬ 
terests  were  not  in  farming,  and  upon  the  ad¬ 
vice  of  his  uncle,  the  rector  of  Burton  Goggles, 
he  was  sent  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge, 
where  he  matriculated  in  1661  as  one  of  the 
boys  w'ho  performed  menial  services  in  return 
for  their  expenses.  Although  there  is  no  record 
of  his  formal  progress  as  a  student,  Newton  is 
known  to  have  read  widely  in  mathematics 
and  mechanics.  His  first  reading  at  Cambridge 
was  in  the  optical  works  of  Kepler.  He  turned 
to  Euclid  because  he  w^as  bothered  by  his  in¬ 
ability  to  comprehend  certain  diagrams  in  a 
book  on  astrology  he  had  bought  at  a  fair; 
finding  its  propositions  self-evident,  he  put  it 
aside  as  “a,  trifling  book,”  until  his  teacher, 
Isaac  Barrow,  induced  him  to  take  up  the  book 
again.  It  appears  to  have  been  the  study  of 
Descartes’  Geometry  which  inspired  him  to  do 
original  mathematical  work.  In  a  small  com¬ 
monplace  book  kept  by  Newton  as  an  under¬ 
graduate,  there  are  several  articles  on  angular 
sections  and  the  squaring  of  curves,  several 
calculations  about  musical  notes,  geometrical 


problems  from  Vieta  and  Van  Schooten,  an¬ 
notations  out  of  Wallis’  Arithmetic  of  Infinities, 
together  with  observations  on  refraction,  on 
the  grinding  of  spherical  optic  glasses,  on  the 
errors  of  lenses,  and  on  the  extraction  of  all 
kinds  of  roots.  It  was  around  the  time  of  his 
taking  the  Bachelor’s  degree,  in  1665,  that 
Newton  discovered  the  binomial  theorem  and 
made  the  first  notes  on  his  discovery  of  the 
“method  of  fluxions.” 

When  the  Great  Plague  spread  from  London 
to  Cambridge  in  1665,  college  was  dismissed, 
and  Newton  retired  to  the  farm  in  Lincoln¬ 
shire,  where  he  conducted  experiments  in  op¬ 
tics  and  chemistry  and  continued  his  mathe¬ 
matical  speculations.  From  this  forced  retire¬ 
ment  in  1666  he  dated  his  discovery  of  the 
gravitational  theory:  “In  the  same  year  I  be¬ 
gan  to  think  of  gravity  extending  to  the  orb  of 
the  Moon,  .  .  .  compared  the  force  requisite  to 
keep  the  Moon  in  her  orb  with  the  force  of 
gravity  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  found 
them  to  answer  pretty  nearly.”  At  about  the 
same  time  his  work  on  optics  led  to  his  expla¬ 
nation  of  the  composition  of  white  light.  Of  the 
work  he  accomplished  in  these  years  Newton 
later  remarked:  “All  this  was  in  the  two  years 
of  1665  and  1666,  for  in  those  years  I  was  in 
the  prime  of  my  age  for  invention  and  minded 
Mathematics  and  Philosophy  more  than  at 
any  time  since.” 

On  the  re-opening  of  Trinity  College  in  1667, 
Newton  was  elected  a  fellow,  and  two  years 
later,  a  little  before  his  twenty-seventh  birth¬ 
day,  he  w'^as  appointed  Lucasian  professor  of 
mathematics,  succeeding  his  friend  and  teach¬ 
er,  Dr.  Barrow.  Newdon  had  already  built  a 
reflecting  telescope  in  1668;  the  second  tele¬ 
scope  of  his  making  he  presented  to  the  Royal 
Society  in  December,  1671.  Two  months  later, 
as  a  fellow  of  the  Society,  he  communicated  his 
discovery  on  light  and  thereby  started  a  con¬ 
troversy  which  was  to  run  for  many  years  and 
to  involve  Hooke,  Lucas,  Linus,  and  others. 
Newton,  who  always  found  controversy  dis¬ 
tasteful,  “blamed  my  own  imprudence  for 
parting  with  so  substantial  a  blessing  as  my 
quiet  to  run  after  a  shadow.”  His  papers  on 


IX 


Biographical  Note 


X 

optics,  the  most  important  of  which  were  com¬ 
municated  to  the  Royal  Society  between  1672 
and  1676,  were  collected  in  the  Optics  (1704). 

It  was  not  until  1684  that  Newton  began  to 
think  of  making  known  his  work  on  gravity. 
Hooke,  Halley,  and  Sir  Christopher  Wren  had 
independently  come  to  some  notion  of  the  law 
of  gra\dty  but  were  not  having  any  success  in 
e.xplaining  the  orbits  of  the  planets.  In  that 
year  Halley  consulted  Newton  on  the  problem 
and  was  astonished  to  find  that  he  had  already 
solved  it.  Newton  submitted  to  him  four  theo¬ 
rems  and  seven  problems,  which  proved  to  be 
the  nucleus  of  his  major  work.  In  some  seven¬ 
teen  or  eighteen  months  during  1685  and  1686 
he  wrote  in  Latin  the  Mathematical  Principles 
of  Natural  Philosophy.  Newton  thought  for 
some  time  of  suppressing  the  third  book,  and 
it  was  only  Halley’s  insistence  that  preserved 
it.  Halley  also  took  upon  himself  the  cost  of 
publishing  the  work  in  1687  after  the  Royal 
Society  proved  unable  to  meet  its  cost.  The 
book  caused  great  excitement  throughout  Eu¬ 
rope,  and  in  1689  Huygens,  at  that  time  the 
most  famous  scientist,  came  to  England  to 
make  the  personal  acquaintance  of  Newton. 

While  working  upon  the  Principles,  Newton 
had  begun  to  take  a  more  prominent  part  in 
university  affairs.  For  his  opposition  to  the  at¬ 
tempt  of  James  II  to  repudiate  the  oath  of 
allegiance  and  supremacy  at  the  university, 
Newton  w'as  elected  parliamentary  member  for 
Cambridge.  On  his  return  to  the  university,  he 
suffered  a  serious  illness  which  incapacitated 
him  for  most  of  1692  and  1693  and  caused  con¬ 
siderable  concern  to  his  friends  and  fellow- 
workers.  After  his  recovery,  he  left  the  univer¬ 
sity  to  work  for  the  government.  Through  his 
friends  Locke,  Wren,  and  Lord  Halifax,  New¬ 
ton  was  made  Warden  of  the  Mint  in  1695  and 
four  years  later,  Master  of  the  Mint,  a  position 
he  held  until  his  death. 

For  the  last  thirty  years  of  his  life  Newton 
produced  little  original  mathematical  work.  He 
kept  his  interest  and  his  skill  in  the  subject;  in 


1696  he  solved  overnight  a  problem  offered  by 
Bernoulli  in  a  competition  for  which  six  months 
had  been  allowed,  and  again  in  1716  he  worked 
in  a  few  hours  a  problem  which  Leibnitz  had 
proposed  in  order  to  “feel  the  pulse  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  analysts.”  He  was  much  occupied,  to  his 
own  distress,  with  two  mathematical  contro¬ 
versies,  one  regarding  the  astronomical  obser¬ 
vations  of  the  astronomer  royal,  and  the  other 
with  Leibnitz  regarding  the  invention  of  cal¬ 
culus.  He  also  worked  on  revisions  for  a  second 
edition  of  the  Principles,  which  appeared  in 
1713. 

Newton’s  scientific  work  brought  him  great 
fame.  He  was  a  popular  visitor  at  the  Court 
and  was  knighted  in  1705.  Many  honors  came 
to  him  from  the  continent;  he  was  in  corre¬ 
spondence  with  all  the  leading  men  of  science, 
and  visitors  became  so  frequent  as  to  prove  a 
serious  discomfort.  Despite  his  fame,  Newton 
maintained  his  modesty.  Shortly  before  his 
death,  he  remarked:  “I  do  not  know  what  I 
may  appear  to  the  world,  but  to  myself  I 
seem  to  have  been  only  like  a  boy  playing  on 
the  seashore,  and  diverting  myself  in  now  and 
then  finding  a  smoother  pebble  or  a  prettier 
shell  than  ordinary,  whilst  the  great  ocean  of 
truth  lay  all  undiscovered  before  me.” 

From  an  early  period  of  his  life  Newton  had 
been  much  interested  in  theological  studies 
and  before  1690  had  begun  to  study  the  proph¬ 
ecies.  In  that  year  he  wrote,  in  the  form  of  a 
letter  to  Locke,  an  Historical  Account  of  Two 
Notable  Corruptions  of  the  Scriptures,  regarding 
two  passages  on  the  Trinity.  He  left  in  manu¬ 
script  Observations  on  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel 
and  the  Apocalypse  and  other  works  of  exegesis. 

After  1725  Newton’s  health  was  much  im¬ 
paired,  and  his  duties  at  the  Mint  were  dis¬ 
charged  by  a  deputy.  In  February,  1727,  he 
presided  for  the  last  time  at  the  Royal  Society, 
of  which  he  had  been  president  since  1703,  and 
died  on  March  20,  1727,  in  his  eighty-fifth 
year.  He  was  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey 
after  lying  in  state  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  ix 

Prefaces  to  the  First,  Second  and  Third  Editions  1 

Definitions  5 

Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion  14 

BOOK  I.  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

SECTION 

I.  Method  of  first  and  last  ratios  25 

II.  Determination  of  centripetal  forces  32 

III.  Motion  of  bodies  in  eccentric  conic  sections  42 

IV.  Finding  of  elliptic,  parabolic,  and  hyperbolic  orbits  from  the  focus  given  50 

V.  How  the  orbits  are  to  be  found  when  neither  focus  is  given  55 

VI.  How  the  motions  are  to  he  found  in  given  orbits  76 

VII.  Rectilinear  ascent  and  descent  of  bodies  81 

VIII.  Determination  of  orbits  in  which  bodies  will  revolve,  being  acted  upon 

by  any  sort  of  centripetal  force  88 

IX.  Motion  of  bodies  in  movable  orbits;  and  the  motion  of  the  apsides  92 

X.  Motion  of  bodies  in  given  surfaces;  and  the  oscillating  pendulous 

motion  of  bodies  101 

XI.  Motions  of  bodies  tending  to  each  other  with  centripetal  forces  111 

XII.  Attractive  forces  of  spherical  bodies  131 

XIII.  Attractive  forces  of  bodies  which  are  not  spherical  144 

XIV.  Motion  of  very  small  bodies  when  agitated  by  centripetal  forces 

tending  to  the  several  parts  of  any  very  great  body  152 

BOOK  II.  The  Motion  of  Bodies  (In  Resisting  Mediums) 

I.  Motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  159 

II.  Motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  as  the  square  of  their  velocities  165 

III.  Motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  partly  in  the  ratio  of  the  velocities, 

and  partly  as  the  square  of  the  same  ratio  183 

IV.  Circular  motion  of  bodies  in  resisting  mediums  189 

V.  Density  and  compression  of  fluids;  hydrostatics  194 

VI.  Motion  and  resistance  of  pendulous  bodies  203 

VII.  Motion  of  fluids,  and  the  resistance  made  to  projected  bodies  219 

VIII.  Motion  propagated  through  fluids  247 

IX.  Circular  motion  of  fluids  259 

BOOK  III.  The  System  of  the  World  (In  Mathematical  Treatment) 

Rules  of  Reasoning  in  Philosophy  270 

Phenomena  272 

Propositions  276 

Motion  of  the  Moon’s  Nodes  315 

General  Scholium  369 


XI 


m 


lli  l9i0iMiWnHE% 


3M4;  l^;;ia«J.,ii>ifva^^  fliii«8««b^,,l^^  m 


S.i  « 


if  iiitttiit  **i^%4iffi¥L'/fttili#  rifiiK?"^l^iflfill^i'*'t  -WtMm  <Sii 


B  i 
■fflFIJSv] 


ri*' 


«.4-Wui,,ite()ii0' 

r«H4¥iiwt4r  ^ 

tiM  4t4i' 
r!'l9i>ivii|:eMo^ 


liisfi 


'Wl^p.  191  WT'V^Bm^  HW 


_  ...  , 


I 


.-:  ,  .-  ,  ,.  ,  ,^<'''  '4.».’  '.t.',  IT)  '>.*^.  ••P 

•(mriliilil^l^^  W«U0#>4r 


M 


. tttwnflfww  I 


|i,^  N»*^  7-: '"!'»>•.■"« 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 


Since  the  ancients  (as  we  are  told  by  Pappus)  esteemed  the  science  of  me¬ 
chanics  of  greatest  importance  in  the  investigation  of  natural  things,  and 
the  moderns,  rejecting  substantial  forms  and  occult  qualities,  have  endeavored 
to  subject  the  phenomena  of  nature  to  the  laws  of  mathematics,  I  have  in  this 
treatise  cultivated  mathematics  as  far  as  it  relates  to  philosophy.  The  ancients 
considered  mechanics  in  a  twofold  respect;  as  rational,  which  proceeds  accu¬ 
rately  by  demonstration,  and  practical.  To  practical  mechanics  all  the  manual 
arts  belong,  from  which  mechanics  took  its  name.  But  as  artificers  do  not  work 
with  perfect  accuracy,  it  comes  to  pass  that  mechanics  is  so  distinguished  from 
geometry  that  what  is  perfectly  accurate  is  called  geometrical ;  what  is  less  so, 
is  called  mechanical.  However,  the  errors  are  not  in  the  art,  but  in  the  artificers. 
He  that  works  \vdth  less  accuracy  is  an  imperfect  mechanic;  and  if  any  could 
work  with  perfect  accuracy,  he  would  be  the  most  perfect  mechanic  of  all,  for 
the  description  of  right  lines  and  circles,  upon  which  geometry  is  founded,  be¬ 
longs  to  mechanics.  Geometry  does  not  teach  us  to  draw  these  lines,  but  re¬ 
quires  them  to  be  drawn,  for  it  requires  that  the  learner  should  first  be  taught 
to  describe  these  accurately  before  he  enters  upon  geometry,  then  it  shows  how 
by  these  operations  problems  may  be  solved.  To  describe  right  lines  and  circles 
are  problems,  but  not  geometrical  problems.  The  solution  of  these  problems  is 
required  from  mechanics,  and  by  geometry  the  use  of  them,  when  so  solved,  is 
shown;  and  it  is  the  glory  of  geometry  that  from  those  few  principles,  brought 
from  without,  it  is  able  to  produce  so  many  things.  Therefore  geometry  is 
founded  in  mechanical  practice,  and  is  nothing  but  that  part  of  universal  me¬ 
chanics  which  accurately  proposes  and  demonstrates  the  art  of  measuring.  But 
since  the  manual  arts  are  chiefly  employed  in  the  moving  of  bodies,  it  happens 
that  geometry  is  commonly  referred  to  their  magnitude,  and  mechanics  to 
their  motion.  In  this  sense  rational  mechanics  will  be  the  science  of  motions 
resulting  from  any  forces  whatsoever,  and  of  the  forces  required  to  produce 
any  motions,  accurately  proposed  and  demonstrated.  This  part  of  mechanics, 
as  far  as  it  extended  to  the  five  powers  which  relate  to  manual  arts,  was  cul¬ 
tivated  by  the  ancients,  who  considered  gravity  (it  not  being  a  manual  power) 
no  otherwise  than  in  moving  weights  by  those  powers.  But  I  consider  philoso¬ 
phy  rather  than  arts  and  write  not  concerning  manual  but  natural  powers,  and 
consider  chiefly  those  things  which  relate  to  gravity,  levity,  elastic  force,  the 
resistance  of  fluids,  and  the  like  forces,  whether  attractive  or  impulsive;  and 
therefore  I  offer  this  work  as  the  mathematical  principles  of  philosophy,  for  the 
whole  burden  of  philosophy  seems  to  consist  in  this — from  the  phenomena  of 
motions  to  investigate  the  forces  of  nature,  and  then  from  these  forces  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  the  other  phenomena;  and  to  this  end  the  general  propositions  in  the 
first  and  second  books  are  directed.  In  the  third  book  I  give  an  example  of  this 
in  the  explication  of  the  System  of  the  World;  for  by  the  propositions  mathe¬ 
matically  demonstrated  in  the  former  books  in  the  third  I  derive  from  the 
celestial  phenomena  the  forces  of  gravity  with  which  bodies  tend  to  the  sun  and 

1 


2  Mathematical  Principles 

the  several  planets.  Then  from  these  forces,  by  other  propositions  which  are 
also  mathematical,  I  deduce  the  motions  of  the  planets,  the  comets,  the  moon, 
and  the  sea.  I  wish  we  could  derive  the  rest  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature  by 
the  same  kind  of  reasoning  from  mechanical  principles,  for  I  am  induced  by 
many  reasons  to  suspect  that  they  may  all  depend  upon  certain  forces  by 
which  the  particles  of  bodies,  by  some  causes  hitherto  unknown,  are  either 
mutually  impelled  towards  one  another,  and  cohere  in  regular  figures,  or  are 
repelled  and  recede  from  one  another.  These  forces  being  unknown,  philo¬ 
sophers  have  hitherto  attempted  the  search  of  Nature  in  vain;  but  I  hope 
the  principles  here  laid  down  will  afford  some  light  either  to  this  or  some  truer 
method  of  philosophy. 

In  the  publication  of  this  work  the  most  acute  and  universally  learned  Mr. 
Edmund  Halley  not  only  assisted  me  in  correcting  the  errors  of  the  press  and 
preparing  the  geometrical  figures,  but  it  was  through  his  solicitations  that  it 
came  to  be  published;  for  when  he  had  obtained  of  me  my  demonstrations  of  the 
figure  of  the  celestial  orbits,  he  continually  pressed  me  to  communicate  the 
same  to  the  Royal  Society,  who  afterwards,  by  their  kind  encouragement  and 
entreaties,  engaged  me  to  think  of  publishing  them.  But  after  I  had  begun  to 
consider  the  inequalities  of  the  lunar  motions,  and  had  entered  upon  some 
other  things  relating  to  the  laws  and  measures  of  gravity  and  other  forces;  and 
the  figures  that  would  be  described  by  bodies  attracted  according  to  given 
laws;  and  the  motion  of  several  bodies  moving  among  themselves;  the  motion 
of  bodies  in  resisting  mediums;  the  forces,  densities,  and  motions,  of  mediums; 
the  orbits  of  the  comets,  and  such  like,  I  deferred  that  publication  till  I  had 
made  a  search  into  those  matters,  and  could  put  forth  the  whole  together. 
^\diat  relates  to  the  lunar  motions  (being  imperfect),  I  have  put  all  together  in 
the  corollaries  of  Prop.  66,  to  avoid  being  obliged  to  propose  and  distinctly 
demonstrate  the  several  things  there  contained  in  a  method  more  prolix  than 
the  subject  deserved  and  interrupt  the  series  of  the  other  propositions.  Some 
things,  found  out  after  the  rest,  I  chose  to  insert  in  places  less  suitable,  rather 
than  change  the  number  of  the  propositions  and  the  citations.  I  heartily  beg 
that  what  I  have  here  done  may  be  read  with  forbearance;  and  that  my  labors 
in  a  subject  so  difficult  may  be  examined,  not  so  much  with  the  view  to  censure, 
as  to  remedy  their  defects. 

Is.  Newton 

Cambridge,  Trinity  College,  May  8,  1686 


PREFACE  to  the  SECOND  EDITION 


In  this  second  edition  of  the  Principia  there  are  many  emendations  and  some 
additions.  In  the  second  section  of  the  first  book,  the  determination  of  forces, 
by  which  bodies  may  be  made  to  revolve  in  given  orbits,  is  illustrated  and  en¬ 
larged.  In  the  seventh  section  of  the  second  book  the  theory  of  the  resistances 
of  fluids  was  more  accurately  investigated,  and  confirmed  by  new  experiments. 
In  the  third  book  the  lunar  theory  and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  were 
more  fully  deduced  from  their  principles;  and  the  theory  of  the  comets  Avas 


Preface 


3 


confirmed  by  more  examples  of  the  calculation  of  their  orbits,  done  also  with 
greater  accuracy. 

Is.  Newton 


London,  March  28,  1713 


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 


In  this  third  edition,  prepared  with  much  care  by  Henry  Pemberton,  M.D.,  a 
man  of  the  greatest  skill  in  these  matters,  some  things  in  the  second  book  on 
the  resistance  of  mediums  are  somewhat  more  comprehensively  handled  than 
before,  and  new  experiments  on  the  resistance  of  heavy  bodies  falling  in  air  are 
added.  In  the  third  book,  the  argument  to  prove  that  the  moon  is  retained  in 
its  orbit  by  the  force  of  gravity  is  more  fully  stated;  and  there  are  added  new 
observations  made  by  Mr.  Pound,  concerning  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  of 
Jupiter  to  one  another.  Some  observations  are  also  added  on  the  comet  wLich 
appeared  in  the  year  1680,  made  in  Germany  in  the  month  of  November  by 
Mr.  Kirk;  which  have  lately  come  to  my  hands.  By  the  help  of  these  it  becomes 
apparent  how  nearly  parabolic  orbits  represent  the  motions  of  comets.  The 
orbit  of  that  comet  is  determined  somewhat  more  accurately  than  before,  by 
the  computation  of  Dr.  Halley,  in  an  ellipse.  And  it  is  showm  that,  in  this  ellip¬ 
tic  orbit,  the  comet  took  its  course  through  the  nine  signs  of  the  heavens,  Avith 
as  much  accuracy  as  the  planets  move  in  the  elliptic  orbits  given  in  astronomy. 
The  orbit  of  the  comet  w  hich  appeared  in  the  year  1723  is  also  added,  computed 
by  Mr.  Bradley,  Professor  of  Astronomy  at  Oxford. 


London,  Jan.  12,  1725-6 


Is.  Newton 


[!( 


mUmi 


„,  "  ‘  '•  ■  .'  '^'■w  ■'‘^.  ’  * 

lib  i^m  ilitftifirtfilf 

wf*  wS^:  ■  WVlffPri*  t 


i;> 


wi 


Wkmk  mAimtikM 


'  h  tUM 


I 


■'teSsS^SS?®*  . . 


tokytc- 


m 


DEFINITIONS 


DEFINITION  I 

The  quantity  of  matter  is  the  measure  of  the  same,  arising  from  its  density  and 
bulk  conjointly. 

Thus  air  of  a  double  density,  in  a  double  space,  is  quadruple  in  quantity;  in 
a  triple  space,  sextuple  in  quantity.  The  same  thing  is  to  be  understood  of 
snow,  and  fine  dust  or  powders,  that  are  condensed  by  compression  or  lique¬ 
faction,  and  of  all  bodies  that  are  by  any  causes  whatever  differently  con¬ 
densed.  I  have  no  regard  in  this  place  to  a  medium,  if  any  such  there  is,  that 
freely  pervades  the  interstices  between  the  parts  of  bodies.  It  is  this  quantity 
that  I  mean  hereafter  everywhere  under  the  name  of  body  or  mass.  And  the 
same  is  known  by  the  weight  of  each  body,  for  it  is  proportional  to  the  weight, 
as  I  have  found  by  experiments  on  pendulums,  very  accurately  made,  which 
shall  be  shown  hereafter. 


DEFINITION  II 

The  quantity  of  motion  is  the  measure  of  the  same,  arising  from  the  velocity  and 
quantity  of  matter  conjointly. 

The  motion  of  the  whole  is  the  sum  of  the  motions  of  all  the  parts;  and  there¬ 
fore  in  a  body  double  in  quantity,  with  equal  velocity,  the  motion  is  double; 
with  twice  the  velocity,  it  is  quadruple. 


DEFINITION  III 

The  vis  insita,  or  innate  force  of  matter,  is  a  power  of  resisting,  by  which  every 
body,  as  much  as  in  it  lies,  continues  in  its  present  state,  whether  it  be  of  rest,  or  of 
moving  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line. 

This  force  is  always  proportional  to  the  body  whose  force  it  is  and  differs 
nothing  from  the  inactivity  of  the  mass,  but  in  our  manner  of  conceiving  it.  A 
body,  from  the  inert  nature  of  matter,  is  not  without  difficulty  put  out  of  its 
state  of  rest  or  motion.  Upon  which  account,  this  vis  insita  may,  by  a  most  sig¬ 
nificant  name,  be  called  inertia  (vis  inertice)  or  force  of  inactivity.  But  a  body 
only  exerts  this  force  when  another  force,  impressed  upon  it,  endeavors  to 
change  its  condition;  and  the  exercise  of  this  force  may  be  considered  as  both 
resistance  and  impulse;  it  is  resistance  so  far  as  the  body,  for  maintaining  its 
present  state,  opposes  the  force  impressed;  it  is  impulse  so  far  as  the  body,  by 
not  easily  giving  way  to  the  impressed  force  of  another,  endeavors  to  change 
the  state  of  that  other.  Resistance  is  usually  ascribed  to  bodies  at  rest,  and  im¬ 
pulse  to  those  in  motion ;  but  motion  and  rest,  as  commonly  conceived,  are  only 
relatively  distinguished ;  nor  are  those  bodies  always  truly  at  rest,  which  com¬ 
monly  are  taken  to  be  so. 


5 


6 


Mathematical  Principles 


DEFINITION  IV 

An  impressed  force  is  an  action  exerted  upon  a  body,  in  order  to  change  its  state, 
either  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  right  line. 

This  force  consists  in  the  action  only,  and  remains  no  longer  in  the  body 
when  the  action  is  over.  For  a  body  maintains  every  new  state  it  acquires,  by 
its  inertia  only.  But  impressed  forces  are  of  different  origins,  as  from  percus 
sion,  from  pressure,  from  centripetal  force. 

DEFINITION  V 

A  centripetal  force  is  that  by  which  bodies  are  drawn  or  impelled,  or  any  way  tend, 
towards  a  point  as  to  a  centre. 

Of  this  sort  is  gravity,  by  which  bodies  tend  to  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  mag¬ 
netism,  by  which  iron  tends  to  the  loadstone;  and  that  force,  whatever  it  is, 
by  which  the  planets  are  continually  drawn  aside  from  the  rectilinear  motions, 
which  otherwise  they  would  pursue,  and  made  to  revolve  in  curvilinear  orbits. 
A  stone,  whirled  about  in  a  sling,  endeavors  to  recede  from  the  hand  that  turns 
it;  and  by  that  endeavor,  distends  the  sling,  and  that  with  so  much  the  greater 
force,  as  it  is  revolved  \vith  the  greater  velocity,  and  as  soon  as  it  is  let  go,  flies 
away.  That  force  which  opposes  itself  to  this  endeavor,  and  by  which  the  sling 
continually  draws  back  the  stone  towards  the  hand,  and  retains  it  in  its  orbit, 
because  it  is  directed  to  the  hand  as  the  centre  of  the  orbit,  I  call  the  centripe¬ 
tal  force.  And  the  same  thing  is  to  be  understood  of  all  bodies,  revolved  in  any 
orbits.  They  all  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  centres  of  their  orbits;  and  were  it 
not  for  the  opposition  of  a  contrary  force  which  restrains  them  to,  and  detains 
them  in  their  orbits,  which  I  therefore  call  centripetal,  would  fly  off  in  right 
lines,  mth  an  uniform  motion.  A  projectile,  if  it  was  not  for  the  force  of  gravity, 
would  not  deviate  towards  the  earth,  but  would  go  off  from  it  in  a  right  line, 
and  that  with  an  uniform  motion,  if  the  resistance  of  the  air  was  taken  away. 
It  is  by  its  gravity  that  it  is  drawn  aside  continually  from  its  rectilinear  course, 
and  made  to  deviate  towards  the  earth,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  force  of 
its  gravity,  and  the  velocity  of  its  motion.  The  less  its  gravity  is,  or  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  its  matter,  or  the  greater  the  velocity  with  which  it  is  projected,  the  less 
will  it  deviate  from  a  rectilinear  course,  and  the  farther  it  will  go.  If  a  leaden 
ball,  projected  from  the  top  of  a  mountain  by  the  force  of  gunpowder,  wth  a 
given  velocity,  and  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  horizon,  is  carried  in  a  curved 
line  to  the  distance  of  two  miles  before  it  falls  to  the  ground ;  the  same,  if  the 
resistance  of  the  air  were  taken  away,  with  a  double  or  decuple  velocity,  would 
fly  twice  or  ten  times  as  far.  And  by  increasing  the  velocity,  we  may  at  pleasure 
increase  the  distance  to  which  it  might  be  projected,  and  diminish  the  curva¬ 
ture  of  the  line  which  it  might  describe,  till  at  last  it  should  fall  at  the  distance 
of  10,  30,  or  90  degrees,  or  even  might  go  quite  round  the  whole  earth  before  it 
falls;  or  lastly,  so  that  it  might  never  fall  to  the  earth,  but  go  forwards  into  the 
celestial  spaces,  and  proceed  in  its  motion  in  infinitum.  And  after  the  same 
manner  that  a  projectile,  by  the  force  of  gravity,  may  be  made  to  revolve  in  an 
orbit,  and  go  round  the  whole  earth,  the  moon  also,  either  by  the  force  of 
gravity,  if  it  is  endued  with  gravity,  or  by  any  other  force,  that  impels  it  to¬ 
wards  the  earth,  may  be  continually  drawn  aside  towards  the  earth,  out  of  the 
rectilinear  way  which  by  its  innate  force  it  would  pursue ;  and  would  be  made 


Definitions  7 

to  revolve  in  the  orbit  which  it  now  describes;  nor  could  the  moon  without 
some  such  force  be  retained  in  its  orbit.  If  this  force  was  too  small,  it  would  not 
sufficiently  turn  the  moon  out  of  a  rectilinear  course;  if  it  was  too  great,  it 
would  turn  it  too  much,  and  draw  down  the  moon  from  its  orbit  towards  the 
earth.  It  is  necessary  that  the  force  be  of  a  just  quantity,  and  it  belongs  to  the 
mathematicians  to  find  the  force  that  may  serve  exactly  to  retain  a  body  in  a 
given  orbit  with  a  given  velocity;  and  vice  versa,  to  determine  the  curvilinear 
way  into  which  a  body  projected  from  a  given  place,  with  a  given  velocity, 
may  be  made  to  deviate  from  its  natural  rectilinear  way,  by  means  of  a  given 
force. 

The  quantity  of  any  centripetal  force  may  be  considered  as  of  three  kinds: 
absolute,  accelerative,  and  motive. 

DEFINITION  VI 

The  absolute  quantity  of  a  centripetal  force  is  the  measure  of  the  same,  proportional 
to  the  efficacy  of  the  cause  that  propagates  it  from  the  centre,  through  the  spaces 
round  about. 

Thus  the  magnetic  force  is  greater  in  one  loadstone  and  less  in  another,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  sizes  and  strength  of  intensity. 

DEFINITION  VII 

The  accelerative  quantity  of  a  centripetal  force  is  the  measure  of  the  same,  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  velocity  which  it  generates  in  a  given  time. 

Thus  the  force  of  the  same  loadstone  is  greater  at  a  less  distance,  and  less  at 
a  greater:  also  the  force  of  gravity  is  greater  in  valleys,  less  on  tops  of  exceeding 
high  mountains;  and  yet  less  (as  shall  hereafter  be  shown),  at  greater  distances 
from  the  body  of  the  earth ;  but  at  equal  distances,  it  is  the  same  everywhere ; 
because  (taking  aw^ay,  or  allowing  for,  the  resistance  of  the  air),  it  equally  ac¬ 
celerates  all  falling  bodies,  whether  heavy  or  light,  great  or  small. 

DEFINITION  VIII 

The  motive  quantity  of  a  centripetal  force  is  the  measure  of  the  same,  proportional 
to  the  motion  which  it  generates  in  a  given  time. 

Thus  the  w'eight  is  greater  in  a  greater  body,  less  in  a  less  body;  and,  in  the 
same  body,  it  is  greater  near  to  the  earth,  and  less  at  remoter  distances.  This 
sort  of  quantity  is  the  centripetency,  or  propension  of  the  whole  body  towards 
the  centre,  or,  as  I  may  say,  its  w^eight;  and  it  is  ahvays  known  by  the  quantity 
of  an  equal  and  contrary  force  just  sufficient  to  hinder  the  descent  of  the  body. 

These  quantities  of  forces,  we  may,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  call  by  the  names 
of  motive,  accelerative,  and  absolute  forces;  and,  for  the  sake  of  distinction, 
consider  them  wdth  respect  to  the  bodies  that  tend  to  the  centre,  to  the  places 
of  those  bodies,  and  to  the  centre  of  force  towards  which  they  tend ;  that  is  to 
say,  I  refer  the  motive  force  to  the  body  as  an  endeavor  and  propensity  of  the 
wffiole  towards  a  centre,  arising  from  the  propensities  of  the  several  parts  taken 
together;  the  accelerative  force  to  the  place  of  the  body,  as  a  certain  powder  dif¬ 
fused  from  the  centre  to  all  places  around  to  move  the  bodies  that  are  in  them ; 
and  the  absolute  force  to  the  centre,  as  endued  with  some  cause,  without  w  hich 
those  motive  forces  w^ould  not  be  propagated  through  the  spaces  round  about; 
whether  that  cause  be  some  central  bod}^  (such  as  is  the  magnet  in  the  centre 


8  Mathematical  Principles 

of  the  magnetic  force,  or  the  earth  in  the  centre  of  the  gravitating  force),  or 
anything  else  that  does  not  yet  appear.  For  I  here  design  only  to  give  a  mathe¬ 
matical  notion  of  those  forces,  without  considering  their  physical  causes  and 
seats. 

Wherefore  the  accelerative  force  Avill  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  motive, 
as  celerity  does  to  motion.  For  the  quantity  of  motion  arises  from  the  celerity 
multiplied  by  the  quantity  of  matter;  and  the  motive  force  arises  from  the  ac¬ 
celerative  force  multiplied  by  the  same  quantity  of  matter.  For  the  sum  of  the 
actions  of  the  accelerative  force,  upon  the  several  particles  of  the  body,  is  the 
motive  force  of  the  whole.  Hence  it  is,  that  near  the  surface  of  the  earth,  where 
the  accelerative  gravity,  or  force  productive  of  gravity,  in  all  bodies  is  the  same, 
the  motive  gravity  or  the  weight  is  as  the  body;  but  if  we  should  ascend  to 
higher  regions,  where  the  accelerative  gravity  is  less,  the  weight  would  be 
equally  diminished,  and  would  always  be  as  the  product  of  the  body,  by  the  ac¬ 
celerative  gravity.  So  in  those  regions,  where  the  accelerative  gravity  is  di¬ 
minished  into  one-half,  the  weight  of  a  body  two  or  three  times  less,  \vill  be  four 
or  six  times  less. 

I  likewise  call  attractions  and  impulses,  in  the  same  sense,  accelerative,  and 
motive;  and  use  the  words  attraction,  impulse,  or  propensity  of  any  sort  to¬ 
wards  a  centre,  promiscuously,  and  indifferently,  one  for  another;  considering 
those  forces  not  physically,  but  mathematically:  wherefore  the  reader  is  not  to 
imagine  that  by  those  words  I  anywhere  take  upon  me  to  define  the  kind,  or 
the  manner  of  any  action,  the  causes  or  the  physical  reason  thereof,  or  that  I 
attribute  forces,  in  a  true  and  physical  sense,  to  certain  centres  (which  are  only 
mathematical  points);  when  at  any  time  I  happen  to  speak  of  centres  as  at¬ 
tracting,  or  as  endued  with  attractive  powers. 

Scholium 

Hitherto  I  have  laid  down  the  definitions  of  such  words  as  are  less  known, 
and  explained  the  sense  in  which  I  would  have  them  to  be  understood  in  the 
following  discourse.  I  do  not  define  time,  space,  place,  and  motion,  as  being 
well  known  to  all.  Only  I  must  observe,  that  the  common  people  conceive  those 
quantities  under  no  other  notions  but  from  the  relation  they  bear  to  sensible 
objects.  And  thence  arise  certain  prejudices,  for  the  removing  of  which  it  will 
be  convenient  to  distinguish  them  into  absolute  and  relative,  true  and  apparent, 
mathematical  and  common. 

I.  Absolute,  true,  and  mathematical  time,  of  itself,  and  from  its  own  nature, 
flows  equably  without  relation  to  anything  external,  and  by  another  name  is 
called  duration:  relative,  apparent,  and  common  time,  is  some  sensible  and 
external  (whether  accurate  or  unequable)  measure  of  duration  by  the  means  of 
motion,  which  is  commonly  used  instead  of  true  time;  such  as  an  hour,  a  day, 
a  month,  a  year. 

II.  Absolute  space,  in  its  own  nature,  without  relation  to  anything  external, 
remains  always  similar  and  immovable.  Relative  space  is  some  movable  dimen¬ 
sion  or  measure  of  the  absolute  spaces;  which  our  senses  determine  by  its  posi¬ 
tion  to  bodies;  and  which  is  commonly  taken  for  immovable  space;  such  is  the 
dimension  of  a  subterraneous,  an  aerial,  or  celestial  space,  determined  by  its 
position  in  respect  of  the  earth.  Absolute  and  relative  space  are  the  same  in 
figure  and  magnitude;  but  they  do  not  remain  always  numerically  the  same. 


Definitions  9 

For  if  the  earth,  for  instance,  moves,  a  space  of  our  air,  which  relatively  and  in 
respect  of  the  earth  remains  always  the  same,  will  at  one  time  be  one  part  of 
the  absolute  space  into  which  the  air  passes;  at  another  time  it  ^vill  be  another 
part  of  the  same,  and  so,  absolutely  understood,  it  ^vill  be  continually  changed. 

III.  Place  is  a  part  of  space  which  a  body  takes  up,  and  is  according  to  the 
space,  either  absolute  or  relative.  I  say,  a  part  of  space;  not  the  situation,  nor 
the  external  surface  of  the  body.  For  the  places  of  equal  solids  are  always  equal; 
but  their  surfaces,  by  reason  of  their  dissimilar  figures,  are  often  unequal.  Posi¬ 
tions  properly  have  no  quantity,  nor  are  they  so  much  the  places  themselves, 
as  the  properties  of  places.  The  motion  of  the  whole  is  the  same  with  the  sum 
of  the  motions  of  the  parts;  that  is,  the  translation  of  the  whole,  out  of  its 
place,  is  the  same  thing  with  the  sum  of  the  translations  of  the  parts  out  of 
their  places;  and  therefore  the  place  of  the  w'hole  is  the  same  as  the  sum  of  the 
places  of  the  parts,  and  for  that  reason,  it  is  internal,  and  in  the  whole  body. 

IV.  Absolute  motion  is  the  translation  of  a  body  from  one  absolute  place 
into  another;  and  relative  motion,  the  translation  from  one  relative  place  into 
another.  Thus  in  a  ship  under  sail,  the  relative  place  of  a  body  is  that  part  of 
the  ship  w'hich  the  body  possesses;  or  that  part  of  the  cavity  w^hich  the  body 
fills,  and  W'hich  therefore  moves  together  with  the  ship:  and  relative  rest  is  the 
continuance  of  the  body  in  the  same  part  of  the  ship,  or  of  its  cavity.  But  real, 
absolute  rest,  is  the  continuance  of  the  body  in  the  same  part  of  that  immov¬ 
able  space,  in  which  the  ship  itself,  its  cavity,  and  all  that  it  contains,  is  moved. 
VTierefore,  if  the  earth  is  really  at  rest,  the  body,  w^hich  relatively  rests  in  the 
ship,  will  really  and  absolutely  move  with  the  same  velocity  which  the  ship  has 
on  the  earth.  But  if  the  earth  also  moves,  the  true  and  absolute  motion  of  the 
body  will  arise,  partly  from  the  true  motion  of  the  earth,  in  immovable  space, 
partly  from  the  relative  motion  of  the  ship  on  the  earth;  and  if  the  body  moves 
also  relatively  in  the  ship,  its  true  motion  will  arise,  partly  from  the  true  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  earth,  in  immovable  space,  and  partly  from  the  relative  motions  as 
w'ell  of  the  ship  on  the  earth,  as  of  the  body  in  the  ship;  and  from  these  relative 
motions  will  arise  the  relative  motion  of  the  body  on  the  earth.  As  if  that  part 
of  the  earth,  where  the  ship  is,  w^as  truly  moved  towards  the  east,  -with  a  veloc¬ 
ity  of  10,010  parts;  while  the  ship  itself,  with  a  fresh  gale,  and  full  sails,  is 
carried  tow^ards  the  west,  with  a  velocity  expressed  by  10  of  those  parts;  but  a 
sailor  w'alks  in  the  ship  tow^ards  the  east,  with  1  part  of  the  said  velocity;  then 
the  sailor  will  be  moved  truly  in  immovable  space  towards  the  east,  with  a 
velocity  of  10,001  parts,  and  relatively  on  the  earth  towards  the  w^est,  with  a 
velocity  of  9  of  those  parts. 

Absolute  time,  in  astronomy,  is  distinguished  from  relative,  by  the  equation 
or  correction  of  the  apparent  time.  For  the  natural  days  are  truly  unequal, 
though  they  are  commonly  considered  as  equal,  and  used  for  a  measure  of  time; 
astronomers  correct  this  inequality  that  they  may  measure  the  celestial  mo¬ 
tions  by  a  more  accurate  time.  It  may  be,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an 
equable  motion,  w'hereby  time  may  be  accurately  measured.  All  motions  may 
be  accelerated  and  retarded,  but  the  flowing  of  absolute  time  is  not  liable  to 
any  change.  The  duration  of  perseverance  of  the  existence  of  things  remains  the 
same,  whether  the  motions  are  swift  or  slow,  or  none  at  all:  and  therefore  this 
duration  ought  to  be  distinguished  from  what  are  only  sensible  measures  there¬ 
of;  and  from  which  we  deduce  it,  by  means  of  the  astronomical  equation.  The 


10  Mathematical  Principles 

necessity  of  this  equation,  for  determining  the  times  of  a  phenomenon,  is  evinced 
as  well  from  the  experiments  of  the  pendulum  clock,  as  by  eclipses  of  the  satel¬ 
lites  of  Jupiter. 

As  the  order  of  the  parts  of  time  is  immutable,  so  also  is  the  order  of  the 
parts  of  space.  Suppose  those  parts  to  be  moved  out  of  their  places,  and  they 
will  be  moved  (if  the  expression  may  be  alloAved)  out  of  themselves.  For  times 
and  spaces  are,  as  it  were,  the  places  as  well  of  themselves  as  of  all  other  things. 
All  things  are  placed  in  time  as  to  order  of  succession;  and  in  space  as  to  order 
of  situation.  It  is  from  their  essence  or  nature  that  they  are  places;  and  that  the 
primary  places  of  things  should  be  movable,  is  absurd.  These  are  therefore  the 
absolute  places;  and  translations  out  of  those  places,  are  the  only  absolute 
motions. 

But  because  the  parts  of  space  cannot  be  seen,  or  distinguished  from  one 
another  by  our  senses,  therefore  in  their  stead  we  use  sensible  measures  of 
them.  For  from  the  positions  and  distances  of  things  from  any  body  considered 
as  immovable,  we  define  all  places;  and  then  Avith  respect  to  such  places,  Ave 
estimate  all  motions,  considering  bodies  as  transferred  from  some  of  those 
places  into  others.  And  so,  instead  of  absolute  places  and  motions,  Ave  use 
relative  ones;  and  that  Avdthout  any  inconvenience  in  common  affairs;  but  in 
philosophical  disquisitions,  Ave  ought  to  abstract  from  our  senses,  and  consider 
things  themselves,  distinct  from  Avhat  are  only  sensible  measures  of  them.  For 
it  may  be  that  there  is  no  body  really  at  rest,  to  Avhich  the  places  and  motions 
of  others  may  be  referred. 

But  we  may  distinguish  rest  and  motion,  absolute  and  relative,  one  from  the 
other  by  their  properties,  causes,  and  effects.  It  is  a  property  of  rest,  that  bodies 
really  at  rest  do  rest  in  respect  to  one  another.  And  therefore  as  it  is  possible, 
that  in  the  remote  regions  of  the  fixed  stars,  or  perhaps  far  beyond  them,  there 
may  be  some  body  absolutely  at  rest;  but  impossible  to  know,  from  the  position 
of  bodies  to  one  another  in  our  regions,  Avhether  any  of  these  do  keep  the  same 
position  to  that  remote  body,  it  folloAvs  that  absolute  rest  cannot  be  determined 
from  the  position  of  bodies  in  our  regions. 

It  is  a  property  of  motion,  that  the  parts,  Avhich  retain  given  positions  to 
their  Avholes,  do  partake  of  the  motions  of  those  Avholes.  For  all  the  parts  of 
revolving  bodies  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis  of  motion;  and  the  impetus 
of  bodies  moving  forAA^ards  arises  from  the  joint  impetus  of  all  the  parts.  There¬ 
fore,  if  surrounding  bodies  are  moved,  those  that  are  relatively  at  rest  AAithin 
them  Avill  partake  of  their  motion.  Upon  Avhich  account,  the  true  and  absolute 
motion  of  a  body  cannot  be  determined  by  the  translation  of  it  from  those 
Avhich  only  seem  to  rest;  for  the  external  bodies  ought  not  only  to  appear  at 
rest,  but  to  be  really  at  rest.  For  otherAAuse,  all  included  bodies,  besides  their 
translation  from  near  the  surrounding  ones,  partake  likeAAUse  of  their  true  mo¬ 
tions;  and  though  that  translation  Avere  not  made,  they  AA^ould  not  be  really  at 
rest,  but  only  seem  to  be  so.  For  the  surrounding  bodies  stand  in  the  like  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  surrounded  as  the  exterior  part  of  a  Avhole  does  to  the  interior,  or  as 
the  shell  does  to  the  kernel ;  but  if  the  shell  moves,  the  kernel  Avill  also  move,  as 
being  part  of  the  Avhole,  AAuthout  any  removal  from  near  the  shell. 

A  property,  near  akin  to  the  preceding,  is  this,  that  if  a  place  is  moved, 
Avhatever  is  placed  therein  moves  along  Avith  it;  and  therefore  a  body,  Avhich  is 
moved  from  a  place  in  motion,  partakes  also  of  the  motion  of  its  place.  Upon 


Definitions  11 

which  account,  all  motions,  from  places  in  motion,  are  no  other  than  parts  of 
entire  and  absolute  motions;  and  every  entire  motion  is  composed  of  the  motion 
of  the  body  out  of  its  first  place,  and  the  motion  of  this  place  out  of  its  place; 
and  so  on,  until  we  come  to  some  immovable  place,  as  in  the  before-mentioned 
example  of  the  sailor.  Wherefore,  entire  and  absolute  motions  can  be  no  other- 
mse  determined  than  by  immovable  places;  and  for  that  reason  I  did  before 
refer  those  absolute  motions  to  immovable  places,  but  relative  ones  to  mov¬ 
able  places.  Now  no  other  places  are  immovable  but  those  that,  from  infinity 
to  infinity,  do  all  retain  the  same  given  position  one  to  another;  and  upon  this 
account  must  ever  remain  unmoved;  and  do  thereby  constitute  immovable 
space. 

The  causes  by  which  true  and  relative  motions  are  distinguished,  one  from 
the  other,  are  the  forces  impressed  upon  bodies  to  generate  motion.  True  mo¬ 
tion  is  neither  generated  nor  altered,  but  by  some  force  impressed  upon  the 
body  moved;  but  relative  motion  may  be  generated  or  altered  wthout  any 
force  impressed  upon  the  body.  For  it  is  sufficient  only  to  impress  some  force 
on  other  bodies  vith  which  the  former  is  compared,  that  by  their  giving  way, 
that  relation  may  be  changed,  in  which  the  relative  rest  or  motion  of  this  other 
body  did  consist.  Again,  true  motion  suffers  always  some  change  from  any 
force  impressed  upon  the  moving  body;  but  relative  motion  does  not  necessarily 
undergo  any  change  by  such  forces.  For  if  the  same  forces  are  likewise  impressed 
on  those  other  bodies,  vdth  which  the  comparison  is  made,  that  the  relative 
position  may  be  preserved,  then  that  condition  will  be  preserved  in  which  the 
relative  motion  consists.  And  therefore  any  relative  motion  may  be  changed 
when  the  true  motion  remains  unaltered,  and  the  relative  may  be  preserved 
when  the  true  suffers  some  change.  Thus,  true  motion  by  no  means  consists  in 
such  relations. 

The  effects  which  distinguish  absolute  from  relative  motion  are,  the  forces 
of  receding  from  the  axis  of  circular  motion.  For  there  are  no  such  forces  in  a 
circular  motion  purely  relative,  but  in  a  true  and  absolute  circular  motion, 
they  are  greater  or  less,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  motion.  If  a  vessel, 
hung  by  a  long  cord,  is  so  often  turned  about  that  the  cord  is  strongly  twisted, 
then  filled  mth  water,  and  held  at  rest  together  with  the  water;  thereupon,  by 
the  sudden  action  of  another  force,  it  is  whirled  about  the  contrary  way,  and 
while  the  cord  is  unt\visting  itself,  the  vessel  continues  for  some  time  in  this 
motion;  the  surface  of  the  water  will  at  first  be  plain,  as  before  the  vessel  began 
to  move;  but  after  that,  the  vessel,  by  gradually  communicating  its  motion  to 
the  water,  will  make  it  begin  sensibly  to  revolve,  and  recede  by  little  and  little 
from  the  middle,  and  ascend  to  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  forming  itself  into  a 
concave  figure  (as  I  have  experienced),  and  the  swifter  the  motion  becomes, 
the  higher  vill  the  water  rise,  till  at  last,  performing  its  revolutions  in  the  same 
times  with  the  vessel,  it  becomes  relatively  at  rest  in  it.  This  ascent  of  the  w’ater 
shows  its  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis  of  its  motion;  and  the  true  and 
absolute  circular  motion  of  the  water,  which  is  here  directly  contrary  to  the 
relative,  becomes  known,  and  may  be  measured  by  this  endeavor.  At  first, 
W'hen  the  relative  motion  of  the  water  in  the  vessel  was  greatest,  it  produced  no 
endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis;  the  water  show'ed  no  tendency  to  the  circum¬ 
ference,  nor  any  ascent  towards  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  but  remained  of  a  plain 
surface,  and  therefore  its  true  circular  motion  had  not  yet  begun.  But  after- 


12  Mathematical  Principles 

wards,  when  the  relative  motion  of  the  water  had  decreased,  the  ascent  thereof 
towards  the  sides  of  the  vessel  proved  its  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis;  and 
this  endeavor  showed  the  real  circular  motion  of  the  water  continually  increas¬ 
ing,  till  it  had  acquired  its  greatest  quantity,  when  the  water  rested  relatively 
in  the  vessel.  And  therefore  this  endeavor  does  not  depend  upon  any  translation 
of  the  water  in  respect  of  the  ambient  bodies,  nor  can  true  circular  motion  be 
defined  by  such  translation.  There  is  only  one  real  circular  motion  of  any  one 
revolving  body,  corresponding  to  only  one  power  of  endeavoring  to  recede  from 
its  axis  of  motion,  as  its  proper  and  adequate  effect;  but  relative  motions,  in 
one  and  the  same  body,  are  innumerable,  according  to  the  various  relations  it 
bears  to  external  bodies,  and,  like  other  relations,  are  altogether  destitute  of 
any  real  effect,  any  otherwise  than  they  may  perhaps  partake  of  that  one  only 
true  motion.  And  therefore  in  their  system  who  suppose  that  our  heavens, 
revolving  below  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  carry  the  planets  along  with  them; 
the  several  parts  of  those  heavens,  and  the  planets,  which  are  indeed  relatively 
at  rest  in  their  heavens,  do  yet  really  move.  For  they  change  their  position  one 
to  another  (which  never  happens  to  bodies  truly  at  rest),  and  being  carried 
together  with  their  heavens,  partake  of  their  motions,  and  as  parts  of  revolving 
wholes,  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  axis  of  their  motions. 

Wherefore  relative  quantities  are  not  the  quantities  themselves,  whose  names 
they  bear,  but  those  sensible  measures  of  them  (either  accurate  or  inaccurate), 
which  are  commonly  used  instead  of  the  measured  quantities  themselves.  And 
if  the  meaning  of  words  is  to  be  determined  by  their  use,  then  by  the  names 
time,  space,  place,  and  motion,  their  [sensible]  mea.sures  are  properly  to  be 
understood;  and  the  expression  \vill  be  unusual,  and  purely  mathematical,  if 
the  measured  quantities  themselves  are  meant.  On  this  account,  those  violate 
the  accuracy  of  language,  which  ought  to  be  kept  precise,  who  interpret  these 
words  for  the  measured  quantities.  Nor  do  those  less  defile  the  purity  of  math¬ 
ematical  and  philosophical  truths,  who  confound  real  quantities  with  their 
relations  and  sensible  measures. 

It  is  indeed  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  to  discover,  and  effectually  to  dis¬ 
tinguish,  the  true  motions  of  particular  bodies  from  the  apparent;  because  the 
parts  of  that  immovable  space,  in  which  those  motions  are  performed,  do  by  no 
means  come  under  the  observation  of  our  senses.  Yet  the  thing  is  not  altogether 
desperate;  for  we  have  some  arguments  to  guide  us,  partly  from  the  apparent 
motions,  which  are  the  differences  of  the  true  motions;  partly  from  the  forces, 
which  are  the  causes  and  effects  of  the  true  motions.  For  instance,  if  two  globes, 
kept  at  a  given  distance  one  from  the  other  by  means  of  a  cord  that  connects 
them,  were  revolved  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  we  might,  from  the 
tension  of  the  cord,  discover  the  endeavor  of  the  globes  to  recede  from  the  axis 
of  their  motion,  and  from  thence  we  might  compute  the  quantity  of  their 
circular  motions.  And  then  if  any  equal  forces  should  be  impressed  at  once  on 
the  alternate  faces  of  the  globes  to  augment  or  diminish  their  circular  motions, 
from  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  tension  of  the  cord,  we  might  infer  the 
increment  or  decrement  of  their  motions;  and  thence  would  be  found  on  what 
faces  those  forces  ought  to  be  impressed,  that  the  motions  of  the  globes  might 
be  most  augmented ;  that  is,  we  might  discover  their  hindmost  faces,  or  those 
which,  in  the  circular  rnotion,  do  follow.  But  the  faces  which  follow  being 
known,  and  consequently  the  opposite  ones  that  precede,  we  should  likewise 


Definitions  13 

know  the  determination  of  their  motions.  And  thus  we  might  find  both  the 
quantity  and  the  determination  of  this  circular  motion,  even  in  an  immense 
vacuum,  where  there  was  nothing  external  or  sensible  with  which  the  globes 
could  be  compared.  But  now,  if  in  that  space  some  remote  bodies  were  placed 
that  kept  always  a  given  position  one  to  another,  as  the  fixed  stars  do  in  our 
regions,  we  could  not  indeed  determine  from  the  relative  translation  of  the 
globes  among  those  bodies,  whether  the  motion  did  belong  to  the  globes  or  to 
the  bodies.  But  if  we  observed  the  cord,  and  found  that  its  tension  was  that 
very  tension  which  the  motions  of  the  globes  required,  we  might  conclude  the 
motion  to  be  in  the  globes,  and  the  bodies  to  be  at  rest;  and  then,  lastly,  from 
the  translation  of  the  globes  among  the  bodies,  we  should  find  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  their  motions.  But  how  we  are  to  obtain  the  true  motions  from  their 
causes,  effects,  and  apparent  differences,  and  the  converse,  shall  be  explained 
more  at  large  in  the  following  treatise.  For  to  this  end  it  was  that  I  composed  it. 


AXIOMS,  OR  LAWS  OF  MOTION 


LAW  I 

Everij  body  continues  in  its  state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  right  line,  unless 
it  is  compelled  to  change  that  state  by  forces  impressed  upon  it. 

Projectiles  continue  in  their  motions,  so  far  as  they  are  not  retarded  by  the 
resistance  of  the  air,  or  impelled  downwards  by  the  force  of  gravity.  A  top, 
whose  parts  by  their  cohesion  are  continually  drawn  aside  from  rectilinear  mo¬ 
tions,  does  not  cease  its  rotation,  othermse  than  as  it  is  retarded  by  the  air. 
The  greater  bodies  of  the  planets  and  comets,  meeting  with  less  resistance  in 
freer  spaces,  preserve  their  motions  both  progressive  and  circular  for  a  much 
longer  time. 


LAW  II 

The  change  of  motion  is  proportional  to  the  motive  force  impressed;  and  is  made  in 
the  direction  of  the  right  line  in  which  that  force  is  impressed. 

If  any  force  generates  a  motion,  a  double  force  will  generate  double  the  mo¬ 
tion,  a  triple  force  triple  the  motion,  whether  that  force  be  impressed  alto¬ 
gether  and  at  once,  or  gradually  and  successively.  And  this  motion  (being  al¬ 
ways  directed  the  same  way  uith  the  generating  force),  if  the  body  moved  be¬ 
fore,  is  added  to  or  subtracted  from  the  former  motion,  according  as  they 
directly  conspire  mth  or  are  directly  contrary  to  each  other;  or  obliquely 
joined,  when  they  are  oblique,  so  as  to  produce  a  new  motion  compounded  from 
the  determination  of  both. 


LAW  III 

To  every  action  there  is  always  opposed  an  equal  reaction:  or,  the  mutual  actions  of 
two  bodies  upon  each  other  are  always  equal,  and  directed  to  contrary  parts. 

Whatever  draws  or  presses  another  is  as  much  drawn  or  pressed  by  that 
other.  If  jmu  press  a  stone  with  your  finger,  the  finger  is  also  pressed  by  the 
stone.  If  a  horse  draws  a  stone  tied  to  a  rope,  the  horse  (if  I  may  so  say)  will 
be  equally  drawn  back  towards  the  stone ;  for  the  distended  rope,  by  the  same 
endeavor  to  relax  or  unbend  itself,  will  draw  the  horse  as  much  towards  the 
stone  as  it  does  the  stone  towards  the  horse,  and  Avill  obstruct  the  progress  of 
the  one  as  much  as  it  advances  that  of  the  other.  If  a  body  impinge  upon 
another,  and  by  its  force  change  the  motion  of  the  other,  that  body  also  (be¬ 
cause  of  the  equality  of  the  mutual  pressure)  will  undergo  an  equal  change,  in 
its  own  motion,  towards  the  contrary  part.  The  changes  made  by  these  actions 
are  equal,  not  in  the  velocities  but  in  the  motions  of  bodies;  that  is  to  sa3%  if  the 
bodies  are  not  hindered  b3'  an3’'  other  impediments.  For,  because  the  motions 
are  equally  changed,  the  changes  of  the  velocities  made  towards  contrary  parts 
are  inversely  proportional  to  the  bodies.  This  law  takes  place  also  in  attractions, 
as  will  be  proved  in  the  next  Scholium. 

14 


15 


Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion 
COROLLARY  I 

A  body,  acted  on  by  two  forces  simidtaneoiisly ,  will  describe  the  diagonal  of  a  paral¬ 
lelogram  in  the  same  time  as  it  wotdd  describe  the  sides  by  those  forces  separately. 

If  a  body  in  a  given  time,  by  the  force  M  impressed  apart  in  the  place  A, 
should  Avith  an  uniform  motion  be  carried  from  A  to  B,  and  by  the  force  N  im¬ 
pressed  apart  in  the  same  place,  should  be  carried  from  A  to  C,  let  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  ABCD  be  completed,  and,  by  both  forces 
acting  together,  it  will  in  the  same  time  be  carried 
in  the  diagonal  from  A  to  D.  For  since  the  force 
N  acts  in  the  direction  of  the  line  AC,  parallel  to 
BD,  this  force  (by  the  second  Law)  will  not  at  all 
alter  the  velocity  generated  by  the  other  force  M, 
by  which  the  body  is  carried  toAvards  the  line  BD.  The  body  therefore  Avill 
arrive  at  the  line  BD  in  the  same  time,  Avhether  the  force  N  be  impressed  or 
not;  and  therefore  at  the  end  of  that  time  it  Avill  be  found  someAvhere  in  the 
line  BD.  By  the  same  argument,  at  the  end  of  the  same  time  it  Avill  be  found 
someAvhere  in  the  line  CD.  Therefore  it  AAdll  be  found  in  the  point  D,  Avhere 
both  lines  meet.  But  it  Avill  move  in  a  right  line  from  A  to  D,  by  LaAv  i. 

COROLLARY  II 

And  hence  is  explained  the  composition  of  any  one  direct  force  AD,  out  of  any  two 
oblique  forces  AC  and  CD;  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  resolution  of  any  one  direct 
force  AD  into  two  oblique  forces  AC  and  CD:  which  composition  and  resolution  are 
abundantly  confirmed  from  mechanics. 

As  if  the  unequal  radii  OM  and  ON  draAvn  from  the  centre  O  of  any  Avheel, 
should  sustain  the  Aveights  A  and  P  by  the  cords  MA  and  NP;  and  the  forces  of 
those  Aveights  to  move  the  Avheel  Avere  required.  Through  the  centre  O  draAV 
the  right  line  KOL,  meeting  the  cords  perpendicularly  in  K  and  L;  and  from 
the  centre  O,  Avdth  OL  the  greater  of  the  distances  OK  and  OL,  describe  a  cir¬ 
cle,  meeting  the  cord  MA  in  D;  and  draAving  OD,  make  AC  parallel  and  DC 
perpendicular  thereto.  Noav,  it  being  indifferent  Avhether  the  points  K,  L, 
D,  of  the  cords  be  fixed  to  the  plane  of  the 
Avheel  or  not,  the  AA'eights  Avill  have  the  same 
effect  Avhether  they  are  suspended  from  the 
points  K  and  L,  or  from  D  and  L.  Let  the 
Avhole  force  of  the  Aveight  A  be  represented  by 
the  line  AD,  and  let  it  be  resolved  into  the 
forces  AC  and  CD,  of  Avhich  the  force  AC, 
draAving  the  radius  OD  directly  from  the 
centre,  a\t11  have  no  effect  to  move  the  Avheel ; 
but  the  other  force  DC,  draAving  the  radius 
DO  perpendicularly,  Avill  have  the  same  effect 
as  if  it  drcAV  perpendicularly  the  radius  OL 
equal  to  OD;  that  is,  it  aatII  have  the  same 
effect  as  the  Aveight  P,  if 

P  :  A  =  DC  :DA, 

but  because  the  triangles  ADC  and  DOK  are  similar, 

DC  :  DA  =  OK  :  OD  =  OK:  OL. 


Mathematical  Principles 


16 

Therefore, 

P  :  A  =  radius  OK  :  radius  OL. 

As  these  radii  lie  in  the  same  right  line  they  will  be  equipollent,  and  so  remain 
in  equilibrium;  which  is  the  well-known  property  of  the  balance,  the  lever,  and 
the  wheel.  If  either  weight  is  greater  than  in  this  ratio,  its  force  to  move  the 
wheel  will  be  so  much  greater. 

If  the  weight  p  =  P,  is  partly  suspended  by  the  cord  Np,  partly  sustained  by 
the  oblique  plane  pG;  draw  pH,  NH,  the  former  perpendicular  to  the  horizon, 
the  latter  to  the  plane  pG;  and  if  the  force  of  the  weight  p  tending  downwards 
is  represented  by  the  line  7jH,  it  may  be  resolved  into  the  forces  pN,  HN.  If 
there  was  any  plane  pQ,  perpendicular  to  the  cord  /jN,  cutting  the  other  plane 
pG  in  a  line  parallel  to  the  horizon,  and  the  weight  p  Avas  supported  only  by 
those  planes  pQ,  pG,  it  would  press  those  planes  perpendicularly  with  the 
forces  pN,  HN;  to  wit,  the  plane  pQ  mth  the  force  pN,  and  the  plane  pG  Avith 
the  force  HN.  And  therefore  if  the  plane  pQ  Avas  taken  aAvay,  so  that  the  Aveight 
might  stretch  the  cord,  because  the  cord,  noAv  sustaining  the  Aveight,  supplied 
the  place  of  the  plane  that  Avas  removed,  it  Avould  be  strained  by  the  same  force 
pN  AA'hich  pressed  upon  the  plane  before.  Therefore,  the 

tension  of  pN  :  tension  of  PN  =  line  pN  :  line  pH. 

Therefore,  if  p  is  to  A  in  a  ratio  AA^hich  is  the  product  of  the  inverse  ratio  of  the 
least  distances  of  their  cords  pN  and  AM  from  the  centre  of  the  Avheel,  and  of 
the  ratio  pH  to  pN,  then  the  Aveights  p  and  A  Avill  have  the  same  effect  to- 
Avards  moving  the  Avheel,  and  Avill,  therefore,  sustain  each  other;  as  anyone 
may  find  by  experiment. 

But  the  Aveight  p  pressing  upon  those  tAvo  oblique  planes,  may  be  considered 
as  a  Avedge  betAveen  the  tAvo  internal  surfaces  of  a  body  split  by  it;  and  hence 
the  forces  of  the  Avedge  and  the  mallet  may  be  determined:  because  the  force 
Avith  AA’hich  the  Aveight  p  presses  the  plane  pQ  is  to  the  force  Avith  Avhich  the 
same,  Avhether  by  its  OAvn  gravity,  or  by  the  bloAv  of  a  mallet,  is  impelled  in  the 
direction  of  the  line  pH  toAvards  both  the  planes,  as 

pN  :  pH; 

and  to  the  force  Avith  Avhich  it  presses  the  other  plane  pG,  as 

pN  :  NH. 

And  thus  the  force  of  the  screAV  may  be  deduced  from  a  like  resolution  of 
forces;  it  being  no  other  than  a  AA^edge  impelled  Avith  the  force  of  a  lever.  There¬ 
fore  the  use  of  this  Corollary  spreads  far  and  AAdde,  and  by  that  diffusive  ex¬ 
tent  the  truth  thereof  is  further  confirmed.  For  on  Avhat  has  been  said  depends 
the  Avhole  doctrine  of  mechanics  variously  demonstrated  by  different  authors. 
For  from  hence  are  easily  deduced  the  forces  of  machines,  Avhich  are  com¬ 
pounded  of  Avheels,  pullies,  levers,  cords,  and  Aveights,  ascending  directly  or 
obliquely,  and  other  mechanical  poAA’ers;  as  also  the  force  of  the  tendons  to 
move  the  bones  of  animals. 


COROLLARY  III 

The  quantity  of  motion,  which  is  obtained  by  taking  the  sum  of  the  motions  directed 
towards  the  same  parts,  and  the  difference  of  those  that  are  directed  to  contrary 
parts,  suffers  no  change  from  the  action  of  bodies  among  themselves. 

For  action  and  its  opposite  reaction  are  equal,  by  LaAV  iii,  and  therefore,  by 
LaAv  II,  thej’  produce  in  the  motions  equal  changes  toAA  ards  opposite  parts. 


Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion  17 

Therefore  if  the  motions  are  directed  towards  the  same  parts,  whatever  is 
added  to  the  motion  of  the  preceding  body  will  be  subtracted  from  the  motion 
of  that  which  follows;  so  that  the  sum  will  be  the  same  as  before.  If  the  bodies 
meet,  with  contrary  motions,  there  Avill  be  an  equal  deduction  from  the  mo¬ 
tions  of  both ;  and  therefore  the  difference  of  the  motions  directed  towards  op¬ 
posite  parts  will  remain  the  same. 

Thus,  if  a  spherical  body  A  is  3  times  greater  than  the  spherical  body  B,  and 
has  a  velocity  =  2,  and  B  follows  in  the  same  direction  with  a  velocity  =  10,  then 
the 

motion  of  A  :  motion  of  B  =  6  :  10. 

Suppose,  then,  their  motions  to  be  of  6  parts  and  of  10  parts,  and  the  sum  will 
be  16  parts.  Therefore,  upon  the  meeting  of  the  bodies,  if  A  acquire  3,  4,  or  5 
parts  of  motion,  B  will  lose  as  many;  and  therefore  after  reflection  A  will  pro¬ 
ceed  Avith  9,  10,  or  11  parts,  and  B  with  7,  6,  or  5  parts;  the  sum  remaining  al¬ 
ways  of  16  parts  as  before.  If  the  body  A  acquire  9,  10,  11,  or  12  parts  of  mo¬ 
tion,  and  therefore  after  meeting  proceed  with  15,  16,  17,  or  18  parts,  the  body 
B,  losing  so  many  parts  as  A  has  got,  will  either  proceed  with  1  part,  having 
lost  9,  or  stop  and  remain  at  rest,  as  having  lost  its  whole  progressive  motion  of 
10  parts;  or  it  will  go  back  with  1  part,  having  not  only  lost  its  whole  motion, 
but  (if  I  may  so  say)  one  part  more;  or  it  will  go  back  with  2  parts,  because  a 
progressive  motion  of  12  parts  is  taken  off.  And  so  the  sums  of  the  conspiring 
motions, 

154-1  or  16-1-0, 

and  the  differences  of  the  contrary  motions, 

17-1  and  18-2, 

will  always  be  equal  to  16  parts,  as  they  Avere  before  the  meeting  and  reflection 
of  the  bodies.  But  the  motions  being  knoAAm  Avith  Avhich  the  bodies  proceed 
after  reflection,  the  velocity  of  either  Avill  be  also  knoAvn,  by  taking  the  velocity 
after  to  the  velocity  before  reflection,  as  the  motion  after  is  to  the  motion  before. 
As  in  the  last  case,  Avhere  the 

motion  of  A  before  reflection  (6)  :  motion  of  A  after  (18) 

=  velocity  of  A  before  (2)  :  velocity  of  A  after  (x) ; 

that  is, 

6  :  18  =  2  :  X,  a:  =  6. 

But  if  the  bodies  are  either  not  spherical,  or,  moving  in  different  right  lines, 
impinge  obliquely  one  upon  the  other,  and  their  motions  after  reflection  are  re¬ 
quired,  in  those  cases  Ave  are  first  to  determine  the  position  of  the  plane  that 
touches  the  bodies  in  the  point  of  impact,  then  the  motion  of  each  body  (by 
Cor.  ii)  is  to  be  resolved  into  tAvo,  one  perpendicular  to  that  plane,  and  the 
other  parallel  to  it.  This  done,  because  the  bodies  act  upon  each  other  in  the 
direction  of  a  line  perpendicular  to  this  plane,  the  parallel  motions  are  to  be 
retained  the  same  after  reflection  as  before ;  and  to  the  perpendicular  motions 
AA^e  are  to  assign  equal  changes  toAvards  the  contrary  parts;  in  such  manner 
that  the  sum  of  the  conspiring  and  the  difference  of  the  contrary  motions  may 
remain  the  same  as  before.  From  such  kind  of  reflections  sometimes  arise  also 
the  circular  motions  of  bodies  about  their  OAAm  centres.  But  these  are  cases 
AA^hich  I  do  not  consider  in  Avhat  folloAvs ;  and  it  Avould  be  too  tedious  to  demon¬ 
strate  every  particular  case  that  relates  to  this  subject. 


18 


Mathematical  Principles 


COROLLARY  IV 

The  common  centre  of  gravity  of  two  or  more  bodies  does  not  alter  its  state  of  motion 
or  rest  by  the  actions  of  the  bodies  among  themselves;  and  therefore  the  common 
centre  of  gravity  of  all  bodies  acting  upon  each  other  {excluding  external  actions  and 
impediments)  is  either  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly  in  a  right  line. 

For  if  two  points  proceed  with  an  uniform  motion  in  right  lines,  and  their 
distance  be  divided  in  a  given  ratio,  the  dividing  point  vill  be  either  at  rest,  or 
proceed  uniformly  in  a  right  line.  This  is  demonstrated  hereafter  in  Lem.  23 
and  Corollary,  when  the  points  are  moved  in  the  same  plane;  and  by  a  like  way 
of  arguing,  it  may  be  demonstrated  when  the  points  are  not  moved  in  the  same 
plane.  Therefore  if  any  number  of  bodies  move  uniformly  in  right  lines,  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  of  any  two  of  them  is  either  at  rest,  or  proceeds 
uniformly  in  a  right  line;  because  the  line  which  connects  the  centres  of  those 
tAvo  bodies  so  moving  is  divided  at  that  common  centre  in  a  given  ratio.  In  like 
manner  the  common  centre  of  those  tAvo  and  that  of  a  third  body  Avill  be  either 
at  rest  or  moving  uniformly  in  a  right  line;  because  at  that  centre  the  distance 
betAveen  the  common  centre  of  the  tAvo  bodies,  and  the  centre  of  this  last,  is 
divided  in  a  given  ratio.  In  like  manner  the  common  centre  of  these  three,  and 
of  a  fourth  body,  is  either  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly  in  a  right  line;  because 
the  distance  betAA^een  the  common  centre  of  the  three  bodies,  and  the  centre  of 
the  fourth,  is  there  also  divided  in  a  given  ratio,  and  so  on  in  infinitum.  There¬ 
fore,  in  a  system  of  bodies  Avhere  there  is  neither  any  mutual  action  among 
themselves,  nor  any  foreign  force  impressed  upon  them  from  Avithout,  and 
Avhich  consequently  move  uniformly  in  right  lines,  the  common  centre  of  gravity 
of  them  all  is  either  at  rest  or  moves  uniformly  forAA^ards  in  a  right  line. 

Moreover,  in  a  system  of  tAvo  bodies  acting  upon  each  other,  since  the  dis¬ 
tances  betAA^een  their  centres  and  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  both  are 
reciprocally  as  the  bodies,  the  relative  motions  of  those  bodies,  Avhether  of 
approaching  to  or  of  receding  from  that  centre,  aauII  be  equal  among  themselves. 
Therefore  since  the  changes  AA'hich  happen  to  motions  are  equal  and  directed  to 
contrary  parts,  the  common  centre  of  those  bodies,  by  their  mutual  action 
betAveen  themselves,  is  neither  accelerated  nor  retarded,  nor  suffers  any  change 
as  to  its  state  of  motion  or  rest.  But  in  a  system  of  several  bodies,  because  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  of  any  tAVo  acting  upon  each  other  suffers  no  change 
in  its  state  by  that  action;  and  much  less  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
others  AAuth  Avhich  that  action  does  not  intervene;  but  the  distance  betAveen 
those  tAvo  centres  is  divided  by  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  bodies 
into  parts  inversely  proportional  to  the  total  sums  of  those  bodies  AA'hose  centres 
they  are;  and  therefore  Avhile  those  tAvo  centres  retain  their  state  of  motion  or 
rest,  the  common  centre  of  all  does  also  retain  its  state :  it  is  manifest  that  the 
common  centre  of  all  never  suffers  any  change  in  the  state  of  its  motion  or  rest 
from  the  actions  of  any  tAvo  bodies  betAveen  themselves.  But  in  such  a  system 
all  the  actions  of  the  bodies  among  themselves  either  happen  betAA’een  tAvo 
bodies,  or  are  composed  of  actions  interchanged  betAveen  some  tAvo  bodies;  and 
therefore  they  do  never  produce  any  alteration  in  the  common  centre  of  all  as 
to  its  state  of  motion  or  rest.  Wherefore  since  that  centre,  Avhen  the  bodies  do 
not  act  one  upon  another,  either  is  at  rest  or  moves  uniformly  forAvards  in  some 
right  line,  it  aaiII,  notAvithstanding  the  mutual  actions  of  the  bodies  among 


Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion  19 

themselves,  always  continue  in  its  state,  either  of  rest,  or  of  proceeding  uni¬ 
formly  in  a  right  line,  unless  it  is  forced  out  of  this  state  by  the  action  of  some 
power  impressed  from  without  upon  the  whole  system.  And  therefore  the  same 
law  takes  place  in  a  system  consisting  of  many  bodies  as  in  one  single  body, 
A\'ith  regard  to  their  persevering  in  their  state  of  motion  or  of  rest.  For  the 
progressive  motion,  whether  of  one  single  body,  or  of  a  whole  system  of  bodies, 
is  always  to  be  estimated  from  the  motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity. 

COROLLARY  V 

The  motions  of  bodies  included  in  a  given  space  are  the  same  among  themselves, 
whether  that  space  is  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line  without 
any  circidar  motion. 

For  the  differences  of  the  motions  tending  towards  the  same  parts,  and  the 
sums  of  those  that  tend  towards  contrary  parts,  are,  at  first  (by  supposition), 
in  both  cases  the  same;  and  it  is  from  those  sums  and  differences  that  the  col¬ 
lisions  and  impulses  do  arise  with  which  the  bodies  impinge  one  upon  another. 
Wherefore  (by  Law  2),  the  effects  of  those  collisions  Avill  be  equal  in  both  cases; 
and  therefore  the  mutual  motions  of  the  bodies  among  themselves  in  the  one 
case  Avail  remain  equal  to  the  motions  of  the  bodies  among  themselves  in  the 
other.  A  clear  proof  of  this  we  have  from  the  experiment  of  a  ship;  vvRere  all 
motions  happen  after  the  same  manner,  whether  the  ship  is  at  rest,  or  is  carried 
uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line. 

COROLLARY  VI 

If  bodies,  moved  in  any  manner  among  theryi  selves,  are  urged  in  the  direction  of 
parallel  lines  by  equal  accelerative  forces,  they  will  all  continue  to  move  among 
themselves,  after  the  same  manner  as  if  they  had  not  been  urged  by  those  forces. 

For  these  forces  acting  equally  (with  respect  to  the  quantities  of  the  bodies 
to  be  moved),  and  in  the  direction  of  parallel  lines,  will  (by  Law  2)  move  all  the 
bodies  equally  (as  to  velocity),  and  therefore  vvdll  never  produce  any  change  in 
the  positions  or  motions  of  the  bodies  among  themselves. 

Scholium 

Hitherto  I  have  laid  down  such  principles  as  have  been  received  by  mathe¬ 
maticians,  and  are  confirmed  by  abundance  of  experiments.  By  the  first  two 
Laws  and  the  first  two  Corollaries,  Galileo  discovered  that  the  descent  of  bodies 
varied  as  the  square  of  the  time  {in  duplicata  rations  temporis)  and  that  the 
motion  of  projectiles  was  in  the  curve  of  a  parabola;  experience  agreeing  with 
both,  unless  so  far  as  these  motions  are  a  little  retarded  by  the  resistance  of  the 
air.  When  a  body  is  falling,  the  uniform  force  of  its  gravity  acting  equally, 
impresses,  in  equal  intervals  of  time,  equal  forces  upon  that  body,  and  there¬ 
fore  generates  equal  velocities;  and  in  the  whole  time  impresses  a  whole  force, 
and  generates  a  whole  velocity  proportional  to  the  time.  And  the  spaces  de¬ 
scribed  in  proportional  times  are  as  the  product  of  the  velocities  and  the  times; 
that  is,  as  the  squares  of  the  times.  And  when  a  body  is  throvvm  upwards,  its 
uniform  gravity  impresses  forces  and  reduces  velocities  proportional  to  the 
times;  and  the  times  of  ascending  to  the  greatest  heights  are  as  the  velocities  to 
be  taken  away,  and  those  heights  are  as  the  product  of  the  velocities  and  the 
times,  or  as  the  squares  of  the  velocities.  And  if  a  body  be  projected  in  any 


20 


Mathematical  Principles 


B 


direction,  the  motion  arising  from  its  projection  is  compounded  with  the  mo¬ 
tion  arising  from  its  gravity.  Thus,  if  the  body  A  by  its  motion  of  projection 
alone  could  describe  in  a  given  time  the  right  line  AB,  and  with  its  motion  of 
falling  alone  could  describe  in  the  same  time  the  altitude  AC;  complete  the 
parallelogram  ABCD,  and  the  body  by  that  compounded 
motion  will  at  the  end  of  the  time  be  found  in  the  place  D; 
and  the  curved  line  AED,  w^hich  that  body  describes,  will  be 
a  parabola,  to  which  the  right  line  AB  will  be  a  tangent  at  A; 
and  w^hose  ordinate  BD  will  be  as  the  square  of  the  line  AB. 

On  the  same  Law's  and  Corollaries  depend  those  things  which 
have  been  demonstrated  concerning  the  times  of  the  vibra¬ 
tion  of  pendulums,  and  are  confirmed  by  the  daily  experi¬ 
ments  of  pendulum  clocks.  By  the  same,  together  with  Law^ 

3,  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  Dr.  Wallis,  and  Mr.  Huygens,  the  greatest  geometers 
of  our  times,  did  severally  determine  the  rules  of  the  impact  and  reflection  of 
hard  bodies,  and  about  the  same  time  communicated  their  discoveries  to  the 
Royal  Society,  exactly  agreeing  among  themselves  as  to  those  rules.  Dr.  Wallis, 
indeed,  was  somew'hat  earlier  in  the  publication;  then  follow^ed  Sir  Christopher 
Wren,  and,  lastly,  Mr.  Huygens.  But  Sir  Christopher  Wren  confirmed  the 
truth  of  the  thing  before  the  Royal  Society  by  the  experiments  on  pendulums, 
w'hich  M.  Mariotte  soon  after  thought  fit  to  explain  in  a  treatise  entirely  upon 
that  subject.  But  to  bring  this  experiment  to  an  accurate  agreement  w'ith  the 
theory,  we  are  to  have  due  regard  as  w^ell  to  the  resistance  of  the  air  as  to  the 
elastic  force  of  the  concurring  bodies.  Let  the  spherical  bodies  A,  B  be  sus- 
p  ^  ^  P  „  pended  by  the  parallel  and  equal  strings  AC, 

BD,  from  the  centres  C,  D.  About  these  cen¬ 
tres,  with  those  lengths  as  radii,  describe  the 
semicircles  EAF,  GBH,  bisected  respectively 
by  the  radii  CA,  DB.  Bring  the  body  A  to 
any  point  R  of  the  arc  EAF,  and  (withdraw  ¬ 
ing  the  body  B)  let  it  go  from  thence,  and 
after  one  oscillation  suppose  it  to  return  to 
the  point  V :  then  RV  will  be  the  retardation  arising  from  the  resistance  of  the 
air.  Of  this  RV  let  ST  be  a  fourth  part,  situated  in  the  middle,  namely,  so  that 

RS  =  TV, 

and 


- 

/  4 
/ 

V\  \ 

t/v  / 

RS:ST  =  3:2, 

then  will  ST  represent  very  nearly  the  retardation  during  the  descent  from  S  to 
A.  Restore  the  body  B  to  its  place :  and,  supposing  the  body  A  to  be  let  fall  from 
the  point  S,  the  velocity  thereof  in  the  place  of  reflection  A,  without  sensible 
error,  will  be  the  same  as  if  it  had  descended  in  vacuo  from  the  point  T.  Upon 
which  account  this  velocity  may  be  represented  by  the  chord  of  the  arc  TA. 
For  it  is  a  proposition  w'ell  knowm  to  geometers,  that  the  velocity  of  a  pendulous 
body  in  the  low'est  point  is  as  the  chord  of  the  arc  which  it  has  described  in  its 
descent.  After  reflection,  suppose  the  body  A  comes  to  the  place  s,  and  the 
body  B  to  the  place  k.  Withdraw'  the  body  B,  and  find  the  place  v,  from  w'hich 
if  the  body  A,  being  let  go,  should  after  one  oscillation  return  to  the  place  r,  st 
may  be  a  fourth  part  of  rv,  so  placed  in  the  middle  thereof  as  to  leave  rs  equal 
to  tv,  and  let  the  chord  of  the  arc  tK  represent  the  velocity  which  the  body  A 


Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion  21 

had  in  the  place  A  immediately  after  reflection.  For  t  will  be  the  true  and  correct 
place  to  which  the  body  A  should  have  ascended,  if  the  resistance  of  the  air  had 
been  taken  off.  In  the  same  way  we  are  to  correct  the  place  k  to  which  the  body 
B  ascends,  by  finding  the  place  I  to  which  it  should  have  ascended  in  vacuo. 
And  thus  everything  may  be  subjected  to  experiment,  in  the  same  manner  as 
if  we  were  really  placed  in  vacuo.  These  things  being  done,  we  are  to  take  the 
product  (if  I  may  so  say)  of  the  body  A,  by  the  chord  of  the  arc  TA  (which 
represents  its  velocity),  that  we  may  have  its  motion  in  the  place  A  immediately 
before  reflection;  and  then  by  the  chord  of  the  arc  tA,  that  we  may  have  its 
motion  in  the  place  A  immediately  after  reflection.  And  so  we  are  to  take  the 
product  of  the  body  B  by  the  chord  of  the  arc  B^,  that  we  may  have  the  motion 
of  the  same  immediately  after  reflection.  And  in  like  manner,  when  two  bodies 
are  let  go  together  from  different  places,  we  are  to  find  the  motion  of  each,  as 
well  before  as  after  reflection;  and  then  we  may  compare  the  motions  between 
themselves,  and  collect  the  effects  of  the  reflection.  Thus  trying  the  thing  with 
pendulums  of  10  feet,  in  unequal  as  well  as  equal  bodies,  and  making  the  bodies 
to  concur  after  a  descent  through  large  spaces,  as  of  8,  12,  or  16  feet,  I  found 
always,  without  an  error  of  3  inches,  that  when  the  bodies  concurred  together 
directly,  equal  changes  towards  the  contrary  parts  were  produced  in  their 
motions,  and,  of  consequence,  that  the  action  and  reaction  were  alwaj'^s  equal. 
As  if  the  body  A  impinged  upon  the  body  B  at  rest  \vith  9  parts  of  motion,  and 
losing  7,  proceeded  after  reflection  Avith  2,  the  body  B  was  carried  backwards 
with  those  7  parts.  If  the  bodies  concurred  with  contrary  motions,  A  with  12 
parts  of  motion,  and  B  Avith  6,  then  if  A  receded  Avith  2,  B  receded  Avith  8; 
namely,  Avith  a  deduction  of  14  parts  of  motion  on  each  side.  For  from  the 
motion  of  A  subtracting  12  parts,  nothing  Avill  remain;  but  subtracting  2  parts 
more,  a  motion  aaiII  be  generated  of  2  parts  toAvards  the  contrary  Avay;  and  so, 
from  the  motion  of  the  body  B  of  6  parts,  subtracting  14  parts,  a  motion  is 
generated  of  8  parts  toAvards  the  contrary  Avay.  But  if  the  bodies  were  made 
both  to  move  toAvards  the  same  Avay,  A,  the  SAvifter,  AAuth  14  parts  of  motion, 
B,  the  sloAver,  Avith  5,  and  after  reflection  A  Avent  on  Avith  5,  B  likeAvise  AA^ent  on 
Avith  14  parts;  9  parts  being  transferred  from  A  to  B.  And  so  in  other  cases.  By 
the  meeting  and  collision  of  bodies,  the  quantity  of  motion,  obtained  from  the 
sum  of  the  motions  directed  toAvards  the  same  way,  or  from  the  difference  of 
those  that  Avere  directed  toAvards  contrary  Avays,  was  never  changed.  For  the 
error  of  an  inch  or  tAvo  in  measures  may  be  easily  ascribed  to  the  difficulty  of 
executing  everything  Avith  accuracy.  It  Avas  not  easy  to  let  go  the  tAvo  pendu¬ 
lums  so  exactly  together  that  the  bodies  should  impinge  one  upon  the  other  in 
the  loAvermost  place  AB;  nor  to  mark  the  places  s,  and  k,  to  Avhich  the  bodies 
ascended  after  impact.  Nay,  and  some  errors,  too,  might  have  happened  from 
the  unequal  density  of  the  parts  of  the  pendulous  bodies  themselves,  and  from 
the  irregularity  of  the  texture  proceeding  from  other  causes. 

But  to  prevent  an  objection  that  may  perhaps  be  alleged  against  the  rule, 
for  the  proof  of  which  this  experiment  was  made,  as  if  this  rule  did  suppose  that 
the  bodies  Avere  either  absolutely  hard,  or  at  least  perfectly  elastic  (Avhereas  no 
such  bodies  are  to  be  found  in  Nature),  I  must  add,  that  the  experiments  Ave 
have  been  describing,  by  no  means  depending  upon  that  quality  of  hardness, 
do  succeed  as  Avell  in  soft  as  in  hard  bodies.  For  if  the  rule  is  to  be  tried  in  bodies 
not  perfectly  hard,  A\"e  are  only  to  diminish  the  reflection  in  such  a  certain 


22  Mathematical  Principles 

proportion  as  the  quantity  of  the  elastic  force  requires.  By  the  theory  of  Wren 
and  Huygens,  bodies  absolutely  hard  return  one  from  another  with  the  same 
velocity  with  which  they  meet.  But  this  may  be  affirmed  with  more  certainty 
of  bodies  perfectly  elastic.  In  bodies  imperfectly  elastic  the  velocity  of  the  re¬ 
turn  is  to  be  diminished  together  with  the  elastic  force;  because  that  force 
(except  when  the  parts  of  bodies  are  bruised  by  their  impact,  or  suffer  some 
such  extension  as  happens  under  the  strokes  of  a  hammer)  is  (as  far  as  I  can 
perceive)  certain  and  determined,  and  makes  the  bodies  to  return  one  from  the 
other  with  a  relative  velocity,  which  is  in  a  given  ratio  to  that  relative  velocity 
\vith  which  they  met.  This  I  tried  in  balls  of  wool,  made  up  tightly,  and  strongly 
compressed.  For,  first,  by  letting  go  the  pendulous  bodies,  and  measuring  their 
reflection,  I  determined  the  quantity  of  their  elastic  force;  and  then,  according 
to  this  force,  estimated  the  reflections  that  ought  to  happen  in  other  cases  of 
impact.  And  mth  this  computation  other  experiments  made  afterwards  did 
accordingly  agree;  the  balls  always  receding  one  from  the  other  Avith  a  relative 
velocity,  which  was  to  the  relative  velocity  with  which  they  met  as  about  5  to 
9.  Balls  of  steel  returned  Avith  almost  the  same  velocity;  those  of  cork  Avith  a 
a  velocity  something  less;  but  in  balls  of  glass  the  proportion  Avas  as  about  15 
to  16.  And  thus  the  third  Law,  so  far  as  it  regards  percussions  and  reflections, 
is  proved  by  a  theory  exactly  agreeing  with  experience. 

In  attractions,  I  briefly  demonstrate  the  thing  after  this  manner.  Suppose  an 
obstacle  is  interposed  to  hinder  the  meeting  of  any  two  bodies  A,  B,  attracting 
one  the  other:  then  if  either  body,  as  A,  is  more  attracted  toAvards  the  other 
body  B,  than  that  other  body  B  is  toAvards  the  first  body  A,  the  obstacle  Avill  be 
more  strongly  urged  by  the  pressure  of  the  body  A  than  by  the  pressure  of  the 
body  B,  and  therefore  aauII  not  remain  in  equilibrium:  but  the  stronger  pressure 
Avill  prevail,  and  Avill  make  the  system  of  the  two  bodies,  together  Avith  the 
obstacle,  to  move  directly  toAvards  the  parts  on  which  B  lies;  and  in  free  spaces, 
to  go  forAvards  in  infinitum  with  a  motion  continually  accelerated;  Avhich  is 
absurd  and  contrary  to  the  first  LaAV.  For,  by  the  first  LaAv,  the  system  ought  to 
continue  in  its  state  of  rest,  or  of  moving  uniformly  forAvards  in  a  right  line;  and 
therefore  the  bodies  must  equally  press  the  obstacle,  and  be  equally  attracted 
one  by  the  other.  I  made  the  experiment  on  the  loadstone  and  iron.  If  these, 
placed  apart  in  proper  vessels,  are  made  to  float  by  one  another  in  standing 
Avater,  neither  of  them  Avill  propel  the  other;  but,  by  being  equally  attracted, 
they  Avill  sustain  each  other’s  pressure,  and  rest  at  last  in  an  equilibrium. 

So  the  gravitation  betAveen  the  earth  and  its  parts  is  mutual.  Let  the  earth 
FI  by  cut  by  any  plane  EG  into  two  parts  EGF  and  EGI,  and  their  Aveights 
one  toAvards  the  other  Avill  be  mutually  equal.  For  if 
by  another  plane  HK,  parallel  to  the  former  EG,  the 
greater  part  EGI  is  cut  into  two  parts  EGKH  and 
HKI,  Avhereof  HKI  is  equal  to  the  part  EFG,  first  cut 
off,  it  is  CAudent  that  the  middle  part  EGKH  Avill  have 
no  propension  by  its  proper  weight  towards  either 
side,  but  aaiII  hang  as  it  were,  and  rest  in  an  equilib¬ 
rium  betAveen  both.  But  the  one  extreme  part  HKI 
Avill  Avith  its  whole  Aveight  bear  upon  and  press  the 
middle  part  toAvards  the  other  extreme  part  EGF;  and  therefore  the  force 
with  which  EGI,  the  sum  of  the  parts  HKI  and  EGKH,  tends  toAvards  the 


Axioms,  or  Laws  of  Motion  23 

third  part  EGF,  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  part  HKI,  that  is,  to  the  weight 
of  the  third  part  EGF.  And  therefore  the  weights  of  the  two  parts  EGI  and 
EGF,  one  towards  the  other,  are  equal,  as  I  was  to  prove.  And  indeed  if  those 
Aveights  were  not  equal,  the  whole  earth  floating  in  the  nonresisting  ether  would 
give  way  to  the  greater  weight,  and,  retiring  from  it,  would  be  carried  off  in 
infinitum. 

And  as  those  bodies  are  equipollent  in  the  impact  and  reflection,  whose  ve¬ 
locities  are  inversely  as  their  innate  forces,  so  in  the  use  of  mechanic  instruments 
those  agents  are  equipollent,  and  mutually  sustain  each  the  contrary  pressure 
of  the  other,  whose  velocities,  estimated  according  to  the  determination  of  the 
forces,  are  inversely  as  the  forces. 

So  those  weights  are  of  equal  force  to  move  the  arms  of  a  balance,  which 
during  the  play  of  the  balance  are  inversely  as  their  velocities  upwards  and 
downwards;  that  is,  if  the  ascent  or  descent  is  direct,  those  weights  are  of  equal 
force,  which  are  inversely  as  the  distances  of  the  points  at  which  they  are  sus¬ 
pended  from  the  axis  of  the  balance;  but  if  they  are  turned  aside  by  the  inter¬ 
position  of  oblique  planes,  or  other  obstacles,  and  made  to  ascend  or  descend 
obliquely,  those  bodies  mil  be  equipollent,  v/hich  are  inversely  as  the  heights 
of  their  ascent  and  descent  taken  according  to  the  perpendicular;  and  that  on 
account  of  the  determination  of  gravity  downAvards. 

And  in  like  manner  in  the  pulley,  or  in  a  combination  of  pulleys,  the  force  of 
a  hand  draAAung  the  rope  directly,  AALich  is  to  the  Aveight,  AA'hether  ascending 
directly  or  obliquely,  as  the  velocity  of  the  perpendicular  ascent  of  the  Aveight 
to  the  velocity  of  the  hand  that  draAvs  the  rope,  aauII  sustain  the  Aveight. 

In  clocks  and  such  like  instruments,  made  up  from  a  combination  of  Avheels, 
the  contrary  forces  that  promote  and  impede  the  motion  of  the  Avheels,  if  they 
are  inversely  as  the  velocities  of  the  parts  of  the  Avheel  on  Avhich  they  are 
impressed,  Avill  mutually  sustain  each  other. 

The  force  of  the  screAv  to  press  a  body  is  to  the  force  of  the  hand  that  turns 
the  handles  by  Avhich  it  is  moved  as  the  circular  velocity  of  the  handle  in  that 
part  Avhere  it  is  impelled  by  the  hand  is  to  the  progressive  velocity  of  the  screAv 
toAA'ards  the  pressed  body. 

The  forces  by  Avhich  the  AA^edge  presses  or  drives  the  tAVo  parts  of  the  Avood  it 
cleaves  are  to  the  force  of  the  mallet  upon  the  Avedge  as  the  progress  of  the 
AA^edge  in  the  direction  of  the  force  impressed  upon  it  by  the  mallet  is  to  the 
velocity  Avith  Avhich  the  parts  of  the  Avood  yield  to  the  Avedge,  in  the  direction 
of  lines  perpendicular  to  the  sides  of  the  Avedge.  And  the  like  account  is  to  be 
given  of  all  machines. 

The  poAver  and  use  of  machines  consist  only  in  this,  that  by  diminishing  the 
velocity  Ave  may  augment  the  force,  and  the  contrary;  from  Avhence,  in  all  sorts 
of  proper  machines,  Ave  have  the  solution  of  this  problem:  To  move  a  given 
weight  with  a  given  power,  or  AAuth  a  given  force  to  overcome  any  other  given 
resistance.  For  if  machines  are  so  contrived  that  the  velocities  of  the  agent  and 
resistant  are  inversely  as  their  forces,  the  agent  Avill  just  sustain  the  resistant, 
but  AAith  a  greater  disparity  of  velocity  aatII  overcome  it.  So  that  if  the  disparity 
of  velocities  is  so  great  as  to  overcome  all  that  resistance  AA'hich  commonly 
arises  either  from  the  friction  of  contiguous  bodies  as  they  slide  by  one  another, 
or  from  the  cohesion  of  continuous  bodies  that  are  to  be  separated,  or  from  the 
AA^eights  of  bodies  to  be  raised,  the  excess  of  the  force  remaining,  after  all  those 


24 


Mathematical  Principles 

resistances  are  overcome,  Avill  produce  an  acceleration  of  motion  proportional 
thereto,  as  well  in  the  parts  of  the  machine  as  in  the  resisting  body.  But  to  treat 
of  mechanics  is  not  my  present  business.  I  was  aiming  only  to  show  by  those 
e.xamples  the  great  extent  and  certainty  of  the  third  Law  of  Motion.  For  if  Ave 
estimate  the  action  of  the  agent  from  the  product  of  its  force  and  velocity,  and 
likewise  the  reaction  of  the  impediment  from  the  product  of  the  velocities  of  its 
several  parts,  and  the  forces  of  resistance  arising  from  the  friction,  cohesion, 
Aveight,  and  acceleration  of  those  parts,  the  action  and  reaction  in  the  use  of  all 
sorts  of  machines  aaiU  be  found  ahvays  equal  to  one  another.  And  so  far  as  the 
action  is  propagated  by  the  intervening  instruments,  and  at  last  impressed 
upon  the  resisting  body,  the  ultimate  action  Avill  be  ahvays  contrary  to  the 
reaction. 


BOOK  ONE 


THE  MOTION  OF  BODIES 

SECTION  I 

The  method  of  first  and  last  ratios  of  quantities,  by  the  help  of  which 

WE  DEMONSTRATE  THE  PROPOSITIONS  THAT  FOLLOW 

Lemma  1 

Quantities,  and  the  ratios  of  quantities,  which  in  any  finite  time  converge  contin¬ 
ually  to  equality,  and  before  the  end  of  that  time  approach  nearer  to  each  other  than 
by  any  given  difference,  become  ultimately  equal. 

If  you  deny  it,  suppose  them  to  be  ultimately  unequal,  and  let  D  be  their 
ultimate  difference.  Therefore  they  cannot  approach  nearer  to  equality  than 
by  that  difference  D ;  which  is  contrary  to  the  supposition. 

Lemma  2 

If  in  any  figure  AacE,  terminated  by  the  right  lines  Aa, 
AE,  and  the  curve  acE,  there  be  inscribed  any  number  of 
parallelograms  Ah,  Be,  Cd,  &c.,  comprehended  under  equal 
bases  AB,  BC,  CD,  &c.,  and  the  sides,  Bb,  Cc,  Dd,  &c., 
g  parallel  to  one  side  Aao/  the  figure;  and  the  parallelograms 
aKbl,  bLcm,  cMdn,  &c.,  are  completed:  thenif  the  breadth 
of  those  parallelograms  be  supposed  to  be  diminished,  and 
their  number  to  be  augmented  in  infinitum,  I  say,  that  the 
\|  ultimate  ratios  which  the  inscribed  figure  AKbLcMdD, 
E  the  circumscribed  figure  AalbmendoE,  and  curvilinear 
figure  AabcdE,  will  have  to  one  another,  are  ratios  of  equality. 

For  the  difference  of  the  inscribed  and  circumscribed  figures  is  the  sum  of 
the  parallelograms  K/,  Lm,  Mn,  Do,  that  is  (from  the  equality  of  all  their 
bases),  the  rectangle  under  one  of  their  bases  Kb  and  the  sum  of  their  altitudes 
Aa,  that  is,  the  rectangle  ABZa.  But  this  rectangle,  because  its  breadth  AB  is 
supposed  diminished  in  infinitum,  becomes  less  than  any  given  space.  And 
therefore  (by  Lem.  1)  the  figures  inscribed  and  circumscribed  become  ulti¬ 
mately  equal  one  to  the  other;  and  much  more  will  the  intermediate  curvilinear 
figure  be  ultimately  equal  to  either.  q.e.d. 

Lemma  3 

The  same  idtimate  ratios  are  also  ratios  of  equality,  when  the  breadths  AB, 
BC,  DC,  &c.,  of  the  parallelograms  are  unequal,  and  are  all  diminished  in  in¬ 
finitum. 

For  suppose  AF  equal  to  the  greatest  breadth,  and  complete  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  FAa/.  This  parallelogram  will  be  greater  than  the  difference  of  the  in- 

25 


Q.E.D. 


26  Mathematical  Principles 

scribed  and  circumscribed  figures;  but,  because  its  breadth  AF  is  diminished 
in  infinitum,  it  will  become  less  than  any  given  rectangle. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  ultimate  sum  of  those  evanescent 
parallelograms  Mil  in  all  parts  coincide  with  the  curvi¬ 
linear  figure. 

Cor.  II.  Much  more  will  the  rectilinear  figure  com¬ 
prehended  under  the  chords  of  the  evanescent  arcs  ah, 
be,  cd,  &c.,  ultimately  coincide  with  the  curvilinear 
figure. 

Cor.  III.  And  also  the  circumscribed  rectilinear  figure 
comprehended  under  the  tangents  of  the  same  arcs. 

Cor.  IV.  And  therefore  these  ultimate  figures  (as  to 
their  perimeters  acE)  are  not  rectilinear,  but  curvilinear 
limits  of  rectilinear  figures. 


Lemma  4 

If  in  two  figures  AacE,  PprT,  there  are  inscribed  {as  before)  two  series  of  'parallelo¬ 
grams,  an  equal  number  in  each  series,  and,  their  breadths  being  diminished  in 
infinitum,  if  the  ultimate  ratios  of  the  parallelograms  in  one  figure  to  those  in  the 
other,  each  to  each  respectively,  are  the  same:  I  say,  that  those  two  figures,  AacE, 
PprT,  are  to  each  other  in  that  same  ratio. 


a 


For  as  the  parallelograms  in  the  one  are  severalty  to  the  parallelograms  in 
the  other,  so  (by  composition)  is  the  sum  of  all  in  the  one  to  the  sum  of  all  in 
the  other;  and  so  is  the  one  figure  to  the  other;  because  (by  Lem.  3)  the  former 
figure  to  the  former  sum,  and  the  latter  figure  to  the  latter  sum,  are  both  in 
the  ratio  of  equality.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  if  tw'o  quantities  of  any  kind  are  divided  in  any  manner  into  an 
equal  number  of  parts,  and  those  parts,  when  their  number  is  augmented,  and 
their  magnitude  diminished  in  infinitum,  have  a  given  ratio  to  each  other,  the 
first  to  the  first,  the  second  to  the  second,  and  so  on  in  order,  all  of  them  taken 
together  wall  be  to  each  other  in  that  same  given  ratio.  For  if,  in  the  figures  of 
this  Lemma,  the  parallelograms  are  taken  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  the 
parts,  the  sum  of  the  parts  will  always  be  as  the  sum  of  the  parallelograms;  and 
therefore  supposing  the  number  of  the  parallelograms  and  parts  to  be  aug¬ 
mented,  and  their  magnitudes  diminished  in  infinitum,  those  sums  will  be  in 
the  ultimate  ratio  of  the  parallelogram  in  the  one  figure  to  the  correspondent 
parallelogram  in  the  other;  that  is  (by  the  supposition),  in  the  ultimate  ratio 
of  an^^  part  of  the  one  quantity  to  the  correspondent  part  of  the  other. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


27 


Lemma  5 

All  homologous  sides  of  similar  figures,  whether  curvilinear  or  rectilinear,  are  pro¬ 
portional;  and  the  areas  are  as  the  squares  of  the  homologous  sides. 


D 


Lemma  6 

’  If  any  arc  ACB,  given  in  position,  is  sub¬ 
tended  by  its  chord  AB,  and  in  any  point  A, 
in  the  middle  of  the  continued  curvature,  is 
touched  by  a  right  line  AD,  produced  both 
ways;  then  if  the  points  A  and  B  approach 
one  another  and  meet,  I  say,  the  angle  BAD, 
contained  between  the  chord  and  the  tan¬ 
gent,  will  be  diminished  in  infinitum,  and 
idtimately  will  vanish. 

For  if  that  angle  does  not  vanish,  the  arc 
ACB  will  contain  with  the  tangent  AD  an  angle  equal  to  a  rectilinear  angle ; 
and  therefore  the  curvature  at  the  point  A  will  not  be  continued,  which  is 
against  the  supposition. 

Lemma  7 


R 

r 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  I  say  that  the  idtimate  ratio  of  the  arc,  chord,  and 
tangent,  any  one  to  any  other,  is  the  ratio  of  equality. 

For  while  the  point  B  approaches  towards  the  point  A,  consider  always  AB 
and  AD  as  produced  to  the  remote  points  b  and  d;  and  parallel  to  the  secant 
BD  draw  bd;  and  let  the  arc  Acb  be  always  similar  to  the  arc  ACB.  Then,  sup¬ 
posing  the  points  A  and  B  to  coincide,  the  angle  dAb  will  vanish,  by  the  pre¬ 
ceding  Lemma;  and  therefore  the  right  lines  A6,  Ad  (which  are  always  finite), 
and  the  intermediate  arc  Acb,  will  coincide,  and  become  equal  among  them¬ 
selves.  Wherefore,  the  right  lines  AB,  AD,  and  the  intermediate  arc  ACB 
(which  are  always  proportional  to  the  former),  will  vanish,  and  ultimately  ac¬ 
quire  the  ratio  of  equality.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Whence  if  through  B  we  draw  BF  parallel  to  the  tangent,  always 
cutting  any  right  line  AF  passing  through  A  in  F,  this  line  BF  will  be  ultimate¬ 
ly  in  the  ratio  of  equality  with  the  evanescent  arc  ACB;  because,  completing 
the  parallelogram  AFBD,  it  is  always  in  a  ratio  of  equality  with  AD. 

Cor.  II.  And  if  through  B  and  A  more  right 
lines  are  drawn,  as  BE,  BD,  AF,  AG,  cutting 
the  tangent  AD  and  its  parallel  BF ;  the  ulti¬ 
mate  ratio  of  all  the  abscissas  AD,  AE,  BF, 

BG,  and  of  the  chord  and  arc  AB,  any  one  to 
any  other,  will  be  the  ratio  of  equality. 

Cor.  III.  And  therefore  in  all  our  reasoning  about  ultimate  ratios,  we  may 
freely  use  any  one  of  those  lines  for  any  other. 


Lemma  8 

If  the  right  lines  AR,  BR,  with  the  arc  ACB,  the  chord  AB,  and  the  tangent  AD, 
constitute  three  triangles  RAB,  RACB,  RAD,  and  the  points  A  and  B  approach 
and  meet:  I  say,  that  the  ultimate  form  of  these  evanescent  triangles  is  that  of  smiil- 
itude,  and  their  ultimate  ratio  that  of  equality. 


28  Mathematical  Principles 

For  while  the  point  B  approaches  towards  the  point  A,  consider  always  AB, 
AD,  AR,  as  produced  to  the  remote  points  b,  d,  and  r,  and  rbd  as  drawn  parallel 
to  RD,  and  let  the  arc  Acb  be  always  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  arc  ACB.  Then  supposing  the 
points  A  and  B  to  coincide,  the  angle  bAd 
will  vanish;  and  therefore  the  three  tri¬ 
angles  rAb,  rAcb,  rAd  (which  are  always 
finite),  will  coincide,  and  on  that  account 
become  both  similar  and  equal.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  triangles  RAB,  RACB,  RAD, 
which  are  always  similar  and  proportional 
to  these,  will  ultimately  become  both  simi¬ 
lar  and  equal  among  themselves.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  And  hence  in  all  reasonings  about  ultimate  ratios,  we  may  use  any 
one  of  those  triangles  for  any  other. 


Lemma  9 

If  a  right  line  AE,  and  a  curved  line  ABC,  both  given  by  position,  cut  each  other  in 
a  given  angle,  A;  and  to  that  right  line,  in  another  given  angle,  BD,  CE  are  ordi- 
nately  applied,  meeting  the  curve  in  B,  C;  and  the  points  B  and  C  together  ap¬ 
proach  towards  and  meet  in  the  point  A:  I  say,  that  the  areas  of  the  triangles  ABD, 
ACE,  will  ultimately  be  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  homologous  sides. 

For  while  the  points  B,  C,  approach  towards  the  point  A,  suppose  always 
AD  to  be  produced  to  the  remote  points  d  and  e,  so  as  Ad,  Ae  may  be  propor- 
e  g  c  tional  to  AD,  AE;  and  the  ordinates  db,  ec,  to 

be  dravTi  parallel  to  the  ordinates  DB  and  EC, 
and  meeting  AB  and  AC  produced  in  b  and  c. 
Let  the  curve  Abe  be  similar  to  the  curve  ABC, 
and  draw  the  right  line  A^  so  as  to  touch  both 
curves  in  A,  and  cut  the  ordinates  DB,  EC,  db, 
ec,  in  F,  G,  /,  g.  Then,  supposing  the  length  Ae 
to  remain  the  same,  let  the  points  B  and  C  meet 
in  the  point  A;  and  the  angle  cAg  vanishing, 
the  curvilinear  areas  Abd,  Ace  will  coincide  with 
the  rectilinear  areas  Afd,  Age;  and  therefore  (by 
Lem.  5)  will  be  one  to  the  other  in  the  dupli¬ 
cate  ratio  of  the  sides  Ad,  Ae.  But  the  areas  ABD,  ACE  are  always  propor¬ 
tional  to  these  areas;  and  so  the  sides  AD,  AE  are  to  these  sides.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  areas  ABD,  ACE  are  ultimately  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the 
sides  AD,  AE.  q.e.d. 


Lemma  10 

The  spaces  which  a  body  describes  by  any  finite  force  urging  it,  whether  that  force 
is  determined  and  hnmutable,  or  is  continually  augmented  or  continually  dimin¬ 
ished,  are  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  motion  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the 
times. 

Let  the  times  be  represented  by  the  lines  AD,  AE,  and  the  velocities  gen¬ 
erated  in  those  times  by  the  ordinates  DB,  EC.  The  spaces  described  with 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  29 

these  velocities  vill  be  as  the  areas  ABD,  ACE,  described  by  those  ordinates, 
that  is,  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  motion  (by  Lem.  9),  in  the  duplicate  ratio 
of  the  times  AD,  AE.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  And  hence  one  may  easily  infer,  that  the  errors  of  bodies  describing 
similar  parts  of  similar  figures  in  proportional  times,  the  errors  being  generated 
by  any  equal  forces  similarly  applied  to  the  bodies,  and  measured  by  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  the  bodies  from  those  places  of  the  similar  figures,  at  which,  without 
the  action  of  those  forces,  the  bodies  would  have  arrived  in  those  proportional 
times — are  nearly  as  the  squares  of  the  times  in  w^hich  they  are  generated. 

Cor.  II.  But  the  errors  that  are  generated  by  proportional  forces,  similarly 
applied  to  the  bodies  at  similar  parts  of  the  similar  figures,  are  as  the  product 
of  the  forces  and  the  squares  of  the  times. 

Cor.  III.  The  same  thing  is  to  be  understood  of  any  spaces  whatsoever  de¬ 
scribed  by  bodies  urged  with  different  forces;  all  wEich,  in  the  very  beginning 
of  the  motion,  are  as  the  product  of  the  forces  and  the  squares  of  the  times. 

Cor.  IV.  And  therefore  the  forces  are  direct!}'’  as  the  spaces  described  in  the 
very  beginning  of  the  motion,  and  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  times. 

CoR.  V.  And  the  squares  of  the  times  are  directly  as  the  spaces  described, 
and  inversely  as  the  forces. 

Scholium 

If  in  comparing  with  each  other  indeterminate  quantities  of  different  sorts, 
any  one  is  said  to  be  directly  or  inversely  as  any  other,  the  meaning  is,  that  the 
former  is  augmented  or  diminished  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  latter,  or  as  its  re¬ 
ciprocal.  And  if  any  one  is  said  to  be  as  any  other  tw'o  or  more,  directly  or  in¬ 
versely,  the  meaning  is,  that  the  first  is  augmented  or  diminished  in  the  ratio 
compounded  of  the  ratios  in  w^hich  the  others,  or  the  reciprocals  of  the  others, 
are  augmented  or  diminished.  Thus,  if  A  is  said  to  be  as  B  directly,  and  C 
directly,  and  D  inversely,  the  meaning  is,  that  A  is  augmented  or  diminished 

in  the  same  ratio  as  B  •  C  •  p,  that  is  to  say,  that  A  and  are  to  each  other 
in  a  given  ratio. 

Lemma  11 

The  evanescent  subtense  of  the  angle  of  contact,  in  all  curves  which  at  the  point  of 
contact  have  a  finite  curvature,  is  ultimately  as  the  square  of  the  subtense  of  the  con¬ 
terminous  arc. 

Case  1.  Let  AB  be  that  arc,  AD  its  tangent,  BD  the 
subtense  of  the  angle  of  contact  perpendicular  on  the  tan¬ 
gent,  AB  the  subtense  of  the  arc.  Draw'  BG  perpendicular 
to  the  subtense  AB,  and  AG  perpendicular  to  the  tangent 
AD,  meeting  in  G;  then  let  the  points  D,  B,  and  G  approach 
to  the  points  d,  b,  and  g,  and  suppose  J  to  be  the  ultimate 
intersection  of  the  lines  BG,  AG,  w-hen  the  points  D,  B 
have  come  to  A.  It  is  evident  that  the  distance  GJ  may  be 
less  than  any  assignable  distance.  But  (from  the  nature 
of  the  circles  passing  through  the  points  A,  B,  G,  and 
through  A,  b,  g), 

AB2  =  AG  BD,  and 
.W~  =  Ag-bd. 


30 


Mathematical  Principles 


But  because  GJ  may  be  assumed  of  less  length  than  any  assignable,  the  ratio 
of  AG  to  Ag  may  be  such  as  to  differ  from  unity  by  less  than  any  assignable 
difference;  and  therefore  the  ratio  of  AB-  to  Ab^  may  be  such  as  to  differ  from 
the  ratio  of  BD  to  bd  by  less  than  any  assignable  difference.  Therefore,  by 
Lem.  1,  ultimately. 


AB2 :  A62  =  BD  :  bd. 


Q.E.D. 


Case  2.  Now  let  BD  be  inclined  to  AD  in  any  given  angle,  and  the  ultimate 
ratio  of  BD  to  bd  will  always  be  the  same  as  before,  and  therefore  the  same  with 
the  ratio  of  AB^  to  Ab-.  q.e.d. 

Case  3.  And  if  we  suppose  the  angle  D  not  to  be  given,  but  that  the  right 
line  BD  converges  to  a  given  point,  or  is  determined  by  any  other  condition 
whatever;  nevertheless  the  angles  D,  d,  being  determined  by  the  same  law, 
will  always  draw  nearer  to  equality,  and  approach  nearer  to  each  other  than 
by  any  assigned  difference,  and  therefore,  by  Lem.  1,  will  at  last  be  equal;  and 
therefore  the  lines  BD,  bd  are  in  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  before,  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  since  the  tangents  AD,  Ad,  the  arcs  AB,  Ab,  and  their  . 
sines,  BC,  be,  become  ultimately  equal  to  the  chords  AB,  Ab,  their  squares 
will  ultimately  become  as  the  subtenses  BD,  bd. 

Cor.  II.  Their  squares  are  also  ultimately  as  the  versed  sines  of  the  arcs, 
bisecting  the  chords,  and  converging  to  a  given  point.  For  those  versed  sines 
are  as  the  subtenses  BD,  bd. 

Cor.  III.  And  therefore  the  versed  sine  is  as  the  square  of 
the  time  in  which  a  body  will  describe  the  arc  with  a  given 
velocity. 

Cor.  IV.  The  ultimate  proportion, 

AADB  :  AAd6  =  AD3 ;  Ad3  =  DB3/2  :d63/2, 
is  derived  from 

AADB  ;  AAd6  =  AD  DB  :  Ad  ■  db 
and  from  the  ultimate  proportion 

AD2  :  Ad2  =  DB  :db. 

So  also  is  obtained  ultimately 

A  ABC  :  AAbc  =  BC^  :bc\ 

Cor.  V.  And  because  DB,  db  are  ultimately  parallel  and  as  the  squares  of  the 
lines  AD,  Ad,  the  ultimate  curvilinear  areas  ADB,  Adb  Avill  be  (by  the  nature 
of  the  parabola)  two-thirds  of  the  rectilinear  triangles  ADB,  Adb,  and  the 
segments,  AB,  Ab  will  be  one-third  of  the  same  triangles.  And  thence  those 
areas  and  those  segments  will  be  as  the  cubes  of  the  tangents  AD,  Ad,  and  also 
of  the  chords  and  arcs  AB,  A6. 


Scholium 

But  we  have  all  along  supposed  the  angle  of  contact  to  be  neither  infinitely 
greater  nor  infinitely  less  than  the  angles  of  contact  made  by  circles  and  their 
tangents;  that  is,  that  the  curvature  at  the  point  A  is  neither  infinitely  small 
nor  infinitely  great,  and  that  the  interval  AJ  is  of  a  finite  magnitude.  For  DB 
may  be  taken  as  AD^:  in  which  case  no  circle  can  be  drawn  through  the  point 
A,  between  the  tangent  AD  and  the  curve  AB,  and  therefore  the  angle  of  con¬ 
tact  will  be  infinitely  less  than  those  of  circles.  And  by  a  like  reasoning,  if  DB 
be  made  successfidly  as  AD'*,  AD^,  AD®,  AD^,  &c.,  we  shall  have  a  series  of 
angles  of  contact,  proceeding  in  infinitum,  wherein  every  succeeding  term  is  in- 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  31 

finitely  less  than  the  preceding.  And  if  DB  be  made  successively  as  AD^, 
AD®/^,  AD^/®,  AD®/^,  AD®/®,  AD^/®,  &c.,  we  shall  have  another  infinite  series  of 
angles  of  contact,  the  first  of  which  is  of  the  same  sort  with  those  of  circles,  the 
second  infinitely  greater,  and  every  succeeding  one  infinitely  greater  than  the 
preceding.  But  between  any  two  of  these  angles  another  series  of  intermediate 
angles  of  contact  may  be  interposed,  proceeding  both  ways  in  infinitum, 
wherein  every  succeeding  angle  shall  be  infinitely  greater  or  infinitely  less  than 
the  preceding.  As  if  between  the  terms  AD^  and  AD®  there  were  interposed  the 
series  AD^®/®,  AD“/®,  AD®/4,  AD’/®,  AD®/®,  AD®/®,  AD^’/^,  AD’^/s,  AD”/®,  &c. 
And  again,  between  any  two  angles  of  this  series,  a  neAV  series  of  intermediate 
angles  may  be  interposed,  differing  from  one  another  by  infinite  intervals. 
Nor  is  Nature  confined  to  any  bounds. 

Those  things  which  have  been  demonstrated  of  curved  lines,  and  the  sur¬ 
faces  Avhich  they  comprehend,  may  be  easily  applied  to  the  curved  surfaces 
and  contents  of  solids.  These  Lemmas  are  premised  to  avoid  the  tediousness  of 
deducing  involved  demonstrations  ad  ahsurdum,  according  to  the  method  of 
the  ancient  geometers.  For  demonstrations  are  shorter  by  the  method  of  indi¬ 
visibles;  but  because  the  hypothesis  of  indivisibles  seems  somewhat  harsh,  and 
therefore  that  method  is  reckoned  less  geometrical,  I  chose  rather  to  reduce 
the  demonstrations  of  the  folloAving  Propositions  to  the  first  and  last  sums  and 
ratios  of  nascent  and  evanescent  quantities,  that  is,  to  the  limits  of  those  sums 
and  ratios,  and  so  to  premise,  as  short  as  I  could,  the  demonstrations  of  those 
limits.  For  hereby  the  same  thing  is  performed  as  by  the  method  of  indivisibles; 
and  now  those  principles  being  demonstrated,  we  may  use  them  with  greater 
safety.  Therefore  if  hereafter  I  should  happen  to  consider  quantities  as  made 
up  of  particles,  or  should  use  little  curved  lines  for  right  ones,  I  would  not  be 
understood  to  mean  indivisibles,  but  evanescent  divisible  quantities;  not  the 
sums  and  ratios  of  determinate  parts,  but  ahvays  the  limits  of  sums  and  ratios; 
and  that  the  force  of  such  demonstrations  always  depends  on  the  method  laid 
down  in  the  foregoing  Lemmas. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  objected,  that  there  is  no  ultimate  proportion  of  evanes¬ 
cent  quantities;  because  the  proportion,  before  the  quantities  have  vanished, 
is  not  the  ultimate,  and  when  they  are  vanished,  is  none.  But  by  the  same  ar¬ 
gument  it  may  be  alleged  that  a  body  arriving  at  a  certain  place,  and  there 
stopping,  has  no  ultimate  velocity;  because  the  velocity,  before  the  body 
comes  to  the  place,  is  not  its  ultimate  velocity;  when  it  has  arrived,  there  is 
none.  But  the  answer  is  easy;  for  by  the  ultimate  velocity  is  meant  that  with 
Avhich  the  body  is  moved,  neither  before  it  arrives  at  its  last  place  and  the  mo¬ 
tion  ceases,  nor  after,  but  at  the  very  instant  it  arrives ;  that  is,  that  velocity 
with  which  the  body  arrives  at  its  last  place,  and  with  which  the  motion  ceases. 
And  in  like  manner,  by  the  ultimate  ratio  of  evanescent  quantities  is  to  be 
understood  the  ratio  of  the  quantities  not  before  they  vanish,  nor  afterwards, 
but  with  which  they  vanish.  In  like  manner  the  first  ratio  of  nascent  quantities 
is  that  with  which  they  begin  to  be.  And  the  first  or  last  sum  is  that  with  Avhich 
they  begin  and  cease  to  be  (or  to  be  augmented  or  diminished ) .  There  is  a  limit 
wLich  the  velocity  at  the  end  of  the  motion  may  attain,  but  not  exceed.  This 
is  the  ultimate  velocity.  And  there  is  the  like  limit  in  all  quantities  and  propor¬ 
tions  that  begin  and  cease  to  be.  And  since  such  limits  are  certain  and  definite, 
to  determine  the  same  is  a  problem  strictly  geometrical.  But  whatever  is  geo- 


32  Mathematical  Principles 

metrical  we  may  use  in  determining  and  demonstrating  any  other  thing  that  is 
also  geometrical. 

It  may  also  be  objected,  that  if  the  ultimate  ratios  of  evanescent  quantities 
are  given,  their  ultimate  magnitudes  will  be  also  given:  and  so  all  quantities 
will  consist  of  indivisibles,  which  is  contrary  to  what  Euclid  has  demonstrated 
concerning  incommensurables,  in  the  tenth  book  of  his  Elements.  But  this  ob¬ 
jection  is  founded  on  a  false  supposition.  For  those  ultimate  ratios  with  which 
quantities  vanish  are  not  truly  the  ratios  of  ultimate  quantities,  but  limits  to¬ 
wards  which  the  ratios  of  quantities  decreasing  without  limit  do  always  con¬ 
verge;  and  to  which  they  approach  nearer  than  by  any  given  difference,  but 
never  go  beyond,  nor  in  effect  attain  to,  till  the  quantities  are  diminished  in 
infinitum.  This  thing  will  appear  more  evident  in  quantities  infinitely  great.  If 
two  quantities,  whose  difference  is  given,  be  augmented  in  infinitum,  the  ulti¬ 
mate  ratio  of  these  quantities  ivill  be  given,  namely,  the  ratio  of  equality;  but 
it  does  not  from  thence  folloiv,  that  the  ultimate  or  greatest  quantities  them¬ 
selves,  whose  ratio  that  is,  ivill  be  given.  Therefore  if  in  what  follows,  for  the 
sake  of  being  more  easily  understood,  I  should  happen  to  mention  quantities 
as  least,  or  evanescent,  or  ultimate,  you  are  not  to  suppose  that  quantities  of 
any  determinate  magnitude  are  meant,  but  such  as  are  conceived  to  be  always 
diminished  without  end. 


SECTION  II 

The  determination  of  centripetal  forces 
Proposition  1.  Theorem  1 

The  areas  which  revolving  bodies  describe  by  radii  drawn  to  an  immovable  centre 
of  force  do  lie  in  the  same  immovable  planes,  and  are  proportional  to  the  times  in 
which  they  are  described. 

For  suppose  the  time  to  be  divided  into  equal  parts,  and  in  the  first  part  of 
that  time  let  the  body  by  its  innate  force  describe  the  right  line  AB.  In  the 
second  part  of  that  time,  the  same  would  (by  Law  i),  if  not  hindered,  proceed 
directly  to  c,  along  the  line  Be  equal  to  AB;  so  that  by  the  radii  AS,  BS,  cS, 
drawn  to  the  centre,  the  equal  areas  ASB,  BSc,  would  be  described.  But  when 
the  body  is  arrived  at  B,  suppose  that  a  centripetal  force  acts  at  once  with  a 
great  impulse,  and,  turning  aside  the  body  from  the  right  line  Be,  compels  it 
aftenvards  to  continue  its  motion  along  the  right  line  BC.  Draw  cC  parallel  to 
BS,  meeting  BC  in  C;  and  at  the  end  of  the  second  part  of  the  time,  the  body 
(by  Cor.  i  of  the  Laws)  will  be  found  in  C,  in  the  same  plane  ivith  the  triangle 
ASB.  Join  SC,  and,  because  SB  and  Cc  are  parallel,  the  triangle  SBC  ivill  be 
equal  to  the  triangle  SBc,  and  therefore  also  to  the  triangle  SAB.  By  the  like 
argument,  if  the  centripetal  force  acts  successively  in  C,  D,  E,  &c.,  and  makes 
the  body,  in  each  single  particle  of  time,  to  describe  the  right  lines  CD,  DE, 
EF,  &c.,  they  ivill  all  lie  in  the  same  plane;  and  the  triangle  SCD  ivill  be  equal 
to  the  triangle  SBC,  and  SDE  to  SCD,  and  SEF  to  SDE.  And  therefore,  in 
equal  times,  equal  areas  are  described  in  one  immovable  plane:  and,  by  com¬ 
position,  any  sums  SADS,  SAFS,  of  those  areas,  are  to  each  other  as  the  times 
in  which  they  are  described.  Now  let  the  number  of  those  triangles  be  aug- 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


33 


■  C 


merited,  and  their  breadth  diminished  in  infinitum;  and  (by  Cor.  iv,  Lem.  3) 
their  ultimate  perimeter  ADF  will  be  a  curved  line:  and  therefore  the  centrip¬ 
etal  force,  by  which  the  body  is  continually  drawn  back  from  the  tangent  of 

this  curve,  will  act  continually; 
and  any  described  areas  SADS, 
SAFS,  which  are  always  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  times  of  de¬ 
scription,  will,  in  this  case  also, 
be  proportional  to  those  times. 

Q.E.D. 

Cor.  i.  The  velocity  of  a 
body  attracted  towards  an  im¬ 
movable  centre,  in  spaces  void 
of  resistance,  is  inversely  as  the 
perpendicular  let  fall  from  that 
centre  on  the  right  line  that 
touches  the  orbit.  For  the  ve¬ 
locities  in  those  places  A,  B,  C, 
D,  E,  are  as  the  bases  AB,  BC, 
CD,  DE,  EF,  of  equal  triangles; 
and  these  bases  are  inversely 
as  the  perpendiculars  let  fall 
upon  them. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  chords  AB,  BC  of  two  arcs,  successively  described  in  equal 
times  by  the  same  body,  in  spaces  void  of  resistance,  are  completed  into  a 
parallelogram  ABCV,  and  the  diagonal  BV  of  this  parallelogram,  in  the  posi¬ 
tion  which  it  ultimately  acquires  when  those  arcs  are  diminished  in  infinitum, 
is  produced  both  ways,  it  will  pass  through  the  centre  of  force. 

Cor.  III.  If  the  chords  AB,  BC,  and  DE,  EF,  of  arcs  described  in  equal  times, 
in  spaces  void  of  resistance,  are  completed  into  the  parallelograms  ABCV, 
DEFZ,  the  forces  in  B  and  E  are  one  to  the  other  in  the  ultimate  ratio  of  the 
diagonals  BV,  EZ,  when  those  arcs  are  diminished  in  infinitum.  For  the  motions 
BC  and  EF  of  the  body  (by  Cor.  1  of  the  Laws)  are  compounded  of  the  motions 
Be,  BV,  and  E/,  EZ;  but  BV  and  EZ,  which  are  equal  to  Cc  and  F/,  in  the 
demonstration  of  this  Proposition,  were  generated  by  the  impulses  of  the  cen¬ 
tripetal  force  in  B  and  E,  and  are  therefore  proportional  to  those  impulses. 

Cor.  IV.  The  forces  by  which  bodies,  in  spaces  void  of  resistance,  are  drawn 
back  from  rectilinear  motions,  and  turned  into  curvilinear  orbits,  are  to  each 
other  as  the  versed  sines  of  arcs  described  in  equal  times;  which  versed  sines 
tend  to  the  centre  of  force,  and  bisect  the  chords  when  those  arcs  are  diminished 
to  infinity.  For  such  versed  sines  are  the  halves  of  the  diagonals  mentioned  in 
Cor.  III. 

Cor.  V.  And  therefore  those  forces  are  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  the  said 
versed  sines  to  the  versed  sines  perpendicular  to  the  horizon  of  those  parabolic 
arcs  which  projectiles  describe  in  the  same  time. 

Cor.  VI.  And  the  same  things  do  all  hold  good  (by  Cor.  v  of  the  Laws)  when 
the  planes  in  which  the  bodies  are  moved,  together  vdth  the  centres  of  force 
which  are  placed  in  those  planes,  are  not  at  rest,  but  move  uniformly  forwards 
in  right  lines. 


34 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  2.  Theorem  2 

Every  body  that  moves  in  any  eurved  line  deserihed  in  a  plane,  and  by  a  radius 
drawn  to  a  point  either  immovable,  or  moving  forwards  with  an  uniform  rectilinear 
motion,  describes  about  that  point  areas  proportional  to  the  times,  is  urged  by  a 
centripetal  force  directed  to  that  point. 

Case  1.  For  every  body  that  moves  in  a  curved  line  is  (by  Law  i)  turned 
aside  from  its  rectilinear  course  by  the  action  of  some  force  that  impels  it.  And 
that  force  by  which  the  body  is  turned  off  from  its  rectilinear  course,  and  is 
made  to  describe,  in  equal 
times,  the  equal  least  triangles 
SAB,  SBC,  SCD,  &c.,  about 
the  immovable  point  S  (by 
Prop.  40,  Book  1,  Elements  of 
Euclid,  and  Law  ii),  acts  in  the 
place  B,  according  to  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  a  line  parallel  tocC,  that 
is,  in  the  direction  of  the  line 
BS;  and  in  the  place  C,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  direction  of  a  line 
parallel  to  dD,  that  is,  in  the 
direction  of  the  line  CS,  <&c.; 
and  therefore  acts  always  in 
the  direction  of  lines  tending  to 
the  immovable  point  S.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  And  (by  Cor.  v  of 
the  Laws)  it  is  indifferent 
whether  the  surface  in  which  a 
body  describes  a  curvilinear  figure  be  at  rest,  or  moves  together  vdth  the  body, 
the  figure  described,  and  its  point  S,  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line. 

Cor.  i.  In  nonresisting  spaces  or  mediums,  if  the  areas  are  not  proportional 
to  the  times,  the  forces  are  not  directed  to  the  point  in  which  the  radii  meet, 
but  deviate  therefrom  towards  the  part  to  which  the  motion  is  directed,  if  the 
description  of  the  areas  is  accelerated,  and  away  from  that  part,  if  retarded. 

Cor.  II.  And  even  in  resisting  mediums,  if  the  description  of  the  areas  is 
accelerated,  the  directions  of  the  forces  deviate  from  the  point  in  which  the 
radii  meet,  towards  the  part  to  which  the  motion  tends. 

Scholium 

A  body  may  be  urged  by  a  centripetal  force  compounded  of  several  forces;  in 
which  case  the  meaning  of  the  Proposition  is,  that  the  force  which  results  out 
of  all  tends  to  the  point  S.  But  if  any  force  acts  continually  in  the  direction  of 
lines  perpendicular  to  the  described  surface,  this  force  will  make  the  body  to 
deviate  from  the  plane  of  its  motion;  but  will  neither  augment  nor  diminish  the 
area  of  the  described  surface,  and  is  therefore  to  be  neglected  in  the  composition 
of  forces. 


Book  I ;  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


35 


Proposition  3.  Theorem  3 

Every  body,  that  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  centre  of  another  body,  howsoever  moved, 
describes  areas  about  that  centre  proportional  to  the  times,  is  urged  by  a  force 
compounded  of  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  that  other  body,  and  of  all  the  ac¬ 
celerative  force  by  which  that  other  body  is  impelled. 

Let  L  represent  the  one,  and  T  the  other  body;  and  (by  Cor.  vi  of  the  Laws) 
if  both  bodies  are  urged  in  the  direction  of  parallel  lines,  by  a  new  force  equal 
and  contrary  to  that  by  which  the  second  body  T  is  urged,  the  first  body  L  will 
go  on  to  describe  about  the  other  body  T  the  same  areas  as  before:  but  the 
force  by  which  that  other  body  T  was  urged  will  be  now  destroyed  by  an  equal 
and  contrary  force;  and  therefore  (by  Law  i)  that  other  body  T,  now  left  to 
itself,  ^\all  either  rest,  or  move  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line:  and  the  first 
body  L,  impelled  by  the  difference  of  the  forces,  that  is,  by  the  force  remaining, 
mil  go  on  to  describe  about  the  other  body  T  areas  proportional  to  the  times. 
And  therefore  (by  Theor.  2)  the  difference  of  the  forces  is  directed  to  the  other 
body  T  as  its  centre.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  one  body  L,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  other  body  T, 
describes  areas  proportional  to  the  times;  and  from  the  whole  force,  by  which 
the  first  body  L  is  urged  (whether  that  force  is  simple,  or,  according  to  Cor.  ii 
of  the  Laws,  compounded  out  of  several  forces),  we  subtract  (by  the  same  Cor.) 
that  whole  accelerative  force  by  which  the  other  body  is  urged;  the  whole 
remaining  force  by  which  the  first  body  is  urged  will  tend  to  the  other  body  T, 
as  its  centre. 

Cor.  II.  And,  if  these  areas  are  proportional  to  the  times  nearly,  the  remain¬ 
ing  force  will  tend  to  the  other  body  T  nearly. 

Cor.  III.  And  vice  versa,  if  the  remaining  force  tends  nearly  to  the  other  body 
T,  those  areas  will  be  nearly  proportional  to  the  times. 

Cor.  IV.  If  the  body  L,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  other  body  T,  describes 
areas,  which,  compared  with  the  times,  are  very  unequal;  and  that  other  body 
T  be  either  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line :  the  action  of 
the  centripetal  force  tending  to  that  other  body  T  is  either  none  at  all,  or  it  is 
mixed  and  compounded  with  very  powerful  actions  of  other  forces:  and  the 
whole  force  compounded  of  them  all,  if  they  are  many,  is  directed  to  another 
(immovable  or  movable)  centre.  The  same  thing  obtains,  when  the  other  body 
is  moved  by  any  motion  whatsoever;  provided  that  centripetal  force  is  taken, 
which  remains  after  subtracting  that  whole  force  acting  upon  that  other  body  T. 

Scholium 

Since  the  equable  description  of  areas  indicates  that  there  is  a  centre  to 

which  tends  that  force  by  which  the  body  is  most  affected,  and  by  which  it  is 

drawn  back  from  its  rectilinear  motion,  and  retained  in  its  orbit,  why  may  we 

not  be  allowed,  in  the  following  discourse,  to  use  the  equable  description  of 

areas  as  an  indication  of  a  centre,  about  which  all  circular  motion  is  performed 

in  free  spaces?  _  ^ 

Proposition  4.  Theorem  4 

The  centripetal  forces  of  bodies,  which  by  equable  motions  describe  different  circles, 
tend  to  the  centres  of  the  same  circles;  and  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the  arcs 
described  in  equal  times  divided  respectively  by  the  radii  of  the  circles. 


36  Mathematical  Principles 

These  forces  tend  to  the  centres  of  the  circles  (by  Prop.  2,  and  Cor.  ii,  Prop. 
1),  and  are  to  one  another  as  the  versed  sines  of  the  least  arcs  described  in  equal 
times  (by  Cor.  iv,  Prop.  1) ;  that  is,  as  the  squares  of  the  same  arcs  divided  by 
the  diameters  of  the  circles  (by  Lem.  7);  and  therefore  since  those  arcs  are  as 
arcs  described  in  any  equal  times,  and  the  diameters  are  as  the  radii,  the  forces 
^Yill  be  as  the  squares  of  any  arcs  described  in  the  same  time  divided  by  the 
radii  of  the  circles.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore,  since  those  arcs  are  as  the  velocities  of  the  bodies,  the 
centripetal  forces  are  as  the  squares  of  the  velocities  divided  by  the  radii. 

Cor.  II.  And  since  the  periodic  times  are  as  the  radii  divided  by  the  veloc¬ 
ities,  the  centripetal  forces  are  as  the  radii  divided  by  the  square  of  the  periodic 
times. 

Cor.  III.  Whence  if  the  periodic  times  are  equal,  and  the  velocities  therefore 
as  the  radii,  the  centripetal  forces  will  be  also  as  the  radii;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  IV.  If  the  periodic  times  and  the  velocities  are  both  as  the  square  roots 
of  the  radii,  the  centripetal  forces  will  be  equal  among  themselves;  and  con¬ 
versely. 

Cor.  V.  If  the  periodic  times  are  as  the  radii,  and  therefore  the  velocities 
equal,  the  centripetal  forces  vill  be  inversely  as  the  radii;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  VI.  If  the  periodic  times  are  as  the  ^th  powers  of  the  radii,  and  there¬ 
fore  the  velocities  inversely  as  the  square  roots  of  the  radii,  the  centripetal 
forces  will  be  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  radii;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  VII.  And  universally,  if  the  periodic  time  is  as  any  power  R"  of  the 
radius  R,  and  therefore  the  velocity  inversely  as  the  power  R“"^  of  the  radius, 
the  centripetal  force  mil  be  inversely  as  the  power  R^^"^  of  the  radius;  and 
conversely. 

Cor.  VIII.  The  same  things  hold  concerning  the  times,  the  velocities,  and  the 
forces  by  which  bodies  describe  the  similar  parts  of  any  similar  figures  that 
have  their  centres  in  a  similar  position  with  those  figures ;  as  appears  by  apply¬ 
ing  the  demonstration  of  the  preceding  cases  to  those.  And  the  application  is 
easy,  by  only  substituting  the  equable  description  of  areas  in  the  place  of 
equable  motion,  and  using  the  distances  of  the  bodies  from  the  centres  instead 
of  the  radii. 

Cor.  IX.  From  the  same  demonstration  it  likewise  follows,  that  the  arc  which 
a  body,  uniformly  revolving  in  a  circle  with  a  given  centripetal  force,  describes 
in  any  time,  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  and  the 
space  which  the  same  body  falling  by  the  same  given  force  would  describe  in 
the  same  given  time. 

Scholium 


The  case  of  the  sixth  Corollary  obtains  in  the  celestial  bodies  (as  Sir  Christo¬ 
pher  Wren,  Dr.  Hooke,  and  Dr.  Halley  have  severally  observed) ;  and  therefore 
in  what  follows,  I  intend  to  treat  more  at  large  of  those  things  which  relate  to 
centripetal  force  decreasing  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  centres. 

Moreover,  by  means  of  the  preceding  Proposition  and  its  Corollaries,  we 
may  discover  the  proportion  of  a  centripetal  force  to  any  other  known  force, 
such  as  that  of  gravity.  For  if  a  body  by  means  of  its  gravity  revolves  in  a  circle 
concentric  to  the  earth,  this  gravity  is  the  centripetal  force  of  that  body.  But 
from  the  descent  of  heavy  bodies,  the  time  of  one  entire  revolution,  as  well  as 
the  arc  described  in  any  given  time,  is  given  (by  Cor.  ix  of  this  Prop.).  And  by 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  37 

such  propositions,  Mr.  Huygens,  in  his  excellent  book  De  horologio  oscillatorio, 
has  compared  the  force  of  gravity  vith  the  centrifugal  forces  of  revolving 
bodies. 

The  preceding  Proposition  may  be  likewise  demonstrated  after  this  manner. 
In  any  circle  suppose  a  polygon  to  be  inscribed  of  any  number  of  sides.  And  if 
a  body,  moved  vith  a  given  velocity  along  the  sides  of  the  polygon,  is  reflected 
from  the  circle  at  the  several  angular  points,  the  force,  with  which  at  every 
reflection  it  strikes  the  circle,  wall  be  as  its  velocity:  and  therefore  the  sum  of 
the  forces,  in  a  given  time,  will  be  as  the  product  of  that  velocity  and  the  num¬ 
ber  of  reflections;  that  is  (if  the  species  of  the  polygon  be  given),  as  the  length 
described  in  that  given  time,  and  increased  or  diminished  in  the  ratio  of  the 
same  length  to  the  radius  of  the  circle;  that  is,  as  the  square  of  that  length 
divided  by  the  radius ;  and  therefore  the  polygon,  by  having  its  sides  diminished 
in  infinitum,  coincides  with  the  circle,  as  the  square  of  the  arc  described  in  a 
given  time  divided  by  the  radius.  This  is  the  centrifugal  force,  with  which  the 
body  impels  the  circle;  and  to  which  the  contrary  force,  wherewith  the  circle 
continually  repels  the  body  towards  the  centre,  is  equal. 

Proposition  5.  Problem  1 

There  being  given,  in  any  places,  the  velocity  with  which  a  body  describes  a  given 
figure,  by  means  of  forces  directed  to  some  common  centre:  to  find  that  centre. 

Let  the  three  right  lines  PT,  TQV,  VR  touch  the  figure  described  in  as  many 
points,  P,  Q,  R,  and  meet  in  T  and  V.  On  the  tangents  erect  the  perpendiculars 

PA,  QB,  RC,  inversely  proportional  to  the  ve¬ 
locities  of  the  body  in  the  points  P,  Q,  R,  from 
which  the  perpendiculars  were  raised ;  that  is, 
so  that  PA  may  be  to  QB  as  the  velocity  in  Q 
to  the  velocity  in  P,  and  QB  to  RC  as  the  ve¬ 
locity  in  R  to  the  velocity  in  Q.  Through  the 
ends  A,  B,  C  of  the  perpendiculars  draw  AD, 
DBE,  EC,  at  right  angles,  meeting  in  D  and 
E:  and  the  right  lines  TD,  VE  produced,  will 
meet  in  S,  the  centre  required. 

For  the  perpendiculars  let  fall  from  the  centre  S  on  the  tangents  PT,  QT, 
are  inversely  as  the  velocities  of  the  bodies  in  the  points  P  and  Q  (by  Cor.  i, 
Prop.  1),  and  therefore,  by  construction,  directly  as  the  perpendiculars  AP, 
BQ;  that  is,  as  the  perpendiculars  let  fall  from  the  point  D  on  the  tangents. 
Whence  it  is  easy  to  infer  that  the  points  S,  D,  T  are  in  one  right  line.  And  by 
the  like  argument  the  points  S,  E,  V  are  also  in  one  right  line;  and  therefore 
the  centre  S  is  in  the  point  where  the  right  lines  TD,  VE  meet.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  6.  Theorem  5 

In  a  space  void  of  resistance,  if  a  body  revolves  in  any  orbit  about  an  immovable 
centre,  and  in  the  least  time  describes  any  arc  just  then  nascent;  and  the  versed  sine 
of  that  arc  is  supposed  to  be  drawn  bisecting  the  chord,  and  produced  passing 
through  the  centre  of  force:  the  centripetal  force  in  the  middle  of  the  arc  will  be 
directly  as  the  versed  sine  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  time. 

For  the  versed  sine  in  a  given  time  is  as  the  force  (by  Cor.  iv.  Prop.  1) ;  and 
augmenting  the  time  in  any  ratio,  because  the  arc  will  be  augmented  in  the 


38 


Mathematical  Principles 


same  ratio,  the  versed  sine  will  be  augmented  in  the  square  of  that  ratio  (by 
Cor.  II  and  iii,  Lem.  11),  and  therefore  is  as  the  force  and  the  square  of  the 
time.  Divide  both  sides  by  the  square  of  the  time,  and  the  force  will  be  directly 
as  the  versed  sine,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  time.  q.e.d. 

And  the  same  thing  may  also  be  easily  demonstrated  by  Cor.  iv,  Lem.  10. 
Cor.  I.  If  a  body  P  revolving  about  the  centre  S  describes  a  curved  line  APQ, 
which  a  right  line  ZPR  touches  in  any  point  P ; 
and  from  any  other  point  Q  of  the  curve,  QR  is 
drawn  parallel  to  the  distance  SP,  meeting  the 
tangent  in  R;  and  QT  is  drawn  perpendicular  to 
the  distance  SP;  the  centripetal  force  will  be  in- 

gp2  .  Q'J'2 

versely  as  the  solid  ,  if  the  solid  be  taken 

(c^R 

of  that  magnitude  which  it  ultimately  acquires 
when  the  points  P  and  Q  coincide.  For  QR  is  equal  to  the  versed  sine  of  double 
the  arc  QP,  whose  middle  is  P :  and  double  the  triangle  SQP,  or  SP  •  QT  is  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  time  in  which  that  double  arc  is  described;  and  therefore 
may  be  used  to  represent  the  time. 

Cor.  II.  By  a  like  reasoning,  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as  the  solid 
S  .  QP2 

— — ;  if  SY  is  a  perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  force  on  PR,  the  tangent 

of  the  orbit.  For  the  rectangles  SY-QP  and  SP-QT  are  equal. 

Cor.  III.  If  the  orbit  is  either  a  circle,  or  touches  or  cuts  a  circle  concentri¬ 
cally,  that  is,  contains  with  a  circle  the  least  angle  of  contact  or  section,  having 
the  same  curvature  and  the  same  radius  of  curvature  at  the  point  P ;  and  if  PV 
be  a  chord  of  this  circle,  drawn  from  the  body  through  the  centre  of  force;  the 

QP^ 


centripetal  force  will  be  inversely  as  the  solid  SY^  PV.  For  PV  is 


QR 


Cor.  IV.  The  same  things  being  supposed,  the  centripetal  force  is  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity  directly,  and  the  chord  inversely.  For  the  velocity  is 
reciprocally  as  the  perpendicular  SY,  by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  1. 

Cor.  V.  Hence  if  any  curvilinear  figure  APQ  is  given,  and  therein  a  point  S  is 
also  given,  to  which  a  centripetal  force  is  continually  directed,  that  law  of  cen¬ 
tripetal  force  may  be  found,  by  which  the  body  P  will  be  continually  drawn 
back  from  a  rectilinear  course,  and,  being  detained  in  the  perimeter  of  that 
figure,  will  describe  the  same  by  a  continual  revolution.  That  is,  we  are  to  find, 

SP2 .  QX2 

by  computation,  either  the  solid  — —  or  the  solid  SY^-PV,  inversely  pro- 

QK 

portional  to  this  force.  Examples  of  this  we  shall  give  in  the  following  Problems. 


Proposition  7.  Problem  2 

If  a  body  revolves  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  it  is  proposed  to  find  the  law  of 
centripetal  force  directed  to  any  given  point. 

Let  VQPA  be  the  circumference  of  the  circle;  S  the  given  point  to  which  as 
to  a  centre  the  force  tends;  P  the  body  moving  in  the  circumference;  Q  the  next 
place  into  which  it  is  to  move ;  and  PRZ  the  tangent  of  the  circle  at  the  preced¬ 
ing  place.  Through  the  point  S  draw  the  chord  PV,  and  the  diameter  VA  of  the 
circle;  join  AP,  and  draw  QT  perpendicular  to  SP,  which  produced,  may  meet 
the  tangent  PR  in  Z;  and  lastly,  through  the  point  Q,  draw  LR  parallel  to  SP, 


Book  I ;  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


39 


meeting  the  circle  in  L,  and  the  tangent  PZ  in  R.  And,  because  of  the  similar 
triangles  ZQR,  ZTP,  VPA,  we  shall  have 

RP2  :  QT2  =  AV2:  PV^. 


Since  RP2  =  RLQR,  QT^: 


RLQRPV2 


SP2 


AV2 


Multiply  those  equals  by  and  the 

(c^R 

points  P  and  Q  coinciding,  for  RL  write 
PV;  then  we  shall  have 

SP2.PV3_SP2.QT2 
AV2  “  QR  • 

And  therefore  (by  Cor.  i  and  v.  Prop.  6) 
the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as 
SP2.PV3 

— — ;  that  is  (because  AV^  is  given), 
inversely  as  the  product  of  SP^  and  PV®. 

Q.E.I. 

The  same  otherwise. 

On  the  tangent  PR  produced  let  fall  the  perpendicular  SY ;  and  (because  of 
the  similar  triangles  SYP,  VPA)  we  shall  have  AV  to  PV  as  SP  to  SY,  and 
SP  •  PV  SP2  •  PV® 

therefore  — rvT-  =SY,  and  — —  =SY2.PV.  And  therefore  (by  Con.  iii  and 


AV 


SP^.PV® 

V,  Prop.  6)  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as  — — ;  that  is  (because  AV  is 


given),  inversely  as  SP^-PV®.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  given  point  S,  to  which  the  centripetal  force  ahvays 
tends,  is  placed  in  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  as  at  V,  the  centripetal  force 
vill  be  inversely  as  the  fifth  power  of  the  altitude  SP. 

Cor.  II.  The  force  by  which  the  body  P  in  the  circle  APTV  revolves  about 
the  centre  of  force  S  is  to  the  force  by  which  the  same  body  P  may  revolve  in 
the  same  circle,  and  in  the  same  periodic  time, 
about  any  other  centre  of  force  R,  as  RP2.SP  to 
the  cube  of  the  right  line  SG,  which  from  the  first 
centre  of  force  S  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  distance 
PR  of  the  body  from  the  second  centre  of  force  R, 
meeting  the  tangent  PG  of  the  orbit  in  G.  For  by 
the  construction  of  this  Proposition,  the  former 
force  is  to  the  latter  as  RP2.PT®  to  SP2.PV®;  that 
SP®  •  PV® 

is,  as  SP  •  RP2  to  — pp — ;  or  (because  of  the  similar  triangles  PSG,  TPV)  toSG®. 

Cor.  III.  The  force  by  which  the  body  P  in  any  orbit  revolves  about  the 
centre  of  force  S,  is  to  the  force  by  which  the  same  body  may  revolve  in  the 
same  orbit,  and  the  same  periodic  time,  about  any  other  centre  of  force  R,  as 
the  solid  SP.RP2,  contained  under  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the  first 
centre  of  force  S,  and  the  square  of  its  distance  from  the  second  centre  of  force 
R,  to  the  cube  of  the  right  line  SG,  drawn  from  the  first  centre  of  the  force  S, 
parallel  to  the  distance  RP  of  the  body  from  the  second  centre  of  force  R, 
meeting  the  tangent  PG  of  the  orbit  in  G.  For  the  force  in  this  orbit  at  any 
point  P  is  the  same  as  in  a  circle  of  the  same  curvature. 


40 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  8.  Problem  3 

If  a  body  moves  in  the  semicircumference  PQA;  it  is  proposed  to  find  the  law  of  the 
centripetal  force  tending  to  a  point  S,  so  remote,  that  all  the  lines  PS,  RS  drawn 
thereto,  may  he  taken  for  parallels. 

From  C,  the  centre  of  the  semicircle,  let  the  semidiameter  CA  be  drawn, 
cutting  the  parallels  at  right  angles  in  M  and  N,  and  join  CP.  Because  of  the 
similar  triangles  CPM,  PZT,  and  RZQ,  we 
shall  have  CP^  :  PM^  =  PR^  :  QT-.  From  the 
nature  of  the  circle,  PR^  =  QR(RN+QN)  = 

QR  -2PM,  when  the  points  P  and  Q  coincide. 

Therefore  CP^ :  PM2  =  QR-2PM  :  QT^;  and 


QT2  2PM3 


and 


QT2.SP2_2PM3SP2 


QR  CP2  ’  QR 

therefore  (by  Cor.  i  and  v 


And 


CP2 

Prop.  6)  the  cen- 

2PM3  SP2  ^  . 

;  that  IS 


tripetal  force  is  inversely  as 

2Sp2 

(neglecting  the  given  ratio  ^p,),  inversely  as  PM®.  q.e.i. 

And  the  same  thing  is  likewise  easily  inferred  from  the  preceding  Propo¬ 
sition. 


Scholium 

And  by  a  like  reasoning,  a  body  will  be  moved  in  an  ellipse,  or  even  in  an 
hyperbola,  or  parabola,  by  a  centripetal  force  which  is  inversely  as  the  cube  of 
the  ordinate  directed  to  an  infinitely  remote  centre  of  force. 


Proposition  9.  Problem  4 


If  a  body  revolves  in  a  spiral  PQS,  cidting  all  the  radii  SP,  SQ,  &c.,  in  a  given 
angle;  it  is  proposed  to  find  the  law  of  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  centre  of 


Suppose  the  indefinitely  small  angle  PSQ  to  be  given;  because,  then,  all  the 
angles  are  given,  the  figure  SPRQT  will  be  given  in  kind.  Therefore  the  ratio 
QT  QT^ 

is  also  given,  and  is  as  QT,  that  is  (because  the  figure  is  given  in  kind) , 

as  SP.  But  if  the  angle  PSQ  is  any  way  changed,  the  right  line  QR,  subtending 
the  angle  of  contact  QPR  (by  Lem.  11)  mil  be  changed  in  the  ratio  of  PR^  or 

QT^ 

QT®.  Therefore  the  ratio  remains  the  same  as  before,  that  is,  as  SP.  And 


QT®SP® 
QR 


QR 

is  as  SP®,  and  therefore  (by  Cor.  i  and  v.  Prop.  6)  the  centripetal  force 


is  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance  SP. 


Q.E.I. 


41 


Book  I;  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

The  same  otherwise. 

The  perpendicular  SY  let  fall  upon  the  tangent,  and  the  chord  PV  of  the 
circle  concentrically  cutting  the  spiral,  are  in  given  ratios  to  the  height  SP ;  and 
therefore  SP®  is  as  SY®-PV,  that  is  (by  Cor.  iii  and  v,  Prop.  6)  inversely  as  the 
centripetal  force. 

Lemma  12 

All  'parallelograms  circumscribed  about  any  conjugate  diameters  of  a  given  ellipse 
or  hyperbola  are  equal  among  themselves. 

This  is  demonstrated  by  the  writers  on  the  conic  sections. 


Proposition  10.  Problem  5 

If  a  body  revolves  in  an  ellipse;  it  is  proposed  to  find  the  law  of  the  centripetal  force 
tending  to  the  centre  of  the  ellipse. 

Suppose  CA,  CB  to  be  semiaxes  of  the  ellipse;  GP,  DK,  conjugate  diam¬ 
eters;  PF,  QT,  perpendiculars  to  those  diameters;  Qp,  an  ordinate  to  the  diam¬ 
eter  GP;  and  if  the  parallelogram 
QyPR  be  completed,  then  (by  the 
properties  of  the  conic  sections) 
Py  «;G  :  Q?;2  =  PC2:  CD®,  and,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  similar  triangles  QpT, 
PCF,  Qp® :  QT2  =  PC® :  PF®;  and 

QT® 

by  eliminating  Qp®,  pG  •  ^  — 


PC® 


CD®PF2 


Pp 

Since  QR  =  Pp, 


PC® 

and  (by  Lem.  12)  BC-CA  = 
CD  PF,  and,  when  the  points  P 
and  Q  coincide,  2PC  =  yG,  we  shall 
have,  multiplying  the  extremes 

QT®PC®_ 


and  means  together. 


2BC®CA2 

PC 
2BC®CA® 


QR 


.  Therefore  (by  Cor.  v.  Prop.  6),  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as 

- - ;  that  is  (because  2BC®-CA®  is  given),  inversely  as  that  is,  di¬ 
rectly  as  the  distance  PC.  q.e.i. 

The  same  otherwise. 

In  the  right  line  PG  on  the  other  side  of  the  point  T,  take  the  point  u  so  that 
Tw  may  be  equal  to  Tv,  then  take  wV,  such  that  uV  :  vG  =  DC® :  PC®.  Since,  by 
the  conic  sections,  Qy®  :  Py-t;G  =  DC® :  PC®,  we  have  Qt;®  =  Pi^-RV.  Add  Pit-Py 
to  both  sides,  and  the  square  of  the  chord  of  the  arc  PQ  will  be  equal  to  the 
rectangle  PV-Py;  and  therefore  a  circle  which  touches  the  conic  section  in  P, 
and  passes  through  the  point  Q,  vdll  pass  also  through  the  point  V.  Now  let  the 
points  P  and  Q  meet,  and  the  ratio  of  uY  to  i^G,  which  is  the  same  wdth  the 
ratio  of  DC®  to  PC®,  will  become  the  ratio  of  PV  to  PG,  or  PV  to  2PC;  and 

2DC® 

therefore  PV  will  be  equal  to  pyr".  And  therefore  the  force  by  which  the  body 

2DC® 

P  revolves  in  the  ellipse  wall  be  inversely  as  pQ  •  PF®  (by  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  6) ; 
that  is  (because  2DC®  PF®  is  given),  directly  as  PC. 


Q.E.I. 


42  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  I.  And  therefore  the  force  is  as  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the  centre 
of  the  ellipse;  and,  vice  versa,  if  the  force  is  as  the  distance,  the  body  will  move 
in  an  ellipse  whose  centre  coincides  with  the  centre  of  force,  or  perhaps  in  a 
circle  into  which  the  ellipse  may  degenerate. 

Cor.  II.  And  the  periodic  times  of  the  revolutions  made  in  all  ellipses  what¬ 
soever  about  the  same  centre  will  be  equal.  For  those  times  in  similar  ellipses 
will  be  equal  (by  Cor.  iii  and  viii,  Prop.  4);  but  in  ellipses  that  have  their 
greater  axis  common,  they  are  to  each  other  as  the  whole  areas  of  the  ellipses 
directly,  and  the  parts  of  the  areas  described  in  the  same  time  inversely;  that 
is,  as  the  lesser  axes  directly,  and  the  velocities  of  the  bodies  in  their  principal 
vertices  inversely;  that  is,  as  those  lesser  a.xcs  directly,  and  the  ordinates  to  the 
same  point  of  the  common  axes  inversely;  and  therefore  (because  of  the  equal¬ 
ity  of  the  direct  and  inverse  ratios)  in  the  ratio  of  equality,  i  :  i. 

Scholium 

If  the  ellipse,  by  having  its  centre  removed  to  an  infinite  distance,  degen¬ 
erates  into  a  parabola,  the  body  will  move  in  this  parabola;  and  the  force,  now 
tending  to  a  centre  infinitely  remote,  will  become  constant.  This  is  Galileo’s 
theorem.  And  if  the  parabolic  section  of  the  cone  (by  changing  the  inclination 
of  the  cutting  plane  to  the  cone)  degenerates  into  an  hyperbola,  the  body  will 
move  in  the  perimeter  of  this  hyperbola,  having  its  centripetal  force  changed 
into  a  centrifugal  force.  And  in  like  manner  as  in  the  circle,  or  in  the  ellipse,  if  the 
forces  are  directed  to  the  centre  of  the  figure  placed  in  the  abscissa,  those  forces 
by  increasing  or  diminishing  the  ordinates  in  any  given  ratio,  or  even  by  chang¬ 
ing  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of  the  ordinates  to  the  abscissa,  are  always 
augmented  or  diminished  in  the  ratio  of  the  distances  from  the  centre;  provided 
the  periodic  times  remain  equal;  so  also  in  all  figures  whatsoever,  if  the  or¬ 
dinates  are  augmented  or  diminished  in  any  given  ratio,  or  their  inclination  is 
any  way  changed,  the  periodic  time  remaining  the  same,  the  forces  directed  to 
any  centre  placed  in  the  abscissa  are  in  the  several  ordinates  augmented  or 
diminished  in  the  ratio  of  the  distances  from  the  centre. 


SECTION  III 


The  motion  of  bodies  in  eccentric  conic  sections 


Proposition  11.  Problem  6 


If  a  body  revolves  in  an  ellipse;  it  is  required  to  find  the  law  of  the  centripetal  force 
tending  to  the  focus  of  the  ellipse. 

Let  S  be  the  focus  of  the  ellipse.  Draw  SP  cutting  the  diameter  DK  of  the 
ellipse  in  E,  and  the  ordinate  Qp  in  x;  and  complete  the  parallelogram  QxPR.  It 
is  evident  that  EP  is  equal  to  the  greater  semiaxis  AC:  for  drawing  HI  from  the 
other  focus  H  of  the  ellipse  parallel  to  EC,  because  CS,  CH  are  equal,  ES,  El 
will  also  be  equal;  so  that  EP  is  the  half-sum  of  PS,  PI,  that  is  (because  of  the 
parallels  HI,  PR,  and  the  equal  angles  IPR,  HPZ),  of  PS,  PH,  which  taken 
together  are  equal  to  the  whole  axis  2AC.  Draw  QT  perpendicular  to  SP,  and 


putting  L  for  the  principal  latus  rectum  of  the  ellipse  (or  for 


2BC\ 
AC  ’’ 


we  shall  have 


43 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

L  QR  :  L  Pi;  =  QR  :  Pi;  =  PE  :  PC  =  AC  :  PC, 
also,  L-Pd  :  Gi'  Py  =  L  :  Gv,  and,  Gy  -P?^ :  Qy^  =  PC^ :  CD^. 

By  Cor.  ii,  Lem.  7,  when 


the 


come  equal  to 


SP^QT^ 
QR 


points  P  and  Q  coincide,  Qy^  = 
and  or  Qy^ :  QT^  =  EP^ :  PF^  = 
CA^  :  PF^,  and  (by  Lem.  12)  = 
CD^  :  CB^.  Multiplying  together 
corresponding  terms  of  the  four 
proportions,  and  simplifying,  we 
shall  have  L-QR  :  QT^  =  AC  L- 
PC2  •  CD2 :  PC  •  Gy  •  CD^  •  CB2  = 
2PC  :  Gy,  since  AC  L  =  2BC2. 
But  the  points  Q  and  P  coinciding, 
2PC  and  Gy  are  equal.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  quantities  L  •  QR  and  QT^, 
proportional  to  these,  will  be  also 
equal.  Let  those  equals  be  multi¬ 
plied  by  and  L  SP^  will  be- 

And  therefore  (by  Cor.  i  and  v.  Prop.  6)  the  cen¬ 


tripetal  force  is  inversely  as  L  •  SP^,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  SP.  Q.E.I. 


The  same  otherwise. 

Since  the  force  tending  to  the  centre  of  the  ellipse,  by  which  the  body  P  may 
revolve  in  that  ellipse,  is  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  10)  as  the  distance  CP  of  the  body 
from  the  centre  C  of  the  ellipse,  let  CE  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  PR  of 
the  ellipse;  and  the  force  by  which  the  same  body  P  may  revolve  about  any 

PE® 

other  point  S  of  the  ellipse,  if  CE  and  PS  intersect  in  E,  will  be  as  (by 

Cor.  Ill,  Prop.  7);  that  is,  if  the  point  S  is  the  focus  of  the  ellipse,  and  there¬ 
fore  PE  be  given  as  SP®  reciprocally.  q.e.i. 

With  the  same  brevity  with  which  we  reduced  the  fifth  Problem  to  the 
parabola,  and  hyperbola,  we  might  do  the  like  here;  but  because  of  the  dignity 
of  the  Problem  and  its  use  in  what  follows,  I  shall  confirm  the  other  cases  by 
particular  demonstrations. 

Proposition  12.  Problem  7 

Suppose  a  body  to  move  in  an  hyperbola;  it  is  required  to  find  the  law  of  the 
centripetal  force  tending  to  the  focus  of  that  figure. 

Let  CA,  CB  be  the  semiaxes  of  the  hyperbola;  PG,  KD  other  conjugate 
diameters;  PF  a  perpendicular  to  the  diameter  KD;  and  Qy  an  ordinate  to  the 
diameter  GP.  Draw  SP  cutting  the  diameter  DK  in  E,  and  the  ordinate  Qy  in 
X,  and  complete  the  parallelogram  QRPa:.  It  is  evident  that  EP  is  equal  to  the 
semitransverse  axis  AC;  for  drawing  HI,  from  the  other  focus  H  of  the  hyper¬ 
bola,  parallel  to  EC,  because  CS,  CH  are  equal,  ES,  El  will  be  also  equal;  so 
that  EP  is  the  half  difference  of  PS,  PI;  that  is  (because  of  the  parallels  IH, 
PR,  and  the  equal  angles  IPR,  HPZ),  of  PS,  PH,  the  difference  of  which  is 


44 


Mathematical  Principles 


equal  to  the  whole  axis  2 AC.  Draw  QT  perpendicular  to  SP;  and  putting  L  for 

2BC^ 

the  principal  latus  rectum  of  the  hyperbola  (that  is,  for  ),  we  shall  have 


L  QR  :  L  Py  =  QR  :  Py  =  Pa: :  Py  =  PE  :  PC  =  AC  :  PC, 
also,  L-Py  :  Gy  Py  =  L  :  Gy,  and  Gy-Py  :  Q,v^  =  FC^ :  CD^.  By  Cor.  ii,  Lem. 
when  P  and  Q  coincide,  Qa:"  =  Qy^  and, 

Q:c2  or  Qy^  :  QT2  =  EP2  ;  PF2  =  CA2  :  PF^,  by  Lem.  12,  =CD2  :  CB^. 


7, 


Multiplying  together  corresponding  terms  of  the  four  proportions,  and  simpli¬ 
fying. 


L  QR  ;  QT2  =  AC  L  PC2  CD2 :  PC  Gy  CD2  .CB2  =  2PC  :  Gy, 
since  AC  L  =  2BC^.  But  the  points  P  and  Q  coinciding,  2PC  and  Gy  are  equal. 
And  therefore  the  quantities  L  •  QR  and  QT^,  proportional  to  them,  will  also  be 


gp2 

equal.  Let  those  equals  be  drawn  into  and  we  shall  have  L-SP^  equal  to 

gp2 .  ^ 

— — .  And  therefore  (by  Cor.  i  and  v,  Prop.  6)  the  centripetal  force  is 


inversely  as  L-SP^,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  SP.  q.e.i. 

The  same  otherwise. 

Find  out  the  force  tending  from  the  centre  C  of  the  hyperbola.  This  will  be 
proportional  to  the  distance  CP.  But  from  thence  (by  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  7)  the 

PE® 

force  tending  to  the  focus  S  will  be  as  -g^2>  is,  because  PE  is  given  re¬ 
ciprocally  as  SP®.  Q.E.I. 

And  the  same  way  may  it  be  demonstrated,  that  the  body  having  its  centri¬ 
petal  changed  into  a  centrifugal  force,  will  move  in  the  conjugate  hyperbola. 


Book  I ;  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


45 


Lemma  13 

The  latus  rectum  of  a  'parabola  belonging  to  an'y  vertex  is  four  times  the  distance  of 
that  vertex  from  the  focus  of  the  figure. 

This  is  demonstrated  by  the  writers  on  the  conic  sections. 


Lemma  14 

The  perpendicular,  let  fall  from  the  focus  of  a  parabola  on  its  tangent,  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  the  distances  of  the  focus  from  the  point  of  contact,  and  from 
the  principal  vertex  of  the  figure. 

For,  let  AP  be  the  parabola,  S  its  focus,  A  its  principal  vertex,  P  the  point  of 
contact,  PO  an  ordinate  to  the  principal  diameter,  PM  the  tangent  meeting  the 

principal  diameter  in  M,  and  SN  the  per¬ 
pendicular  from  the  focus  on  the  tangent: 
join  AN,  and  because  of  the  equal  lines 
MS  and  SP,  MN  and  NP,  MA  and  AO, 
the  right  lines  AN,  OP  will  be  parallel; 
and  thence  the  triangle  SAN  will  be  right- 
angled  at  A,  and  similar  to  the  equal  tri¬ 
angles  SNM,  SNP;  therefore  PS  is  to  SN 
as  SN  is  to  SA.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  PS2  is  to  SN^  as  PS  is  to  SA. 

Cor.  II.  And  because  SA  is  given,  SN^  \vill  vary  as  PS. 

Cor.  III.  And  the  intersection  of  any  tangent  PM,  with  the  right  line  SN, 
drawn  from  the  focus  perpendicular  on  the  tangent,  falls  in  the  right  line  AN 
that  touches  the  parabola  in  the  principal  vertex. 


Proposition  13.  Problem  8 

If  a  body  moves  in  the  perimeter  of  a  parabola;  it  is  required  to  find  the  law  of  the 
centripetal  force  tending  to  the  focus  of  that  figure. 

Retaining  the  construction  of  the  preceding  Lemma,  let  P  be  the  body  in  the 
perimeter  of  the  parabola;  and  from  the  place  Q,  into  which  it  is  next  to  suc¬ 
ceed,  draw  QR  parallel  and  QT  per¬ 
pendicular  to  SP,  as  also  Q,v  parallel 
to  the  tangent,  and  meeting  the  di¬ 
ameter  PG  in  V,  and  the  distance  SP 
in  X.  Now  because  of  the  similar  tri¬ 
angles  Fxv,  SPM,  and  of  the  equal 
sides  SP,  SM  of  the  one,  the  sides  Pa: 
or  QR  and  Py  of  the  other  mil  be  also 
equal.  But  (by  the  conic  sections)  the 
square  of  the  ordinate  Qp  is  equal  to 
the  rectangle  under  the  latus  rectum 
and  the  segment  Pw  of  the  diameter;  that  is  (by  Lem.  13),  to  the  rectangle 
4PS-Py,  or  4PS-QR;  and  the  points  P  and  Q  coinciding,  (by  Cor.  ii,  Lem.  7), 
Qa:  =  Q2;.  And  therefore  Qa:^,  in  this  case,  becomes  equal  to  the  rectangle 
4PS  QR.  But  (because  of  the  similar  triangles  Qa;T,  SPN), 

Qa:2  ;  =  :  SN2  =  PS  :  SA  (by  Cor.  i,  Lem.  14), 

=  4PS  QR  :4SA-QR. 


46 


Mathematical  Principles 


Therefore  (by  Prop.  9,  Book  v,  Elements  of  Euclid),  QT2=4SA-QR.  Multiply 
gp2  SP^QT- 

these  equals  by  and  — —  wall  become  equal  to  SP-  -4SA:  and  therefore 

(by  Cor.  i  and  v,  Prop.  6),  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as  SP^-dSA;  that 
is,  because  4SA  is  given,  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  SP.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  From  the  three  last  Propositions  it  follows,  that  if  any  body  P  goes 
from  the  place  P  \nth  any  velocity  in  the  direction  of  any  right  line  PR,  and  at 
the  same  time  is  urged  by  the  action  of  a  centripetal  force  that  is  inversely 
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  places  from  the  centre,  the 
body  will  move  in  one  of  the  conic  sections,  having  its  focus  in  the  centre  of 
force;  and  conversely.  For  the  focus,  the  point  of  contact,  and  the  position  of 
the  tangent,  being  given,  a  conic  section  may  be  described,  which  at  that  point 
shall  have  a  given  curvature.  But  the  curvature  is  given  from  the  centripetal 
force  and  velocity  of  the  body  being  given;  and  two  orbits,  touching  one  the 
other,  cannot  be  described  by  the  same  centripetal  force  and  the  same  velocity. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  velocity  vith  which  the  body  goes  from  its  place  P  is  such, 
that  in  any  infinitely  small  moment  of  time  the  small  line  PR  may  be  thereby 
described;  and  the  centripetal  force  such  as  in  the  same  time  to  move  the  same 
body  through  the  space  QR;  the  body  will  move  in  one  of  the  conic  sections, 

QT2 

whose  principal  latus  rectum  is  the  quantity  in  its  ultimate  state,  when  the 

small  lines  PR,  QR  are  diminished  in  infinitum.  In  these  Corollaries  I  consider 
the  circle  as  an  ellipse;  and  I  except  the  case  where  the  body  descends  to  the 
centre  in  a  right  line. 


Proposition  14.  Theorem  6 

If  several  bodies  revolve  about  one  common  centre,  and  the  centripetal  force  is 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  places  from  the  centre:  I  say,  that  the 
principal  latera  recta  of  their  orbits  are  as  the  squares  of  the  areas,  which  the  bodies 
by  radii  drawn  to  the  centre  describe  in  the  same  time. 

.  QT2 . 

For  (by  Cor.  ii,  Prop.  13)  the  latus  rectum  L  is  equal  to  the  quantity  m 

its  ultimate  state  when  the  points  P  and  Q  coincide.  But  the  small  line  QR  in  a 
given  time  is  as  the  generating  centripetal  force ; 
that  is  (by  supposition),  inversely  as  SP-.  and 

therefore  is  as  QT^  •  SP^;  that  is,  the  latus  rec- 
QK 

turn  L  is  as  the  square  of  the  area  QT-SP.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  the  whole  area  of  the  ellipse,  and 
the  rectangle  under  the  axes,  which  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  it,  is  as  the  product  of  the  square  root 
of  the  latus  rectum,  and  the  periodic  time.  For 
the  whole  area  is  as  the  area  QT-SP,  described  in  a  given  time,  multiplied  by 

the  periodic  time.  ^  r,,  « 

Proposition  15.  Theorem  7 


The  same  things  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  periodic  times  in  ellipses  are  as  the 
l/ith  power  (in  ratione  sesquiplicata)  of  their  greater  axes. 

For  the  lesser  axis  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  greater  axis  and  the 
latus  rectum;  and,  therefore,  the  product  of  the  axes  is  equal  to  the  product  of 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  47 

the  square  root  of  the  latus  rectum  and  the  ^th  power  of  the  greater  axis.  But 
the  product  of  the  axes  (by  Cor.,  Prop.  14)  varies  as  the  product  of  the  square 
root  of  the  latus  rectum,  and  the  periodic  time.  Divide  both  sides  by  the  square 
root  of  the  latus  rectum  and  it  follows  that  the  ^th  power  of  the  greater  axis 
varies  as  the  periodic  time.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Therefore  the  periodic  times  in  ellipses  are  the  same  as  in  circles  whose 
diameters  are  equal  to  the  greater  axes  of  the  ellipses. 


Proposition  16.  Theorem  8 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  and  right  lines  being  drawn  to  the  bodies  that 
shall  touch  the  orbits,  and  perpendiculars  being  let  fall  on  those  tangents  from  the 
common  focus:  I  say,  that  the  velocities  of  the  bodies  vary  inversely  as  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  and  directly  as  the  square  roots  of  the  principal  latera  recta. 

From  the  focus  S  draw  SY  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  PR,  and  the  velocity 

SY2 

of  the  body  P  varies  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  quantity  For  that 

velocity  is  as  the  infinitely  small  arc  PQ  described  in  a  given  moment  of  time, 

that  is  (by  Lem.  7),  as  the  tangent  PR;  that  is 
(because  of  the  proportion,  PR  :  QT  =  SP  :  SY), 

as  or  inversely  as  SY,  and  directly  as 

SP-QT;  but  SP-QT  is  as  the  area  described  in 
the  given  time,  that  is  (by  Prop.  14),  as  the 
square  root  of  the  latus  rectum.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  The  principal  latera  recta  vary  as  the 
squares  of  the  perpendiculars  and  the  squares  of 
the  velocities. 

Cor.  II.  The  velocities  of  bodies,  in  their  greatest  and  least  distances  from 
the  common  focus,  are  inversely  as  the  distances  and  directly  as  the  square 
root  of  the  principal  latera  recta.  For  those  perpendiculars  are  now  the  distances. 

Cor.  III.  And  therefore  the  velocity  in  a  conic  section,  at  its  greatest  or  least 
distance  from  the  focus,  is  to  the  velocity  in  a  circle,  at  the  same  distance  from 
the  centre,  as  the  square  root  of  the  principal  latus  rectum  is  to  the  square  root 
of  double  that  distance. 

Cor.  IV.  The  velocities  of  the  bodies  revolving  in  ellipses,  at  their  mean 
distances  from  the  common  focus,  are  the  same  as  those  of  bodies  revolving  in 
circles,  at  the  same  distances;  that  is  (by  Cor.  vi.  Prop.  4),  inversely  as  the 
square  root  of  the  distances.  For  the  perpendiculars  are  now  the  lesser  semi¬ 
axes,  and  these  are  as  mean  proportionals  between  the  distances  and  the  latera 
recta.  Let  the  inverse  of  this  ratio  [of  the  minor  semiaxes]  be  multiplied  by  the 
square  root  of  the  direct  ratio  of  the  latera  recta,  and  we  shall  have  the  square 
root  of  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  distances. 

Cor.  V.  In  the  same  figure,  or  even  in  different  figures,  whose  principal  latera 
recta  are  equal,  the  velocity  of  a  body  is  inversely  as  the  perpendicular  let  fall 
from  the  focus  on  the  tangent. 

Cor.  VI.  In  a  parabola,  the  velocity  is  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the 
ratio  of  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the  focus  of  the  figure;  it  is  more  variable 
in  the  ellipse,  and  less  in  the  hyperbola,  than  according  to  this  ratio.  For  (by 
Cor.  II,  Lem.  14)  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  focus  on  the  tangent  of  a 


48  Mathematical  Principles 

parabola  is  as  the  square  root  of  the  distance.  In  the  hyperbola  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  is  less  variable;  in  the  ellipse,  more. 

Cor.  VII.  In  a  parabola,  the  velocity  of  a  body  at  any  distance  from  the  focus 
is  to  the  velocity  of  a  body  revolving  in  a  circle,  at  the  same  distance  from  the 
centre,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  number  2  to  1 ;  in  the  ellipse  it  is 
less,  and  in  the  hyperbola  greater,  than  according  to  this  ratio.  For  (by  Cor.  ii 
of  this  Prop.)  the  velocity  at  the  vertex  of  a  parabola  is  in  this  ratio,  and  (by 
Cor.  VI  of  this  Prop,  and  Prop.  4)  the  same  proportion  holds  in  all  distances. 
And  hence,  also,  in  a  parabola,  the  velocity  is  everywhere  equal  to  the  velocity 
of  a  body  revolving  in  a  circle  at  half  the  distance;  in  the  ellipse  it  is  less,  and  in 
the  hyperbola  greater. 

Cor.  VIII.  The  velocity  of  a  body  revolving  in  any  conic  section  is  to  the 
velocity  of  a  body  revolving  in  a  circle,  at  the  distance  of  half  the  principal 
latus  rectum  of  the  section,  as  that  distance  to  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from 
the  focus  on  the  tangent  of  the  section.  This  appears  from  Cor.  v. 

Cor.  IX.  Wherefore,  since  (by  Cor.  vi.  Prop.  4)  the  velocity  of  a  body  revolv¬ 
ing  in  this  circle  is  to  the  velocity  of  another  body  revolving  in  any  other  circle, 
inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances;  therefore,  likevdse, 
the  velocity  of  a  body  revolving  in  a  conic  section  will  be  to  the  velocity  of  a 
body  revolving  in  a  circle  at  the  same  distance  as  a  mean  proportional  between 
that  common  distance,  and  half  the  principal  latus  rectum  of  the  section,  to 
the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  common  focus  upon  the  tangent  of  the 
section. 


Proposition  17.  Problem  9 

Supposing  the  centripetal  force  to  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the 
distances  of  places  from  the  centre,  and  that  the  absolute  value  of  that  force  is  knoum; 
it  is  required  to  determine  the  line  which  a  body  will  describe  that  is  let  go  from  a 
given  place  with  a  given  velocity  in  the  direction  of  a  given  right  line. 

Let  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  point  S  be  such  as  will  make  the  body 
p  revolve  in  any  given  orbit  pq;  and  suppose  the  velocity  of  this  body  in  the 

place  p  is  known.  Then  from  the 
place  P  suppose  the  body  P  to  be 
let  go  with  a  given  velocity  in  the 
direction  of  the  line  PR;  but  by 
virtue  of  a  centripetal  force  to  be 
immediately  turned  aside  from 
that  right  line  into  the  conic  sec¬ 
tion  PQ.  This,  the  right  line  PR 
will  therefore  touch  in  P.  Suppose 
likevTse  that  the  right  line  pr 
touches  the  orbit  pq  in  p;  and  if 
from  S  you  suppose  perpendiculars 
let  fall  on  those  tangents,  the  principal  latus  rectum  of  the  conic  section  (by 
Cor.  I,  Prop.  16)  will  be  to  the  principal  latus  rectum  of  that  orbit  in  a  ratio 
compounded  of  the  squared  ratio  of  the  perpendiculars,  and  the  squared  ratio 
of  the  velocities;  and  is  therefore  given.  Let  this  latus  rectum  be  L;  the  focus  S 
of  the  conic  section  is  also  given.  Let  the  angle  RPH  be  the  supplement  of  the 
angle  RPS,  and  the  line  PH,  in  which  the  other  focus  H  is  placed,  is  given  by 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  49 

position.  Let  fall  SK  perpendicular  on  PH,  and  erect  the  conjugate  semiaxis 
BC;  this  done,  we  shall  have 

Sp2  _  2PH  •  PK + PH2  =  SW- = 4CH2  =  4(BH2  -  BC^)  = 
(SP+PH)2-L(SP+PH)=SP2+2PSPH+PH2-L(SP+PH). 

Add  on  both  sides 

2PKPH-SP2-PH2+L(SP+PH), 

and  we  shall  have 

L(SP+PH)=2PS  PH+2PK  PH,  or 
(SP+PH)  :  PH  =2  (SP+KP)  :  L. 

Hence  PH  is  given  both  in  length  and  position.  That  is,  if  the  velocity  of  the 
body  in  P  is  such  that  the  latus  rectum  L  is  less  than  2SP+2KP,  PH  vdll  lie  on 
the  same  side  of  the  tangent  PR  vith  the  line  SP;  and  therefore  the  figure  vdll 
be  an  ellipse,  which  from  the  given  foci  S,  H,  and  the  principal  axis  SP+PH,  is 
given  also.  But  if  the  velocity  of  the  body  is  so  great,  that  the  latus  rectum  L 
becomes  equal  to  2SP+2KP,  the  length  PH  will  be  infinite;  and  therefore,  the 
figure  will  be  a  parabola,  which  has  its  axis  SH  parallel  to  the  fine  PK,  and  is 
thence  given.  But  if  the  body  goes  from  its  place  P  with  a  yet  greater  velocity, 
the  length  PH  is  to  be  taken  on  the  other  side  the  tangent;  and  so  the  tangent 
passing  between  the  foci,  the  figure  will  be  an  hyperbola  having  its  principal 
axis  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  lines  SP  and  PH,  and  thence  is  given.  For  if 
the  body,  in  these  cases,  revolves  in  a  conic  section  so  found,  it  is  demonstrated 
in  Props.  11, 12,  and  13,  that  the  centripetal  force  vdll  be  inversely  as  the  square 
of  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the  centre  of  force  S;  and  therefore  we  have 
rightly  determined  the  line  PQ,  which  a  body  let  go  from  a  given  place  P  vith 
a  given  velocity,  and  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  PR  given  by  position, 
would  describe  vith  such  a  force.  q.e.f. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  in  every  conic  section,  from  the  principal  vertex  D,  the  latus 
rectum  L,  and  the  focus  S  given,  the  other  focus  H  is  given,  by  taking  DH  to 
DS  as  the  latus  rectum  to  the  difference  between  the  latus  rectum  and  4DS. 
For  the  proportion 

SP+PH  ;  PH=2SP+2KP  ;  L 
becomes,  in  the  case  of  this  Corollary, 

DS+DH  :  DH=4DS  :  L, 
and  DS  :  DH  =  4DS-L  :  L. 

Cor.  II.  Whence  if  the  velocity  of  a  body  in  the  principal  vertex  D  is  given, 
the  orbit  may  be  readily  found;  namely,  by  taking  its  latus  rectum  to  twice  the 
distance  DS,  in  the  squared  ratio  of  this  given  velocity  to  the  velocity  of  a  body 
revolving  in  a  circle  at  the  distance  DS  (by  Cor.  iii,  Prop.  16),  and  then  taking 
DH  to  DS  as  the  latus  rectum  to  the  difference  between  the  latus  rectum  and 
4DS. 

Cor.  hi.  Hence  also  if  a  body  move  in  any  conic  section,  and  if  forced  out  of 
its  orbit  by  any  impulse,  you  may  discover  the  orbit  in  which  it  will  afterwards 
pursue  its  course.  For  by  compounding  the  proper  motion  of  the  body  with 
that  motion,  which  the  impulse  alone  would  generate,  you  vill  have  the  motion 
with  which  the  body  will  go  off  from  a  given  place  of  impulse  in  the  direction  of 
a  right  fine  given  in  position. 

Cor.  IV.  And  if  that  body  is  continually  disturbed  by  the  action  of  some 
foreign  force,  w’e  may  nearly  know  its  course,  by  collecting  the  changes  w+ich 
that  force  introduces  in  some  points,  and  estimating  the  continual  changes  it 


50  Mathematical  Principles 

will  undergo  in  the  intermediate  places,  from  the  analogy  that  appears  in  the 
progress  of  the  series. 


Scholium 


If  a  body  P,  by  means  of  a  centripetal 
force  tending  to  any  given  point  R,  move  in 
the  perimeter  of  any  given  conic  section  whose 
centre  is  C;  and  the  law  of  the  centripetal 
force  is  required:  draw  CG  parallel  to  the 
radius  RP,  and  meeting  the  tangent  PG  ol 
the  orbit  in  G;  and  the  force  required  (by 
Cor.  I  and  Schol.,  Prop.  10,  and  Cor.  iii, 

CG^ 

Prop.  7)  will  be  as  . 

XVX 


SECTION  IV 


The  finding  of  elliptic,  parabolic,  and  hyperbolic  orbits,  from  the 

FOCUS  GIVEN 

Lemma  15 

If  from  the  two  foci  S,  H,  of  any  ellipse  or  hyperbola,  we  draw  to  any  third  point  V 
the  right  lines  SV,  H  V,  whereof  one  HV  is  equal  to  the  principal  axis  of  the  figure, 

that  is,  to  the  axis  in  which  the  foci  are  situated,  the  other, 
SV,  is  bisected  in  T  by  the  perpendicular  TR  let  fall 
upon  it;  that  perpendicularTK  will  somewhere  touch  the 
conic  section:  and,  vice  versa,  if  it  does  touch  it,  HV 
will  be  equal  to  the  principal  axis  of  the  figure. 

For,  let  the  perpendicular  TR  cut  the  right  line  HV,  produced,  if  need  be,  in 
R;  and  join  SR.  Because  TS,  TV  are  equal,  therefore  the  right  lines  SR,  VR,  as 
well  as  the  angles  TRS,  TRV,  vdll  be  also  equal.  Whence  the  point  R  will  be  in 
the  conic  section,  and  the  perpendicular  TR  will  touch  the  same;  and  the 
contrary.  q.e.d. 


B 


Proposition  18.  Problem  10 

From  a  focus  and  the  principal  axes  given,  to  describe  elliptic  and  hyperbolic  curves 
which  shall  pass  through  given  points,  and  touch  right  lines  given  by  position. 

Let  S  be  the  common  focus  of  the  figures;  AB  the  length  of  the  principal  axis 
of  any  conic;  P  a  point  through  which  the  conic  should  pass;  and  TR  a  right 
line  which  it  should  touch.  About  the  centre  P, 
with  the  radius  AB— SP,  if  the  orbit  is  an  ellipse, 
or  AB+SP,  if  the  orbit  is  an  hyperbola,  describe 
the  circle  HG.  On  the  tangent  TR  let  fall  the 
perpendicular  ST,  and  produce  the  same  to  V,  so 
that  TV  may  be  equal  to  ST ;  and  about  V  as  a 
centre  with  the  interval  AB  describe  the  circle 
FH.  In  this  manner,  whether  two  points  P,  p,  are  given,  or  two  tangents  TR, 
tr,  or  a  point  P  and  a  tangent  TR,  we  are  to  describe  two  circles.  Let  H  be  their 


N 


R 


H 


sf  S 


GF 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  51 

common  intersection,  and  from  the  foci  S,  H,  with  the  given  axis  describe  the 
conic :  I  say,  the  thing  is  done.  For  (because  PH +SP  in  the  ellipse,  and  PH  —  SP 
in  the  hyperbola,  is  equal  to  the  axis)  the  described  conic  will  pass  through 
the  point  P,  and  (by  the  preceding  Lemma)  vill  touch  the  right  line  TR.  And 
by  the  same  argument  it  will  either  pass  through  the  two  points  P,  p,  or  touch 
the  two  right  lines  TR,  tr.  q.e.f. 

Proposition  19.  Problem  11 

About  a  given  focus,  to  describe  a  parabola  which  shall  pass  through  given  points 
and  touch  right  lines  given  by  position. 

Let  S  be  the  focus,  P  a  point,  and  TR  a  tangent  of  the  curve  to  be  described. 
About  P  as  a  centre,  with  the  radius  PS,  describe  the  circle  FG.  From  the  focus 
let  fall  ST  perpendicular  on  the  tangent,  and  produce  the  same  to  V,  so  as  TV 

may  be  equal  to  ST.  After  the  same  manner  another  circle 
jg  is  to  be  described,  if  another  point  p  is  given;  or  another 
point  V  is  to  be  found,  if  another  tangent  tr  is  given;  then 
draw  the  right  hne  IF,  which  shall  touch  the  two  circles 
FG,  fg,  if  two  points  P,  p  are  given;  or  pass  through  the 
two  points  Y,  V,  if  two  tangents  TR,  tr,  are  given;  or  touch 
the  circle  FG,  and  pass  through  the  point  V,  if  the  point 
P  and  the  tangent  TR  are  given.  On  FI  let  fall  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  SI,  and  bisect  the  same  in  K;  and  vith  the  axis 
SK  and  principal  vertex  K  describe  a  parabola:  I  say,  the 
thing  is  done.  For  this  parabola  (because  SK  is  equal  to  IK,  and  SP  to  FP) 
will  pass  through  the  point  P;  and  (by  Cor.  iii,  Lem.  14)  because  ST  is  equal 
to  TV,  and  STR  a  right  angle,  it  vill  touch  the  right  line  TR.  q.e.f. 


Proposition  20.  Problem  12 

About  a  given  focus,  to  describe  any  given  conic  which  shall  pass  through  given 
points  and  touch  right  lines  given  by  position. 

Case  1.  About  the  focus  S  it  is  required  to  describe  a  conic  ABC,  passing 
through  two  points  B,  C.  Because  the  conic  is  given  in  kind,  the  ratio  of  the 
principal  axis  to  the  distance  of  the  foci  vdll 
be  given.  In  that  ratio  take  KB  to  BS,  and  LC 
to  CS.  About  the  centres  B,  C,  vdth  the  in¬ 
tervals  BK,  CL,  describe  two  circles;  and  on 
the  right  hne  KL,  that  touches  the  same  in  K 
and  L,  let  fall  the  perpendicular  SG;  which 
cut  in  A  and  a,  so  that  GA  may  be  to  AS,  and  Ga  to  aS,  as  KB  to  BS;  and  vdth 
the  axis  Aa,  and  vertices  A,  a,  describe  a  conic:  I  say,  the  thing  is  done.  For  let 
H  be  the  other  focus  of  the  described  figure,  and  seeing  that  GA  :  AS  =  Ga  :  aS, 
we  shall  have 

Ga  — GA  :  aS— AS  =  GA  :  AS,  or  Aa  :  SH  =  GA  :  AS,  and  therefore  GA  and 
AS  are  in  the  ratio  which  the  principal  axis  of  the  figure  to  be  described  has  to 
the  distance  of  its  foci;  and  therefore  the  described  figure  is  of  the  same  kind 
with  the  figure  which  was  to  be  described.  And  since  KB  to  BS,  and  LC  to  CS, 
are  in  the  same  ratio,  this  figure  vdll  pass  through  the  points  B,  C,  as  is  mani¬ 
fest  from  the  conic  sections. 

Case  2.  About  the  focus  S  it  is  required  to  describe  a  conic  which  shall  some- 


52 


Mathematical  Principles 


O 


'■\k. 


H 


where  touch  two  right  lines  TR,  Ir.  From  the  focus  on  those  tangents  let  fall 
the  perpendiculars  ST,  Si,  which  produce  to  V,  v,  so  that  TV,  tv  may  be  equal 
to  TS,  tS.  Bisect  Yv  in  0,  and  erect  the  indefinite  perpendicular  OH,  and  cut 
the  right  line  VS  infinitely  produced  in  K  and  k, 
so  that  VK  be  to  KS,  and  Yk  to  A^S,  as  the  prin¬ 
cipal  axis  of  the  conic  to  be  described  is  to  the 
distance  of  its  foci.  On  the  diameter  KA"  describe 
a  circle  cutting  OH  in  H ;  and  wth  the  foci  S,  H, 
and  principal  axis  equal  to  VH,  describe  a 
conic:  I  say,  the  thing  is  done.  For  bisecting  KA’ 
in  X,  and  joining  HX,  HS,  HV,  Hp,  because  VK 
is  to  KS  as  VA-  to  A^S;  and  by  composition,  as 
VK+VA'  to  KS+A'S;  and  by  subtraction,  as  VA*— VK  to  ArS  — KS,  that  is,  as 
2VX  to  2KX,  and  2KX  to  2SX,  and  therefore  as  VX  to  HX  and  HX  to  SX, 
the  triangles  VXH,  HXS  mil  be  similar;  therefore  VH  will  be  to  SH  as  VX  to 
XH;  and  therefore  as  VK  to  KS.  Wherefore  VH,  the  principal  axis  of  the  de¬ 
scribed  conic,  has  the  same  ratio  to  SH,  the  distance  of  the  foci,  as  the  prin¬ 
cipal  axis  of  the  conic  which  was  to  be  described  has  to  the  distance  of  its  foci; 
and  is  therefore  of  the  same  kind.  And  seeing  VH,  wH  are  equal  to  the  principal 
axis,  and  VS,  i^S  are  perpendicularly  bisected  by  the  right  lines  TR,  Ir,  it  is  ev¬ 
ident  (by  Lem.  15)  that  those  right  lines  touch  the  described  conic.  q.e.f. 

Case  3.  About  the  focus  S  it  is  required  to  describe  a  conic  which  shall  touch 
a  right  line  TR  in  a  given  point  R.  On  the  right  line  TR  let  fall  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  ST,  which  produce  to  V,  so  that  TV  may 
be  equal  to  ST;  join  VR,  and  cut  the  right 
line  VS  indefinitely  produced  in  K  and  Ar,  so 
that  VK  may  be  to  SK,  and  VAr  to  SAr,  as  the 
\  principal  axis  of  the  ellipse  to  be  described  to 

. 1. .  the  distance  of  its  foci;  and  on  the  diameter 

^  KA’  describing  a  circle,  cut  the  right  line  VR 
produced  in  H;  then  with  the  foci  S,  H,  and 
principal  axis  equal  to  VH,  describe  a  conic:  I  say,  the  thing  is  done.  For 
VH  :  SH  =  VK  :  SK,  and  therefore  as  the  principal  axis  of  the  conic  which  was 
to  be  described  to  the  distance  of  its  foci  (as  appears  from  what  we  have  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  Case  2);  and  therefore  the  described  conic  is  of  the  same  kind 
with  that  which  was  to  be  described;  but  that  the  right  line  TR,  by  which 
the  angle  VRS  is  bisected,  touches  the  conic  in  the  point  R,  is  certain  from  the 
properties  of  the  conic  sections.  q.e.f. 

Case  4.  About  the  focus  S  it  is  required  to  describe  a  conic  APB  that  shall 
touch  a  right  line  TR,  and  pass  through  any  given  point  P  without  the  tangent, 
and  shall  be  similar  to  the  figure  apb,  described  mth  the  principal  axis  ah,  and 
foci  s,  h.  On  the  tangent  TR  let  fall  the  perpendicular  ST,  which  produce  to  V, 
so  that  TV  may  be  equal  to  ST ;  and  making  the  angles  hsq,  shq,  equal  to  the 
angles  VSP,  SVP,  about  g  as  a  centre,  and  mth  a  radius  which  shall  be  to  ab  as 
SP  to  VS,  describe  a  circle  cutting  the  figure  apb  in  p.  Join  sp,  and  draw  SH 
such  that  it  may  be  to  sh  as  SP  is  to  sp,  and  may  make  the  angle  PSH  equal  to 
the  angle  psh,  and  the  angle  VSH  equal  to  the  angle  psq.  Then  mth  the  foci 
S,  H,  and  principal  axis  AB,  equal  to  the  distance  VH,  describe  a  conic  section: 
I  say,  the  thing  is  done;  for  if  sv  is  drawn  so  that  it  shall  be  to  sp  as  sh  is  to  sq, 


R 


H.,.- 


K 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  53 

and  shall  make  the  angle  vsp  equal  to  the  angle  hsq,  and  the  angle  vsh  equal  to 
the  angle  psg,  the  triangles  svh,  spq,  will  be  similar,  and  therefore  vh  will  be  to 
pq  as  sh  is  to  sq;  that  is  (because  of  the  similar  triangles  VSP,  hsq),  as  VS  is  to 
SP,  or  as  ab  to  pq.  Wherefore  vh  and  ab  are  equal.  But,  because  of  the  similar 


V 


triangles  VSH,  vsh,  VH  is  to  SH  as  vh  to  sh;  that  is,  the  axis  of  the  conic  section 
now  described  is  to  the  distance  of  its  foci  as  the  axis  ab  to  the  distance  of  the 
foci  sh;  and  therefore  the  figure  now  described  is  similar  to  the  figure  aph.  But, 
because  the  triangle  PSH  is  similar  to  the  triangle  psh,  this  figure  passes  through 
the  point  P;  and  because  VH  is  equal  to  its  axis,  and  VS  is  perpendicularly 
bisected  by  the  right  line  TR,  the  said  figure  touches  the  right  line  TR.  q.e.f. 


Lemma  16 

From  three  given  points  to  draw  to  a  fourth  point  that  is  not  given  three  right  lines 
whose  differences  either  shall  be  given  or  are  zero. 

Case  1.  Let  the  given  points  be  A,  B,  C,  and  Z  the  fourth  point  which  we  are 
to  find;  because  of  the  given  difference  of  the  lines  AZ,  BZ,  the  locus  of  the 
point  Z  will  be  an  hyperbola  whose  foci  are  A  and  B,  and  whose  principal  axis 

is  the  given  difference.  Let  that  axis  be  MN. 
Taking  PM  to  MA  as  MN  to  AB,  erect  PR  per¬ 
pendicular  to  AB,  and  let  fall  ZR  perpendicular 
to  PR;  then  from  the  nature  of  the  hyperbola, 
ZR  :  AZ  =  MN  :  AB.  And  by  the  like  argument, 
the  locus  of  the  point  Z  mil  be  another  hyper¬ 
bola,  whose  foci  are  A,  C,  and  whose  principal 
axis  is  the  difference  between  AZ  and  CZ;  and  QS 
a  perpendicular  on  AC  may  be  drawn,  to  which 
(QS)  if  from  any  point  Z  of  this  hyperbola  a  per- 
pen^cular  ZS  is  let  fall,  (this  ZS)  shall  be  to  AZ 
as  the  difference  between  AZ  and  CZ  is  to  AC. 
Wherefore  the  ratios  of  ZR  and  ZS  to  AZ  are  given,  and  consequently  the  ratio 
of  ZR  to  ZS  one  to  the  other;  and  therefore  if  the  right  lines  RP,  SQ,  meet  in 
T,  and  TZ  and  TA  are  drawn,  the  figure  TRZS  will  be  given  in  kind,  and 
the  right  line  TZ,  in  which  the  point  Z  is  somewhere  placed,  will  be  given  in 
position.  There  will  be  given  also  the  right  line  TA,  and  the  angle  ATZ;  and 


54 


Mathematical  Principles 

because  the  ratios  of  AZ  and  TZ  to  ZS  are  given,  their  ratio  to  each  other  is 
given  also;  and  thence  will  be  given  likewise  the  triangle  ATZ,  whose  vertex  is 
the  point  Z.  q.e.i. 

Case  2.  If  two  of  the  three  lines,  for  example  AZ  and  BZ,  are  equal,  draw  the 
right  line  TZ  so  as  to  bisect  the  right  line  AB;  then  find  the  triangle  ATZ  as 
above.  q.e.i. 

Case  3.  If  all  the  three  are  equal,  the  point  Z  vill  be  placed  in  the  centre  of  a 
circle  that  passes  through  the  points  A,  B,  C.  q.e.i. 

This  problematic  Lemma  is  likeMTse  solved  in  the  Book  of  Tactions  of  Apol¬ 
lonius  [of  Perga],  restored  by  Vieta. 

Proposition  21.  Problem  13 

About  a  given  focus,  to  describe  a  conic  that  shall  pass  through  given  points  and 
touch  right  lines  given  by  position. 

Let  the  focus  S,  the  point  P,  and  the  tangent  TR  be  given,  and  suppose  that 
the  other  focus  H  is  to  be  found.  On  the  tangent  let  fall  the  perpendicular  ST, 
which  produce  to  Y,  so  that  TY  may  be  equal  to  ST,  and  YH  Avill  be  equal  to 
the  principal  axis.  Join  SP,  HP,  and  SP  vill  be  the  y.. 
difference  between  HP  and  the  principal  axis. 

After  this  manner,  if  more  tangents  TR  are  given, 
or  more  points  P,  we  shall  always  determine  as 
many  lines  YH,  or  PH,  drawn  from  the  said  points 
Y  or  P,  to  the  focus  H,  which  either  shall  be  equal 
to  the  axes,  or  differ  from  the  axes  by  given  lengths 
SP;  and  therefore  which  shall  either  be  equal  among  themselves,  or  shall  have 
given  differences;  from  whence  (by  the  preceding  Lemma),  that  other  focus  H 
is  given.  But  having  the  foci  and  the  length  of  the  axis  (which  is  either  YH, 
or,  if  the  conic  be  an  ellipse,  PH-t-SP;  or  PH  — SP,  if  it  be  an  hyperbola),  the 
conic  is  given.  q.e.i. 


Scholium 

When  the  conic  is  an  hyperbola,  I  do  not  include  its  conjugate  hyperbola 
under  the  name  of  this  conic.  For  a  body  going  on  with  a  continued  motion  can 
never  pass  out  of  one  hyperbola  into  its  conjugate  hyperbola. 

The  case  when  three  points  are 
given  is  more  readily  solved  thus. 
Let  B,  C,  D  be  the  given  points. 
Join  BC,  CD,  and  produce  them 
to  E,  F,  so  as  EB  may  be  to  EC  as 
SB  to  SC;  and  FC  to  FD  as  SC  to 
SD.  On  EF  drawn  and  produced 
let  fall  the  perpendiculars  SG,  BH, 
and  in  GS  produced  indefinitely 
take  GA  to  AS,  and  Ga  to  aS,  as 
HB  is  to  BS:  then  A  vnW  be  the 
vertex,  and  Aa  the  principal  axis 
of  the  conic;  which,  according  as  GA  is  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  AS, 
vill  be  either  an  ellipse,  a  parabola,  or  an  hyperbola;  the  point  a  in  the  first 
case  falling  on  the  same  side  of  the  line  GF  as  the  point  A;  in  the  second,  going 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  55 

off  to  an  infinite  distance;  in  the  third,  falling  on  the  other  side  of  the  line  GF. 
For  if  on  GF  the  perpendiculars  Cl,  DK  are  let  fall,  IC  will  be  to  HB  as  EC  to 
EB;  that  is,  as  SC  to  SB;  and  by  permutation,  IC  to  SC  as  HB  to  SB,  or  as  GA 
to  SA.  And,  by  the  like  argument,  we  may  prove  that  KD  is  to  SD  in  the  same 
ratio.  WTierefore  the  points  B,  C,  D  lie  in  a  conic  section  described  about 
the  focus  S,  in  such  manner  that  all  the  right  lines  drawn  from  the  focus  S  to 
the  several  points  of  the  section,  and  the  perpendiculars  let  fall  from  the  same 
points  on  the  right  line  GF,  are  in  that  given  ratio. 

That  excellent  geometer  M.  de  la  Hire  has  solved  this  Problem  much  after 
the  same  way,  in  his  Conics,  Prop.  25,  Book  viii. 


SECTION  V 

How  THE  ORBITS  ARE  TO  BE  FOUND  WHEN  NEITHER  FOCUS  IS  GIVEN 

LeM-ALA.  17 

If  from  any  point  P  o/  a  given  conic  section,  to  the  four  produced  sides  AB,  CD, 
AC,  DB  of  any  trapezium  ABDC  inscribed  in  that  section,  as  many  right  lines 
PQ,  PR,  PS,  PT  are  drawn  in  given  angles,  each  line  to  each  side;  the  rectangle 
PQ-PR  of  those  on  the  opposite  sides  AB,  CD,  vhll  be  to  the  rectangle  PS-PT  of 
those  on  the  other  two  opposite  sides  AC,  BD,  in  a  given  ratio. 

Case  1.  Let  us  suppose,  first,  that  the  lines 
drawn  to  one  pair  of  opposite  sides  are  parallel 
to  either  of  the  other  sides;  as  PQ  and  PR  to 
the  side  AC,  and  PS  and  PT  to  the  side  AB.  And 
further,  that  one  pair  of  the  opposite  sides,  as 
AC  and  BD,  are  parallel  between  themselves; 
then  the  right  line  which  bisects  those  parallel 
sides  will  be  one  of  the  diameters  of  the  conic 
section,  and  vdll  likewise  bisect  RQ.  Let  O  be 
the  point  in  which  RQ  is  bisected,  and  PO  will 
be  an  ordinate  to  that  diameter.  Produce  PO 
to  PO,  and  OK  vill  be  an  ordinate  on  the  other 
side  of  that  diameter.  Since,  therefore,  the  points  A,  B,  P,  and  K  are  placed  in 
the  conic  section,  and  PK  cuts  AB  in  a  given  angle,  the  rectangle  PQ  •  QK  (by 
Props.  17,  19,  21,  and  23,  Book  iii.  Conics  of  Apollonius)  vdll  be  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AQ-QB  in  a  given  ratio.  But  QK  and 
PR  are  equal,  as  being  the  differences  of  the 
equal  lines  OK,  OP,  and  OQ,  OR;  whence  the 
rectangles  PQ-QK  and  PQ  PR  are  equal;  and 
therefore  the  rectangle  PQ-PR  is  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AQ  •  QB,  that  is,  to  the  rectangle  PS  •  PT, 
in  a  given  ratio.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Let  us  next  suppose  that  the  opposite 
sides  AC  and  BD  of  the  trapezium  are  not  par¬ 
allel.  Draw  Bd  parallel  to  AC,  and  meeting  as 
well  the  right  line  ST  in  t,  as  the  conic  section  in  d.  Join  Cd  cutting  PQ  in  r, 
and  draw  DM  parallel  to  PQ,  cutting  Cd  in  M,  and  AB  in  N.  Then  (because  of 


to  K,  so  that  OK  may  be  equal 


56  Mathematical  Principles 

the  similar  triangles  BT<,  DBN)  B<  or  PQ  :T<  =  DN  :NB.  AndsoRr  :  AQorPS  = 
DM  :  AN.  Wherefore,  by  multiplying  the  antecedents  by  the  antecedents,  and 
the  consequents  by  the  consequents,  as  the  rectangle  PQ  •  Rr  is  to  the  rectangle 
PS  T/,  so  will  the  rectangle  DN  DM  be  to  the  rectangle  NA-NB;  and  (by 
Case  1)  so  is  the  rectangle  PQ-Pr  to  the  rectangle  PS-P/,  and,  by  division,  so 
is  the  rectangle  PQ-PR  to  the, rectangle  PS-PT.  q.e.d. 

Case  3.  Let  us  suppose,  lastly,  the  four  lines  PQ,  PR,  PS,  PT  not  to  be 
parallel  to  the  sides  AC,  AB,  but  any  way  in¬ 
clined  to  them.  In  their  place  draw  P^,  Pr,  par¬ 
allel  to  AC;  and  Ps,  P/  parallel  to  AB;  and  be¬ 
cause  the  angles  of  the  triangles  PQ?,  PRr,  PSs, 

PT/  are  given,  the  ratios  of  PQ  to  Pg,  PR  to  Pr, 

PS  to  Ps,  PT  to  P/  will  be  also  given;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  compounded  ratios  PQ-PR  to  Pg-Pr, 
and  PS  -  PT  to  Ps  -  P/  are  given.  But  from  what 
we  have  demonstrated  before,  the  ratio  of  Pg  -  Pr 
to  Ps  -  P/  is  given;  and  therefore  also  the  ratio  of 
PQ-PR  to  PS-PT.  q.e.d. 

Lemma  18 


The  same  things  supposed,  if  the  rectangle  PQ  -  PR  of  the  lines  drawn  to  the  two 
opposite  sides  of  the  trapezium  is  to  the  rectangle  PS  •  PT  of  those  drawn  to  the  other 
two  sides  in  a  given  ratio,  the  point  P,  from  whence  those  lines  are  drawn,  will  be 
placed  in  a  conic  section  described  about  the  trapezium. 

Conceive  a  conic  section  to  be  described  passing  through  the  points  A,  B,  C, 
D,  and  any  one  of  the  infinite  number  of  points  P,  as  for  example  p:  I  say,  the 
point  P  mil  be  always  placed  in  this  section.  If  you  deny  the  thing,  join  AP 

cutting  this  conic  section  somewhere  else,  if 
possible,  than  in  P,  as  in  b.  Therefore  if  from 
those  points  p  and  b,  in  the  given  angles  to 
the  sides  of  the  trapezium,  we  draw  the  right 
lines  pq,  pr,  ps,  pt,  and  bh,  bn,  bf,  bd,  we  shall 
have,  as  bk-bn  to  bf-bd,  so  (by  Lem.  17) 
pq-pr  to  ps-pt;  and  so  (by  supposition) 
PQ  -  PR  to  PS  •  PT.  And  because  of  the  sim¬ 
ilar  trapezia  bkAf,  PQAS,  as  bk  to  bf,  so  PQ 
to  PS.  Wherefore  by  dividing  the  terms  of 
the  preceding  proportion  by  the  correspond¬ 
ent  terms  of  this,  we  shall  have  bn  to  bd  as 
PR  to  PT.  And  therefore  the  equiangular 
trapezia  Dnbd,  DRPT,  are  similar,  and  consequently  their  diagonals  D6,  DP 
do  coincide.  Wherefore  b  falls  in  the  intersection  of  the  right  lines  AP,  DP,  and 
consequently  coincides  Avith  the  point  P.  And  therefore  the  point  P,  wherever 
it  is  taken,  falls  mthin  the  assigned  conic  section.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  if  three  right  lines  PQ,  PR,  PS  are  drawn  from  a  common  point 
P,  to  as  many  other  right  lines  given  in  position,  AB,  CD,  AC,  each  to  each,  in 
as  many  angles  respectively  given,  and  the  rectangle  PQ  -  PR  under  any  two  of 
the  lines  drawn  be  to  the  square  of  the  third  PS  in  a  given  ratio;  the  point  P, 
from  which  the  right  lines  are  drawn,  mil  be  placed  in  a  conic  section  that 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  57 

touches  the  lines  AB,  CD  in  A  and  C;  and  the  contrary.  For  the  position  of  the 
three  right  lines  AB,  CD,  AC  remaining  the  same,  let  the  line  BD  approach  to 
and  coincide  with  the  line  AC;  then  let  the  line  PT  come  likemse  to  coincide 
with  the  line  PS ;  and  the  rectangle  PS  •  PT  will  become  PS-,  and  the  right  lines 
AB,  CD,  which  before  did  cut  the  curve  in  the  points  A  and  B,  C  and  D,  can  no 
longer  cut,  but  only  touch,  the  curve  in  those  coinciding  points. 

Scholium 

In  this  Lemma,  the  name  of  conic  section  is  to  be  understood  in  a  large  sense, 
comprehending  as  well  the  rectilinear  section  through  the  vertex  of  the  cone, 
as  the  circular  one  parallel  to  the  base.  For  if  the  point  p  happens  to  be  in  a 
right  line,  by  which  the  points  A  and  D,  or  C  and  B  are  joined,  the  conic  section 

\vill  be  changed  into  two  right  lines,  one  of 
which  is  that  right  line  upon  which  the 
point  p  falls,  and  the  other  is  a  right  line 
that  joins  the  other  two  of  the  four  points. 
If  the  two  opposite  angles  of  the  trapezium 
taken  together  are  equal  to  two  right  angles, 
and  if  the  four  lines  PQ,  PR,  PS,  PT  are 
drawn  to  the  sides  thereof  at  right  angles, 
or  any  other  equal  angles,  and  the  rectangle 
PQ-PR  under  two  of  the  lines  drawn  PQ 
and  PR,  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  PS  PT 
under  the  other  two  PS  and  PT,  the  conic 
section  will  become  a  circle.  And  the  same 
thing  will  happen  if  the  four  lines  are  drawn  in  any  angles,  and  the  rectangle 
PQ  •  PR,  under  one  pair  of  the  lines  drawn,  is  to  the  rectangle  PS  •  PT  under 
the  other  pair  as  the  rectangle  under  the  sines  of  the  angles  S,  T,  in  which  the 
two  last  lines  PS,  PT  are  drawn,  to  the  rectangle  under  the  sines  of  the  angles 
Q,  R,  in  which  the  first  two  PQ,  PR  are  drawn.  In  all  other  cases  the  locus  of 
the  point  P  will  be  one  of  the  three  figures  which  pass  commonly  by  the  name  of 
the  conic  sections.  But  in  place  of  the  trapezium  ABCD,  Ave  may  substitute  a 
quadrilateral  figure  whose  two  opposite  sides  cross  one  another  like  diagonals. 
And  one  or  two  of  the  four  points  A,  B,  C,  D  may  be  supposed  to  be  removed 
to  an  infinite  distance,  by  which  means  the  sides  of  the  figure  which  converge 
to  those  points,  Avill  become  parallel;  and  in  this  case  the  conic  section  will  pass 
through  the  other  points,  and  will  go  the  same  way  as  the  parallels  in  infin¬ 
itum. 


Lemma  19 

To  find  a  point  P  from  which  if  four  right  lines  PQ,  PR,  PS,  PT  are  drawn  to  as 
many  other  right  lines  AB,  CD,  AC,  BD,  given  by  position,  each  to  each,  at  given 
angles,  the  rectangle  PQ  •  PR,  under  any  two  of  the  lines  drawn,  shall  be  to  the 
rectangle  PS  •  PT,  under  the  other  two,  in  a  given  ratio. 

Suppose  the  lines  AB,  CD,  to  which  the  two  right  lines  PQ,  PR,  containing 
one  of  the  rectangles,  are  draAvn  to  meet  two  other  lines,  given  by  position,  in 
the  points  A,  B,  C,  D.  From  one  of  those,  as  A,  draw  any  right  line  AH,  in 
which  you  w  ould  find  the  point  P.  Let  this  cut  the  opposite  lines  BD,  CD,  in  H 
and  I ;  and,  because  all  the  angles  of  the  figure  are  given,  the  ratio  of  PQ  to  PA, 


58 


Mathematical  Principles 


and  PA  to  PS,  and  therefore  of  PQ  to  PS,  will  be  also  given.  This  ratio  taken  as 
a  divisor  of  the  given  ratio  of  PQ  •  PR  to  PS  PT,  gives  the  ratio  of  PR  to  PT; 
and  multiplying  the  given  ratios  of  PI  to 
PR,  and  PT  to  PH,  the  ratio  of  PI  to  PH, 
and  therefore  the  point  P,  will  be  given. 

Q.E.I. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  also  a  tangent  may  be 
drawn  to  any  point  D  of  the  locus  of  all  the 
points  P.  For  the  chord  PD,  where  the 
points  P  and  D  meet,  that  is,  w^here  AH  is 
drawn  through  the  point  D,  becomes  a 
tangent.  In  which  case  the  ultimate  ratio 
of  the  evanescent  lines  IP  and  PH  will  be 
found  as  above.  Therefore  draw  CF  parallel  to  AD,  meeting  BD  in  F,  and  cut 
it  in  E  in  the  same  ultimate  ratio,  then  DE  Avill  be  the  tangent;  because  CF 
and  the  evanescent  IH  are  parallel,  and  similarly  cut  in  E  and  P. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  also  the  locus  of  all  the  points  P  may  be  determined.  Through 
any  of  the  points  A,  B,  C,  D,  as  A,  draw  AE  touching  the  locus,  and  through 

any  other  point  B,  parallel  to  the  tangent, 
draw  BF  meeting  the  locus  in  F;  and  find  the 
point  F  by  this  Lemma.  Bisect  BF  in  G,  and, 
dra^ving  the  indefinite  line  AG,  this  will  be 
the  position  of  the  diameter  to  which  BG 
and  FG  are  ordinates.  Let  this  AG  meet  the 
locus  in  H,  and  AH  will  be  its  diameter  or 
latus  transversum,  to  which  the  latus  rectum 
mil  be  as  BG^  to  AG  GH.  If  AG  nowhere 
meets  the  locus,  the  line  AH  being  infinite, 
the  locus  will  be  a  parabola;  and  its  latus 
rectum  corresponding  to  the  diameter  AG 

BG^ 

wall  be  But  if  it  does  meet  it  anywhere,  the  locus  will  be  an  hyperbola, 


when  the  points  A  and  H  are  placed  on  the  same  side  of  the  point  G;  and  an 
elUpse,  if  the  point  G  falls  between  the  points  A  and  H;  unless,  perhaps,  the 
angle  AGB  is  a  right  angle,  and  at  the  same  time  BG^  equal  to  the  rectangle 
GA-GH,  in  which  case  the  locus  will  be  a  circle. 

And  so  we  have  given  in  this  Corollary  a  solution  of  that  famous  Problem 
of  the  ancients  concerning  four  lines,  begun  by  Euclid,  and  carried  on  by 
Apollonius;  and  this  not  an  analytical  calculus  but  a  geometrical  composition, 
such  as  the  ancients  required. 


Lemma  20 

If  the  two  opposite  angular  points  A  and  P  of  any  parallelogram  ASPQ  touch  any 
conic  section  in  the  points  A  and  P;  and  the  sides  AQ,  AS  of  one  of  those  angles, 
indefinitely  produced,  meet  the  same  conic  section  in  B  and  C ;  and  from  the  points 
of  meeting  B  and  C  to  any  fifth  point  D  of  the  conic  section,  two  right  lines  BD, 
CD  are  drawn  meeting  the  two  other  sides  PS,  PQ  of  the  parallelogram,  indefinitely 
produced,  in  T  and  R;  the  parts  PR  and  PT,  cut  off  from  the  sides,  will  always  he 
one  to  the  other  in  a  given  ratio.  And  conversely,  if  those  parts  cut  off  are  one  to  the 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  59 

other  in  a  given  ratio,  the  locus  of  the  point  D  will  be  a  conic  section  passing  through 
the  four  points  A,  B,  G,  P. 

Case  1.  Join  BP,  CP,  and  from  the  point  D  draw  the  two  right  lines  DG, 
DE,  of  which  the  first  DG  shall  be  parallel  to  AB,  and  meet  PB,  PQ,  CA,  in  H, 

I,  G ;  and  the  other  DE  shall  be  parallel  to 
AC,  and  meet  PC,  PS,  AB,  in  F,  K,  E;  and 
(by  Lem.  17)  the  rectangle  DE  •  DF  will  be 
to  the  rectangle  DG  •  DH  in  a  given  ratio. 
But  PQ  is  to  DE  (or  IQ)  as  PB  to  HB,  and 
consequently  as  PT  to  DH ;  and  by  permu¬ 
tation  PQ  is  to  PT  as  DE  to  DH.  Likewise 
PR  is  to  DF  as  RC  to  DC,  and  therefore 
as  (IG  or)  PS  to  DG;  and  by  permutation 
PR  is  to  PS  as  DF  to  DG;  and,  by  com¬ 
pounding  those  ratios,  the  rectangle 
PQ  •  PR  will  be  to  the  rectangle  PS  •  PT  as 
the  rectangle  DE  •  DF  is  to  the  rectangle 
DG-DH,  and  consequently  in  a  given 
ratio.  But  PQ  and  PS  are  given,  and  therefore  the  ratio  of  PR  to  PT  is  given. 

Q.E.D. 

Case  2.  But  if  PR  and  PT  are  supposed  to  be  in  a  given  ratio  one  to  the 
other,  then  by  going  back  again,  by  a  like  reasoning,  it  will  follow  that  the 
rectangle  DE  •  DF  is  to  the  rectangle  DG  •  DH  in  a  given  ratio;  and  so  the  point 
D  (by  Lem.  18)  will  lie  in  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  points  A,  B,  C,  P, 
as  its  locus.  Q.E.D. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  we  draw  BC  cutting  PQ  in  r  and  in  PT  take  P^  to  Pr  in  the 
same  ratio  which  PT  has  to  PR;  then  B^  will  touch  the  conic  section  in  the 
point  B.  For  suppose  the  point  D  to  coalesce  with  the  point  B,  so  that  the 
chord  BD  vanishing,  BT  shall  become  a  tangent;  and  CD  and  BT  will  coincide 
with  CB  and  B^. 

Cor.  II.  And,  vice  versa,  if  B^  is  a  tangent,  and  the  lines  BD,  CD  meet  in  any 
point  D  of  a  conic  section,  PR  will  be  to  PT  as  Pr  to  Yt.  And,  on  the  contrary, 
if  PR  is  to  PT  as  Pr  to  P^,  then  BD  and  CD  will  meet  in  some  point  D  of  a 
conic  section. 

Cor.  III.  One  conic  section  cannot  cut  another  conic  section  in  more  than 
four  points.  For,  if  it  is  possible,  let  two  conic  sections  pass  through  the  five 
points  A,  B,  C,  P,  O;  and  let  the  right  line  BD  cut  them  in  the  points  D,  d,  and 
the  right  line  Cd  cut  the  right  line  PQ  in  q.  Therefore  PR  is  to  PT  as  Tq  to  PT : 
whence  PR  and  P^  are  equal  one  to  the  other,  against  the  supposition. 

Lemma  21 

If  two  movable  and  indefinite  right  lines  BM,  CM  drawn  through  given  points  B, 
C,  as  poles,  do  by  their  point  of  meeting  M  describe  a  third  right  line  MN  given  by 
position;  and  other  two  indefinite  right  lines  BD,  CD  are  drawn,  making  with  the 
former  two  at  those  given  points  B,  C,  given  angles,  MBD,  MCD:  I  say,  that  those 
two  right  lines  BD,  CD  will  by  their  point  of  meeting  D  describe  a  conic  section 
passing  through  the  points  B,  C.  And  conversely,  if  the  right  lines  BD,  CD  do  by 
their  point  of  meeting  D  describe  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  given  points 
B,  C,  A,  and  the  angle  DBM  is  always  equal  to  the  given  angle  ABC,  as  well  as  the 


60  Mathematical  Principles 

angle  DCM  always  equal  to  the  given  angle  ACB,  the  point  M  will  lie  in  a  right 
line  given  by  position,  as  its  locus. 

For  in  the  right  line  MN  let  a  point  N  be  given,  and  when  the  movable  point 
M  falls  on  the  immovable  point  N,  let  the  movable  point  D  fall  on  an  immov¬ 
able  point  P.  Join  CN,  BN,  CP, 

BP,  and  from  the  point  P  draw 
the  right  lines  PT,  PR  meeting 
BD,  CD  in  T  and  R,  and 
making  the  angle  BPT  equal  to 
the  given  angle  BNM,  and  the 
angle  CPR  equal  to  the  given 
angle  CNM.  Wherefore  since 
(by  supposition)  the  angles 
MBD,  NBP  are  equal,  as  also 
the  angles  MCD,  NCP,  take 
away  the  angles  NBD  and 
NCD  that  are  common,  and 
there  will  remain  the  angles 
NBM  and  PBT,  NCM  and  PCR  equal;  and  therefore  the  triangles  NBM,  PBT 
are  similar,  as  also  the  triangles  NCM,  PCR.  Wherefore  PT  is  to  NM  as  PB 
to  NB;  and  PR  to  NM  as  PC  to  NC.  But  the  points  B,  C,  N,  P  are  immov¬ 
able:  wherefore  PT  and  PR  have  a  given  ratio  to  NM,  and  consequently  a 
given  ratio  between  themselves;  and  therefore,  (by  Lem.  20)  the  point  D 
wherein  the  movable  right  lines  BT  and  CR  continually  concur,  will  be  placed 
in  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  points  B,  C,  P.  q.e.d. 

And  conversely,  if  the  movable  point  D  lies  in  a  conic  section  passing  through 
the  given  points  B,  C,  A;  and  the  angle  DBM  is  always  equal  to  the  given 

angle  ABC,  and  the  angle  DCM 
always  equal  to  the  given  angle 
ACB,  and  when  the  point  D  falls 
successively  on  any  two  immov¬ 
able  points  p,  P,  of  the  conic  sec¬ 
tion,  the  movable  point  M  falls 
successively  on  two  immovable 
points  n,  N.  Through  these  points 
n,  N,  draw  the  right  line  nN :  this 
hne  nN  mil  be  the  continual  locus 
of  that  movable  point  M.  For,  if 
possible,  let  the  point  M  be  placed 
in  any  curved  line.  Therefore  the 
point  D  will  be  placed  in  a  conic 
section  passing  through  the  five 
points  B,  C,  A,  p,  P,  when  the  point  M  is  continually  placed  in  a  curved 
line.  But  from  what  was  demonstrated  before,  the  point  D  mil  be  also  placed 
in  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  same  five  points  B,  C,  A,  p,  P,  when 
the  point  M  is  continually  placed  in  a  right  line.  Wherefore  the  two 
conic  sections  mil  both  pass  through  the  same  five  points,  against  Cor.  in, 
Lem.  20.  It  is  therefore  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  point  M  is  placed  in  a 
curved  line.  q.e.d. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


61 


Proposition  22.  Problem  14 


To  describe  a  conic  that  shall  pass  through  five  given  points. 

Let  the  five  given  points  be  A,  B,  C,  P,  D.  From  any  one  of  them,  as  A,  to 
any  other  two  as  B,  C,  which  may  be  called  the  poles,  draw  the  right  lines  AB, 

AC,  and  parallel  to  those  the  lines 
TPS,  PRQ  through  the  fourth  point  P. 
Then  from  the  two  poles  B,  C,  draw 
through  the  fifth  point  D  two  indefi¬ 
nite  lines  BDT,  CRD,  meeting  with 
the  last  drawn  lines  TPS,  PRQ  (the 
former  with  the  former,  and  the  latter 
Avith  the  latter)  in  T  and  R.  And  then 
draw  the  right  line  tr  parallel  to  TR, 
cutting  off  from  the  right  lines  PT, 
PR,  any  segments  P^,Pr,  proportional 
to  PT,  PR;  and  if  through  their  ex¬ 
tremities  t,  r,  and  the  poles  B,  C,  the  right  lines  B^,  Cr  are  draAvn,  meeting  in 
d,  that  point  d  mil  be  placed  in  the  conic  required.  For  (by  Lem.  20)  that 
point  d  is  placed  in  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  four  points  A,  B,  C,  P; 
and  the  lines  Rr,  T^  vanishing,  the  point  d  comes  to  coincide  mth  the  point  D. 
Wherefore  the  conic  section  passes  through  the  five  points  A,  B,  C,  P,  D. 


C 


Q.E.D. 


The  same  otherwise. 

Of  the  given  points  join  any  three,  as  A,  B,  C;  and  about  two  of  them  B,  C, 
as  poles,  making  the  angles  ABC,  ACB  of  a  given  magnitude  to  revolve,  apply 
the  legs  BA,  CA,  first  to  the 
point  D,  then  to  the  point  P,  and 
mark  the  points  M,  N,  in  which 
the  other  legs  BL,  CL  intersect 
each  other  in  both  cases.  Draw 
the  indefinite  right  line  MN,  and 
let  those  movable  angles  revolve 
about  their  poles  B,  C,  in  such 
manner  that  the  intersection, 
which  is  now  supposed  to  be  m, 
of  the  legs  BL,  CL,  or  BM,  CM, 
may  always  fall  in  that  indefinite 
right  line  MN ;  and  the  intersec¬ 
tion,  which  is  now  supposed  to 
be  d,  of  the  legs  BA,  CA,  or  BD, 

CD,  mil  describe  the  conic  re¬ 
quired,  PADdB.  For  (by  Lem. 

21)  the  point  d  mil  be  placed  in  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  points 
B,  C;  and  when  the  point  m  comes  to  coincide  mth  the  points  L,  M,  N,  the 
point  d  mil  (by  construction)  come  to  coincide  mth  the  points  A,  D,  P. 
Wherefore  a  conic  section  mil  be  described  that  shall  pass  through  the  five 
points  A,  B,  C,  P,  D.  q.e.f. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  a  right  line  may  be  readily  drawn  which  shall  be  a  tangent  to 


62 


Mathematical  Principles 


the  conic  in  any  given  point  B.  Let  the  point  d  come  to  coincide  with  the  point 

B,  and  the  right  line  Bd  will  become  the  tangent  required. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  also  may  be  found  the  centres,  diameters,  and  latera  recta  of 
the  conics,  as  in  Cor.  ii,  Lem.  19. 

Scholium 

The  former  of  these  constructions  will  become  something  more  simple  by 
joining  B,  P,  and  in  that  line,  produced,  if  need  be,  taking  Bp  to  BP  as  PR  is  to 
PT;  and  through  p  draw  the  indefinite  right  line 
pe  parallel  to  SPT,  and  in  that  line  pe  taking 
always  pe  equal  to  Pr;  and  draw  the  right  lines 
Be,  Cr  to  meet  in  d.  For  since  Pr  to  Pf,  PR  to  PT, 
pB  to  PB,  pe  to  P<,  are  all  in  the  same  ratio,  pe 
and  Pr  Avill  be  always  equal.  After  this  manner 
the  points  of  the  conic  are  most  readily  found, 
unless  you  would  rather  describe  the  curve  me¬ 
chanically,  as  in  the  second  construction. 

Proposition  23.  Problem  15 

To  describe  a  conic  that  shall  pass  through  four  given  points,  and  touch  a  given 
right  line. 

Case  1.  Suppose  that  HB  is  the  given  tangent,  B  the  point  of  contact,  and 

C,  D,  P,  the  three  other  given  points.  Join  BC,  and  draw  PS  parallel  to  BH, 

and  PQ  parallel  to  BC;  complete 
the  parallelogram  BSPQ.  Draw  BD 
cutting  SP  in  T,  and  CD  cutting 
PQ  in  R.  Lastly,  draw  any  line  tr 
parallel  to  TR,  cutting  off  from  PQ, 
PS,  the  segments  Pr,  P/  propor¬ 
tional  to  PR,  PT  respectively, 
and  draw  Cr,  B^;  their  point  of 
intersection  d  will  (by  Lem.  20) 
always  fall  on  the  conic  to  be  des¬ 
cribed. 

The  same  otherwise. 

Let  the  angle  CBH  of  a  given  magnitude  revolve 
about  the  pole  B,  as  also  the  rectilinear  radius  DC, 
both  ways  produced,  about  the  pole  C.  Mark  the 
points  M,  N,  on  which  the  leg  BC  of  the  angle  cuts 
that  radius  when  BH,  the  other  leg  thereof,  meets 
the  same  radius  in  the  points  P  and  D.  Then  drawing 
the  indefinite  line  MN,  let  that  radius  CP  or  CD 
and  the  leg  BC  of  the  angle  continually  meet  in  this 
line;  and  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  other  leg  BH  m 
with  the  radius  will  delineate  the  conic  required.  ^ 

For  if  in  the  constructions  of  the  preceding  Prob¬ 
lem  the  point  A  comes  to  a  coincidence  with  the 
point  B,  the  lines  CA  and  CB  will  coincide,  and  the  N 
line  AB,  in  its  last  situation,  will  become  the  tan-  /j 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  63 

gent  BH ;  and  therefore  the  constructions  there  set  down  will  become  the  same 
with  the  constructions  here  described.  Wherefore  the  intersection  of  the  leg 
BH  with  the  radius  will  describe  a  conic  section  passing  through  the  points  C, 
D,  P,  and  touching  the  line  BH  in  the  point  B.  q.e.f. 

Case  2.  Suppose  the  four  points  B,  C,  D,  P,  given,  being  situated  without 
the  tangent  HI.  Join  each  two  by  the  lines  BD,  CP  meeting  in  G,  and  cutting 
the  tangent  in  H  and  I.  Cut  the  tangent  in  A  in  such  manner  that  HA  may  be 

to  I A  as  the  product  of  the  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  CG  and  GP,  and  the  mean 
proportional  between  BH  and  HD  is  to  the 
product  of  the  mean  proportional  between 
GD  and  GB,  and  the  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  PI  and  IC,  and  A  will  be  the  point  of 
contact.  For  if  HX,  a  parallel  to  the  right 
line  PI,  cuts  the  conic  in  any  points  X  and 
Y,  the  point  A  (by  the  properties  of  the 
conic  sections)  will  come  to  be  so  placed, 
that  HA^  will  become  to  AI^  in  a  ratio  that 
is  compounded  out  of  the  ratio  of  the  rectangle  HX  HY  to  the  rectangle 
BH  •  HD,  or  of  the  rectangle  CG  •  GP  to  the  rectangle  DG  •  GB;  and  the  ratio  of 
the  rectangle  BH  •  HD  to  the  rectangle  PI  •  IC.  But  after  the  point  of  contact  A 
is  found,  the  conic  will  be  described  as  in  the  first  Case,  q.e.f.  But  the  point 
A  may  be  taken  either  between  or  without  the  points  H  and  I,  upon  which 
account  a  two-fold  conic  may  be  described. 


Proposition  24.  Problem  16 


To  describe  a  conic  that  shall  pass  through  three  given  points,  and  touch  two  given 
right  lines. 

Suppose  HI,  KL  to  be  the  given  tangents  and  B,  C,  D  the  given  points. 
Through  any  two  of  those  points,  as  B,  D,  draw  the  indefinite  right  line  BD 
meeting  the  tangents  in  the  points  H,  K.  Then  likewise  through  any  other  two 
of  these  points,  as  C,  D,  draw  the  indefinite 
right  line  CD  meeting  the  tangents  in  the 
points  I,  L.  Cut  the  lines  drawn  in  R  and  S, 
so  that  HR  may  be  to  KR  as  the  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  BH  and  HD  is  to  the 
mean  proportional  between  BK  and  KD, 
and  IS  to  LS  as  the  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  Cl  and  ID  is  to  the  mean  proportion¬ 
al  between  CL  and  LD.  But  you  may  cut,  at 
pleasure,  either  within  or  between  the  points 
K  and  H,  I  and  L,  or  without  them.  Then 
draw  RS  cutting  the  tangents  in  A  and  P, 
and  A  and  P  will  be  the  points  of  contact.  For  if  A  and  P  are  supposed  to  be 
the  points  of  contact,  situated  anywhere  else  in  the  tangents,  and  through  any 
of  the  points  H,  I,  K,  L,  as  I,  situated  in  either  tangent  HI,  a  right  line  lY 
is  drawn  parallel  to  the  other  tangent  KL,  and  meeting  the  curve  in  X  and 
Y,  and  in  that  right  line  there  be  taken  IZ  equal  to  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  IX  and  I Y,  the  rectangle  XI  •  lY  or  IZ^  will  (by  the  properties  of  the 


64  Mathematical  Principles 

conic  sections)  be  to  LP^  as  the  rectangle  Cl -ID  is  to  the  rectangle  CLLD; 
that  is  (by  the  construction),  as  SI  is  to  SL^,  and  therefore  IZ  :  LP  =  SI  :  SL. 
Wherefore  the  points  S,  P,  Z  are  in  one  right  line.  Moreover,  since  the  tan¬ 
gents  meet  in  G,  the  rectangle  XI  •  I Y  or  IZ^  mil  (by  the  properties  of  the 
conic  sections)  be  to  I as  GP^  is  to  GA^,  and  consequently  IZ  :  lA  =  GP  :  GA. 
Wherefore  the  points  P,  Z,  A  lie  in  one  right  line,  and  therefore  the  points  S, 
P,  and  A  are  in  one  right  line.  And  the  same  argument  mil  prove  that  the 
points  R,  P,  and  A  are  in  one  right  line.  Wherefore  the  points  of  contact  A  and 
P  lie  in  the  right  line  RS.  But  after  these  points  are  found,  the  conic  may  be 
described,  as  in  the  first  Case  of  the  preceding  Problem.  q.e.f. 

In  this  Proposition,  and  Case  2  of  the  foregoing,  the  constructions  are  the 

same,  whether  the  right  line  XY  cuts  the  conic  in  X  and  Y,  or  not;  neither  do 

they  depend  upon  that  section.  But  the  constructions  being  demonstrated 

where  that  right  line  does  cut  the  conic,  the  constructions  where  it  does  not  are 

also  known;  and  therefore,  for  brevity’s  sake,  I  omit  any  further  demonstration 

of  them.  T 

Lemma  22 

To  transform  figures  into  other  figures  of  the  same  kind. 

Suppose  that  any  figure  HGI  is  to  be  transformed.  Draw,  at  pleasure,  two 
parallel  lines  AO,  BL,  cutting  any  given  third  line  AB  in  A  and  B,  and  from 
any  point  G  of  the  figure,  draw  out  any  right  line  GD,  parallel  to  OA,  till  it 
meets  the  right  line  AB.  Then  from  any 
given  point  0  in  the  line  OA,  draw  to 
the  point  D  the  right  line  OD,  meeting 
BL  in  d;  and  from  the  point  of  intersec¬ 
tion  raise  the  right  line  dg  containing  any 
given  angle  with  the  right  line  BL,  and 
having  such  ratio  to  Od  as  DG  has  to 
OD;  and  g  will  be  the  point  in  the  new 
figure  hgi,  corresponding  to  the  point  G. 

And  in  like  manner  the  several  points  of 
the  first  figure  will  give  as  many  corre¬ 
spondent  points  of  the  new  figure.  If  we 
therefore  conceive  the  point  G  to  be  carried  along  by  a  continual  motion 
through  all  the  points  of  the  first  figure,  the  point  g  will  be  likewise  carried 
along  by  a  continual  motion  through  all  the  points  of  the  new  figure,  and  de¬ 
scribe  the  same.  For  distinction’s  sake,  let  us  call  DG  the  first  ordinate,  dg  the 
new  ordinate,  AD  the  first  abscissa,  ad  the  new  abscissa,  0  the  pole,  OD  the 
abscinding  radius,  OA  the  first  ordinate  radius,  and  Oa  (by  which  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  OABa  is  completed)  the  new  ordinate  radius. 

I  say,  then,  that  if  the  point  G  is  placed  in  a  given  right  line,  the  point  g  will 
be  also  placed  in  a  given  right  line.  If  the  point  G  is  placed  in  a  conic  section, 
the  point  g  mil  be  likemse  placed  in  a  conic  section.  And  here  I  understand  the 
circle  as  one  of  the  conic  sections.  But  further,  if  the  point  G  is  placed  in  a  line 
of  the  third  analytical  order,  the  point  g  will  also  be  placed  in  a  line  of  the  third 
order,  and  so  on  in  curved  lines  of  higher  orders.  The  two  lines  in  which  the 
points  G,  g  are  placed,  will  be  always  of  the  same  analytical  order.  For  as 

0  A  •  AB 

ad  :  OA  =  Od  :  OT>  =  dg  :  DG  =  AB  ;  AD;  and  therefore  AD  is  equal  to - 


ad  ’ 


65 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

and  DG  equal  to  the  point  G  is  placed  in  a  right  line,  and  there¬ 

fore,  in  any  equation  by  which  the  relation  between  the  abscissa  AD  and  the 
ordinate  GD  is  expressed,  those  indetermined  lines  AD  and  DG  rise  no  higher 

OA- AB 

than  to  one  dimension,  by  writing  this  equation  — —  in  place  of  AD,  and 

place  of  DG,  a  new  equation  A\dll  be  produced,  in  which  the  new 

abscissa  ad  and  new  ordinate  dg  rise  only  to  one  dimension;  and  which  therefore 
must  denote  a  right  line.  But  if  AD  and  DG  (or  either  of  them)  had  risen  to  two 
dimensions  in  the  first  equation,  ad  and  dg  would  likemse  have  risen  to  two 
dimensions  in  the  second  equation.  And  so  on  in  three  or  more  dimensions.  The 
indetermined  lines,  ad,  dg  in  the  second  equation,  and  AD,  DG  in  the  first,  will 
always  rise  to  the  same  number  of  dimensions;  and  therefore  the  lines  in  which 
the  points  G,  g  are  placed  are  of  the  same  analytical  order. 

I  say,  further,  that  if  any  right  line  touches  the  curved  line  in  the  first  figure, 
the  same  right  line  transferred  the  same  way  with  the  curve  into  the  new  figure 
will  touch  that  curved  line  in  the  new  figure,  and  conversely.  For  if  any  two 
points  of  the  curve  in  the  first  figure  are  supposed  to  approach  one  the  other  till 
they  come  to  coincide,  the  same  points  transferred  will  approach  one  the  other 
till  they  come  to  coincide  in  the  new  figure;  and  therefore  the  right  lines  with 
which  those  points  are  joined  will  become  together  tangents  of  the  curves  in 
both  figures.  I  might  have  given  demonstrations  of  these  assertions  in  a  more 
geometrical  form;  but  I  study  to  be  brief. 

Wherefore  if  one  rectilinear  figure  is  to  be  transformed  into  another,  we  need 
only  transfer  the  intersections  of  the  right  lines  of  which  the  first  figure  con¬ 
sists,  and  through  the  transferred  intersections  to  draw  right  lines  in  the  new 
figure.  But  if  a  curvilinear  figure  is  to  be  transformed,  we  must  transfer  the 
points,  the  tangents,  and  other  right  lines,  by  means  of  which  the  curved  line  is 
defined.  This  Lemma  is  of  use  in  the  solution  of  the  more  difficult  Problems; 
for  thereby  we  may  transform  the  proposed  figures,  if  they  are  intricate,  into 
others  that  are  more  simple.  Thus  any  right  lines  converging  to  a  point  are 
transformed  into  parallels,  by  taking  for  the  first  ordinate  radius  any  right  line 
that  passes  through  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  converging  lines,  and  that 
because  their  point  of  intersection  is  by  this  means  made  to  go  off  in  infinitum; 
and  parallel  lines  are  such  as  tend  to  a  point  infinitely  remote.  And  after  the 
problem  is  solved  in  the  new  figure,  if  by  the  inverse  operations  we  transform 
the  new  into  the  first  figure,  we  shall  have  the  solution  required. 

This  Lemma  is  also  of  use  in  the  solution  of  solid  problems.  For  as  often  as 
two  conic  sections  occur,  by  the  intersection  of  which  a  problem  may  be  solved, 
any  one  of  them  may  be  transformed,  if  it  is  an  hyperbola  or  a  parabola,  into 
an  ellipse,  and  then  this  ellipse  may  be  easily  changed  into  a  circle.  So  also  a 
right  line  and  a  conic  section,  in  the  construction  of  plane  problems,  may  be 
transformed  into  a  right  line  and  a  circle. 


Proposition  25.  Problem  17 

To  describe  a  conic  that  shall  pass  through  two  given  points,  and  touch  three  given 
right  lines. 

Through  the  intersection  of  any  two  of  the  tangents  one  with  the  other,  and 


66  Mathematical  Principles 

the  intersection  of  the  third  tangent  with  the  right  line  which  passes  through 
the  two  given  points,  draw  an  indefinite  right  line;  and,  taking  this  line  for  the 
first  ordinate  radius,  transform  the  figure  by  the  preceding  Lemma  into  a  new 
figure.  In  this  figure  those  two  tangents  will  be¬ 
come  parallel  to  each  other,  and  the  third  tan¬ 
gent  \vt11  be  parallel  to  the  right  line  that  passes 
through  the  two  given  points.  Suppose  hi,  kl  to 
be  those  two  parallel  tangents,  ik  the  third  tan¬ 
gent,  and  hi  a  right  line  parallel  thereto,  passing 
through  those  points  a,  h,  through  which  the 
conic  section  ought  to  pass  in  this  new  figure;  and 
completing  the  parallelogram  hikl,  let  the  right 
lines  hi,  ik,  kl  be  so  cut  in  c,  d,  e,  that  he  may  be  to 
the  square  root  of  the  rectangle  ahh,  ic  to  id,  and 
ke  to  kd,  as  the  sum  of  the  right  lines  hi  and  kl  is  to  the  sum  of  the  three  lines, 
the  first  whereof  is  the  right  line  ik,  and  the  other  two  are  the  square  roots  of 
the  rectangles  ahb  and  alb;  and  c,  d,  e  will  be  the  points  of  contact.  For  by  the 
properties  of  the  conic  sections, 

hc^  :  ah‘hb  =  ic^  :  id}  =  ke^  :  kd^  =  eP'  :  al-lb. 

Therefore, 

he  :  \/{ah-hb)  =ie  :  id  =  ke  :kd  =  el:  y/ (al-lb) 

=  he-\-ie-{-ke-\-el  :  \/ (ah  ■  hb)  -{-id-^kd-{-  \/al  -  lb 
=  hi-\-kl  :  (ah -hb)-\-ik-{-^ (al-lb). 

Wherefore  from  that  given  ratio  we  have  the  points  of  contact  c,  d,  e,  in  the 
new  figure.  By  the  inverted  operations  of  the  last  Lemma,  let  those  points  be 
transferred  into  the  first  figure,  and  the  conic  will  be  there  described  by  Prob. 
14.  Q.E.F.  But  according  as  the  points  a,  b,  fall  between  the  points  h,  I,  or  \vith- 
out  them,  the  points  e,  d,  e  must  be  taken  either  between  the  points  h,  i,  k,  I, 
or  without  them.  If  one  of  the  points  a,  b  falls  between  the  points  h,  i,  and  the 
other  without  the  points  h,  I,  the  Problem  is  impossible. 

Proposition  26.  Problem  18 

To  deseribe  a  eonie  that  shall  pass  through  a  given  point,  and  toueh  four  given  right 
lines. 

From  the  common  intersections  of  any  two  of  the  tangents  to  the  common 
intersection  of  the  other  two,  draw  an  indefinite  right  line;  and  taking  this  line 

for  the  first  ordinate  radius,  transform  the  figure 
(by  Lem.  22)  into  a  new  figure,  and  the  two 
pairs  of  tangents,  each  of  which  before  concurred 
in  the  first  ordinate  radius,  will  now  become 
parallel.  Let  hi  and  kl,  ik  and  hi,  be  those  pairs 
of  parallels  completing  the  parallelogram  hikl. 
And  let  p  be  the  point  in  this  new  figure  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  given  point  in  the  first  figure. 
Through  0  the  centre  of  the  figure  draw  pq :  and 
Oq  being  equal  to  Op,  q  will  be  the  other  point 
through  which  the  conic  section  must  pass  in 
this  new  figure.  Let  this  point  be  transferred,  by  the  inverse  operation  of  Lem. 
22,  into  the  first  figure,  and  there  we  shall  have  the  two  points  through  which 


Book  I ;  The  Motion  of  Bodies  67 

the  conic  is  to  be  described.  But  through  those  points  that  conic  may  be  de¬ 
scribed  by  Prop.  17.  t  oo 

Lemma  23 

If  two  given  right  lines,  as  AC,  BD,  terminating  in  given  'points  A,  B,  are  in  a 
given  ratio  one  to  the  other,  and  the  right  line  CD,  by  which  the  indetermined  points 
C,  D  are  joined  is  cut  in  K  in  a  given  ratio:  I  say,  that  the  point  K  will  be  placed  in 
a  given  right  line. 

For  let  the  right  lines  AC,  BD  meet  in  E,  and  in  BE  take  BG  to  AE  as  BD 
is  to  AC,  and  let  FD  be  always  equal  to  the  given  line  EG ;  and,  by  construc¬ 
tion,  EC  will  be  to  GD,  that  is,  to  EF,  as 
AC  to  BD,  and  therefore  in  a  given  ratio; 
and  therefore  the  triangle  EFC  will  be 
given  in  kind.  Let  CF  be  cut  in  L  so  as  CL 
may  be  to  CF  in  the  ratio  of  CK  to  CD ; 
and  because  that  is  a  given  ratio,  the  tri¬ 
angle  EFL  Mill  be  given  in  kind,  and  there¬ 
fore  the  point  L  vdll  be  placed  in  the  given 
right  line  EL.  Join  LK,  and  the  triangles 
CLK,  CFD  will  be  similar;  and  because 
FD  is  a  given  line,  and  LK  is  to  FD  in  a 
given  ratio,  LK  vdll  be  also  given.  To  this  let  EH  be  taken  equal,  and  ELKH 
will  be  always  a  parallelogram.  And  therefore  the  point  K  is  always  placed  in 
the  given  side  HK  of  that  parallelogram.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Because  the  figure  EFLC  is  given  in  kind,  the  three  right  lines  EF,  EL, 
and  EC,  that  is,  GD,  HK,  and  EC,  will  have  given  ratios  to  each  other. 


Lemma  24 

If  three  right  lines,  two  whereof  are  parallel,  and  given  in  position,  touch  any  conic 
section:  I  say,  that  the  semidiaineter  of  the  section  which  is  parallel  to  those  two  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  the  segments  of  those  two  that  are  intercepted  between 
the  points  of  contact  and  the  third  tangent. 

Let  AF,  GB  be  the  tw'o  parallels  touch¬ 
ing  the  conic  section  ADB  in  A  and  B; 

EF  the  third  right  line  touching  the 
conic  section  in  I,  and  meeting  the  twm 
former  tangents  in  F  and  G,  and  let  CD 
be  the  semidiameter  of  the  figure  parallel 
to  those  tangents:  I  say,  that  AF,  CD, 

BG  are  continually  proportional.  For  if 
the  conjugate  diameters  AB,  DM  meet 
the  tangent  FG  in  E  and  H,  and  cut  one 
the  other  in  C,  and  the  parallelogram 
IKCL  be  completed;  from  the  nature  of 
the  conic  sections, 

EC  :  CA  =  CA  :  CL; 

thence,  EC  -  CA  :  CA  -  CL  =  EC  :  CA 

or  EA:AL  =  EC:CA; 

thence,  EA  :  EA-|-AL  =  EC  :  EC+CA 

EA  :  EL  =  EC  :  EB. 


or 


68  Mathematical  Principles 

Therefore,  because  of  the  similitude  of  the  triangles  EAF,  ELI,  ECH,  EBG, 

AF  :  LI  =  CH  :  BG. 

Like^nse,  from  the  nature  of  the  conic  sections, 

LI  or  CK  :  CD  =  CD  :  CH. 

Taking  the  products  of  corresponding  terms  in  the  last  two  proportions  and 
simplifying, 

AF:CD  =  CD:BG.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  two  tangents  FG,  PQ  meet  two  parallel  tangents  AF,  BG  in 
F  and  G,  P  and  Q,  and  cut  one  the  other  in  0;  then  by  the  Lemma  applied  to 
EG  and  PQ, 

AF  :  CD  =  CD  :  BG, 

BQ  :  CD  =  CD  :  AP. 

Therefore,  AF  :  AP  =  BQ  :  BG 

and  AP-AF  :  AP  =  BG-BQ  :  BG 

or  PF:AP  =  GQ:BG, 

and  AP  :  BG  =  PF  :  GQ  =  F0  :  G0  =  AF  :  BQ. 

Cor.  ii.  Whence  also  the  two  right  lines  PG,  FQ  drawn  through  the  points 
P  and  G,  F  and  Q,  will  meet  in  the  right  line  ACB  passing  through  the  centre 
of  the  figure  and  the  points  of  contact  A,  B. 


LEM^L\  25 


If  four  sides  of  a  parallelogram  indefinitely  produced  touch  any  conic  section,  and 
are  cut  by  a  fifth  tangent:  I  say,  that,  taking  those  segments  of  any  two  conterminous 
sides  that  terminate  in  opposite  angles  of  the  parallelogram,  either  segment  is  to  the 
side  from  which  it  is  cut  off  as  that  part  of  the  other  conterminous  side  which  is 
intercepted  between  the  point  of  contact  and  the  third  side  is  to  the  other  segment. 

Let  the  four  sides  ML,  IK,  KL, 

MI  of  the  parallelogram  MLIK 
touch  the  conic  section  in  A,  B,  C, 

D;  and  let  the  fifth  tangent  FQ  cut 
those  sides  in  F,  Q,  H,  and  E;  and 
taking  the  segments  ME,  KQ  of  the 
sides  iVII,  KI,  or  the  segments  KH, 

MF  of  the  sides  KL,  ML ;  I  say,  that 
ME  :  MI  =  BK  :  KQ, 
and  KH:KL  =  AM:MF. 

For,  by  Cor.  i  of  the  preceding 
Lemma, 

ME  :  El  =  AM  or  BK  :  BQ, 
and  by  addition, 

ME :  MI  =  BK 

Also,  KH 

and  by  subtraction. 


KQ. 

HL  =  BK  or  AM  :  AF, 


Q.E.D. 


KH:KL  =  AM:MF.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  a  parallelogram  IKLM  described  about  a  given  conic  section 
is  given,  the  rectangle  KQ-ME,  as  also  the  rectangle  KH-MF  equal  thereto, 
will  be  given.  For,  by  reason  of  the  similar  triangles  KQH,  MFE,  those  rec¬ 
tangles  are  equal. 

Cor.  ii.  And  if  a  sixth  tangent  eg  is  drawn  meeting  the  tangents  KI,  MI  in  q 


69 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

and  e,  the  rectangle  KQ  •  ME  Avill  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  K5  •  Me,  and 

KQ  :  Me  =  K9  :  ME, 

and  by  subtraction 

KQ  :  Me  =  Qg  :  Ee. 

Cor.  III.  Hence,  also,  if  Eg,  eQ  are  joined  and  bisected,  and  a  right  line  is 
drawn  through  the  points  of  bisection,  this  right  line  wall  pass  through  the 
centre  of  the  conic  section.  For  since  Qg  :  Ee==KQ  :  Me,  the  same  right  line 
will  pass  through  the  middle  of  all  the  lines  Eg,  eQ,  MK  (by  Lem.  23),  and  the 
middle  point  of  the  right  line  MK  is  the  centre  of  the  section. 

Proposition  27.  Problem  19 

To  describe  a  conic  that  may  touch  jive  right  lines  given  in  'position. 
Supposing  ABG,  BCF,  GCD,  FDE,  EA  to  be  the  tangents  given  in  position. 
Bisect  in  M  and  N,  AF,  BE,  the  diagonals  of  the  quadrilateral  figure  ABFE 
contained  under  any  four  of  them;  and  (by  Cor.  iii,  Lem.  25)  the  right  line  MN 


drawn  through  the  points  of  bisection  will  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  conic. 
Again,  bisect  in  P  and  Q  the  diagonals  (if  I  may  so  call  them)  BD,  GF  of  the 
quadrilateral  figure  BGDF  contained  under  any  other  four  tangents,  and  the 
right  line  PQ  drawn  through  the  points  of  bisection  will  pass  through  the  centre 
of  the  conic;  and  therefore  the  centre  \vill  be  given  in  the  intersection  of  the 
bisecting  lines.  Suppose  it  to  be  0.  Parallel  to  any  tangent  BC  draw  KL  at  such 
distance  that  the  centre  0  may  be  placed  in  the  middle  between  the  parallels; 
this  KL  mil  touch  the  conic  to  be  described.  Let  this  cut  any  other  two  tan¬ 
gents  GCD,  FDE,  in  L  and  K.  Through  the  points  C  and  K,  F  and  L,  where 
the  tangents  not  parallel,  CL,  FK,  meet  the  parallel  tangents  CF,  KL,  draw 
CK,  FL  meeting  in  R;  and  the  right  line  OR,  drawn  and  produced,  mil  cut  the 
parallel  tangents  CF,  KL,  in  the  points  of  contact.  This  appears  from  Cor.  ii, 
Lem.  24.  And  by  the  same  method  the  other  points  of  contact  may  be  found, 
and  then  the  conic  may  be  described  by  Prob.  14.  q.e.f. 

Scholium 

Under  the  preceding  Propositions  are  comprehended  those  Problems  where¬ 
in  either  the  centres  or  asymptotes  of  the  conics  are  given.  For  wLen  points  and 
tangents  and  the  centre  are  given,  as  many  other  points  and  as  many  other 


.K 


Nj 

p  X 

6 

C\ 

pB 

M 

70  Mathematical  Principles 

tangents  are  given  at  an  equal  distance  on  the  other  side  of  the  centre.  And  an 
asymptote  is  to  be  considered  as  a  tangent,  and  its  infinitely  remote  extremity 
(if  we  may  say  so)  is  a  point  of  contact.  Conceive  the  point  of  contact  of  any 
tangent  removed  in  infinitum,  and  the  tangent  will  degenerate  into  an  asymp¬ 
tote,  and  the  constructions  of  the  preceding  Problems  mil  be  changed  into  the 
constructions  of  those  Problems  wherein  the  asymptote  is  given. 

After  the  conic  is  described,  we  may  find  its  axes  and  foci  in  this  manner.  In 
the  construction  and  figure  of  Lem.  21,  let  those  legs  BP,  CP,  of  the  movable 
angles  PBN,  PCN,  by  the  intersection  of 
which  the  conic  was  described,  be  made  par¬ 
allel  one  to  the  other;  and  retaining  that  po¬ 
sition,  let  them  revolve  about  their  poles  B,  C, 
in  that  figure.  In  the  meanwhile  let  the  other 
legs  CN,  BN,  of  those  angles,  by  their  inter¬ 
section  K  or  A’,  describe  the  circle  BKGC.  Let 
O  be  the  centre  of  this  circle;  and  from  this 
centre  upon  the  ruler  MN,  wherein  those  legs 
CN,  BN  did  concur  while  the  conic  was  de¬ 
scribed,  let  fall  the  perpendicular  OH  meeting 
the  circle  in  K  and  L.  And  when  those  other 
legs  CK,  BK  meet  in  the  point  K  that  is  nearest  to  the  ruler,  the  first  legs  CP, 
BP  will  be  parallel  to  the  greater  axis,  and  perpendicular  on  the  lesser;  and  the 
contrary  mil  happen  if  those  legs  meet  in  the  remotest  point  L.  Whence  if  the 
centre  of  the  conic  is  given,  the  axes  mil  be  given;  and  those  being  given,  the 
foci  mil  be  readily  found. 

But  the  squares  of  the  axes  are  one  to  the  other  as  KH  to  LH,  and  thence  it 
is  easy  to  describe  a  conic  given  in  kind  through  four  given  points.  For  if  two  of 

the  given  points  are  made  the  poles  C,  B,  the 
third  will  give  the  movable  angles  PCK, 
PBK;  but  those  being  given,  the  circle 
BGKC  may  be  described.  Then,  because 
the  conic  is  given  in  kind,  the  ratio  of  OH 
to  OK,  and  therefore  OH  itself,  mil  be 
given.  About  the  centre  0,  mth  the  interval 
OH,  describe  another  circle,  and  the  right 
line  that  touches  this  circle,  and  passes 
through  the  intersection  of  the  legs  CK, 
BK,  when  the  first  legs  CP,  BP  meet  in  the 
fourth  given  point,  mil  be  the  ruler  MN, 
by  means  of  which  the  conic  may  be  described.  Whence  also  on  the  other 
hand  a  trapezium  given  in  kind  (excepting  a  few  cases  that  are  impossible) 
may  be  inscribed  in  a  given  conic  section. 

There  are  also  other  Lemmas,  by  the  help  of  which  conics  given  in  kind  may 
be  described  through  given  points,  and  touching  given  lines.  Of  such  a  sort  is 
this,  that  if  a  right  line  is  drawn  through  any  point  given  in  position,  that  may 
cut  a  given  conic  section  in  two  points,  and  the  distance  of  the  intersections  is 
bisected,  the  point  of  bisection  mil  touch  another  conic  section  of  the  same 
kind  with  the  former,  and  having  its  axes  parallel  to  the  axes  of  the  former. 
But  I  hasten  to  things  of  greater  use. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


71 


Lemivla.  26 

To  place  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle,  given  both  in  kind  and  in  magnitude,  in 
respect  to  as  many  right  lines  given  in  position,  provided  they  are  not  all  parallel 
among  themselves,  in  such  manner  that  the  several  angles  may  touch  the  several 
lines. 

Three  indefinite  right  lines  AB,  AC,  BC  are  given  in  position,  and  it  is  re¬ 
quired  so  to  place  the  triangle  DEF  that  its  angle  D  may  touch  the  line  AB,  its 

angle  E  the  line  AC,  and  its  angle  F  the 
line  BC.  Upon  DE,  DF,  and  EF  describe 
three  segments  of  circles  DRE,  DGF, 
EMF,  capable  of  angles  equal  to  the 
angles  BAC,  ABC,  ACB  respectively. 
But  those  segments  are  to  be  described 
towards  such  sides  of  the  lines  DE,  DF, 
EF,  that  the  letters  DRED  may  turn 
round  about  in  the  same  order  vdth  the 
letters  BACB ;  the  letters  DGFD  in  the 
same  order  vdth  the  letters  ABCA;  and 
the  letters  EMFE  in  the  same  order  with  the  letters  ACB  A;  then,  completing 
those  segments  into  entire  circles,  let  the  two  former  circles  cut  each  other  in 
G,  and  suppose  P  and  Q  to  be  their  centres.  Then  joining  GP,  PQ,  take 

Ga  :  AB  =  GP  :  PQ; 

and  about  the  centre  G,  vdth  the  interval  Ga,  describe  a  circle  that  may  cut  the 
first  circle  DGE  in  a.  Join  aD  cutting  the  second  circle  DFG  in  h,  as  well  as  aE 
cutting  the  third  circle  EMF  in  c.  Complete  the  figure  ABCde/  similar  and 
equal  to  the  figure  afecDEF:  I  say,  the  thing  is  done. 

For  dravdng  Fc  meeting  aD  in  n,  and  joining  aG,  5G,  QG,  QD,  PD,  by 
construction  the  angle  EaD  is  equal  to  the  angle  CAB,  and  the  angle  acF  equal 
to  the  angle  ACB ;  and  therefore  the 
triangle  anc  equiangular  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  ABC.  Wherefore  the  angle  anc 
or  FnD  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC, 
and  consequently  to  the  angle  F6D; 
and  therefore  the  point  n  falls  on 
the  point  h.  Moreover  the  angle 
GPQ,  which  is  half  the  angle  GPD 
at  the  centre,  is  equal  to  the  angle 
GaD  at  the  circumference;  and  the 
angle  GQP,  which  is  half  the  angle 
GQD  at  the  centre,  is  equal  to  the 
supplement  of  the  angle  G6D  at  the 
circumference,  and  therefore  equal 
to  the  angle  Gba.  Upon  which  ac¬ 
count  the  triangles  GPQ,  Ga6  are 
similar,  and 

Ga  :  a5  =  GP  :  PQ 
and,  by  construction. 


GP  :  PQ  =  Ga  :  AB. 


72  Mathematical  Principles 

Wherefore  ab  and  AB  are  equal;  and  consequently  the  triangles  abc,  ABC, 
which  we  have  now  proved  to  be  similar,  are  also  equal.  And  therefore  since  the 
angles  D,  E,  F  of  the  triangle  DEF  do  respectively  touch  the  sides  ab,  ac,  be  of 
the  triangle  abc,  the  figure  ABCdef  may  be  completed  similar  and  equal  to  the 
figure  ofjcDEF,  and  by  completing  it  the  Problem  will  be  solved.  q.e.f. 

Cor.  Hence  a  right  line  may  be  drawn  whose  parts  given  in  length  may  be 
intercepted  between  three  right  lines  given  in  position.  Suppose  the  triangle 
DEF,  by  the  approach  of  its  point  D  to  the  side  EF,  and  by  having  the  sides 
DE,  DF  placed  into  the  same  straight  line,  to  be  itself  changed  into  a  right  line 
whose  given  part  DE  is  to  be  placed  between  the  right  lines  AB,  AC  given  in 
position;  and  its  given  part  DF  is  to  be  placed  between  the  right  lines  AB,  BC 
given  in  position;  then,  by  applying  the  preceding  construction  to  this  case,  the 
Problem  \vt11  be  solved. 


Proposition  28.  Problem  20 

To  describe  a  conic  given  both  in  kind  and  in  magnitude,  given  parts  of  which  shall 
he  placed  between  three  right  lines  given  in  position. 

Suppose  a  conic  is  to  be  described  that  may  be  similar  and  equal  to  the 
curved  line  DEF,  and  may  be  cut  by  three  right  lines  AB,  AC,  BC,  given  in 
position,  into  parts  DE  and  EF,  similar  and  equal  to  the  given  parts  of  this 
curved  line. 


Draw  the  right  lines  DE,  EF,  DF;  and  place  the  angles  D,  E,  F,  of  this 
triangle  DEF,  so  as  to  touch  those  right  lines  given  in  position  (by  Lem.  26). 
Then  about  the  triangle  describe  the  conic,  similar  and  equal  to  the  curve 
DEF.  QE.F. 


Lemma  27 

To  describe  a  trapezium  given  in  kind,  the  angles  whereof  may  respectively  touch 
four  right  lines  given  in  position,  that  are  neither  all  parallel  among  themselves,  nor 
converge  to  one  common  point. 

Let  the  four  right  lines  ABC,  AD,  BD,  CE  be  given  in  position;  the  first 
cutting  the  second  in  A,  the  third  in  B,  and  the  fourth  in  C;  and  suppose  a 
trapezium  fghi  is  to  be  described  that  may  be  similar  to  the  trapezium  FGHI, 
and  whose  angle  /,  equal  to  the  given  angle  F,  may  touch  the  right  line  ABC; 
and  the  other  angles  g,  h,  i,  equal  to  the  other  given  angles  G,  H,  I,  may  touch 
the  other  lines  AD,  BD,  CE  respectively.  Join  FH,  and  upon  FG,  FH,  FI 
describe  as  many  segments  of  circles  FSG,  FTH,  FVI,  the  first  of  which  FSG 
may  be  capable  of  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  BAD ;  the  second  FTH  capable 
of  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  CBD ;  and  the  third  FVI  of  an  angle  equal  to  the 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  73 

angle  ACE.  But  the  segments  are  to  be  described  towards  those  sides  of  the 
lines  FG,  FH,  FI,  that  the  circular  order  of  the  letters  FSGF  may  be  the  same 
as  of  the  letters  BADE,  and  that  the  letters  FTHF  may  turn  about  in  the 
same  order  as  the  letters  CBDC,  and  the  letters  FVIF  in  the  same  order  as  the 
letters  ACEA.  Complete  the  segments  into  entire  circles,  and  let  P  be  the  centre 


of  the  first  circle  FSG,  Q  the  centre  of  the  second  FTH.  Join  and  produce  both 
ways  the  line  PQ,  and  in  it  take  QR  so  that  QR  :  PQ  =  BC  ;  AB.  But  QR  is  to 
be  taken  towards  that  side  of  the  point  Q,  that  the  order  of  the  letters  P,  Q,  R 
may  be  the  same  as  of  the  letters  A,  B,  C;  and  about  the  centre  R  with  the 
radius  RF  describe  a  fourth  circle  FNc  cutting  the  third  circle  FVI  in  c.  Join 
Fc  cutting  the  first  circle  in  a,  and  the  second  in  h.  Draw  aG,  6H,  cl,  and  let  the 
figure  ABC/gr/if  be  made  similar  to  the  figure  a6cFGHI;  and  the  trapezium 
will  be  that  which  was  required  to  be  described. 

For  let  the  two  first  circles  FSG,  FTPI  cut  one  the  other  in  K;  join  PK,  QK, 
RK,  aK,  6K,  cK,  and  produce  QP  to  L.  The  angles  FaK,  F6K,  FcK  at  the 
circumferences  are  the  halves  of  the  angles  FPK,  FQK,  FRK  at  the  centres, 
and  therefore  equal  to  LPK,  LQK,  LRK,  the  halves  of  those  angles.  Therefore 
the  figure  PQRK  is  equiangular  and  similar  to  the  figure  abcK,  and  conse¬ 
quently  ah  is  to  be  as  PQ  to  QR,  that  is,  as  AB  to  BC.  But  by  construction  the 
angles /Agf,  /B/i,  fCi  are  equal  to  the  angles  FaG,  F6H,  Fcl.  And  therefore  the 
figure  ABCfghi  may  be  completed  similar  to  the  figure  a6cFGHI.  This  done,  a 
trapezium  fghi  will  be  constructed  similar  to  the  trapezium  FGHI,  and  by  its 
angles  /,  g,  h,  i  mil  touch  the  right  lines  ABC,  AD,  BD,  CE.  q.e.f. 

Cor.  Hence  a  right  line  may  be  drawn  whose  parts  intercepted  in  a  given 
order,  between  four  right  lines  given  by  position,  shall  have  a  given  proportion 
among  themselves.  Let  the  angles  FGH,  GHI  be  so  far  increased  that  the  right 
lines  FG,  GH,  HI  may  lie  in  the  same  line;  and  by  constructing  the  Problem  in 
this  case,  a  right  line  fghi  will  be  drawn,  whose  parts  fg,  gh,  hi,  intercepted 
betAveen  the  four  right  lines  given  in  position,  AB  and  AD,  AD  and  BD,  BD 
and  CE,  aauII  be  to  each  other  as  the  lines  FG,  GH,  HI,  and  Avill  observe  the 
same  order  among  themselves.  But  the  same  thing  may  be  more  readily  done 
in  this  manner; 


74  Mathematical  Principles 

Produce  AB  to  K  and  BD  to  L,  so  as  BK  may  be  to  AB  as  HI  to  GH;  and 
DL  to  BD  as  GI  to  FG;  and  join  KL  meeting  the  right  line  CE  in  i.  Produce 
iL  to  M,  so  as  LM  may  be  to  iL  as  GH  to  HI;  then  draw  MQ  parallel  to  LB, 
and  meeting  the  right  line  AD  in  g,  and  join  gi  cutting  AB,  BD  in  /,  h:  I  say, 
the  thing  is  done. 

For  let  cut  the  right  line  AB  in  Q,  and  AD  the  right  line  KL  in  S,  and 
draw  AP  parallel  to  BD  and  meeting  iL  in  P,  and  g'M  to  L/i  {gi  to  hi,  Mi  to  Li, 
GI  to  HI,  AK  to  BK)  and  AP  to  BL  will  be  in  the  same  ratio.  Cut  DL  in  R,  so 


as  DL  to  RL  may  be  in  that  same  ratio;  and  because  gfS  to  gfM,  AS  to  AP,  and 
DS  to  DL  are  proportional;  therefore,  as  g'S  to  L/i,  so  will  AS  be  to  BL,  and  DS 
to  RL;  and  mixtly,  BL  — RL  to  L/i  — BL,  as  AS  — DS  to  g'S  — AS.  That  is,  BR  is 
to  B/i  as  AD  is  to  Kg,  and  therefore  as  BD  to  g'Q.  And  alternately  BR  is  to  BD 
as  B/i  to  g'Q,  or  as//i  tofg.  But  by  construction  the  line  BL  was  cut  in  D  and  R 
in  the  same  ratio  as  the  line  FI  in  G  and  H;  and  therefore  BR  is  to  BD  as  FH 
to  FG.  Therefore //i  is  iofg  as  FH  to  FG.  Since,  therefore,  gi  to  hi  likewise  is  as 
Mi  to  Li,  that  is,  as  GI  to  HI,  it  is  manifest  that  the  lines  FI,  ji  are  similarly 
cut  in  G  and  H,  g  and  h.  q.e.f. 

In  the  construction  of  this  Corollary,  after  the  line  LK  is  drawn  cutting  CE 
in  i,  we  may  produce  iE  to  V,  so  as  EV  may  be  to  Ei  as  FH  to  HI,  and  then 
draw  V/  parallel  to  BD.  It  will  come  to  the  same,  if  about  the  centre  i  with  an 
interval  IH,  we  describe  a  circle  cutting  BD  in  X,  and  produce  iX  to  Y  so  as 
iY  may  be  equal  to  IF,  and  then  draw  Y/  parallel  to  BD. 

Sir  Christopher  Wren  and  Dr.  Wallis  have  long  ago  given  other  solutions  of 
this  Problem. 


Proposition  29.  Problem  21 

To  describe  a  conic  given  in  kind,  that  may  he  cut  by  four  right  lines  given  in 
'position,  into  parts  given  in  order,  kind,  and  proportion. 

Suppose  a  conic  is  to  be  described  that  may  be  similar  to  the  curved  line 
FGHI,  and  whose  parts,  similar  and  proportional  to  the  parts  FG,  GH,  HI  of 
the  other,  may  be  intercepted  between  the  right  lines  AB  and  AD,  AD  and  BD, 
BD  and  CE  given  in  position,  viz.,  the  first  between  the  first  pair  of  those  lines. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  75 

the  second  between  the  second,  and  the  third  between  the  third.  Draw  the 
right  lines  FG,  GH,  HI,  FI;  and  (by  Lem.  27)  describe  a  trapezium that 
may  be  similar  to  the  trapezium  FGHI,  and  whose  angles  /,  g,  h,  i  may  touch 
the  right  lines  given  in  position  AB,  AD,  BD,  CE,  severally  according  to  their 
order.  And  then  about  this  trapezium  describe  a  conic,  that  conic  will  be  similar 
to  the  curved  line  FGHI. 


This  problem  may  be  likewise  constructed  in  the  following  manner.  Joining 
FG,  GH,  HI,  FI,  produce  GF  to  V,  and  join  FH,  IG,  and  make  the  angles 
CAK,  DAL  equal  to  the  angles  FGH,  VFH.  Let  AK,  AL  meet  the  right  line 
BD  in  K  and  L,  and  thence  draw  KM,  LN,  of  which  let  KM  make  the  angle 
AKM  equal  to  the  angle  GHI,  and  be  itself  to  AK  as  HI  is  to  GH;  and  let  LN 
make  the  angle  ALN  equal  to  the  angle  FHI,  and  be  itself  to  AL  as  HI  to  FH. 
But  AK,  KM,  AL,  LN  are  to  be  drawn  towards  those  sides  of  the  lines  AD, 


AK,  AL,  that  the  letters  CAKMC,  ALKA,  DALND  may  be  carried  round  in 
the  same  order  as  the  letters  FGHIF;  and  draw  MN  meeting  the  right  line  CE 
in  i.  Make  the  angle  fEP  equal  to  the  angle  IGF,  and  let  PE  be  to  Ef  as  FG  to 
GI;  and  through  P  draw  PQ/  that  may  with  the  right  line  ADE  contain  an 
angle  PQE  equal  to  the  angle  FIG,  and  may  meet  the  right  line  AB  in  /,  and 
join  Ji.  But  PE  and  PQ  are  to  be  drawn  towards  those  sides  of  the  lines  CE, 
PE  that  the  circular  order  of  the  letters  PEfP  and  PEQP  may  be  the  same  as  of 
the  letters  FGHIF ;  and  if  upon  the  line  ji,  in  the  same  order  of  letters,  and 
similar  to  the  trapezium  FGHI,  a  trapezium  fghi  is  constructed,  and  a  conic 
given  in  kind  is  circumscribed  about  it,  the  Problem  will  be  solved. 

So  far  concerning  the  finding  of  the  orbits.  It  remains  that  we  determine  the 
motions  of  bodies  in  the  orbits  so  found. 


76 


Mathematical  Principles 


SECTION  VI 

How  THE  MOTIONS  ARE  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  GIVEN  ORBITS 

Proposition  30.  Problem  22 

To  find  at  any  assigned  time  the  place  of  a  body  moving  in  a  given  parabola. 
Let  S  be  the  focus,  and  A  the  principal  vertex  of  the  parabola;  and  suppose 
4AS-M  equal  to  the  parabolic  area  to  be  cut  off  APS,  which  either  was  de¬ 
scribed  by  the  radius  SP,  since  the  body’s  departure 
from  the  vertex,  or  is  to  be  described  thereby  before 
its  arrival  there.  Now  the  quantity  of  that  area  to 
be  cut  off  is  known  from  the  time  which  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  it.  Bisect  AS  in  G,  and  erect  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  GH  equal  to  3M,  and  a  circle  described 
about  the  centre  H,  with  the  radius  HS,  will  cut  the 
parabola  in  the  place  P  required.  For  letting  fall  PO 
perpendicular  on  the  axis,  and  drawing  PH,  there 
will  be 

AG^+GHH  =  HP2  =  (AO  -  AG)2+  (PO  -  GH)^) 

=  A02 -1-  P02  -  2 AO  •  AG  -  2GH  •  PO  4-  AG^ + GH^. 

Whence 

2GH-P0(  =  A02+P02-2A0-AG)=A02-1-^P02.  For  AO^ 

PO^ 

write  dividing  all  the  terms  by  3PO,  and  multiplying  them  by 

2AS,  we  shall  have 

VsGB.  •  AS  ( =  3^ AO  •  PO  4-  3^AS  •  PO  =  .  pq  =  ~  ■  po  =  to  the 

D  O 

area,  APO  — SPO)  =to  the  area  APS.  But  GH  was  3M,  and  therefore 

V^GH-AS  is  4AS-M. 

Therefore  the  area  cut  off  APS  is  equal  to  the  area  that  was  to  be  cut  off 
4AS-M.  Q.E.D. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  GH  is  to  AS  as  the  time  in  which  the  body  described  the  arc 
AP  to  the  time  in  which  the  body  described  the  arc  between  the  vertex  A  and 
the  perpendicular  erected  from  the  focus  S  upon  the  axis. 

Cor.  II.  And  supposing  a  circle  ASP  continually  to  pass  through  the  moving 
body  P,  the  velocity  of  the  point  H  is  to  the  velocity  which  the  body  had  in  the 
vertex  A  as  3  to  8;  and  therefore  in  the  same  ratio  is  the  line  GH  to  the  right 
line  which  the  body,  in  the  time  of  its  moving  from  A  to  P,  would  describe  with 
that  velocity  which  it  had  in  the  vertex  A. 

Cor.  III.  Hence,  also,  on  the  other  hand,  the  time  may  be  found  in  which  the 
body  has  described  any  assigned  arc  AP.  Join  AP,  and  on  its  middle  point  erect 
a  perpendicular  meeting  the  right  line  GH  in  H. 

Lemma  28 

There  is  no  oval  figure  whose  area,  cut  off  by  right  lines  at  pleasure,  can  be 
universally  found  by  means  of  equations  of  any  number  of  finite  terms  and 
dimensions. 

Suppose  that  within  the  oval  any  point  is  given,  about  which  as  a  pole  a 
right  line  is  continually  revolving  with  an  uniform  motion,  w^hile  in  that  right 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  77 

line  a  movable  point  going  out  from  the  pole  moves  always  forwards  mth  a 
velocity  proportional  to  the  square  of  that  right  line  within  the  oval.  By  this 
motion  that  point  mil  describe  a  spiral  mth  infinite  circumgyrations.  Now  if  a 
portion  of  the  area  of  the  oval  cut  off  by  that  right  line  could  be  found  by  a 
finite  equation,  the  distance  of  the  point  from  the  pole,  which  is  proportional 
to  this  area,  might  be  found  by  the  same  equation,  and  therefore  all  the  points 
of  the  spiral  might  be  found  by  a  finite  equation  also;  and  therefore  the  inter¬ 
section  of  a  right  line  given  in  position  mth  the  spiral  might  also  be  found  by  a 
finite  equation.  But  every  right  line  infinitely  produced  cuts  a  spiral  in  an 
infinite  number  of  points;  and  the  equation  by  which  any  one  intersection  of 
two  lines  is  found  at  the  same  time  exhibits  all  their  intersections  by  as  many 
roots,  and  therefore  rises  to  as  many  dimensions  as  there  are  intersections. 
Because  two  circles  cut  one  another  in  two  points,  one  of  those  intersections  is 
not  to  be  found  but  by  an  equation  of  two  dimensions,  by  which  the  other 
intersection  may  be  also  found.  Because  there  may  be  four  intersections  of  two 
conic  sections,  any  one  of  them  is  not  to  be  found  universally,  but  by  an  equa¬ 
tion  of  four  dimensions,  by  which  they  may  be  all  found  together.  For  if  those 
intersections  are  severally  sought,  because  the  law  and  condition  of  all  is  the 
same,  the  calculus  mil  be  the  same  in  every  case,  and  therefore  the  conclusion 
always  the  same,  which  must  therefore  comprehend  all  those  intersections  at 
once  mthin  itself,  and  exhibit  them  all  indifferently.  Hence  it  is  that  the  inter¬ 
sections  of  the  conic  sections  mth  the  curves  of  the  third  order,  because  they 
may  amount  to  six,  come  out  together  by  equations  of  six  dimensions;  and  the 
intersections  of  two  curves  of  the  third  order,  because  they  may  amount  to 
nine,  come  out  together  by  equations  of  nine  dimensions.  If  this  did  not  nec¬ 
essarily  happen,  we  might  reduce  all  solid  to  plane  Problems,  and  those  higher 
than  solid  to  solid  Problems.  But  here  I  speak  of  curves  irreducible  in  power. 
For  if  the  equation  by  which  the  curve  is  defined  may  be  reduced  to  a  lower 
power,  the  curve  mil  not  be  one  single  curve,  but  composed  of  two,  or  more, 
whose  intersections  may  be  severally  found  by  different  calculi.  After  the  same 
manner  the  two  intersections  of  right  lines  mth  the  conic  sections  come  out 
always  by  equations  of  two  dimensions;  the  three  intersections  of  right  lines 
with  the  irreducible  curves  of  the  third  order,  by  equations  of  three  dimensions; 
the  four  intersections  of  right  lines  mth  the  irreducible  curves  of  the  fourth 
order,  by  equations  of  four  dimensions;  and  so  on  in  infinitum.  Wherefore  the 
innumerable  intersections  of  a  right  line  with  a  spiral,  since  this  is  but  one 
simple  curve,  and  not  reducible  to  more  curves,  require  equations  infinite  in 
number  of  dimensions  and  roots,  by  which  they  may  be  all  exhibited  together. 
For  the  law  and  calculus  of  all  is  the  same.  For  if  a  perpendicular  is  let  fall  from 
the  pole  upon  that  intersecting  right  line,  and  that  perpendicular  together  mth 
the  intersecting  line  revolves  about  the  pole,  the  intersections  of  the  spiral  mil 
mutually  pass  the  one  into  the  other;  and  that  which  was  first  or  nearest,  after 
one  revolution,  will  be  the  second;  after  two,  the  third;  and  so  on:  nor  will  the 
equation  in  the  meantime  be  changed  but  as  the  magnitudes  of  those  quantities 
are  changed,  by  which  the  position  of  the  intersecting  line  is  determined. 
Therefore  since  those  quantities  after  every  revolution  return  to  their  first 
magnitudes,  the  equation  will  return  to  its  first  form;  and  consequently  one 
and  the  same  equation  will  exhibit  all  the  intersections,  and  will  therefore  have 
an  infinite  number  of  roots,  by  which  they  may  be  all  exhibited.  Therefore  the 
intersection  of  a  right  line  with  a  spiral  cannot  be  universally  found  by  any 


78  Mathematical  Principles 

finite  equation;  and  hence  there  is  no  oval  figure  whose  area,  cut  off  by  right 
lines  at  pleasure,  can  be  universally  exhibited  by  any  such  equation. 

By  the  same  argument,  if  the  interval  of  the  pole  and  point  by  which  the 
spiral  is  described  is  taken  proportional  to  that  part  of  the  perimeter  of  the 
oval  which  is  cut  off,  it  may  be  proved  that  the  length  of  the  perimeter  cannot 
be  universally  exhibited  by  any  finite  equation.  But  here  I  speak  of  ovals  that 
are  not  touched  by  conjugate  figures  running  out  in  infinitum. 

Cor.  Hence  the  area  of  an  ellipse,  described  by  a  radius  drawn  from  the 
focus  to  the  moving  body,  is  not  to  be  found  from  the  time  given  by  a  finite 
equation;  and  therefore  cannot  be  determined  by  the  description  of  curves 
geometrically  rational.  Those  curves  I  call  geometrically  rational,  all  the  points 
whereof  may  be  determined  by  lengths  that  are  definable  by  equations;  that 
is,  by  the  complicated  ratios  of  lengths.  Other  curves  (such  as  spirals,  quad- 
ratrixes,  and  cycloids)  I  call  geometrically  irrational.  For  the  lengths  which  are 
or  are  not  as  number  to  number  (according  to  Book  x.  Elements  of  Euclid)  are 
arithmetically  rational  or  irrational.  And  therefore  I  cut  off  an  area  of  an 
ellipse  proportional  to  the  time  in  which  it  is  described  by  a  curve  geometrically 
irrational,  in  the  follomng  manner: 

Proposition  31.  Problem  23 

To  find  the  place  of  a  body  moving  in  a  given  ellipse  at  any  assigned  time. 

Suppose  A  to  be  the  principal  vertex,  S  the  focus,  and  0  the  centre  of  the 
ellipse  APB;  and  let  P  be  the  place  of  the  body  to  be  found.  Produce  OA  to  G 
so  that  OG  :  OA  =  OA  :  OS.  Erect  the  perpendicular  GH;  and  about  the  centre 


O,  with  the  radius  OG,  describe  the  circle  GEF;  and  on  the  ruler  GH,  as  a  base, 
suppose  the  wheel  GEF  to  move  forwards,  revolving  about  its  axis,  and  in  the 
meantime  by  its  point  A  describing  the  cycloid  ALL  This  done,  take  GK  to  the 
perimeter  GEFG  of  the  wheel,  in  the  ratio  of  the  time  in  which  the  body  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  A  described  the  arc  AP,  to  the  time  of  a  whole  revolution  in  the 
ellipse.  Erect  the  perpendicular  KL  meeting  the  cycloid  in  L;  then  LP  drawn 
parallel  to  KG  \vill  meet  the  ellipse  in  P,  the  required  place  of  the  body. 

For  about  the  centre  0  Avdth  the  radius  OA  describe  the  semicircle  AQB,  and 
let  LP,  produced,  if  need  be,  meet  the  arc  AQ  in  Q,  and  join  SQ,  OQ.  Let  OQ 
meet  the  arc  EFG  in  F,  and  upon  OQ  let  fall  the  perpendicular  SR.  The  area 
APS  varies  as  the  area  AQS,  that  is,  as  the  difference  between  the  sector  OQA 
and  the  triangle  OQS,  or  as  the  difference  of  the  rectangles  3^0Q-AQ,  and 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  79 

^OQ  •  SR,  that  is,  because  ^OQ  is  given,  as  the  difference  between  the  arc 
AQ  and  the  right  line  SR;  and  therefore  (because  of  the  equality  of  the  given 
ratios  SR  to  the  sine  of  the  arc  AQ,  OS  to  OA,  OA  to  OG,  AQ  to  GF;  and  by 
division,  AQ  —  SR  to  GF  —  sine  of  the  arc  AQ)  as  GK,  the  difference  between 
the  arc  GF  and  the  sine  of  the  arc  AQ.  q.e.d. 

Scholium 

But  since  the  description  of  this  curve  is  difficult,  a  solution  by  approxima¬ 
tion  wall  be  preferable.  First,  then,  let  there  be  found  a  certain  angle  B  which 
may  be  to  an  angle  of  57.29578  degrees,  which  an  arc  equal  to  the  radius  sub¬ 
tends,  as  SH,  the  distance  of  the  foci,  to  AB,  the  diameter  of  the  elhpse. 

Secondly,  a  certain  length  L, 
which  may  be  to  the  radius  in 
the  same  ratio  inversely.  And 
these  being  found,  the  Problem 
may  be  solved  by  the  following 
analysis.  By  any  construction 
(or  even  by  conjecture),  sup¬ 
pose  we  know  P  the  place  of  the 
body  near  its  true  place  p.  Then 
letting  fall  on  the  axis  of  the 
elhpse  the  ordinate  PR  from  the 
proportion  of  the  diameters  of  the  ellipse,  the  ordinate  RQ  of  the  circumscribed 
circle  AQB  will  be  given;  which  ordinate  is  the  sine  of  the  angle  AOQ,  sup¬ 
posing  AO  to  be  the  radius,  and  also  cuts  the  elhpse  in  P.  It  will  be  sufficient 
if  that  angle  is  found  by  a  rude  calculus  in  numbers  near  the  truth.  Suppose 
we  also  know  the  angle  proportional  to  the  time,  that  is,  which  is  to  four  right 
angles  as  the  time  in  which  the  body  described  the  arc  Ap  to  the  time  of  one 
revolution  in  the  elhpse.  Let  this  angle  be  N.  Then  take  an  angle  D,  which  may 
be  to  the  angle  B  as  the  sine  of  the  angle  AOQ  to  the  radius;  and  an  angle  E 
which  may  be  to  the  angle  N— AOQ +D  as  the  length  L  to  the  same  length  L 
diminished  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle  AOQ,  when  that  angle  is  less  than  a  right 
angle,  or  increased  thereby  when  greater.  In  the  next  place,  take  an  angle  F 
that  may  be  to  the  angle  B  as  the  sine  of  the  angle  AOQ+E  to  the  radius,  and 
an  angle  G,  that  may  be  to  the  angle  N  —  AOQ— E+F  as  the  length  L  to 
the  same  length  L  diminished  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle  AOQ+E,  when  that 
angle  is  less  than  a  right  angle,  or  increased  thereby  when  greater.  For  the 
third  time  take  an  angle  H,  that  may  be  to  the  angle  B  as  the  sine  of  the  angle 
AOQ+E+G  to  the  radius;  and  an  angle  I  to  the  angle  N— AOQ— E  —  G+H, 
as  the  length  L  is  to  the  same  length  L  diminished  by  the  cosine  of  the  angle 
AOQ+E+G,  when  that  angle  is  less  than  a  right  angle,  or  increased  thereby 
when  greater.  And  so  we  may  proceed  in  infinitum.  Lastly,  take  the  angle 
AOg  equal  to  the  angle  AOQ+E+G+I+,  &c.,  and  from  its  cosine  Or  and 
the  ordinate  pr,  which  is  to  its  sine  qr  as  the  lesser  axis  of  the  ellipse  to  the 
greater,  we  shall  have  p  the  correct  place  of  the  body.  When  the  angle  N  — 
AOQ+D  happens  to  be  negative,  the  sign  +  of  the  angle  E  must  be  every¬ 
where  changed  into  — ,  and  the  sign  —  into  + .  And  the  same  thing  is  to  be 
understood  of  the  signs  of  the  angles  G  and  I,  when  the  anglesN— AOQ  — E+F, 
and  N— AOQ— E  —  G+H  come  out  negative.  But  the  infinite  series  AOQ+ 


80  Mathematical  Principles 

E+G+I+,  &c.,  converges  so  very  fast,  that  it  will  be  scarcely  ever  needful 
to  proceed  beyond  the  second  term  E.  And  the  calculus  is  founded  upon  this 
Theorem,  that  the  area  APS  varies  as  the  difference  between  the  arc  AQ  and 
the  right  line  let  fall  from  the  focus  S  perpendicularly  upon  the  radius  OQ. 

And  by  a  calculus  not  unlike,  the  Problem  is  solved  in  the  hyperbola.  Let  its 
centre  be  0,  its  vertex  A,  its  focus  S,  and  asymptote  OK;  and  suppose  the 
amount  of  the  area  to  be  cut  off  is  known,  as  being  proportional  to  the  time. 
Let  that  be  A,  and  by  conjecture  suppose 
we  know  the  position  of  a  right  line  SP, 
that  cuts  off  an  area  APS  near  the  truth. 

Join  OP,  and  from  A  and  P  to  the  asymp¬ 
tote  draw  AI,  PK,  parallel  to  the  other 
asymptote;  and  by  the  table  of  logarithms 
the  area  AIKP  will  be  given,  and  equal 
thereto  the  area  OP  A,  which,  subtracted 
from  the  triangle  OPS,  will  leave  the  area 
cut  off  APS.  And  by  applying  2 APS  — 2 A, 
or  2A— 2APS,  the  double  difference  of  the 
area  A  that  was  to  be  cut  off,  and  the  area 
APS  that  is  cut  off,  to  the  hne  SN  that  is  let  fall  from  the  focus  S,  perpendicular 
upon  the  tangent  TP,  we  shall  have  the  length  of  the  chord  PQ.  Which  chord 
PQ  is  to  be  inscribed  between  A  and  P,  if  the  area  APS  that  is  cut  off  be 
greater  than  the  area  A  that  was  to  be  cut  off,  but  towards  the  contrary  side 
of  the  point  P,  if  otherwise :  and  the  point  Q  will  be  the  place  of  the  body  more 
accurately.  And  by  repeating  the  computation  the  place  may  be  found  con¬ 
tinually  to  greater  and  greater  accuracy. 

And  by  such  computations  we  have  a  general  analytical  resolution  of  the 
Problem.  But  the  particular  calculus  that  follows  is  better  fitted  for  astro¬ 
nomical  purposes.  Supposing  AO,  OB,  OD  to  be  the  semiaxes  of  the  ellipse,  and 
L  its  latus  rectum,  and  D  the  difference  between  the  lesser  semiaxis  OD,  and 

3^L  the  half  of  the  latus  rectum :  let  an  angle  Y 
be  found,  whose  sine  may  be  to  the  radius  as  the 
rectangle  under  that  difference  D,  and  AOJ-OD 
the  half  sum  of  the  axes,  to  the  square  of  the 
greater  axis  AB.  Find  also  an  angle  Z,  whose 
sine  maybe  to  the  radius  as  the  double  rectangle 
under  the  distance  of  the  foci  SH  and  that  dif¬ 
ference  D,  to  triple  the  square  of  half  the  greater 
semiaxis  AO.  Those  angles  being  once  found, 
the  place  of  the  body  may  be  thus  determined. 
Take  the  angle  T  proportional  to  the  time  in  which  the  arc  BP  was  described, 
or  equal  to  what  is  called  the  mean  motion;  and  take  an  angle  V,  the  first 
equation  of  the  mean  motion,  to  the  angle  Y,  the  greatest  first  equation,  as  the 
sine  of  double  the  angle  T  is  to  the  radius;  and  take  an  angle  X,  the  second 
equation,  to  the  angle  Z,  the  second  greatest  equation,  as  the  cube  of  the  sine 
of  the  angle  T  is  to  the  cube  of  the  radius.  Then  take  the  angle  BHP,  the  mean 
equated  motion  either  equal  to  T-f-XJ-V,  the  sum  of  the  angles  T,  V,  X,  if 
the  angle  T  is  less  than  a  right  angle,  or  equal  to  TJ-X  — V,  the  difference  of 
the  same,  if  that  angle  T  is  greater  than  one  and  less  than  two  right  angles;  and 


D 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  81 

if  HP  meets  the  ellipse  in  P,  draw  SP,  and  it  wll  cut  off  the  area  BSP,  nearly 
proportional  to  the  time. 

This  practice  seems  to  be  expeditious  enough,  because  the  angles  V  and  X, 
taken  in  fractions  of  seconds,  if  you  please,  being  very  small,  it  \vill  be  suffi¬ 
cient  to  find  two  or  three  of  their  first  figures.  But  it  is  likewse  sufficiently  ac¬ 
curate  to  answer  to  the  theory  of  the  planets’  motions.  For  even  in  the  orbit  of 
Mars,  where  the  greatest  equation  of  the  centre  amounts  to  ten  degrees,  the 
error  mil  scarcely  exceed  one  second.  But  when  the  angle  of  the  mean  motion 
equated  BHP  is  found,  the  angle  of  the  true  motion  BSP,  and  the  distance  SP, 
are  readily  had  by  the  known  methods. 

And  so  far  concerning  the  motion  of  bodies  in  curved  lines.  But  it  may  also 
come  to  pass  that  a  moving  body  shall  ascend  or  descend  in  a  right  line ;  and  I 
shall  now  go  on  to  explain  what  belongs  to  such  kind  of  motions. 


SECTION  VII 

The  rectilinear  ascent  and  descent  of  bodies 
Proposition  32.  Problem  24 

Supposing  that  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the 
distance  of  the  places  from  the  centre;  it  is  required  to  define  the  spaces  which  a 
body,  falling  directly,  describes  in  given  times. 

Case  1.  If  the  body  does  not  fall  perpendicularly,  it  will  (by  Cor.  i,  Prop.  13) 
describe  some  conic  section  whose  focus  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  force.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  conic  section  to  be  ARPB  and  its  focus  S.  And, 
first,  if  the  figure  be  an  ellipse,  upon  the  greater  axis  thereof 
AB  describe  the  semicircle  ADB,  and  let  the  right  line 
DPC  pass  through  the  falling  body,  making  right  angles 
mth  the  axis;  and  dramng  DS,  PS,  the  area  ASD  mil  be 
proportional  to  the  area  ASP,  and  therefore  also  to  the 
time.  The  axis  AB  still  remaining  the  same,  let  the  breadth 
of  the  ellipse  be  continually  diminished,  and  the  area  ASD 
will  always  remain  proportional  to  the  time.  Suppose  that 
breadth  to  be  diminished  in  infinitum;  and  the  orbit  APB 
in  that  case  coinciding  mth  the  axis 
AB,  and  the  focus  S  mth  the  ex¬ 
treme  point  of  the  axis  B,  the  body 
will  descend  in  the  right  line  AC,  and  the  area  ABD  mil 
become  proportional  to  the  time.  Therefore  the  space  g 
AC  mil  be  given  which  the  body  describes  in  a  given  e 
time  by  its  perpendicular  fall  from  the  place  A,  if  the 
area  ABD  is  taken  proportional  to  the  time,  and  from 
the  point  D  the  right  line  DC  is  let  fall  perpendicularly 
on  the  right  line  AB.  q.e.i. 

Case  2.  If  the  figure  RPB  is  an  hyperbola,  on  the 
same  principal  diameter  AB  describe  the  rectangular 
hyperbola  BED;  and  because  there  exist  between  the 
several  areas  and  the  heights  CP  and  CD  relations,  A 


82  Mathematical  Principles 

CSP  :  CSD  =  CB/P  :  CBED  =  SP/B  :  SDEB  =  CP  :  CD,  and  since  the  area 
SP/B  varies  as  the  time  in  which  the  body  P  will  move  through  the  arc  P/B, 
the  area  SDEB  will  also  vary  as  that  time.  Let  the  latus  rectum  of  the  hy¬ 
perbola  RPB  be  diminished  in  infinitum,  the  transverse  axis  remaining  the 
same;  and  the  arc  PB  will  come  to  coincide  with  the  right  line  CB,  and  the 
focus  S  with  the  vertex  B,  and  the  right  line  SD  with  the  right  line  BD.  And 
therefore  the  area  BDEB  will  vary  as  the  time  in  which  r 

the  body  C,  by  its  perpendicular  descent,  describes  the 
line  CB.  Q.e.i.  C 

Case  3.  And  by  the  like  argument,  if  the  figure  RPB 
is  a  parabola,  and  to  the  same  principal  vertex  B  another 
parabola  BED  is  described,  that  may  always  remain 
given  while  the  former  parabola  in  whose  perimeter  the  5 
body  P  moves,  by  having  its  latus  rectum  diminished  B 
and  reduced  to  nothing,  comes  to  coincide  with  the  line  CB,  the  parabolic  seg¬ 
ment  BDEB  mil  vary  as  the  time  in  which  that  body  P  or  C  mil  descend  to 
the  centre  S  or  B.  q.e.i. 


Proposition  33.  Theorem  9 

The  things  above  found  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  velocity  of  a  falling  body  in 
any  place  C  is  to  the  velocity  of  a  body,  describing  a  circle  about  the  centre  B  at  the 
distance  BC,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  AC,  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the 
remoter  vertex  A  of  the  circle  or  rectangular  hyperbola,  to  HAB,  the  principal  semi¬ 
diameter  of  the  figure. 

Let  AB,  the  common  diameter  of  both  figures  RPB,  DEB,  be  bisected  in  0; 
and  draw  the  right  line  PT  that  may  touch  the  figure  RPB  in  P,  and  likemse 
cut  that  common  diameter  AB  (produced,  if  need  be)  in  T;  and  let  SY  be 
perpendicular  to  this  line,  and  BQ  perpendicular  to  this  diameter,  and  suppose 

the  latus  rectum  of  the  figure  RPB 
to  be  L.  From  Cor.  ix.  Prop.  16,  it 
is  manifest  that  the  velocity  of  a 
body,  moving  in  the  line  RPB 
about  the  centre  S,  in  any  place 
P,  is  to  the  velocity  of  a  body 
describing  a  circle  about  the  same 
centre,  at  the  distance  SP,  as  the 
square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the 
rectangle  3^L‘SP  to  SY^.  For 
by  the  properties  of  the  conic 
sections  AC-CB  is  to  CP^  as 

2 AO  to  L,  and  therefore 

is  equal  to  L.  Therefore  those 
velocities  are  to  each  other  as 
the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of 
CP  AO  SP  , 

— .  ^  —  to  SY^.  Moreover, 

AC  •  CB 

by  the  properties  of  the  conic 
sections, 


83 


thence, 

and 

From  this, 
and 

and,  since 
one  obtains 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

CO:BO  =  BO:TO, 
CO+BO  :  BO  =  BO+TO  :  TO, 
CO  :  BO  =  CB  :  BT. 
BO-CO  :  BO  =  BT-CB  :BT 
AO  =  TC:BT  =  CP:BQ; 
BQAC 


AC 

CP  = 

CP^AOSP 


AO 


equal  to 


BQ=^AC-SP 


AC  CB  AO  BC  • 

Now  suppose  CP,  the  breadth  of  the  figure  RPB,  to  be  diminished  in  infinitum, 
so  that  the  point  P  may  come  to  coincide  mth  the  point  C,  and  the  point  S 
with  the  point  B,  and  the  line  SP  ^vith  the  line  BC,  and  the  line  SY  ^vith  the 
line  BQ;  and  the  velocity  of  the  body  now  descending  perpendicularly  in  the 
line  CB  will  be  to  the  velocity  of  a  body  describing  a  circle  about  the  centre  B, 


at  the  distance  BC,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of 


BQ2ACSP 


to  SY^,  that 


AOBC 

is  (neglecting  the  ratios  of  equality  of  SP  to  BC,  and  BQ^  to  SY^),  as  the  square 
root  of  the  ratio  of  AC  to  AO,  or  J/^AB.  q.e.d. 

COR.  I.  When  the  points  B  and  S  come  to  coincide,  TC  mil  become  to  TS  as 
AC  to  AO. 

Cor.  II.  A  body  revolving  in  any  circle  at  a  given  distance  from  the  centre, 
by  its  motion  converted  upwards,  will  ascend  to  double  its  distance  from  the 
C0Ilt;rG 

Proposition  34.  Theorem  10 

If  the  figure  BED  is  a  parabola,  I  say,  that  the  velocity  of  a  falling  body  in  any 
place  C  is  equal  to  the  velocity  by  which  a  body  may  uniformly  describe  a  circle 
about  the  centre  B  at  half  the  interval  BC. 

For  (by  Cor.  vii.  Prop.  16)  the  velocity  of 
a  body  describing  a  parabola  RPB  about  the 
centre  S,  in  any  place  P,  is  equal  to  the  velocity 
of  a  body  uniformly  describing  a  circle  about 
the  same  centre  S  at  half  the  interval  SP.  Let 
the  breadth  CP  of  the  parabola  be  diminished 
in  infinitum,  so  that  the  parabolic  arc  P/B  may 
come  to  coincide  with  the  right  line  CB,  the 
centre  S  with  the  vertex  B,  and  the  interval  SP 
mth  the  interval  BC,  and  the  Proposition  "will 
be  manifest.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  35.  Theorem  11 

The  same  things  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  area  of  the  figure  DES,  described  by  the 
indefinite  radius  SD,  is  equal  to  the  area  which  a  body  with  a  radius  equal  to  half 
the  latus  rectum  of  the  figure  DES  describes  in  the  same  time,  by  uniformly  revolv¬ 
ing  about  the  centre  S. 

For  suppose  a  body  C  in  the  smallest  moment  of  time  describes  in  falling  the 
infinitely  little  line  Cc,  while  another  body  K,  uniformly  revolving  about  the 
centre  S  in  the  circle  OKA-,  describes  the  arc  KAr.  Erect  the  perpendiculars  CD, 
cd,  meeting  the  figure  DES  in  D,  d.  Join  SD,  Sd,  SK,  SAr,  and  draw  Dd  meeting 
the  axis  AS  in  T,  and  thereon  let  fall  the  perpendicular  SY. 


84 


Mathematical  Principles 


Case  1 .  If  the  figure  DES  is  a  circle,  or  a  rectangular  hyperbola,  bisect  its 
transverse  diameter  AS  in  0,  and  SO  \xi\\  be  half  the  latus  rectum.  And  because 

TC  :  TD  =  Cc  :  Dd, 
and  TD:TS  =  CD:Sy, 

there  follows  TC  :  TS  =  CD  •  Cc  :  S Y  •  Dd. 

But  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  33)  TC  :  TS  =  AC  :  AO, 

namely,  if  in  the  coalescence  of  the  points  D,  d  the  ultimate  ratios  of  the  lines 
are  taken.  Therefore, 

AC  :  AO  or  SK  =  CD-Cc  :  SY-Dd. 

Further,  the  velocity  of  the  descending  body  in  C  is  to  the  velocity  of  a  body 
describing  a  circle  about  the  centre  S,  at  the  interval  SC,  as  the  square  root  of 
the  ratio  of  AC  to  AO  or  SK  (by  Prop.  33) ;  and  this  velocity  is  to  the  velocity 
of  a  body  describing  the  circle  OKk  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  SK  to  SC 
(by  Cor.  vi.  Prop.  4) ;  and,  consequently,  the  first  velocity  is  to  the  last,  that  is, 
the  little  line  Cc  to  the  arc  Kk,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  AC  to  SC,  that 
is,  in  the  ratio  of  AC  to  CD.  Therefore, 

CD-Cc  =  AC-KA-, 

hence,  AC  :  SK  =  AC  •  Kk  :  S Y  •  Dd, 

and  SK-KA-  =  SY-Dd, 

and  ^SK-KA-  =  ^SY-Dd, 

that  is,  the  area  KS/r  is  equal  to  the  area 
SDd.  Therefore  in  every  moment  of  time  two 
equal  particles,  KS/r  and  SDd,  of  areas  are 
generated,  which,  if  their  magnitude  is  dimi¬ 
nished,  and  their  number  increased  in  infini- 
tum,  obtain  the  ratio  of  equality,  and  conse-  j 
quently  (by  Cor.,  Lem.  iv)  the  whole  areas  / 
together  generated  are  always  equal,  q.e.d.  \ 

Case  2.  But  if  the  figure  DES  is  a  parabola,  \ 
we  shall  find,  as  above, 

CD  Cc  :  SY  Dd  =  TC  :  TS, 
that  is,  =2:1;  therefore, 

MCD  Cc  =  J^  SY-Dd. 

But  the  velocity  of  the  falling  body  in  C  is 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  85 

equal  to  the  velocity  with  which  a  circle  may  be  uniformly  described  at  the 
interval  ^SC  (by  Prop.  34).  And  this  velocity  to  the  velocity  mth  which  a 
circle  may  be  described  with  the  radius  SK,  that  is,  the  little  line  Cc  to  the  arc 
KA’,  is  (by  Cor.  vi,  Prop.  4)  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  SK  to  ^SC; 
that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  SK  to  3^CD.  Therefore  ^/^SK-KA-  is  equal  to  3^CD-Cc, 
and  therefore  equal  to  3^SY-Dd;  that  is,  the  area  KSA’  is  equal  to  the  area 
SDd,  as  above.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  36.  Problem  25 

To  determine  the  times  of  the  descent  of  a  body  falling  from  a  given 
place  A. 

Upon  the  diameter  AS,  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the 
centre  at  the  beginning,  describe  the  semicircle  ADS,  as  like- 
mse  the  semicircle  OKH  equal  thereto,  about  the  centre  S. 
From  any  place  C  of  the  body  erect  the  ordinate  CD.  Join  SD, 
and  make  the  sector  OSK  equal  to  the  area  ASD.  It  is  evident 
(by  Prop.  35)  that  the  body  in  falling  will  describe  the  space  AC 
in  the  same  time  in  which  another  body,  uniformly  revolving 
about  the  centre  S,  may  describe  the  arc  OK,  q.e.f. 


Proposition  37.  Problem  26 

To  define  the  times  of  the  ascent  or  descent  of  a  body  projected  upwards  or  down¬ 
wards  from  a  given  place. 


Suppose  the  body  to  go  off  from  the  given  place  G,  in  the  direction  of  the  line 
GS,  with  any  velocity.  Take  GA  to  3^AS  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  this 
velocity  to  the  uniform  velocity  in  a  circle,  "with  which  the  body  may  revolve 
about  the  centre  S  at  the  given  interval  SG.  If  that  ratio  is  the  same  as  of  the 
number  2  to  1,  the  point  A  is  infinitely  remote;  in  which  case  a  parabola  is  to  be 
described  with  any  latus  rectum  to  the  vertex  S,  and  axis  SG;  as  appears  by 
Prop.  34,  But  if  that  ratio  is  less  or  greater  then  the  ratio  of  2  to  1,  in  the  former 
case  a  circle,  in  the  latter  a  rectangular  hyperbola,  is  to  be  described  on  the 
diameter  SA;  as  appears  by  Prop.  33.  Then  about  the  centre  S,  with  a  radius 
equal  to  half  the  latus  rectum,  describe  the  circle  HA’K;  and  at  the  place  G  of 
the  ascending  or  descending  body,  and  at  any  other  place  C,  erect  the  perpen- 


86  Mathematical  Principles 

diculars  GI,  CD,  meeting  the  conic  section  or  circle  in  I  and  D.  Then  joining 
SI,  SD,  let  the  sectors  HSK,  HSA’  be  made  equal  to  the  segments  SEIS,SEDS, 
and  (by  Prop.  35)  the  body  G  will  describe  the  space  GC  in  the  same  time  in 
which  the  body  K  may  describe  the  arc  Kk.  q.e.f. 

Proposition  38.  Theorem  12 

Supposing  that  the  centripetal  force  is  proportional  to  the  altitude  or  distance  of 
places  from  the  centre,  I  say,  that  the  times  and  velocities  of  falling  bodies,  and  the 
spaces  which  they  describe,  are  respectively  proportional  to  the  arcs,  and  the  sines 
and  versed  sines  of  the  arcs. 

Suppose  the  body  to  fall  from  any  place  A  in  the  right 
line  AS;  and  about  the  centre  of  force  S,  with  the  radius 
AS,  describe  the  quadrant  of  a  circle  AE;  and  let  CD  be 
the  sine  of  any  arc  AD ;  and  the  body  A  will  in  the  time 
AD  in  falling  describe  the  space  AC,  and  in  the  place  C 
will  acquire  the  velocity  CD. 

This  is  demonstrated  the  same  way  from  Prop.  10,  as 
Prop.  32  was  demonstrated  from  Prop.  11. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  times  are  equal  in  which  one  body  falling  from  the  place 
A  arrives  at  the  centre  S,  and  another  body  revolving  describes  the  quadrantal 
arc  ADE. 

Cor.  II.  Therefore  all  the  times  are  equal  in  which  bodies  falling  from  what¬ 
soever  places  arrive  at  the  centre.  For  all  the  periodic  times  of  revolving  bodies 
are  equal  (by  Cor.  iii,  Prop.  4). 

Proposition  39.  Problem  27 

Supposing  a  centripetal  force  of  any  kind,  and  granting  the  quadratures  of  curvi¬ 
linear  figures;  it  is  required  to  find  the  velocity  of  a  body,  ascending  or  descending 
in  a  right  line,  in  the  several  places  through  which  it  passes,  as  also  the  time  in 
which  it  will  arrive  at  any  place;  and  conversely. 

Suppose  the  body  E  to  fall  from  any  place  A  in  the  right  line  ADEC;  and 
from  its  place  E  imagine  a  perpendicular  EG  always  erected  proportional  to 
the  centripetal  force  in  that  place  tending  to  the  centre  C;  and  let  BFG  be  a 

curved  line,  the  locus  of  the  point  G.  And  in  the 
beginning  of  the  motion  suppose  EG  to  coincide 
with  the  perpendicular  AB;  and  the  velocity  of 
the  body  in  any  place  E  will  be  as  a  right  line 
whose  square  is  equal  to  the  curvilinear  area 
ABGE.  Q.E.i. 

In  EG  take  EM  inversely  proportional  to  a 
right  line  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  area 
ABGE,  and  let  VLM  be  a  curved  line  wherein  the 
point  M  is  always  placed,  and  to  which  the  right 
line  AB  produced  is  an  asymptote;  and  the  time 
in  which  the  body  in  falling  describes  the  line 
AE,  will  be  as  the  curvilinear  area  ABTVME. 

Q.E.I. 

For  in  the  right  line  AE  let  there  be  taken  the 
very  small  line  DE  of  a  given  length,  and  let 


B  T 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


87 


DBF  be  the  place  of  the  line  EMG,  when  the  body  was  in  D;  and  if  the 
centripetal  force  be  such,  that  a  right  line,  whose  square  is  equal  to  the 
area  ABGE,  is  as  the  velocity  of  the  descending  body,  the  area  itself  vdll 
be  as  the  square  of  that  velocity;  that  is,  if  for  the  velocities  in  D  and  E 
we  write  V  and  V+I,  the  area  ABFD  vill  be  as  YY,  and  the  area  ABGE  as 
VV+2VI+II;  and  by  subtraction,  the  area  DFGE  as  2VI+II,  and  therefore 


DFGE 

DE 


mil  be  as 


2VI+II 
DE  ^ 


that  is,  if  we  take  the  first  ratios  of  those  quantities 


when  just  nascent,  the  length  DF  is  as  the  quantity 


2VI 

DE’ 


and  therefore  also  as 


1  •  V 

half  that  quantity  But  the  time  in  which  the  body  in  falling  describes  the 

very  small  line  DE,  is  directly  as  that  line  and  inversely  as  the  velocity  V;  and 
the  force  mil  be  directly  as  the  increment  I  of  the  velocity  and  inversely  as  the 
time;  and  therefore  if  we  take  the  first  ratios  when  those  quantities  are  just 
DV 

nascent,  as  that  is,  as  the  length  DF.  Therefore  a  force  proportional  to 

DF  or  EG  will  cause  the  body  to  descend  with  a  velocity  that  is  as  the  right 
line  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  area  ABGE.  q.e.d. 

Moreover,  since  the  time  in  which  a  very  small  line  DE  of  a  given  length 
may  be  described  is  inversely  as  the  velocity  and  therefore  also  inversely  as  a 
right  line  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  area  ABFD;  and  since  the  line  DL,  and 
by  consequence  the  nascent  area  DLME,  will  be  inversely  as  the  same  right 
line,  the  time  will  be  as  the  area  DLME,  and  the  sum  of  all  the  times  will  be  as 
the  sum  of  all  the  areas;  that  is  (by  Cor.,  Lem.  4),  the  wLole  time  in  w'hich  the 
line  AE  is  described  will  be  as  the  whole  area  ATVME.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Let  P  be  the  place  from  whence  a  body  ought  to  fall,  so  as  that,  when 
urged  by  any  knowm  uniform  centripetal  force  (such  as  gravity  is  commonly 
supposed  to  be),  it  may  acquire  in  the  place  D  a  velocity  equal  to  the  velocity 
which  another  body,  falling  by  any  force  whatever,  hath  acquired  in  that  place 
D.  In  the  perpendicular  DF  let  there  be  taken  DR,  which  may  be  to  DF  as 
that  uniform  force  to  the  other  force  in  the  place  D.  Complete  the  rectangle 
PDRQ,  and  cut  off  the  area  ABFD  equal  to  that  rectangle.  Then  A  will  be  the 
place  from  w^hence  the  other  body  fell.  For  completing  the  rectangle  DRSE, 
since  the  area  ABFD  is  to  the  area  DFGE  as  W  to  2VI,  and  therefore  as  l^Y 
to  I,  that  is,  as  half  the  whole  velocity  to  the  increment  of  the  velocity  of  the 
body  falhng  by  the  variable  force;  and  in  like  manner  the  area  PQRD  to  the 
area  DRSE  as  half  the  wLole  velocity  to  the  increment  of  the  velocity  of  the 
body  falling  by  the  uniform  force;  and  since  those  increments  (by  reason  of  the 
equality  of  the  nascent  times)  are  as  the  generating  forces,  that  is,  as  the  or¬ 
dinates  DF,  DR,  and  consequently  as  the  nascent  areas  DFGE,  DRSE;  there¬ 
fore,  the  whole  areas  ABFD,  PQRD  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  halves  of  the 
w’hole  velocities;  and  therefore,  because  the  velocities  are  equal,  they  become 
equal  also. 

Cor.  II.  Whence  if  any  body  be  projected  either  upw'ards  or  dowmwards  with 
a  given  velocity  from  any  place  D,  and  there  be  given  the  law’  of  centripetal 
force  acting  on  it,  its  velocity  will  be  found  in  any  other  place,  as  e,  by  erecting 
the  ordinate  eg,  and  taking  that  velocity  to  the  velocity  in  the  place  D  as  a 
right  line  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  PQRD,  either  increased  by  the 


88  Mathematical  Principles 

curvilinear  area  DFge,  if  the  place  e  is  below  the 
place  D,  or  diminished  by  the  same  area  T)Yge,  if 
it  be  higher,  is  to  the  right  line  whose  square  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  PQRD  alone. 

Cor.  III.  The  time  is  also  known  by  erecting 
the  ordinate  em  inversely  proportional  to  the 
square  root  of  PQRD+or  — DFgre,  and  taking 
the  time  in  which  the  body  has  described  the 
line  De  to  the  time  in  which  another  body  has 
fallen  with  an  uniform  force  from  P,  and  in 
falling  arrived  at  D  in  the  proportion  of  the  cur¬ 
vilinear  area  DLme  to  the  rectangle  2PD-DL. 

For  the  time  in  which  a  body  falling  with  an 
uniform  force  hath  described  the  line  PD  is  to 
the  time  in  which  the  same  body  hath  described 
the  line  PE  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  PD  to  PE;  that  is  (the  very 
small  line  DE  being  just  nascent),  in  the  ratio  of  PD  to  PD-f3^DE  or  2Pr) 
to2PD-|-DE,  and,  by  subtraction,  to  the  time  in  which  the  body  hath  de¬ 
scribed  the  small  line  DE,  as  2PD  to  DE,  and  therefore  as  the  rectangle 
2PD-DL  to  the  area  DLME;  and  the  time  in  which  both  the  bodies  de¬ 
scribed  the  very  small  line  DE  is  to  the  time  in  which  the  body  with  the 
variable  motion  described  the  line  De  as  the  area  DLME  to  the  area  DLwe; 
and  therefore  the  first  mentioned  of  these  times  is  to  the  last  as  the  rectangle 
2PD  •  DL  to  the  area  DLme. 


SECTION  VIII 


The  determination  of  orbits  in  which  bodies  will  revolve,  being  acted 

UPON  BY  ANY  SORT  OF  CENTRIPETAL  FORCE 

Proposition  40.  Theorem  13 

If  a  body,  acted  upon  by  any  centripetal  force,  is  moved  in  any  manner,  and  an¬ 
other  body  ascends  or  descends  in  a  right  line,  and  their  velocities  be  equal  in  any 
one  case  of  equal  altitudes,  their  velocities  will  be  also  equal  at  all  equal  altitudes. 

Let  a  body  descend  from  A  through  D  and  E,  to  the  centre  C;  and  let  an¬ 
other  body  move  from  V  in  the  curved  line  VIK/r.  From  the  centre  C,  mth  any 
distances,  describe  the  concentric  circles  DI,  EK,  meeting  the  right  line  AC  in 
D  and  E,  and  the  curve  VIK  in  I  and  K.  Draw  IC  meeting  KE  in  N,  and  on 
IK  let  fall  the  perpendicular  NT;  and  let  the  interval  DE  or  IN  between  the 
circumferences  of  the  circles  be  very  small^  and  imagine  the  bodies  in  D  and  I 
to  have  equal  velocities.  Then  because  the  distances  CD  and  Cl  are  equal,  the 
centripetal  forces  in  D  and  I  will  be  also  equal.  Let  those  forces  be  expressed 
by  the  equal  short  lines  DE  and  IN ;  and  let  the  force  IN  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the 
Laws  of  Motion)  be  resolved  into  two  others,  NT  and  IT.  Then  the  force  NT 
acting  in  the  direction  of  the  line  NT  perpendicular  to  the  path  ITK  of  the 
body  will  not  at  all  affect  or  change  the  velocity  of  the  body  in  that  path,  but 
only  draw  it  aside  from  a  rectilinear  course,  and  make  it  deflect  continually 
from  the  tangent  of  the  orbit,  and  proceed  in  the  curvilinear  path  ITK/r.  That 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  89 

^  whole  force,  therefore,  will  be  spent  in  producing  this  effect;  but 
y  the  other  force  IT,  acting  in  the  direction  of  the  course  of  the 
body,  will  be  all  employed  in  accelerating  it,  and  in  the  least 
given  time  will  produce  an  acceleration  proportional  to  itself. 
Therefore  the  accelerations  of  the  bodies  in  D  and  I,  produced 
^  in  equal  times,  are  as  the  lines  DE,  IT  (if  we  take  the  first  ratios 
g  of  the  nascent  lines  DE,  IN,  IK,  IT,  NT) ;  and  in  unequal  times 
as  the  product  of  those  lines  and  the  times.  But  the  times  in  which 
DE  and  IK  are  described,  are,  by  reason  of  the  equal  velocities  (in 
D  and  I),  as  the  spaces  described  DE  and  IK,  and  therefore  the 
accelerations  in  the  course  of  the  bodies  through  the  lines  DE 
and  IK  are  as  DE  and  IT,  and  DE  and  IK  conjointly;  that  is, 
as  the  square  of  DE  to  the  rectangle  IT  •  IK.  But  the  rectangle 
^  IT  •  IK  is  equal  to  the  square  of  IN,  that  is,  equal  to  the  square 
of  DE;  and  therefore  the  accelerations  generated  in  the  passage 
of  the  bodies  from  D  and  I  to  E  and  K  are  equal.  Therefore  the  velocities  of 
the  bodies  in  E  and  K  are  also  equal :  and  by  the  same  reasoning  they  will 
always  be  found  equal  in  any  subsequent  equal  distances.  q.e.d. 

By  the  same  reasoning,  bodies  of  equal  velocities  and  equal  distances  from 
the  centre  mil  be  equally  retarded  in  their  ascent  to  equal  distances,  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  if  a  body  either  oscillates  by  hanging  to  a  string,  or  by  any 
polished  and  perfectly  smooth  impediment  is  forced  to  move  in  a  curved  line; 
and  another  body  ascends  or  descends  in  a  right  line,  and  their  velocities  be 
equal  at  any  one  equal  altitude,  their  velocities  mil  be  also  equal  at  all  other 
equal  altitudes.  For  by  the  string  of  the  pendulous  body,  or  by  the  impediment 
of  a  vessel  perfectly  smooth,  the  same  thing  will  be  effected  as  by  the  trans¬ 
verse  force  NT.  The  body  is  neither  accelerated  nor  retarded  by  it,  but  only  is 
obliged  to  leave  its  rectilinear  course. 

Cor.  II.  Suppose  the  quantity  P  to  be  the  greatest  distance  from  the  centre 
to  which  a  body  can  ascend,  whether  it  be  oscillating,  or  revolving  in  a  curve, 
and  so  the  same  projected  upwards  from  any  point  of  a  curve  with  the  velocity 
it  has  in  that  point.  Let  the  quantity  A  be  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the 
centre  in  any  other  point  of  the  orbit;  and  let  the  centripetal  force  be  always  as 
the  power  of  the  quantity  A,  the  index  of  which  power  rt  —  1  is  any  num¬ 
ber  n  diminished  by  unity.  Then  the  velocity  in  every  altitude  A  will  be  as 
■\/(P”— A”),  and  therefore  will  be  given.  For  by  Prop.  39,  the  velocity  of  a  body 
ascending  and  descending  in  a  right  line  is  in  that  very  ratio. 

Proposition  41.  Problem  28 

Supposing  a  centripetal  force  of  any  kind,  and  granting  the  quadratures  of  curvi¬ 
linear  figures;  it  is  required  to  find  as  well  the  curves  in  which  bodies  will  move,  as 
the  times  of  their  motions  in  the  curves  found. 

Let  any  centripetal  force  tend  to  the  centre  C,  and  let  it  be  required  to  find 
the  curve  VIK^.  Let  there  be  given  the  circle  VR,  described  from  the  centre  C 
with  any  radius  CV ;  and  from  the  same  centre  describe  any  other  circles  ID, 
KE,  cutting  the  curve  in  I  and  K,  and  the  right  line  CV  in  D  and  E.  Then 
draw  the  right  line  CNIX  cutting  the  circles  KE,  VR  in  N  and  X,  and  the  right 
line  CKY  meeting  the  circle  VR  in  Y.  Let  the  points  I  and  K  be  indefinitely 
near;  and  let  the  body  go  on  from  V  through  I  and  K  to  A’;  and  let  the  point  A 


90 


Mathematical  Principles 


be  the  place  from  which  another  body  is  to  fall,  so  as  in  the  place  D  to  acquire 
a  velocity  equal  to  the  velocity  of  the  first  body  in  1.  And  things  remaining  as 
in  Prop.  39,  the  short  line  IK,  described  in  the  least  given  time,  will  be  as  the 
velocity,  and  therefore  as  the  right  line  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  area 
ABFD,  and  the  triangle  ICK  proportional  to  the  time  will  be  given,  and  there¬ 
fore  KN  will  be  inversely  as  the  altitude  IC;  that  is  (if  there  be  given  any 

quantity  Q,  and  the  altitude  IC  be  called  A),  as-^.  This  quantity-^call  Z,  and 

suppose  the  magnitude  of  Q  to  be  such  that  in  some  one  case 

VABFD  :  Z  =  IK  :  KN, 

and  then  in  all  cases 


and 

and  by  subtraction, 
and  therefore 


vABFD  :  Z  =  IK  :  KN, 
ABFD  :  ZZ  =  IK2  :  KN^, 

ABFD-ZZ  :  ZZ  =  IN2  :  KN^, 


and 

Since 

it  follows  that 


V(ABFD-ZZ)  ;  Z  or  2  =  IN  :  KN, 

A  •  KN  = - Qll^ - 

^  V(ABFD-ZZ) 

YX  XC  :  A  KN  =  CX2  :  AA, 


YXXC  = 


QINCX2 


AAV(ABFD-ZZ) 

Therefore  in  the  perpendicular  DF  let  there  be  taken  continually  D6,  Dc  equal 

2\/(ABFD-ZZ)’  2AAV^BFD-ZZ)  respectively,  and  let  the  curved  lines 

ah,  ac,  the  foci  of  the  points  b  and  c,  be  described;  and  from  the  point  V  let  the 
perpendicular  Va  be  erected  to  the  line  AC,  cutting  off  the  curvilinear  areas 
VD6a,  VDca,  and  let  the  ordinates  Es,  Ea:,  be  erected  also.  Then  because  the 
rectangle  D6TN  or  DftsE  is  equal  to  half  the  rectangle  A-KN,  or  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  ICK;  and  the  rectangle  DcTN  or  DcxE  is  equal  to  half  the  rectangle 
YX  •  XC,  or  to  the  triangle  XCY ;  that  is,  because  the  nascent  particles  DbzE, 
ICK  of  the  areas  VD6a,  VIC  are  always  equal;  and  the  nascent  particles  DcxE, 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  91 

XCY  of  the  areas  VDm,  VCX  are  always  equal:  therefore  the  generated  area 
VD6a  will  be  equal  to  the  generated  area  VIC,  and  therefore  proportional  to 
the  time;  and  the  generated  area  VDca  is  equal  to  the  generated  sector  VCX. 
If,  therefore,  any  time  be  given  during  which  the  body  has  been  moving  from 
V,  there  will  be  also  given  the  area  proportional  to  it  VD6a;  and  thence  will  be 
given  the  altitude  of  the  body  CD  or  Cl ;  and  the  area  VDca,  and  the  sector 
VCX  equal  thereto,  together  vith  its  angle  VCI.  But  the  angle  VCI,  and  the 
altitude  Cl  being  given,  there  is  also  given  the  place  I,  in  which  the  body  will 
be  found  at  the  end  of  that  time.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  i.  Hence  the  greatest  and  least  altitudes  of  the  bodies,  that  is,  the  ap¬ 
sides  of  the  curves,  may  be  found  very  readily.  For  the  apsides  are  those  points 
in  which  a  right  line  IC  drawn  through  the  centre  falls  perpendicularly  upon 
the  curves  VIK;  which  comes  to  pass  when  the  right  lines  IK  and  NK  become 
equal;  that  is,  when  the  area  ABFD  is  equal  to  ZZ. 

Cor.  II.  So  also  the  angle  KIN,  in  which  the  curve  at  any  place  cuts  the  line 
IC,  may  be  readily  found  by  the  given  altitude  IC  of  the  body;  namely,  by 
making  the  sine  of  that  angle  to  the  radius  as  KN  to  IK,  that  is,  as  Z  to  the 
square  root  of  the  area  ABFD. 

Cor.  III.  If  to  the  centre  C,  and  the  principal  vertex  V,  there  be  described  a 
conic  section  VRS;  and  from  any  point  thereof,  as  R,  there  be  drawn  the  tan¬ 
gent  RT  meeting  the  axis  CV  indefinitely  produced  in  the  point  T ;  and  then 

joining  CR  there  be  drawn  the  right  line  CP, 
equal  to  the  abscissa  CT,  making  an  angle  VCP 
^  proportional  to  the  sector  VCR;  and  if  a  centri¬ 
petal  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  cubes 
V  of  the  distances  of  the  places  from  the  centre, 
tends  to  the  centre  C;  and  from  the  place  V 
there  sets  out  a  body  with  a  just  velocity  in  the 
direction  of  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  right  line 
C  CV ;  that  body  ^vill  proceed  in  a  curve  VPQ, 
which  the  point  P  will  always  touch ;  and  there¬ 
fore  if  the  conic  section  VRS  be  an  hyperbola, 
the  body  will  descend  to  the  centre;  but  if  it  be  an  ellipse,  it  will  ascend  con¬ 
tinually,  and  go  farther  and  farther  off  in  infinitum.  And,  on  the  contrary,  if 
a  body  endued  with  any  velocity  goes  off  from  the  place  V,  and  according  as 
it  begins  either  to  descend  obliquely  to  the  centre,  or  to  ascend  obliquely  from 
it,  the  figure  VRS  be  either  an  hyperbola  or  an  ellipse,  the  curve  may  be  found 
by  increasing  or  diminishing  the  angle  VCP  in  a  given  ratio.  And  the  centripetal 
force  becoming  centrifugal,  the  body  vill  ascend  obliquely  in  the  curve  VPQ, 
which  is  found  by  taking  the  angle  VCP  proportional  to  the  elliptic  sector  VRC, 
and  the  length  CP  equal  to  the  length  CT,  as  before.  All  these  things  follow 
from  the  foregoing  Proposition,  by  the  quadrature  of  a  certain  curve,  the  in¬ 
vention  of  which,  as  being  easy  enough,  for  brevity’s  sake  I  omit. 

Proposition  42.  Problem  29 

The  law  of  centripetal  force  being  given,  it  is  required  to  find  the  motion  of  a  body  set¬ 
ting  out  from  a  given  place,  with  a  given  velocity ,  in  the  direction  of  a  givenrightline. 

Suppose  the  same  things  as  in  the  three  preceding  Propositions ;  and  let  the 
body  go  off  from  the  place  I  in  the  direction  of  the  little  line  IK,  vnth  the  same 


92  Mathematical  Principles 

velocity  as  another  body,  by  falling  with  an  uniform  centripetal  force  from  the 
place  P,  may  acquire  in  1);  and  let  this  uniform  force  be  to  the  force  with  which 
the  body  is  at  first  urged  in  I,  as  DR  to  DF.  Let  the  body  go  on  towards  k;  and 


about  the  centre  C,  with  the  radius  Ck,  describe  the  circle  ke,  meeting  the  right 
line  PD  in  e,  and  let  there  be  erected  the  lines  eg,  ev,  ew,  ordinately  applied  to 
the  curves  BFgr,  abv,  acw.  From  the  given  rectangle  PDRQ  and  the  given  law  of 
centripetal  force,  by  which  the  first  body  is  acted  on,  the  curved  line  BFgf  is 
also  given,  by  the  construction  of  Prop.  27,  and  its  Cor.  i.  Then  from  the  given 
angle  CIK  is  given  the  proportion  of  the  nascent  lines  IK,  KN ;  and  thence,  by 
the  construction  of  Prob.  28,  there  is  given  the  quantity  Q,  with  the  curved 
lines  abv,  acw;  and  therefore,  at  the  end  of  any  time  Dbve,  there  is  given  both 
the  altitude  of  the  body  Ce  or  Ck,  and  the  area  Dcwe,  with  the  sector  equal  to 
it  XCy,  the  angle  ICk,  and  the  place  k,  in  which  the  body  w'ill  then  be  found. 

Q.E.I. 

We  suppose  in  these  Propositions  the  centripetal  force  to  vary  in  its  recess 
from  the  centre  according  to  some  law,  which  anyone  may  imagine  at  pleasure, 
but  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre  to  be  everywhere  the  same. 

I  have  hitherto  considered  the  motions  of  bodies  in  immovable  orbits.  It 
remains  now  to  add  something  concerning  their  motions  in  orbits  which  re¬ 
volve  round  the  centres  of  force. 

SECTION  IX 

The  motion  of  bodies  in  movable  orbits;  and  the  motion  of  the  apsides 

Proposition  43.  Problem  30 

It  is  required  to  make  a  body  move  in  a  curve  that  revolves  about  the  centre  of  force 
in  the  same  manner  as  another  body  in  the  same  eurve  at  rest. 

In  the  fixed  orbit  VPK,  let  the  body  P  revolve,  proceeding  from  V  towards 
K.  From  the  centre  C  let  there  be  continually  drawn  Cp,  equal  to  CP,  making 
the  angle  VCp  proportional  to  the  angle  VCP;  and  the  area  which  the  line  Cp 
describes  will  be  to  the  area  VCP,  which  the  line  CP  describes  at  the  same  time, 
as  the  velocity  of  the  describing  line  Cp  to  the  velocity  of  the  describing  line 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  93 

CP;  that  is,  as  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP,  therefore  in  a  given  ratio,  and 
therefore  proportional  to  the  time.  Since,  then,  the  area  described  by  the  line 
Cp  in  a  fixed  plane  is  proportional  to  the  time,  it  is  manifest  that  a  body,  being 

acted  upon  by  a  suitable  centripetal  force,  may  re¬ 
volve  with  the  point  p  in  the  curved  line  which  the 
same  point  p,  by  the  method  just  now  explained, 
may  be  made  to  describe  in  a  fixed  plane.  Make 
the  angle  VCm  equal  to  the  angle  PCp,  and  the  line 
Cm  equal  to  CV,  and  the  figure  uCp  equal  to  the 
figure  VCP,  and  the  body  being  always  in  the 
point  p,  will  move  in  the  perimeter  of  the  revolving 
figure  uCp,  and  will  describe  its  (revolving)  arc  up 
in  the  same  time  that  the  other  body  P  describes 
the  similar  and  equal  arc  VP  in  the  fixed  figure 
VPK.  Find,  then,  by  Cor.  v,  Prop.  6,  the  centrip¬ 
etal  force  by  which  the  body  may  be  made  to  revolve  in  the  curved  line  which 
the  point  p  describes  in  a  fixed  plane,  and  the  Problem  wiW  be  solved,  q.e.f. 


Proposition  44.  Theorem  14 

The  difference  of  the  forces,  by  which  two  bodies  may  be  made  to  move  equally,  one 
in  a  fixed,  the  other  in  the  same  orbit  revolving,  varies  inversely  as  the  cube  of  their 
common  altitudes. 

Let  the  parts  of  the  fixed  orbit  VP,  PK  be  similar  and  equal  to  the  parts  of 
the  revolving  orbit  up,  pk;  and  let  the  distance  of  the  points  P  and  K  be  sup¬ 
posed  of  the  utmost  smallness.  Let  fall  a  perpendicular  kr  from  the  point  k  to 
the  right  line  pC,  and  produce  it  to 
m,  so  that  mr  may  be  to  kr  as  the 
angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP.  Be¬ 
cause  the  altitudes  of  the  bodies  PC 
and  pC,  KC  and  kC,  are  always 
equal,  it  is  manifest  that  the  in¬ 
crements  or  decrements  of  the  lines 
PC  and  pC  are  always  equal;  and 
therefore  if  each  of  the  several  mo¬ 
tions  of  the  bodies  in  the  places  P 
and  p  be  resolved  into  two  (by 
Cor.  II  of  the  Laws  of  Motion),  one 
of  which  is  directed  towards  the 
centre,  or  according  to  the  lines  PC, 
pC,  and  the  other,  transverse  to  the 
former,  hath  a  direction  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  the  lines  PC  and  pC;  the 
motions  towards  the  centre  will  be 
equal,  and  the  transverse  motion 
of  the  body  p  mil  be  to  the  trans¬ 
verse  motion  of  the  body  P  as  the  angular  motion  of  the  line  pC  to  the  angular 
motion  of  the  line  PC;  that  is,  as  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP.  Therefore, 
at  the  same  time  that  the  body  P,  by  both  its  motions,  comes  to  the  point  K, 
the  body  p,  having  an  equal  motion  towards  the  centre,  will  be  equally  moved 


94 


Mathematical  Principles 


from  p  towards  C;  and  therefore  that  time  being  expired,  it  will  be  found  some¬ 
where  in  the  line  7nkr,  which,  passing  through  the  point  k,  is  perpendicular  to 
the  line  pC;  and  by  its  transverse  motion  will  acquire  a  distance  from  the  line 
pC,  that  will  be  to  the  distance  which  the  other  body  P  acquires  from  the  line 
PC  as  the  transverse  motion  of  the  body  p  to  the  transverse  motion  of  the 
other  body  P.  Therefore  since  kr  is  equal  to  the  distance  which  the  body  P  ac¬ 
quires  from  the  line  PC,  and  mr  is  to  kr  as  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP, 
that  is,  as  the  transverse  motion  of  the  body  p  to  the  transverse  motion  of 
the  body  P,  it  is  manifest  that  the  body  p,  at  the  expiration  of  that  time, 
wiW  be  found  in  the  place  m.  These  things  will  be  so,  if  the  bodies  p  and  P  are 
equally  moved  in  the  directions  of  the  lines  pC  and  PC,  and  are  therefore  urged 
WTth  equal  forces  in  those  directions.  But  if  we  take  an  angle  pCn  that  is  to 
the  angle  pCk  as  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP,  and  nC  be  equal  to  kC,  in 
that  case  the  body  p  at  the  expiration  of  the  time  vail  really  be  in  n;  and  is 
therefore  urged  with  a  greater  force  than  the  body  P,  if  the  angle  nQp  is  greater 
than  the  angle  kCp,  that  is,  if  the  orbit  upk  moves  either  progressively,  or  in  a 
retrograde  direction,  Mith  a  velocity  greater  than  the  double  of  that  with  which 
the  line  CP  is  carried  forwards;  and  with  a  less  force  if  the  retrograde  motion 
of  the  orbit  is  slower.  And  the  difference  of  the  forces  will  be  as  the  interval  mn 
of  the  places  through  which  the  body  would  be  carried  by  the  action  of  that 
difference  in  that  given  space  of  time.  About  the  centre  C  with  the  interval  Cw 
or  CA’  suppose  a  circle  described  cutting  the  lines  mr,  mn  produced  in  s  and  t, 
and  the  rectangle  mn-mt  will  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  mk-ms,  and  therefore 

TYbJc  *  TTtS  «  •  . 

7nn  will  be  equal  to - .  But  since  the  triangles  pCk,  pCn,  in  a  given  time, 

ml 

are  of  a  given  magnitude,  kr  and  mr,  and  their  difference  mk,  and  their  sum  ms, 
are  inversely  as  the  altitude  pC,  and  therefore  the  rectangle  mk-7ns  is  inversely 
as  the  square  of  the  altitude  pC.  Moreover,  ml  is  directly  as  ^mi,  that  is,  as  the 

altitude  pC.  These  are  the  first  ratios  of  the  nascent  lines;  and  hence 

that  is,  the  nascent  short  line  mn,  and  the  difference  of  the  forces  proportional 
thereto,  are  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  altitude  pC.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  difference  of  the  forces  in  the  places  P  and  p,  or  K  and  k, 
is  to  the  force  wnth  w^hich  a  body  may  revolve  with  a  circular  motion  from  R  to 
K,  in  the  same  time  that  the  body  P  in  a  fixed  orbit  describes  the  arc  PK,  as 

-r-.T^  xi  X  •  mk-ms 

the  nascent  line  mn  to  the  versed  sine  of  the  nascent  arc  RK,  that  is,  as - — 

mi 


rk^ 


or  as  mk  -  7ns  to  the  square  of  rk ;  that  is,  if  we  take  given  quantities  F 


and  G  in  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  the  angle  VCP  bears  to  the  angle  VCp, 
as  GG— FF  to  FF.  And,  therefore,  if  from  the  centre  C,  with  any  distance  CP 
or  Cp,  there  be  described  a  circular  sector  equal  to  the  w'hole  area  VPC,  which 
the  body  revolving  in  a  fixed  orbit  hath  by  a  radius  drawm  to  the  centre  de¬ 
scribed  in  any  certain  time,  the  difference  of  the  forces,  with  w^hich  the  body  P 
revolves  in  a  fixed  orbit,  and  the  body  p  in  a  movable  orbit,  will  be  to  the  cen¬ 
tripetal  force,  with  which  another  body  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  centre  can 
uniformly  describe  that  sector  in  the  same  time  as  the  area  VPC  is  described, 
as  GG  — FF  to  FF.  For  that  sector  and  the  area  pCk  are  to  each  other  as  the 
times  in  wRich  they  are  described. 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  95 

Cor.  II.  If  the  orbit  VPK  be  an  ellipse,  having  its  focus  C,  and  its  highest 
apse  V,  and  we  suppose  the  ellipse  upk  similar  and  equal  to  it,  so  that  pC  may 
be  always  equal  to  PC,  and  the  angle  VCp  be  to  the  angle  VCP  in  the  given 
ratio  of  G  to  F;  and  for  the  altitude  PC  or  pC  we  put  A,  and  2R  for  the  latus 

rectum  of  the  ellipse,  the  force  with 
which  a  body  may  be  made  to  re¬ 
volve  in  a  movable  ellipse  uill  be  as 

FF  ,  RGG-RFF  , 

AA^ - A« - ’  conversely. 

Let  the  force  with  which  a  body 
may  revolve  in  a  fixed  ellipse  be  ex- 

FF 

pressed  by  the  quantity 


'‘Hr 

\ 

K  K  \ 

5/  1  X.  \ 

h;- 

[r  \  xX 

: . . 

c . . 

m’- 

AA’ 


and 


the  force  in  V  will  be 


FF 

CV2' 


But  the 


fore  is  as 
RGG 


RFF 


force  vdth  Avhich  a  body  may  re¬ 
volve  in  a  circle  at  the  distance  CV, 
vdth  the  same  velocity  as  a  body 
revolving  in  an  ellipse  has  in  V,  is 
to  the  force  with  which  a  body  re¬ 
volving  in  an  ellipse  is  acted  upon 
in  the  apse  V,  as  half  the  latus  rec¬ 
tum  of  the  ellipse  to  the  semidiam¬ 
eter  CV  of  the  circle,  and  there- 

and  the  force  which  is  to  this  as  GG  — FF  to  FF,  is  as 


CV3 
RFF 

- - ;  and  this  force  (by  Cor.  i  of  this  Prop.)  is  the  difference  of  the 


CV3 

forces  in  V,  with  which  the  body  P  revolves  in  the  fixed  ellipse  VPK,  and  the 
body  p  in  the  movable  ellipse  upk.  Then  since  by  this  Proposition  that  differ¬ 


ence  at  any  other  altitude  A  is  to  itself  at  the  altitude  CV  as  .-To  7;^,, 

A**  CV^ 


the 


same  difference  in  every  altitude  A  vdll  be  as 
FF 


RGG-RFF 

A^ 


Therefore  to  the 


force  by  which  the  body  may  revolve  in  a  fixed  ellipse  VPK,  add  the  excess 


RGG-RFF 


and  the  sum  will  be  the  whole  force 


FF  ,  RGG-RFF 


by  which 


^3  ,  . ,  ^3 

a  body  may  revolve  in  the  same  time  in  the  movable  ellipse  upk. 

Cor.  III.  In  the  same  manner  it  will  be  found,  that,  if  the  fixed  orbit  VPK  be 
an  ellipse  having  its  centre  in  the  centre  of  the  forces  C,  and  there  be  supposed 
a  movable  ellipse  upk,  similar,  equal,  and  concentric  to  it;  and  2R  be  the  prin¬ 
cipal  latus  rectum  of  that  ellipse,  and  2T  the  latus  transversum,  or  greater 
axis;  and  the  angle  VCp  be  continually  to  the  angle  VCP  as  G  to  F;  the  forces 
with  wRich  bodies  may  revolve  in  the  fixed  and  movable  ellipse,  in  equal  times, 

FFA  ,  FFA  ,  RGG-RFF  , 

wall  be  as  and  ^,3-  H - - respectively. 

Cor.  IV.  And  universally,  if  the  greatest  altitude  CV  of  the  body  be  called  T, 
and  the  radius  of  the  curvature  wKich  the  orbit  VPK  has  in  V,  that  is,  the 


96 


Mathematical  Principles 


radius  of  a  circle  equally  curved,  be  called  R,  and  the  centripetal  force  with 
which  a  body  may  revolve  in  any  fixed  curve  VPK  at  the  place  V  be  called 
VFF 

other  places  P  be  indefinitely  styled  X;  and  the  altitude  CP  be 


called  A,  and  G  be  taken  to  F  in  the  given  ratio  of  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle 
VCP;  the  centripetal  force  vith  which  the  same  body  vill  perform  the  same 
motions  in  the  same  time,  in  the  same  curve  xiyk  revohdng  vdth  a  circular 


motion,  will  be  as  the  sum  of  the  forces  X 


VRGG-VRFF 
^  A3 


Cor.  V.  Therefore  the  motion  of  a  body  in  a  fixed  orbit  being  given,  its  angu¬ 
lar  motion  round  the  centre  of  the  forces  may  be  increased  or  diminished  in  a 
given  ratio;  and  thence  new  fixed  orbits  may  be  found  in  which  bodies  may 
revolve  with  new  centripetal  forces. 

Cor.  VI.  Therefore  if  there  be  erected  the  line  VP  of  an  indeterminate  length, 
perpendicular  to  the  line  CV  given  by  position,  and  CP  be  drawn,  and  Cp 
equal  to  it,  making  the  angle  VCp  having  a  given 
ratio  to  the  angle  VCP,  the  force  vith  which  a  body 
may  revolve  in  the  curved  line  VpA*,  which  the  point 
p  is  continually  describing,  -wdll  be  inversely  as  the 
cube  of  the  altitude  Cp.  For  the  body  P,  by  its  inertia 
alone,  no  other  force  impelling  it,  vnW  proceed  uni¬ 
formly  in  the  right  line  VP.  Add,  then,  a  force  tending 
to  the  centre  C  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  altitude 
CP  or  Cp,  and  (by  what  was  just  demonstrated)  the 
body  Mill  deflect  from  the  rectilinear  motion  into  the  curved  line  Ypk.  But  this 
curve  Ypk  is  the  same  vdth  the  curve  VPQ  found  in  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  41,  in  which, 
I  said,  bodies  attracted  vdth  such  forces  would  ascend  obliquely. 


Proposition  45.  Problem  31 


To  find  the  motion  of  the  apsides  in  orbits  approaching  very  near  to  circles. 

This  problem  is  solved  arithmetically  by  reducing  the  orbit,  which  a  body 
revolving  in  a  movable  ellipse  (as  in  Cor.  ii  and  iii  of  the  above  Prop.)  de¬ 
scribes  in  a  fixed  plane,  to  the  figure  of  the  orbit  whose  apsides  are  required ; 
and  then  seeking  the  apsides  of  the  orbit  which  that  body  describes  in  a  fixed 
plane.  But  orbits  acquire  the  same  figure,  if  the  centripetal  forces  vdth  which 
they  are  described,  compared  between  themselves,  are  made  proportional  at 
equal  altitudes.  Let  the  point  V  be  the  highest  apse,  and  write  T  for  the  great¬ 
est  altitude  CV,  A  for  any  other  altitude  CP  or  Cp,  and  X  for  the  difference  of 
the  altitudes  CV  — CP;  and  the  force  vith  which  a  body  moves  in  an  ellipse 
revolving  about  its  focus  C  (as  in  Cor.  ii),  and  which  in  Cor.  ii  was  as 


FF  RGG-RFF 
AA"^  A3 


that  is,  as 


FFA-bRGG-RFF 

A3 


,  by  substituting  T— X  for 


A, 


mil  become  as 


RGG  -  RFF + TFF  -  FFX 
A3 


In  like  manner  any  other  centrip¬ 


etal  force  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  fraction  whose  denominator  is  A3,  and  the 
numerators  are  to  be  made  analogous  by  collating  together  the  homologous 
terms.  This  will  be  made  plainer  by  Examples. 

Exam.  i.  Let  us  suppose  the  centripetal  force  to  be  uniform,  and  therefore  as 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


97 


A8  ^  .  T3-3TTX+3TXX-X3 

or,  writing  T  —  X  for  A  in  the  numerator,  as - ^3 - .  Then 

collating  together  the  correspondent  terms  of  the  numerators,  that  is,  those 
that  consist  of  given  quantities  with  those  of  given  quantities,  and  those  of 
quantities  not  given  with  those  of  quantities  not  given,  it  will  become 
RGG-RFF+TFF  :  T®=  -FFX  :  -3TTX+3TXX-X* 

=  -FF  :  -3TT+3TX-XX. 

Now  since  the  orbit  is  supposed  extremely  near  to  a  circle,  let  it  coincide  vdth  a 
circle;  and  because  in  that  case  R  and  T  become  equal,  and  X  is  infinitely 
diminished,  the  last  ratios  will  be 

GG  :  T2=-FF  :  -3TT, 

and  again,  GG  :  FF  =  TT  :  3TT  =  1:3; 

and  therefore  G  is  to  F,  that  is,  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP,  as  1  to  \/3. 
Therefore  since  the  body,  in  a  fixed  ellipse,  in  descending  from  the  upper  to  the 
lower  apse,  describes  an  angle,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  180°,  the  other  body  in  a 
movable  ellipse,  and  therefore  in  the  fixed  plane  we  are  treating  of,  Avill  in  its 

180° 

descent  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  apse,  describe  an  angle  VCp  of  — 7^.  And 

this  comes  to  pass  by  reason  of  the  likeness  of  this  orbit  which  a  body  acted 
upon  by  an  uniform  centripetal  force  describes,  and  of  that  orbit  which  a  body 
performing  its  circuits  in  a  revolving  ellipse  will  describe  in  a  fixed  plane.  By 
this  collation  of  the  terms,  these  orbits  are  made  similar;  not  universally,  in¬ 
deed,  but  then  only  when  they  approach  very  near  to  a  circular  figure.  A  body, 
therefore,  revolving  with  an  uniform  centripetal  force  in  an  orbit  nearly  cir- 

180° 

cular,  will  always  describe  an  angle  of  or  103°  55'  23"  at  the  centre; 

moving  from  the  upper  apse  to  the  lower  apse  when  it  has  once  described  that 
angle,  and  thence  returning  to  the  upper  apse  when  it  has  described  that  angle 
again;  and  so  on  in  mfinitum. 

Exam.  2.  Suppose  the  centripetal  force  to  be  as  any  power  of  the  altitude  A, 

A” 

as,  for  example,  A"“®,  or  where  n  — 3  and  n  signify  any  indices  of  powers 

whatever,  whether  integers  or  fractions,  rational  or  surd,  affirmative  or  nega¬ 
tive.  That  numerator  A"  or  (T  — X)"  being  reduced  to  an  indeterminate  series 
by  my  method  of  converging  series,  will  become 

T”-nXT»-i+^^^^  XXT”-2,  &c. 

And  comparing  these  terms  with  the  terms  of  the  other  numerator, 

RGG  -  RFF + TFF  -  FFX, 

it  becomes 


RGG  — RFF -b  TFF  :  T”=  —  FF  :  —  nT”~^- 


nn—n 


XT"-2  &c. 


And  taking  the  last  ratios  where  the  orbits  approach  to  circles,  it  becomes 

RGG  :  T"=-FF  :  -nT^~\ 
or,  GG  :  T”-i  =  FF  :  nT«-S 

and  again,  GG  :  FF  =  T"~^  :  wT"~^  =  1  :  n; 

and  therefore  G  is  to  F,  that  is,  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP,  as  1  to  \/n. 
Therefore  since  the  angle  VCP,  described  in  the  descent  of  the  body  from  the 
upper  apse  to  the  lower  apse  in  an  ellipse,  is  of  180°,  the  angle  VCp,  described 


98  Mathematical  Principles 

in  the  descent  of  the  body  from  the  upper  apse  to  the  lower  apse  in  an  orbit 
nearly  circular  which  a  body  describes  with  a  centripetal  force  proportional  to 

180° 

the  power  A"“®,  will  be  equal  to  an  angle  of  and  this  angle  being  repeated, 

the  body  will  return  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  apse,  and  so  on  in  infinitum. 
As  if  the  centripetal  force  be  as  the  distance  of  the  body  from  the  centre,  that 
A4 

is,  as  A,  or  n  mil  be  equal  to  4,  and  \/n  equal  to  2;  and  therefore  the  angle 

180® 

between  the  upper  and  the  lower  apse  will  be  equal  to  or  90°.  Therefore 

the  body  having  performed  a  fourth  part  of  one  revolution,  will  arrive  at  the 
lower  apse,  and  having  performed  another  fourth  part,  will  arrive  at  the  upper 
apse,  and  so  on  in  infinitum.  This  appears  also  from  Prop.  x.  For  a  body  acted 
on  by  this  centripetal  force  will  revolve  in  a  fixed  ellipse,  whose  centre  is  the 
centre  of  force.  If  the  centripetal  force  is  inversely  as  the  distance,  that  is, 
1  A^ 

directly  as  ^  or  n  will  be  equal  to  2;  and  therefore  the  angle  between  the 

180® 

upper  and  the  lower  apse  will  be  or  127°  16'  45";  and  hence  a  body  re¬ 
volving  with  such  a  force  will,  by  a  continual  repetition  of  this  angle,  move 
alternately  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  and  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  apse 
forever.  So,  also,  if  the  centripetal  force  be  inversely  as  the  fourth  root  of  the 
eleventh  power  of  the  altitude,  that  is,  inversely  as  A^,  and  therefore  directly 

1  A-  180° 

as  or  as  n  mil  be  equal  to  and  mil  be  equal  to  360°;  and 

therefore  the  body  parting  from  the  upper  apse,  and  from  thence  continually 
descending,  will  arrive  at  the  lower  apse  when  it  has  completed  one  entire  revo¬ 
lution;  and  thence  ascending  continually,  when  it  has  completed  another  entire 
revolution,  it  mil  arrive  again  at  the  upper  apse;  and  so  alternately  forever. 

Exam.  3.  Taking  m  and  n  for  any  indices  of  the  powers  of  the  altitude,  and  h 
and  c  for  any  given  numbers,  suppose  the  centripetal  force  to  be  as  (6A'"+cA") 
^  A®,  that  is,  as  [6(T  — X)'"^c(T— X)”]^  A®,  or  (by  the  method  of  converging 
series  above  mentioned)  as 

[feT™-]-  cT” — mfoXT”*-^ — wcXT”"^  4 - 2 —  6XXT'"“^H - ^ — 

-cXXT"-2,  &c.]-^A3; 

and  comparing  the  terms  of  the  numerators,  there  will  arise, 

RGG-RFF+TFF  :  6T'"-fcT"=  -FF  :  -mfeT'^-'-ncT'^-i-f- 


mm  —  m 


nn  —  n 


cXT”-2,  &c. 


2  '  2 

And  taking  the  last  ratios  that  arise  when  the  orbits  come  to  a  circular  form, 
there  will  come  forth 

GG  :  6T'”-i+cT"-'  =  FF  :  ?w6T'"-i-fncT"-i; 
and  again,  GG  :  FF  =  6T'”“^-|-cT"“^  :  w&T”“^-l-ncT”“b 
This  proportion,  by  expressing  the  greatest  altitude  CV  or  T  arithmetically  by 

Tlih'\'TlC 

unity,  becomes,  GG  :  FF  =  6+c  :  mh-\-nc  =  1  :  .  Whence  G  becomes  to 

F,  that  is,  the  angle  VCp  to  the  angle  VCP,  as  1  to  V  .  And  therefore. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


99 


since  the  angle  VCP  between  the  upper  and  the  lower  apse,  in  a  fixed  ellipse,  is 
of  180°,  the  angle  VCp  between  the  same  apsides  in  an  orbit  which  a  body 

describes  with  a  centripetal  force,  that  is,  as  — ,3  "  ,  will  be  equal  to  an 


o  h~\~c 

angle  of  180°  And  by  the  same  reasoning,  if  the  centripetal  force  be 

hA.^  —  cA” 

,  the  angle  between  the  apsides  will  be  found  equal  to 


as 


A^ 


180°  V 


b  —  c 
mb  —  nc 


After  the  same  manner  the  Problem  is  solved  in  more  difficult  cases.  The 
quantity  to  which  the  centripetal  force  is  proportional  must  always  be  resolved 
into  a  converging  series  whose  denominator  is  Al  Then  the  given  part  of  the 
numerator  arising  from  that  operation  is  to  be  supposed  in  the  same  ratio  to 
that  part  of  it  which  is  not  given,  as  the  given  part  of  this  numerator  RGG 
—  RFF 4-TFF  —  FFX  is  to  that  part  of  the  same  numerator  which  is  not  given. 
And  taking  away  the  superfluous  quantities,  and  ^vriting  unity  for  T,  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  G  to  F  is  obtained. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  centripetal  force  be  as  any  power  of  the  altitude,  that 
power  may  be  found  from  the  motion  of  the  apsides;  and  conversely.  That  is, 
if  the  whole  angular  motion,  with  which  the  body  returns  to  the  same  apse,  be 
to  the  angular  motion  of  one  revolution,  or  360°,  as  any  number  as  m  to  another 
as  n,  and  the  altitude  be  called  A;  the  force  wll  be  as  the  power  A^-^  of  the 

altitude  A;  the  index  of  which  power  is - 3.  This  appears  by  the  second 

Example.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  the  force  in  its  recess  from  the  centre  cannot 
decrease  in  a  greater  than  a  cubed  ratio  of  the  altitude.  A  body  revolving  vdth 
such  a  force,  and  parting  from  the  apse,  if  it  once  begins  to  descend,  can  never 
arrive  at  the  lower  apse  or  least  altitude,  but  wall  descend  to  the  centre,  de¬ 
scribing  the  curved  line  treated  of  in  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  41.  But  if  it  should,  at  its 
parting  from  the  lower  apse,  begin  to  ascend  ever  so  little,  it  vnW  ascend  in 
infinitum,  and  never  come  to  the  upper  apse;  but  will  describe  the  curved  line 
spoken  of  in  the  same  Cor.,  and  Cor.  vi.  Prop.  45.  So  that  where  the  force  in  its 
recess  from  the  centre  decreases  in  a  greater  than  a  cubed  ratio  of  the  altitude, 
the  body  at  its  parting  from  the  apse,  will  either  descend  to  the  centre,  or 
ascend  in  infinitum,  according  as  it  descends  or  ascends  at  the  beginning  of  its 
motion.  But  if  the  force  in  its  recess  from  the  centre  either  decreases  in  a  less 
than  a  cubed  ratio  of  the  altitude,  or  increases  in  any  ratio  of  the  altitude  what¬ 
soever,  the  body  vill  never  descend  to  the  centre,  but  will  at  some  time  arrive 
at  the  low^er  apse;  and,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  body  alternately  ascending  and 
descending  from  one  apse  to  another  never  comes  to  the  centre,  then  either  the 
force  increases  in  the  recess  from  the  centre,  or  it  decreases  in  a  less  than  a 
cubed  ratio  of  the  altitude;  and  the  sooner  the  body  returns  from  one  apse  to 
another,  the  farther  is  the  ratio  of  the  forces  from  the  cubed  ratio.  As  if  the 
body  should  return  to  and  from  the  upper  apse  by  an  alternate  descent  and 
ascent  in  8  revolutions,  or  in  4,  or  2,  or  13^;  that  is,  if  m  should  be  to  n  as  8,  or 

4,  or  2,  or  13^  to  1,  and  therefore - 3,  be  3^4  —  3,  or  3^6  —  3,  or  3^  —  3,  or  % 

77X77X 

—3;  then  the  force  will  be  as  or  or  or  that  is,  it  \vill  be 


100 


Mathematical  Principles 


inversely  as  or  or  A®“^S  or  If  the  body  after  each  revo¬ 

lution  returns  to  the  same  apse,  and  the  apse  remains  unmoved,  then  m  will  be 

to  n  as  1  to  1,  and  therefore  A^~®  ■will  be  equal  to  A“^,  or  and  therefore  the 


decrease  of  the  forces  will  be  in  a  squared  ratio  of  the  altitude;  as  was  demon¬ 
strated  above.  If  the  body  in  three  fourth  parts,  or  two  thirds,  or  one  third,  or 
one  fourth  part  of  an  entire  revolution,  return  to  the  same  apse;  m  Mill  be  to  n 

nn  _ « 

as  M  or  ^  or  or  3^  to  1,  and  therefore  A”*”*  is  equal  to  A'’^~®,  or  or 

A^~^  or  A^®“®;  and  therefore  the  force  is  either  inversely  as  A’’^^  or  A^'‘,  or 
directly  as  A®  or  A^®.  Lastly  if  the  body  in  its  progress  from  the  upper  apse  to 
the  same  upper  apse  again,  goes  over  one  entire  revolution  and  three  degrees 
more,  and  therefore  that  apse  in  each  revolution  of  the  body  moves  forward 
three  degrees,  then  m  will  be  to  n  as  363°  to  360°,  or  as  121  to  120,  and  therefore 

A\dll  be  equal  to  A“T4^t,  and  therefore  the  centripetal  force  will  be  in- 
versely  as  A  qj.  inversely  as  A  very  nearly.  Therefore  the  centripetal 
force  decreases  in  a  ratio  something  greater  than  the  squared  ratio;  but  ap¬ 
proaching  59%  times  nearer  to  the  squared  than  the  cubed. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  also  if  a  body,  urged  by  a  centripetal  force  which  is  inversely 
as  the  square  of  the  altitude,  revolves  in  an  ellipse  whose  focus  is  in  the  centre 
of  the  forces;  and  a  new  and  foreign  force  should  be  added  to  or  subtracted 
from  this  centripetal  force,  the  motion  of  the  apsides  arising  from  that  foreign 
force  may  (by  the  third  Example)  be  known;  and  conversely:  If  the  force  with 

which  the  body  revolves  in  the  ellipse  be  as  and  the  foreign  force  as  cA, 


and  therefore  the  remaining  force  as 


A-cA' 
A®  ’ 


then  (by  the  third  Example)  b 


will  be  equal  to  1,  m  equal  to  1,  and  n  equal  to  4;  and  therefore  the  angle  of 

1  —  c 

revolution  between  the  apsides  is  equal  to  180°\/  ^  Suppose  that  foreign 

force  to  be  357.45  times  less  than  the  other  force  with  which  the  body  revolves 
in  the  ellipse;  that  is,  c  to  be  35745,  A  or  T  being  equal  to  1;  and  then  180° 


V  vAll  be  180°  VMJf  or  180° -7623,  that  is,  180°  45'  44".  Therefore  the 

body,  parting  from  the  upper  apse,  vdll  arrive  at  the  lower  apse  ^vith  an  angular 
motion  of  180°  45'  44",  and  this  angular  motion  being  repeated,  ^\^ll  return  to 
the  upper  apse;  and  therefore  the  upper  apse  in  each  revolution  will  go  forward 
1°  31'  28".  The  apse  of  the  moon  is  about  tvdce  as  s-\vift. 

So  much  for  the  motion  of  bodies  in  orbits  whose  planes  pass  through  the 
centre  of  force.  It  now  remains  to  determine  those  motions  in  eccentric  planes. 
For  those  authors  who  treat  of  the  motion  of  heavy  bodies  used  to  consider  the 
ascent  and  descent  of  such  bodies,  not  only  in  a  perpendicular  direction,  but  at 
all  degrees  of  obliquity  upon  any  given  planes ;  and  for  the  same  reason  we  are 
to  consider  in  this  place  the  motions  of  bodies  tending  to  centres  by  means  of 
any  forces  whatsoever,  when  those  bodies  move  in  eccentric  planes.  These 
planes  are  supposed  to  be  perfectly  smooth  and  polished,  so  as  not  to  retard  the 
motion  of  the  bodies  in  the  least.  Moreover,  in  these  demonstrations,  instead 
of  the  planes  upon  which  those  bodies  roll  or  slide,  and  which  are  therefore 
tangent  planes  to  the  bodies,  I  shall  use  planes  parallel  to  them,  in  which  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  101 

centres  of  the  bodies  move,  and  by  that  motion  describe  orbits.  And  by  the 
same  method  I  afterwards  determine  the  motions  of  bodies  performed  in  curved 
surfaces. 


SECTION  X 

The  motion  of  bodies  in  given  surfaces;  and  the  oscillating 

PENDULOUS  MOTION  OF  BODIES 

Proposition  46.  Problem  32 

Any  kind  of  centripetal  force  being  supposed,  and  the  centre  offeree,  and  any  plane 
whatsoever  in  which  the  body  revolves,  being  given,  and  the  quadratures  of  curvi¬ 
linear  figures  being  allowed;  it  is  required  to  determine  the  motion  of  a  body  going 
off  from  a  given  plane  with  a  given  velocity,  in  the  direction  of  a  given  right  line  in 
that  plane. 

Let  S  be  the  centre  of  force,  SC  the  least  distance  of  that  centre  from  the 
given  plane,  P  a  body  issuing  from  the  place  P  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line 
PZ,  Q  the  same  body  revolving  in  its  curve,  and  PQR  the  curve  itself  which  is 
required  to  be  found,  described  in  that  given  plane.  Join  CQ,  QS,  and  if  in  QS 

we  take  SV  proportional  to  the  cen¬ 
tripetal  force  with  which  the  body 
is  attracted  towards  the  centre  S, 
and  draw  VT  parallel  to  CQ,  and 
meeting  SC  in  T ;  then  vtII  the  force 
SV  be  resolved  into  two  (by  Cor.  ii 
of  the  Laws  of  Motion),  the  force 
ST,  and  the  force  TV ;  of  which  ST 
attracting  the  body  in  the  direction 
of  a  line  perpendicular  to  that  plane, 
does  not  at  all  change  its  motion  in 
that  plane.  But  the  action  of  the 
other  force  TV,  coinciding  mth  the 
position  of  the  plane  itself,  attracts 
the  body  directly  towards  the  given 
point  C  in  that  plane;  and  therefore  causes  the  body  to  move  in  the  plane  in 
the  same  manner  as  if  the  force  ST  were  taken  away,  and  the  body  were  to  re¬ 
volve  in  free  space  about  the  centre  C  by  means  of  the  force  TV  alone.  But 
there  being  given  the  centripetal  force  TV  with  which  the  body  Q  revolves  in 
free  space  about  the  given  centre  C,  there  is  given  (by  Prop.  42)  the  curve 
PQR  which  the  body  describes;  the  place  Q,  in  which  the  body  vdll  be  found 
at  any  given  time;  and,  lastly,  the  velocity  of  the  body  in  that  place  Q.  And 
conversely.  q.e.i. 


R 


Proposition  47.  Theorem  15 

Supposing  the  centripetal  force  to  be  proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  body  from 
the  centre;  all  bodies  revolving  in  any  planes  whatsoever  will  describe  ellipses,  and 
complete  their  revolutions  in  equal  times;  and  those  which  move  in  right  lines,  run¬ 
ning  backwards  and  forwards  alternately,  will  complete  their  several  periods  of 
going  and  returning  in  the  same  times. 


102  Mathematical  Principles 

For  letting  all  things  stand  as  in  the  foregoing  Proposition,  the  force  SV, 
with  which  the  body  Q  revolving  in  any  plane  PQR  is  attracted  towards  the 
centre  S,  is  as  the  distance  SQ;  and  therefore  because  SV  and  SQ,  TV  and  CQ 
are  proportional,  the  force  TV  vdth  which  the  body  is  attracted  towards  the 
given  point  C  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  is  as  the  distance  CQ.  Therefore  the 
forces  with  which  bodies  found  in  the  plane  PQR  are  attracted  towards  the 
point  C,  are  in  proportion  to  the  distances  equal  to  the  forces  vdth  which  the 
same  bodies  are  attracted  every  way  towards  the  centre  S;  and  therefore  the 
bodies  will  move  in  the  same  times,  and  in  the  same  figures,  in  any  plane  PQR 
about  the  point  C,  as  they  would  do  in  free  spaces  about  the  centre  S;  and 
therefore  (by  Cor.  ii,  Prop.  10,  and  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  38)  they  will  in  equal  times 
either  describe  ellipses  in  that  plane  about  the  centre  C,  or  move  to  and  fro  in 
right  lines  passing  through  the  centre  C  in  that  plane;  completing  the  same 
periods  of  time  in  all  cases.  q.e.d. 

Scholium 

The  ascent  and  descent  of  bodies  in  curved  surfaces  has  a  near  relation  to 
these  motions  we  have  been  speaking  of.  Imagine  curved  lines  to  be  described 
on  any  plane,  and  to  revolve  about  any  given  axes  passing  through  the  centre 
of  force,  and  by  that  revolution  to  describe  curved  surfaces;  and  that  the  bodies 
move  in  such  sort  that  their  centres  may  be  always  found  in  those  surfaces.  If 
those  bodies  oscillate  to  and  fro  udth  an  oblique  ascent  and  descent,  their 
motions  will  be  performed  in  planes  passing  through  the  axis,  and  therefore  in 
the  curved  lines,  by  whose  revolution  those  curved  surfaces  were  generated.  In 
those  cases,  therefore,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  consider  the  motion  in  those 
curved  lines. 


Proposition  48.  Theorem  16 

If  a  wheel  stands  upon  the  outside  of  a  globe  at  right  angles  thereto,  and  revolving 
about  its  own  axis  goes  forwards  in  a  great  circle,  the  length  of  the  curvilinear  path 
which  any  point,  given  in  the  perimeter  of  the  wheel,  hath  described  since  the  time 
that  it  touched  the  globe  {which  curvilinear  path  we  may  call  the  cycloid  or  epi¬ 
cycloid),  will  be  to  double  the  versed  sine  of  half  the  arc  which  since  that  time  hath 
touched  the  globe  in  passing  over  it,  as  the  sum  of  the  diameters  of  the  globe  and  the 
wheel  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  globe. 

Proposition  49.  Theorem  17 

If  a  wheel  stands  upon  the  inside  of  a  concave  globe  at  right  angles  thereto,  and 
revolving  about  its  own  axis  goes  forwards  in  one  of  the  great  circles  of  the  globe,  the 
length  of  the  curvilinear  path  which  any  point,  given  in  the  perimeter  of  the  wheel, 
hath  described  since  it  touched  the  globe,  will  be  to  the  double  of  the  versed  sine  of 
half  the  arc  which  in  all  that  time  hath  touched  the  globe  in  passing  over  it,  as  the 
difference  of  the  diameters  of  the  globe  and  the  wheel  to  the  semidiameter  of  the 
globe. 

Let  ABL  be  the  globe,  C  its  centre,  BPV  the  wheel  resting  on  it,  E  the  centre 
of  the  wheel,  B  the  point  of  contact,  and  P  the  given  point  in  the  perimeter  of 
the  wheel.  Imagine  this  wheel  to  proceed  in  the  great  circle  ABL  from  A 
through  B  towards  L,  and  in  its  progress  to  revolve  in  such  a  manner  that  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  103 

arcs  AB,  PB  may  be  always  equal  one  to  the  other,  and  the  given  point  P  in  the 
perimeter  of  the  wheel  may  describe  in  the  meantime  the  curvilinear  path  AP. 
Let  AP  be  the  whole  curvilinear  path  described  since  the  wheel  touched  the 
globe  in  A,  and  the  length  of  this  path  AP  will  be  to  twice  the  versed  sine  of 
the  arc  3^PB  as  2CE  to  CB.  For  let  the  right  line  CE  (produced  if  need  be) 
meet  the  wheel  in  V,  and  join  CP,  BP,  EP,  VP;  produce  (3P,  and  let  fall  there¬ 
on  the  perpendicular  VF.  Let  PH,  VH,  meeting  in  H,  touch  the  circle  in  P  and 
V,  and  let  PH  cut  VF  in  G,  and  to  VP  let  fall  the  perpendiculars  GI,  HK.  From 


the  centre  C  wdth  any  radius  let  there  be  described  the  circle  nom,  cutting  the 
right  line  CP  in  n,  the  perimeter  of  the  wheel  BP  in  o,  and  the  curvilinear  path 
AP  in  m;  and  from  the  centre  V  vdth  the  radius  Vo  let  there  be  described  a 
circle  cutting  VP  produced  in  q. 

Because  the  wheel  in  its  progress  always  revolves  about  the  point  of  contact 
B,  it  is  manifest  that  the  right  line  BP  is  perpendicular  to  that  curved  line  AP 
which  the  point  P  of  the  wheel  describes,  and  therefore  that  the  right  line  VP 
will  touch  this  curve  in  the  point  P.  Let  the  radius  of  the  circle  nom  be  grad¬ 
ually  increased  or  diminished  so  that  at  last  it  becomes  equal  to  the  distance 
CP;  and  by  reason  of  the  similitude  of  the  evanescent  figure  Pnomg,  and  the 
figure  PFGVI,  the  ultimate  ratio  of  the  evanescent  short  lines  Pm,  Pn,  Po,  Pg, 
that  is,  the  ratio  of  the  momentary  increments  of  the  curve  AP,  the  right  line 
CP,  the  circular  arc  BP,  and  the  right  line  VP,  wall  be  the  same  as  of  the  lines 


104  Mathematical  Principles 

PV,  PF,  PG,  PI,  respectively.  But  since  VF  is  perpendicular  to  CF,  and  VH  to 
CV,  and  therefore  the  angles  HVG,  VCF  equal;  and  the  angle  VHG  (because 
the  angles  of  the  quadrilateral  HVEP  are  right  in  V  and  P)  is  equal  to  the  angle 
CEP,  the  triangles  VHG,  CEP  will  be  similar;  and  thence  it  will  come  to  pass 
that  EP  :  CE  =  HG  :  HV  or  HP  =  KI  :  PK, 

and  by  addition  or  subtraction, 

CB  :  CE  =  PI  :  PK, 

and  CB  :  2CE  =  PI  :  PV  =  Pg  :  Pm. 

Therefore  the  decrement  of  the  line  VP,  that  is,  the  increment  of  the  line 
BV  — VP  to  the  increment  of  the  curved  line  AP  is  in  a  given  ratio  of  CB  to 
2CE,  and  therefore  (by  Cor.,  Lem.  4)  the  lengths  BV  — VP  and  AP,  generated 
by  those  increments,  are  in  the  same  ratio.  But  if  BV  be  radius,  VP  is  the  cosine 
of  the  angle  BVP  or  3^BEP,  and  therefore  BV  — VP  is  the  versed  sine  of  the 
same  angle,  and  therefore  in  this  wheel,  whose  radius  is  3^BV,  BV— VP  will  be 
double  the  versed  sine  of  the  arc  3^BP.  Therefore  AP  is  to  double  the  versed 
sine  of  the  arc  3^BP  as  2CE  to  CB.  q.e.d. 

The  line  AP  in  the  former  of  these  Propositions  we  shall  name  the  cycloid 
wthout  the  globe,  the  other  in  the  latter  Proposition  the  cycloid  -within  the 
globe,  for  distinction’s  sake. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  there  be  described  the  entire  cycloid  ASL,  and  the  same  be 
bisected  in  S,  the  length  of  the  part  PS  -will  be  to  the  length  PV  (which  is  the 
double  of  the  sine  of  the  angle  VBP,  when  EB  is  radius)  as  2CE  to  CB,  and 
therefore  in  a  given  ratio. 

Cor.  II.  And  the  length  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  cycloid  AS  wiW  be  equal 
to  a  right  line  which  is  to  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  BV  as  2CE  to  CB. 

Proposition  50.  Problem  33 

To  cause  a  'pendulous  body  to  oscillate  in  a  given  cycloid. 

Let  there  be  given  within  the  globe  QVS  described  with  the  centre  C,  the 
cycloid  QRS,  bisected  in  R,  and  meeting  the  surface  of  the  globe  with  its  ex¬ 
treme  points  Q  and  S  on  either 
hand.  Let  there  be  drawn  CR 
bisecting  the  arc  QS  in  0,  and 
let  it  be  produced  to  A  in  such 
sort  that  CA  may  be  to  CO  as 
CO  to  CR.  About  the  centre  C, 
with  the  radius  CA,  let  there 
be  described  an  exterior  globe 
DAF ;  and  within  this  globe,  by 
a  wheel  whose  diameter  is  AO, 
let  there  be  described  two  semi¬ 
cycloids  AQ,  AS,  touching  the 
interior  globe  in  Q  and  S,  and 
meeting  the  exterior  globe  in  A. 

From  that  point  A,  with  a 
thread  APT  in  length  equal  to 
the  line  AR,  let  the  body  T  be 
suspended  and  oscillated  in 
such  manner  between  the  two 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  105 

semicycloids  AQ,  AvS,  that,  as  often  as  the  pendulum  parts  from  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  AR,  the  upper  part  of  the  thread  AP  may  be  applied  to  that  semi¬ 
cycloid  APS  towards  which  the  motion  tends,  and  fold  itself  round  that  curved 
line,  as  if  it  were  some  solid  obstacle,  the  remaining  part  of  the  same  thread 
PT  which  has  not  yet  touched  the  semicycloid  continuing  straight.  Then  will 
the  weight  T  oscillate  in  the  given  cycloid  QRS.  q.e.f. 

For  let  the  thread  PT  meet  the  cycloid  QRS  in  T,  and  the  circle  QOS  in  V, 
and  let  CV  be  drawn;  and  to  the  rectilinear  part  of  the  thread  PT  from  the  ex¬ 
treme  points  P  and  T  let  there  be  erected  the  perpendiculars  BP,  TW,  meeting 
the  right  line  CV  in  B  and  W.  It  is  evident,  from  the  construction  and  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  similar  figures  AS,  SR,  that  those  perpendiculars  PB,  TW,  cut  off 
from  CV  the  lengths  VB,  VW,  equal  the  diameters  of  the  wheels  OA,  OR. 
Therefore  TP  is  to  VP  (which  is  double  the  sine  of  the  angle  VBP  when  3^BV 
is  radius)  as  BW  to  BV,  or  AO+OR  to  AO,  that  is  (since  CA  and  CO,  CO  and 
CR,  and  by  division  AO  and  OR  are  proportional),  as  CA+CO  to  CA,  or,  if 
BV  be  bisected  in  E,  as  2CE  to  CB.  Therefore  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  49),  the  length 
of  the  rectilinear  part  of  the  thread  PT  is  always  equal  to  the  arc  of  the  cycloid 
PS,  and  the  whole  thread  APT  is  always  equal  to  half  the  cycloid  APS,  that  is 
(by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  49),  to  the  length  AR.  And  conversely,  if  the  string  is  always 
equal  to  the  length  AR,  the  point  T  will  always  move  in  the  given  cycloid  QRS. 

Q.E.D. 

Cor.  The  string  AR  is  equal  to  the  semicycloid  AS,  and  therefore  has  the 
same  ratio  to  AC,  the  semidiameter  of  the  exterior  globe,  as  the  like  semicycloid 
SR  has  to  CO,  the  semidiameter  of  the  interior  globe. 


Proposition  51.  Theorem  18 

If  a  centripetal  force  tending  on  all  sides  to  the  centre  C  of  a  globe,  be  in  all  places 
as  the  distance  of  the  place  from  the  centre;  and,  by  this  force  alone  acting  upon  it, 

the  body  T  oscillate  {in  the  manner  above 
described)  in  the  perimeter  of  the  cycloid 
QRS :  I  say,  that  all  the  oscillations,  how¬ 
soever  unequal  in  themselves,  will  be  per¬ 
formed  in  equal  times. 

For  upon  the  tangent  TW  indefinitely 
produced  let  fall  the  perpendicular  CX, 
and  join  CT.  Because  the  centripetal 
force  with  which  the  body  T  is  impelled 
towards  C  is  as  the  distance  CT,  let  this 
(by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws)  be  resolved  into 
the  parts  CX,  TX,  of  which  CX  impelling 
the  body  directly  from  P  stretches  the 
thread  PT,  and  by  the  resistance  the 
thread  makes  to  it  is  totally  employed, 
producing  no  other  effect;  but  the  other 
part  TX,  impelling  the  body  transversely 
or  towards  X,  directly  accelerates  the 
motion  in  the  cycloid.  Then  it  is  plain 
that  the  acceleration  of  the  body,  proportional  to  this  accelerating  force,  will 
be  every  moment  as  the  length  TX,  that  is  (because  CV,  WV,  and  TX,  TW 


106  Mathematical  Principles 

proportional  to  them  are  given),  as  the  length  TW,  that  is  (by  Cor.  i,  Prop. 
39),  as  the  length  of  the  arc  of  the  cycloid  TR.  If  therefore  two  pendulums 
APT,  Arpl,  be  unequally  drawn  aside  from  the  perpendicular  AR,  and  let  fall 
together,  their  accelerations  will  be  always  as  the  arcs  to  be  described  TR,  ^R. 
But  the  parts  described  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion  are  as  the  accelerations, 
that  is,  as  the  whole  spaces  that  are  to  be  described  at  the  beginning,  and  there¬ 
fore  the  parts  which  remain  to  be  described,  and  the  subsequent  accelerations 
proportional  to  those  parts,  are  also  as  the  whole,  and  so  on.  Therefore  the  ac¬ 
celerations,  and  consequently  the  velocities  generated,  and  the  parts  described 
with  those  velocities,  and  the  parts  to  be  described,  are  always  as  the  whole; 
and  therefore  the  parts  to  be  described  preserving  a  given  ratio  to  each  other 
will  vanish  together,  that  is,  the  two  bodies  oscillating  will  arrive  together  at 
the  perpendicular  AR.  And  since  on  the  other  hand  the  ascent  of  the  pendu¬ 
lums  from  the  lowest  place  R  through  the  same  cycloidal  arcs  mth  a  retro¬ 
grade  motion,  is  retarded  in  the  several  places  they  pass  through  by  the  same 
forces  by  which  their  descent  was  accelerated,  it  is  plain  that  the  velocities  of 
their  ascent  and  descent  through  the  same  arcs  are  equal,  and  consequently 
performed  in  equal  times;  and,  therefore,  since  the  two  parts  of  the  cycloid  RS 
and  RQ  l3dng  on  either  side  of  the  perpendicular  are  similar  and  equal,  the 
two  pendulums  will  perform  as  well  the  whole  as  the  half  of  their  oscillations 
in  the  same  times.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  The  force  with  which  the  body  T  is  accelerated  or  retarded  in  any  place 
T  of  the  cycloid,  is  to  the  whole  weight  of  the  same  body  in  the  highest  place  S 
or  Q  as  the  arc  of  the  cycloid  TR  is  to  the  arc  SR  or  QR. 

Proposition  52.  Problem  34 

To  define  the  velocities  of  'pendulums  in  the  several  places,  and  the  times  in  which 
both  the  entire  oscillations  and  their  several  parts  are  performed. 

About  any  centre  G,  with  the  radius  GH  equal  to  the  arc  of  the  cycloid  RS, 
describe  a  semicircle  HKM  bisected  by  the  semidiameter  GK.  And  if  a  centri¬ 
petal  force  proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  places  from  the  centre  tend  to 
the  centre  G,  and  it  be  in  the  perimeter  HIK  equal  to  the 
centripetal  force  in  the  perimeter  of  the  globe  QOS  tending 
towards  its  centre,  and  at  the  same  time  that  the  pendulum 
T  is  let  fall  from  the  highest  place  S,  a  body,  as  L,  is  let  fall 
from  H  to  G;  then  because  the  forces  which  act  upon  the 
bodies  are  equal  at  the  beginning,  and  always  proportional 
to  the  spaces  to  be  described  TR,  LG,  and  therefore  if  TR 
and  LG  are  equal,  are  also  equal  in  the  places  T  and  L,  it  is 
plain  that  those  bodies  describe  at  the  beginning  equal  spaces 
ST,  HL,  and  therefore  are  still  acted  upon  equally,  and  con¬ 
tinue  to  describe  equal  spaces.  Therefore  by  Prop.  38,  the 
time  in  which  the  body  describes  the  arc  ST  is  to  the  time  of 
one  oscillation,  as  the  arc  HI  the  time  in  which  the  body  H  arrives  at  L,  to 
the  semiperiphery  HKM,  the  time  in  which  the  body  H  mil  come  to  M.  And 
the  velocity  of  the  pendulous  body  in  the  place  T  is  to  its  velocity  in  the 
lowest  place  R,  that  is,  the  velocity  of  the  body  H  in  the  place  L  to  its  velocity 
in  the  place  G,  or  the  momentary  increment  of  the  line  HL  to  the  momentary 
increment  of  the  line  HG  (the  arcs  HI,  HK  increasing  with  an  uniform  velocity) 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


107 


as  the  ordinate  LI  to  the  radius  GK,  or  as  \/(SR^  — TR^)  to  SR.  Hence,  since 
in  unequal  oscillations  there  are  described  in  equal  times  arcs  proportional  to 
the  entire  arcs  of  the  oscillations,  there  are  obtained,  from  the  times  given, 
both  the  velocities  and  the  arcs  described  in  all  the  oscillations  universally. 
Which  was  first  required. 

Let  now  any  pendulous  bodies  oscillate  in  different  cycloids  described  ^vithin 
different  globes,  whose  absolute  forces  are  also  different;  and  if  the  absolute 
force  of  any  globe  QOS  be  called  V,  the  accelerative  force  vdth  which  the  pen¬ 
dulum  is  acted  on  in  the  circumference  of  this 
globe,  when  it  begins  to  move  directly  towards 
its  centre,  vdll  be  as  the  distance  of  the  pendulous 
body  from  that  centre  and  the  absolute  force  of 
the  globe  conjointly,  that  is,  as  CO-V.  Therefore 
the  short  line  HY,  which  is  as  this  accelerated 
force  CO-V,  will  be  described  in  a  given  time; 
and  if  there  be  erected  the  perpendicular  YZ 
meeting  the  circumference  in  Z,  the  nascent  arc 
HZ  will  denote  that  given  time.  But  that  nascent 
arc  HZ  varies  as  the  square  root  of  the  rectangle 
GH-HY,  and  therefore  as  V(GH-CO-V). 
Whence  the  time  of  an  entire  oscillation  in  the 
cycloid  QRS  (it  being  as  the  semiperiphery 
HKM,  which  denotes  that  entire  oscillation,  di¬ 
rectly;  and  as  the  arc  HZ,  which  in  like  manner  denotes  a  given  time,  in¬ 
versely)  will  be  as  GH  directly  and  V(GH-CO-V)  inversely;  that  is,  because 

SR/  AR 

GH  and  SR  are  equal,  as  Vqq  -y>  or  (by  Cor.,  Prop.  50),  as  y •  There¬ 

fore  the  oscillations  in  all  globes  and  cycloids,  performed  with  any  absolute 
forces  whatever,  vary  directly  as  the  square  root  of  the  length  of  the  string,  and 
inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  distance  between  the  point  of  suspension 
and  the  centre  of  the  globe,  and  also  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  absolute 
force  of  the  globe.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  also  the  times  of  oscillating,  falling,  and  revolving  bodies  may 
be  compared  among  themselves.  For  if  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  %vith  which 
the  cycloid  is  described  within  the  globe  is  supposed  equal  to  the  semidiameter 
of  the  globe,  the  cycloid  vnW  become  a  right  line  passing  through  the  centre  of 
the  globe,  and  the  oscillation  will  be  changed  into  a  descent  and  subsequent 
ascent  in  that  right  line.  Hence  there  is  given  both  the  time  of  the  descent  from 
any  place  to  the  centre,  and  the  time  equal  to  it  in  which  the  body  revolving 
uniformly  about  the  centre  of  the  globe  at  any  distance  describes  an  arc  of  a 
quadrant.  For  this  time  (by  Case  2)  is  to  the  time  of  half  the  oscillation  in  any 

AR 

cycloid  QRS  as  1  to 

Cor.  II.  Hence  also  follow  what  Sir  Christopher  Wren  and  Mr.  Huygens 
have  discovered  concerning  the  common  cycloid.  For  if  the  diameter  of  the 
globe  be  infinitely  increased,  its  spherical  surface  will  be  changed  into  a  plane, 
and  the  centripetal  force  mil  act  uniformly  in  the  direction  of  lines  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  that  plane,  and  our  cycloid  mil  become  the  same  with  the  common 
cycloid.  But  in  that  case  the  length  of  the  arc  of  the  cycloid  between  that  plane 


108  Mathematical  Principles 

and  the  describing  point  Mill  become  equal  to  four  times  the  versed  sine  of  half 
the  arc  of  the  wheel  between  the  same  plane  and  the  describing  point,  as  was 
discovered  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren.  And  a  pendulum  between  two  such  cy¬ 
cloids  will  oscillate  in  a  similar  and  equal  cycloid  in  equal  times,  as  Mr.  Huy¬ 
gens  demonstrated.  The  descent  of  heavy  bodies  also  in  the  time  of  one  oscil¬ 
lation  will  be  the  same  as  Mr.  Huygens  exhibited. 

The  Propositions  here  demonstrated  are  adapted  to  the  true  constitution  of 
the  earth,  so  far  as  wheels  moving  in  any  of  its  great  circles  will  describe,  by  the 
motions  of  nails  fixed  in  their  perimeters,  cycloids  without  the  globe;  and 
pendulums,  in  mines  and  deep  caverns  of  the  earth,  must  oscillate  in  cycloids 
MTthin  the  globe,  that  those  oscillations  may  be  performed  in  equal  times.  For 
gravity  (as  will  be  shown  in  the  third  book)  decreases  in  its  progress  from  the 
surface  of  the  earth;  upwards  as  the  square  root  of  the  distances  from  the 
centre  of  the  earth;  downwards  as  these  distances. 


Proposition  53.  Problem  35 

Granting  the  quadratures  of  curvilinear  figures,  it  is  required  to  find  the  forces  with 
which  bodies  moving  in  given  curved  lines  may  always  -perform  their  oscillations  in 
equal  times. 

Let  the  body  T  oscillate  in  any  curved  line  STRQ,  whose  axis  is  AR  passing 
through  the  centre  of  force  C.  Draw  TX  touching  that  curve  in  any  place  of 
the  body  T,  and  in  that  tangent  TX  take  TY 
equal  to  the  arc  TR.  The  length  of  that  arc  is 
known  from  the  common  methods  used  for  the 
quadratures  of  figures.  From  the  point  Y  draw 
the  right  line  YZ  perpendicular  to  the  tangent. 

Draw  CT  meeting  YZ  in  Z,  and  the  centripetal 
force  will  be  proportional  to  the  right  line  TZ. 

Q.E.I. 

For  if  the  force  with  which  the  body  is  at¬ 
tracted  from  T  towards  C  be  expressed  by  the 
right  line  TZ  taken  proportional  to  it,  that  force 
will  be  resolved  into  two  forces  TY,  YZ,  of  which 
YZ,  drawing  the  body  in  the  direction  of  the 
length  of  the  thread  PT,  does  not  at  all  change 
its  motion;  whereas  the  other  force  TY  directly 
accelerates  or  retards  its  motion  in  the  curve 
STRQ.  Therefore  since  that  force  is  as  the 
space  to  be  described  TR,  the  accelerations  or 
retardations  of  the  body  in  describing  two  pro¬ 
portional  parts  (a  greater  and  a  less)  of  two  oscillations,  ^vill  be  always  as  those 
parts,  and  therefore  will  cause  those  parts  to  be  described  together.  But  bodies 
which  continually  describe  in  the  same  time  parts  proportional  to  the  whole, 
wll  describe  the  whole  in  the  same  time.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  body  T,  hanging  by  a  rectilinear  thread  AT  from  the 
centre  A,  describe  the  circular  arc  STRQ,  and  in  the  meantime  be  acted  on  by 
any  force  tending  downwards  with  parallel  directions,  which  is  to  the  uniform 
force  of  gravity  as  the  arc  TR  to  its  sine  TN,  the  times  of  the  several  oscilla¬ 
tions  mil  be  equal.  For  because  TZ,  AR  are  parallel,  the  triangles  ATN,  ZTY 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  109 

are  similar;  and  therefore TZ  ^^ill  be  to  AT  as  TY  to  TN ; 
that  is,  if  the  uniform  force  of  gravity  be  expressed  by 
the  given  length  AT,  the  force  TZ,  by  which  the  oscil¬ 
lations  become  isochronous,  vill  be  to  the  force  of  grav¬ 
ity  AT,  as  the  arc  TR  equal  to  TY  is  to  TN  the  sine  of 
that  arc. 

Cor.  II.  And  therefore  in  clocks,  if  forces  are  im¬ 
pressed  by  some  machine  upon  the  pendulum  which  con¬ 
tinues  the  motion,  and  so  compounded  vdth  the  force  of 
gravity  that  the  whole  force  tending  do vm wards  vdll  be 
always  as  a  line  which  is  obtained  by  dividing  the  product  of  the  arc  TR 
and  the  radius  AR,  by  the  sine  TN,  then  all  the  oscillations  will  become 
isochronous. 

Proposition  54.  Problem  36 

Granting  the  quadratures  of  curvilinear  figures,  it  is  required  to  find  the  times  in 
which  bodies  by  means  of  any  centripetal  force  will  descend  or  ascend  in  any  curved 
lines  in  a  plane  passing  through  the  centre  of  force. 

Let  the  body  descend  from  any  place  S,  and  move  in  any  curve  ST^R  given 
in  a  plane  passing  through  the  centre  of  force  C.  Join  CS,  and  let  it  be  di\dded 
into  innumerable  equal  parts,  and  let  T)d  be  one 
of  those  parts.  From  the  centre  C,  with  the  radii  p: 

CD,  Cd,  let  the  circles  DT,  dt  be  described,  meeting 
the  curved  line  ST^R  in  T  and  t.  And  because  the 
law  of  centripetal  force  is  given,  and  also  the  alti¬ 
tude  CS  from  which  the  body  at  first  fell,  there 
vdll  be  given  the  velocity  of  the  body  in  any  other 
altitude  CT  (by  Prop.  39).  But  the  time  in  which 
the  body  describes  the  short  line  T^  is  as  the  length 
of  that  short  line,  that  is,  directly  as  the  secant 
of  the  angle  ^TC  and  inversely  as  the  velocity. 

Let  the  ordinate  DN,  proportional  to  this  time, 
be  made  perpendicular  to  the  right  fine  CS  at  the 
point  D,  and  because  Dd  is  given,  the  rectangle 
Dd  •  DN,  that  is,  the  area  DNTirf,  vdll  be  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  same  time.  Therefore  if  PNn  be  a 
curved  line  which  the  point  N  continually  touches,  and  its  asymptote  be  the 
right  line  SQ  standing  upon  the  line  CS  at  right  angles,  the  area  SQPND  will 
be  proportional  to  the  time  in  which  the  body  in  its  descent  hath  described  the 
line  ST;  and  therefore  that  area  being  found,  the  time  is  also  given.  q.e.i. 

Proposition  55.  Theorem  19 

If  a  body  move  in  any  curved  surface,  whose  axis  passes  through  the  centre  offeree, 
and  from  the  body  a  perpendicular  be  let  fall  upon  the  axis;  and  a  line  parallel  and 
equal  thereto  be  drawn  from  any  given  point  of  the  axis:  I  say,  that  this  parallel  line 
will  describe  an  area  proportional  to  the  time. 

Let  BKL  be  a  curved  surface,  T  a  body  revolving  in  it,  STR  a  curve  which 
the  body  describes  in  the  same,  S  the  beginning  of  the  curve,  OIMK  the  axis  of 
the  curved  surface,  TN  a  right  line  let  fall  perpendicularly  from  the  body  to  the 
axis;  OP  a  line  parallel  and  equal  thereto  drawn  from  the  given  point  0  in  the 


Mathematical  Principles 


110 

axis;  AP  the  path  described  by  the  point 
P  in  the  plane  AOP  in  which  the  re¬ 
volving  line  OP  is  found;  A  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  that  path  answering  to  the 
point  S;  TC  a  right  line  dravTi  from  the 
body  to  the  centre;  TG  a  part  thereof 
proportional  to  the  centripetal  force  vdth 
which  the  body  tends  towards  the  centre 
C;  TM  a  right  line  perpendicular  to  the 
curved  surface;  TI  a  part  thereof  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  force  of  pressure  vdth 
which  the  body  urges  the  surface,  and 
therefore  with  which  it  is  again  repelled 
by  the  surface  towards  M ;  PTF  a  right 
line  parallel  to  the  axis  and  passing 
through  the  body,  and  GF,  IH  right 
lines  let  fall  perpendicularly  from  the 
points  G  and  I  upon  that  parallel  PHTF.  I  say,  now,  that  the  area  AOP,  de¬ 
scribed  by  the  radius  OP  from  the  beginning  of  the  motion,  is  proportional  to 
the  time.  For  the  force  TG  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws  of  Motion)  is  resolved  into 
the  forces  TF,  FG;  and  the  force  TI  into  the  forces  TH,  HI;  but  the  forces 
TF,  TH,  acting  in  the  direction  of  the  line  PF  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
AOP,  introduce  no  change  in  the  motion  of  the  body  but  in  a  direction  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  that  plane.  Therefore  its  motion,  so  far  as  it  hath  the  same  direction 
mth  the  position  of  the  plane,  that  is,  the  motion  of  the  point  P,  by  which  the 
projection  AP  of  the  curve  is  described  in  that  plane,  is  the  same  as  if  the  forces 
TF,  TH  were  taken  away,  and  the  body  were  acted  on  by  the  forces  FG,  HI 
alone;  that  is,  the  same  as  if  the  body  were  to  describe  in  the  plane  AOP  the 
curve  AP  by  means  of  a  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  centre  0,  and  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  forces  FG  and  HI.  But  wdth  such  a  force  as  that  (by  Prop.l) 
the  area  AOP  vdll  be  described  proportional  to  the  time.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  By  the  same  reasoning,  if  a  body,  acted  on  by  forces  tending  to  two  or 
more  centres  in  the  same  given  right  line  CO,  should  describe  in  a  free  space 
any  curved  line  ST,  the  area  AOP  would  be  always  proportional  to  the  time. 

Proposition  56.  Problem  37 

Granting  the  quadratures  of  curvilinear  figures,  and  supposing  that  there  are  given 
both  the  law  of  centripetal  force  tending  to  a  given  centre,  and  the  curved  surface 
whose  axis  passes  through  that  centre;  it  is  required  to  find  the  curve  which  a  body 
will  describe  in  that  surface,  when  going  off  from  a  given  place  with  a  given  velocity, 
and  in  a  given  direction  in  that  surface. 

The  last  construction  remaining,  let  the  body  T  go  from  the  given  place  S, 
in  the  direction  of  a  line  given  by  position,  and  turn  into  the  curve  sought  STR, 
whose  orthographic  projection  in  the  plane  BDO  is  AP.  And  from  the  given 
velocity  of  the  body  in  the  altitude  SC,  its  velocity  in  any  other  altitude  TC 
will  be  also  given.  With  that  velocity,  in  a  given  moment  of  time,  let  the  body 
describe  the  segment  T^  of  its  curve  and  let  Pp  be  the  projection  of  that  seg¬ 
ment  described  in  the  plane  AOP.  .Join  Op,  and  a  little  circle  being  described 
upon  the  curved  surface  about  the  centre  T  with  the  radius  Ti,  let  the  pro- 


Ill 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

jection  of  that  little  circle  in  the  plane 
AOP  be  the  ellipse  pQ.  And  because  the 
magnitude  of  that  little  circle  Tt,  and 
TN  or  PO  its  distance  from  the  axis  CO 
is  also  given,  the  ellipse  pQ  vdll  be  given 
both  in  kind  and  magnitude,  as  also  its 
position  to  the  right  line  PO.  And  since 
the  area  POp  is  proportional  to  the  time, 
and  therefore  given  because  the  time  is 
given,  the  angle  POp  vdll  be  given.  And 
thence  vdll  be  given  p  the  common  in¬ 
tersection  of  the  ellipse  and  the  right 
line  Op,  together  vdth  the  angle  OPp,  in 
which  the  projection  APp  of  the  curve 
cuts  the  line  OP.  But  from  thence  (by 
comparing  Prop.  41,  vdth  its  Cor.  ii)  the 
manner  of  determining  the  curve  APp 
easily  appears.  Then  from  the  several  points  P  of  that  projection  erecting  to 
the  plane  AOP,  the  perpendiculars  PT  meeting  the  curved  surface  in  T,  there 
^vill  be  given  the  several  points  T  of  the  curve.  q.e.i. 

SECTION  XI 

The  motions  of  bodies  tending  to  each  other  with  centripetal  forces 

I  have  hitherto  been  treating  of  the  attractions  of  bodies  towards  an  im¬ 
movable  centre;  though  very  probably  there  is  no  such  thing  existent  in  na¬ 
ture.  For  attractions  are  made  towards  bodies,  and  the  actions  of  the  bodies 
attracted  and  attracting  are  always  reciprocal  and  equal,  by  Law  iii;  so  that 
if  there  are  two  bodies,  neither  the  attracted  nor  the  attracting  body  is  truly 
at  rest,  but  both  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  Laws  of  Motion),  being  as  it  were  mutually 
attracted,  revolve  about  a  common  centre  of  gravity.  And  if  there  be  more 
bodies,  which  either  are  attracted  by  one  body,  which  is  attracted  by  them 
again,  or  which  all  attract  each  other  mutually,  these  bodies  mil  be  so  moved 
among  themselves,  that  their  common  centre  of  gravity  mil  either  be  at  rest, 
or  move  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line.  I  shall  therefore  at  present  go  on  to 
treat  of  the  motion  of  bodies  attracting  each  other;  considering  the  centripetal 
forces  as  attractions;  though  perhaps  in  a  physical  strictness  they  may  more 
truly  be  called  impulses.  But  these  Propositions  are  to  be  considered  as  purely 
mathematical;  and  therefore,  laying  aside  all  physical  considerations,  I  make 
use  of  a  familiar  way  of  speaking,  to  make  myself  the  more  easily  understood 
by  a  mathematical  reader. 

Proposition  57.  Theorem  20 

Two  bodies  attracting  each  other  mutually  describe  similar  figures  about  their  com¬ 
mon  centre  of  gravity,  and  about  each  other  mutually. 

For  the  distances  of  the  bodies  from  their  common  centre  of  gravity  are 
inversely  as  the  bodies;  and  therefore  in  a  given  ratio  to  each  other;  and  thence, 
by  composition  of  ratios,  in  a  given  ratio  to  the  whole  distance  between  the 


112  Mathematical  Principles 

bodies.  Now  these  distances  are  carried  round  their  common  extremity  with  an 
uniform  angular  motion,  because  lying  in  the  same  right  line  they  never  change 
their  inclination  to  each  other.  But  right  lines  that  are  in  a  given  ratio  to  each 
other,  and  are  carried  round  their  extremities  with  an  uniform  angular  motion, 
describe  upon  planes,  which  either  rest  together  with  them,  or  are  moved  ^vith 
any  motion  not  angular,  figures  entirely  similar  round  those  extremities.  There¬ 
fore  the  figures  described  by  the  revolution  of  these  distances  are  similar,  q.e.d. 

Proposition  58.  Theorem  21 

If  two  bodies  attract  each  other  with  forces  of  any  kind,  and  revolve  about  the  com¬ 
mon  centre  of  gravity:  I  say,  that,  by  the  same  forces,  there  may  be  described  round 
either  body  unmoved  a  figure  similar  and  equal  to  the  figures  which  the  bodies  so 
moving  describe  round  each  other. 

Let  the  bodies  S  and  P  revolve  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity  C, 
proceeding  from  S  to  T,  and  from  P  to  Q.  From  the  given  point  s  let  there  be 
continually  drawn  sp,  sq,  equal  and  parallel  to  SP,  TQ;  and  the  curve  pqv, 
which  the  point  p  describes  in  its  revolution  round  the  fixed  point  s,  will  be 


similar  and  equal  to  the  curves  which  the  bodies  S  and  P  describe  about  each 
other;  and  therefore,  by  Theor.  20,  similar  to  the  curves  ST  and  PQV  which  the 
same  bodies  describe  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity  C;  and  that  be¬ 
cause  the  proportions  of  the  lines  SC,  CP,  and  SP  or  sp,  to  each  other,  are  given. 

Case  1 .  The  common  centre  of  gravity  C  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  Laws  of  Motion) 
is  either  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly  in  a  right  line.  Let  us  first  suppose  it  at 
rest,  and  in  s  and  p  let  there  be  placed  two  bodies,  one  immovable  in  s,  the 
other  movable  in  p,  similar  and  equal  to  the  bodies  S  and  P.  Then  let  the  right 
lines  PR  and  pr  touch  the  curves  PQ  and  pq  in  P  and  p,  and  produce  CQ  and 
sq  to  R  and  r.  And  because  the  figures  CPRQ,  sprq  are  similar,  RQ  Avill  be  to 
rq  as  CP  to  sp,  and  therefore  in  a  given  ratio.  Hence  if  the  force  mth  which  the 
body  P  is  attracted  towards  the  body  S,  and  by  consequence  towards  the 
intermediate  centre  C,  were  to  the  force  vdth  which  the  body  p  is  attracted 
towards  the  centre  s,  in  the  same  given  ratio,  these  forces  would  in  equal  times 
attract  the  bodies  from  the  tangents  PR,  pr  to  the  arcs  PQ,  pq,  through  the 
intervals  proportional  to  them  RQ,  rq;  and  therefore  this  last  force  (tending 
to  s)  would  make  the  body  p  revolve  in  the  curve  pqv,  which  would  become 
similar  to  the  curve  PQV,  in  which  the  first  force  obliges  the  body  P  to  revolve; 
and  their  revolutions  would  be  completed  in  the  same  times.  But  because  those 
forces  are  not  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  CP  to  sp,  but  (by  reason  of  the  simi¬ 
larity  and  equality  of  the  bodies  S  and  s,  P  and  p,  and  the  equality  of  the  dis¬ 
tances  SP,  sp)  mutually  equal,  the  bodies  in  equal  times  will  be  equally  drawn 
from  the  tangents;  and  therefore  that  the  body  p  may  be  attracted  through  the 
greater  interval  rq,  there  is  required  a  greater  time,  which  ^vill  vary  as  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


113 


square  root  of  the  intervals;  because,  by  Lem.  10,  the  spaces  described  at  the 
beginning  of  the  motion  are  as  the  square  of  the  times.  Suppose,  then,  the 
velocity  of  the  body  p  to  be  to  the  velocity  of  the  body  P  as  the  square  root  of 
the  ratio  of  the  distance  sp  to  the  distance  CP,  so  that  the  arcs  pq,  PQ,  which 
are  in  a  simple  proportion  to  each  other,  may  be  described  in  times  that  are 
as  the  square  root  of  the  distances;  and  the  bodies  P,  p,  always  attracted  by 
equal  forces,  vdll  describe  round  the  fixed  centres  C  and  s  similar  figures  PQV, 
pqv,  the  latter  of  which  pqv  is  similar  and  equal  to  the  figure  which  the  body 
P  describes  round  the  movable  body  S.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Suppose  now  that  the  common  centre  of  gravity,  together  with  the 
space  in  which  the  bodies  are  moved  among  themselves,  proceeds  uniformly 
in  a  right  line;  and  (by  Cor.  vi  of  the  Laws  of  Motion)  all  the  motions  in  this 
space  will  be  performed  in  the  same  manner  as  before;  and  therefore  the  bodies 
will  describe  about  each  other  the  same  figures  as  before,  which  will  be  there¬ 
fore  similar  and  equal  to  the  figure  pqv.  q.e.d. 

Cor  I.  Hence  two  bodies  attracting  each  other  with  forces  proportional  to 
their  distance,  describe  (by  Prop.  10),  both  round  their  common  centre  of 
gravity,  and  round  each  other,  concentric  ellipses;  and,  conversely,  if  such 
figures  are  described,  the  forces  are  proportional  to  the  distances. 

Cor.  II.  And  two  bodies,  whose  forces  are  inversely  proportional  to  the 
square  of  their  distance,  describe  (by  Props.  11,  12,  13),  both  round  their  com¬ 
mon  centre  of  gravity,  and  round  each  other,  conic  sections  having  their  focus 
in  the  centre  about  which  the  figures  are  described.  And,  conversely,  if  such 
figures  are  described,  the  centripetal  forces  are  inversely  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  distance. 

Cor.  III.  Any  two  bodies  revolving  round  their  common  centre  of  gravity 
describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times,  by  radii  drawn  both  to  that  centre 
and  to  each  other. 

Proposition  59.  Theorem  22 

The  periodic  time  of  two  bodies  S  and  P  revolving  round  their  common  centre  of 
gravity  C,  is  to  the  periodic  time  of  one  of  the  bodies  P  revolving  round  the  other  S 
remaining  fixed,  and  describing  a  figure  similar  and  equal  to  those  which  the  bodies 
describe  about  each  other,  as  VS  is  to  V(S+P). 

For,  by  the  demonstration  of  the  last  Proposition,  the  times  in  which  any 
similar  arcs  PQ  and  pq  are  described  are  as  VCP  is  to  VSP,  or  \/sp,  that  is, 
as  VS  is  to  V(S+P).  And  by  composition  of  ratios,  the  sums  of  the  times  in 
which  all  the  similar  arcs  PQ  and  pq  are  described,  that  is,  the  whole  times  in 
which  the  whole  similar  figures  are  described,  are  in  the  same  ratio,  VS  to 

V(S-|-P).  Proposition  60.  Theorem  23  Q-e.d. 


If  two  bodies  S  and  P,  attracting  each  other  with  forces  inversely  proportional  to 
the  square  of  their  distance,  revolve  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity:  I  say, 
that  the  principal  axis  of  the  ellipse  which  either  of  the  bodies,  as  P,  describes  by 
this  motion  about  the  other  S,  will  be  to  the  principal  axis  of  the  ellipse,  which  the 
same  body  P  may  describe  in  the  same  periodic  time  about  the  other  body  S  fixed, 
as  the  sum  of  the  two  bodies  S-|-P  the  first  of  two  mean  proportionals  between 
that  sum  and  the  other  body  S. 

For  if  the  ellipses  described  were  equal  to  each  other,  their  periodic  times  by 
the  last  Theorem  would  be  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  body  S  to  the 


114  Mathematical  Principles 

sum  of  the  bodies  S  +  P.  Let  the  periodic  time  in  the  latter  ellipse  be  diminished 
in  that  ratio,  and  the  periodic  times  will  become  equal;  but,  by  Prop,  15,  the 
principal  axis  of  the  ellipse  will  be  diminished  in  a  ratio  which  is  the  ^th  poAver 
of  the  former  ratio;  that  is,  in  a  ratio  to  which  the  ratio  of  S  to  S+P  is  the  cube, 
and  therefore  that  axis  vdW  be  to  the  principal  axis  of  the  other  ellipse  as  the 
first  of  two  mean  proportionals  betAveen  S  +  P  and  S  to  S+P.  And  inversely  the 
principal  axis  of  the  ellipse  described  about  the  movable  body  Avill  be  to  the 
principal  axis  of  that  described  round  the  immovable  as  S+P  to  the  first  of 
tAA'o  mean  proportionals  betAA'een  S+P  and  S.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  61.  Theorem  24 

If  two  bodies  attracting  each  other  with  any  kind  of  forces,  and  not  otherwise 
agitated  or  obstructed,  are  moved  in  any  manner  whatsoever,  those  motions  will  be 
the  same  as  if  they  did  not  at  all  attract  each  other,  but  were  both  attracted  with  the 
same  forces  by  a  third  body  placed  in  their  common  centre  of  gravity;  and  the  law 
of  the  attracting  forces  will  be  the  same  in  respect  of  the  distance  of  the  bodies  from 
the  common  centre,  as  in  respect  of  the  distance  between  the  two  bodies. 

For  those  forces  Avith  Ax+ich  the  bodies  attract  each  other,  by  tending  to  the 
bodies,  tend  also  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  lying  directly  betAveen  them; 
and  therefore  are  the  same  as  if  they  proceeded  from  an  intermediate  body. 

q.e.d. 

And  because  there  is  given  the  ratio  of  the  distance  of  either  body  from  that 
common  centre  to  the  distance  betAveen  the  tAvo  bodies,  there  is  given,  of 
course,  the  ratio  of  any  poAver  of  one  distance  to  the  same  poAA^er  of  the  other 
distance;  and  also  the  ratio  of  any  quantity  derived  in  any  manner  from  one  of 
the  distances  compounded  in  any  manner  Avith  given  quantities,  to  another 
quantity  derived  in  like  manner  from  the  other  distance,  and  as  many  given 
quantities  having  that  given  ratio  of  the  distances  to  the  first.  Therefore  if  the 
force  AATth  AA'hich  one  body  is  attracted  by  another  be  directly  or  inversely  as 
the  distance  of  the  bodies  from  each  other,  or  as  any  poAver  of  that  distance; 
or,  lastly,  as  any  quantity  derived  after  any  manner  from  that  distance  com¬ 
pounded  Avith  given  quantities;  then  aaoU  the  same  force  AAuth  Avhich  the  same 
body  is  attracted  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  be  in  like  manner  directly 
or  inversely  as  the  distance  of  the  attracted  body  from  the  common  centre,  or 
as  any  poAver  of  that  distance;  or,  lastly,  as  a  quantity  derived  in  like  sort  from 
that  distance  compounded  Axdth  analogous  given  quantities.  That  is,  the  law 
of  attracting  force  Avill  be  the  same  Avith  respect  to  both  distances.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  62.  Problem  38 

To  determine  the  motions  of  two  bodies  which  attract  each  other  with  forces  inversely 
proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  distance  between  them,  and  are  let  fall  from  given 
places. 

The  bodies,  by  the  last  Theorem,  aatU  be  moved  in  the  same  manner  as  if 
they  Avere  attracted  by  a  third  placed  in  the  common  centre  of  their  gravity; 
and  by  the  hypothesis  that  centre  aatII  be  fixed  at  the  beginning  of  their  motion, 
and  therefore  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  Lravs  of  Motion)  Avill  be  ahvays  fixed.  The 
motions  of  the  bodies  are  therefore  to  be  determined  (by  Prob.  25)  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  they  Ax^ere  impelled  by  forces  tending  to  that  centre;  and  then  we 
shall  have  the  motions  of  the  bodies  attracting  each  other.  q.e.i. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


115 


Proposition  63.  Problem  39 

To  determine  the  motions  of  two  bodies  attracting  each  other  with  forces  inversely 
proportional  to  the  squares  of  their  distance,  and  going  off  from  given  places  in 
given  directions  with  given  velocities. 

The  motions  of  the  bodies  at  the  beginning  being  given,  there  is  given  also 
the  uniform  motion  of  the  common  centre  of  gravity,  and  the  motion  of  the 
space  which  moves  along  with  this  centre  uniformly  in  a  right  line,  and  also 
the  very  first, or  beginning  motions  of  the  bodies  in  respect  of  this  space.  Then 
(by  Cor.  v  of  the  Laws,  and  the  last  Theorem)  the  subsequent  motions  will  be 
performed  in  the  same  manner  in  that  space,  as  if  that  space  together  with  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  were  at  rest,  and  as  if  the  bodies  did  not  attract  each 
other,  but  were  attracted  by  a  third  body  placed  in  that  centre.  The  motion 
therefore  in  this  movable  space  of  each  body  going  off  from  a  given  place,  in 
a  given  direction,  vith  a  given  velocity,  and  acted  upon  by  a  centripetal  force 
tending  to  that  centre,  is  to  be  determined  by  Probs.  9  and  26.  and  at  the  same 
time  vdll  be  obtained  the  motion  of  the  other  round  the  same  centre.  With 
this  motion  compound  the  uniform  progressive  motion  of  the  entire  system  of 
the  space  and  the  bodies  revolving  in  it,  and  there  will  be  obtained  the  absolute 
motion  of  the  bodies  in  immovable  space.  q.e.i. 

Proposition  64.  Problem  40 

Supposing  forces  with  which  bodies  attract  each  other  to  increase  in  a  simple  ratio 
of  their  distances  from  the  centres;  it  is  required  to  find  the  motions  of  several  bodies 
among  themselves. 

Suppose  the  first  two  bodies  T  and  L  to  have  their  common  centre  of  gravity 
in  D.  These,  by  Cor.  i,  Theor.  21,  mil  describe  ellipses  having  their  centres  in 
D,  the  magnitudes  of  which  ellipses  are  knovm  by  Prob.  5. 

Let  now  a  third  body  S  attract  the  two  former  T  and  L  mth  the  accelerative 
forces  ST,  SL,  and  let  it  be  attracted  again  by  them.  The  force  ST  (by  Cor.  ii 
of  the  Laws  of  Motion)  is  resolved  into  the  forces  SD,  DT;  and  the  force  SL 
into  the  forces  SD  and  DL.  Now  the  forces  DT,  DL,  which  are  as  their  sum 

TL,  and  therefore  as  the  accelerative 
forces  -with  which  the  bodies  T  and  L  at¬ 
tract  each  other,  added  to  the  forces  of  the 
bodies  T  and  L,  the  first  to  the  first,  and 
the  last  to  the  last,  compose  forces  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  distances  DT  and  DL  as  be¬ 
fore,  but  only  greater  than  those  former 
forces;  and  therefore  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  10, 
and  Cor.  i  and  viii.  Prop.  4)  they  vill 
cause  those  bodies  to  describe  ellipses  as  before,  but  with  a  swifter  motion. 
The  remaining  accelerative  forces  SD  and  DL,  by  the  motive  forces  SD-T 
and  SD  •  L,  which  are  as  the  bodies  attracting  those  bodies  equally  and  in  the 
direction  of  the  lines  TI,  LK  parallel  to  DS,  do  not  at  all  change  their  situations 
mth  respect  to  one  another,  but  cause  them  equally  to  approach  to  the  line 
IK;  which  must  be  imagined  drawn  through  the  middle  of  the  body  S,  and 
perpendicular  to  the  line  DS.  But  that  approach  to  the  line  IK  will  be  hindered 
by  causing  the  system  of  the  bodies  T  and  L  on  one  side,  and  the  body  S  on  the 


116  Mathematical  Principles 

other.  NN-ith  proper  velocities,  to  revolve  round  the  common  centre  of  gravity 
C.  With  such  a  motion  the  body  S,  because  the  sum  of  the  motive  forces 
SD-T  and  SD-L  is  proportional  to  the  distance  CS,  tends  to  the  centre  C, 
and  will  describe  an  ellipse  round  that  centre;  and  the  point  D,  because  the 
lines  CS  and  CD  are  proportional,  will  describe  a  like  ellipse  over  against  it. 
But  the  bodies  T  and  L,  attracted  by  the  motive  forces  SD-T  and  SD-L,  the 
first  by  the  first,  and  the  last  by  the  last,  equally  and  in  the  direction  of  the 
parallel  lines  TI  and  LK,  as  was  said  before,  will  (by  Cor.  v  and  vi  of  the  Laws 
of  Motion)  continue  to  describe  their  ellipses  round  the  movable  centre  D,  as 
before.  q.e.i. 

Let  there  be  added  a  fourth  body  V,  and,  by  the  like  reasoning,  it  will  be 
demonstrated  that  this  body  and  the  point  C  vnll  describe  ellipses  about  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  B;  the  motions  of  the  bodies  T,  L,  and  S  round  the 
centres  D  and  C  remaining  the  same  as  before,  but  accelerated.  And  by  the 
same  method  one  may  add  yet  more  bodies  at  pleasure.  q.e.i. 

This  would  be  the  case,  though  the  bodies  T  and  L  should  attract  each  other 
with  accelerative  forces  greater  or  less  than  those  with  which  they  attract  the 
other  bodies  in  proportion  to  their  distance.  Let  all  the  accelerative  attractions 
be  to  each  other  as  the  distances  multiplied  into  the  attracting  bodies;  and 
from  what  has  gone  before  it  will  easily  be  concluded  that  all  the  bodies  will 
describe  different  ellipses  with  ecpial  periodic  times  about  their  common  centre 
of  gravity  B,  in  an  immovable  plane.  q.e.i. 

Proposition  65.  Theorem  25 

Bodies,  whose  forces  decrease  as  the  square  of  their  distances  from  their  centres, 
may  move  among  themselves  in  ellipses;  and  by  radii  drawn  to  the  foci  may  describe 
areas  very  nearly  proportional  to  the  times. 

In  the  last  Proposition  we  demonstrated  that  case  in  which  the  motions  will 
be  performed  exactly  in  ellipses.  The  more  distant  the  law^  of  the  forces  is 
from  the  law'  in  that  case,  the  more  will  the  bodies  disturb  each  other’s  motions; 
neither  is  it  possible  that  bodies  attracting  each  other  according  to  the  law 
supposed  in  this  Proposition  should  move  exactly  in  ellipses,  unless  by  keeping 
a  certain  proportion  of  distances  from  each  other.  How'ever,  in  the  following 
cases  the  orbits  Avill  not  much  differ  from  ellipses. 

Case  1.  Imagine  several  lesser  bodies  to  revolve  about  some  very  great  one 
at  different  distances  from  it,  and  suppose  absolute  forces  tending  to  every  one 
of  the  bodies  proportional  to  each.  And  because  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  Laws)  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  of  them  all  is  either  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly 
forw'ards  in  a  right  line,  suppose  the  lesser  bodies  so  small  that  the  great  body 
may  be  never  at  a  sensible  distance  from  that  centre;  and  then  the  great  body 
will,  without  any  sensible  error,  be  either  at  rest,  or  move  uniformly  forwards 
in  a  right  line ;  and  the  lesser  will  revolve  about  that  great  one  in  ellipses,  and 
by  radii  drawn  thereto  will  describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times;  if  we  ex¬ 
cept  the  errors  that  may  be  introduced  by  the  receding  of  the  great  body  from 
the  common  centre  of  gravity,  or  by  the  actions  of  the  lesser  bodies  upon  each 
other.  But  the  lesser  bodies  may  be  so  far  diminished,  as  that  this  recess  and 
the  actions  of  the  bodies  on  each  other  may  become  less  than  any  assignable; 
and  therefore  so  as  that  the  orbits  may  become  ellipses,  and  the  areas  answer 
to  the  times,  without  any  error  that  is  not  less  than  any  assignable.  q.e.o. 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  117 

Case  2.  Let  us  imagine  a  system  of  lesser  bodies  revolving  about  a  very 
great  one  in  the  manner  just  described,  or  any  other  system  of  two  bodies 
revolving  about  each  other,  to  be  moving  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line, 
and  in  the  meantime  to  be  impelled  sideways  by  the  force  of  another  vastly 
greater  body  situate  at  a  great  distance.  And  because  the  equal  accelerative 
forces  vith  which  the  bodies  are  impelled  in  parallel  directions  do  not  change 
the  situation  of  the  bodies  vith  respect  to  each  other,  but  only  oblige  the  whole 
system  to  change  its  place  while  the  parts  still  retain  their  motions  among 
themselves,  it  is  manifest  that  no  change  in  those  motions  of  the  attracted 
bodies  can  arise  from  their  attractions  towards  the  greater,  unless  by  the  in¬ 
equality  of  the  accelerative  attractions,  or  by  the  inclinations  of  the  lines  to¬ 
wards  each  other,  in  whose  directions  the  attractions  are  made.  Suppose, 
therefore,  all  the  accelerative  attractions  made  towards  the  great  body  to  be 
among  themselves  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances;  and  then,  by  in¬ 
creasing  the  distance  of  the  great  body  till  the  differences  of  the  right  lines 
drawn  from  that  to  the  others  in  respect  of  their  length,  and  the  inclinations 
of  those  lines  to  each  other,  be  less  than  any  given,  the  motions  of  the  parts  of 
the  system  vdll  continue  without  errors  that  are  not  less  than  any  given.  And 
because,  by  the  small  distance  of  those  parts  from  each  other,  the  whole  sys¬ 
tem  is  attracted  as  if  it  were  but  one  body,  it  vdll  therefore  be  moved  by  this 
attraction  as  if  it  were  one  body;  that  is,  its  centre  of  gravity  vdll  describe 
about  the  great  body  one  of  the  conic  sections  (that  is,  a  parabola  or  hyperbola 
when  the  attraction  is  but  languid  and  an  ellipse  when  it  is  more  vigorous) ;  and 
by  radii  drawn  thereto,  it  vill  describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times,  without 
any  errors  but  those  which  arise  from  the  distances  of  the  parts,  and  these  are 
by  the  supposition  exceedingly  small,  and  maybe  diminished  at  pleasure,  q.e.o. 

By  a  like  reasoning  one  may  proceed  to  more  complicated  cases  in  infinitum. 

Cor.  I.  In  the  second  Case,  the  nearer  the  very  great  body  approaches  to 
the  system  of  two  or  more  revolving  bodies,  the  greater  will  the  perturbation 
be  of  the  motions  of  the  parts  of  the  system  among  themselves;  because  the 
inclinations  of  the  lines  drawn  from  that  great  body  to  those  parts  become 
greater;  and  the  inequality  of  the  proportion  is  also  greater. 

Cor.  II.  But  the  perturbation  vdll  be  greatest  of  all,  if  we  suppose  the  accel¬ 
erative  attractions  of  the  parts  of  the  system  towards  the  greatest  body  of  all 
are  not  to  each  other  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  that  great 
body;  especially  if  the  inequality  of  this  proportion  be  greater  than  the  in¬ 
equality  of  the  proportion  of  the  distances  from  the  great  body.  For  if  the  ac¬ 
celerative  force,  acting  in  parallel  directions  and  equally,  causes  no  perturba¬ 
tion  in  the  motions  of  the  parts  of  the  system,  it  must  of  course,  when  it  acts 
unequally,  cause  a  perturbation  somewhere,  which  vill  be  greater  or  less  as 
the  inequality  is  greater  or  less.  The  excess  of  the  greater  impulses  acting  upon 
some  bodies,  and  not  acting  upon  others,  must  necessarily  change  their  situa¬ 
tion  among  themselves.  And  this  perturbation,  added  to  the  perturbation 
arising  from  the  inequality  and  inclination  of  the  lines,  makes  the  whole  per¬ 
turbation  greater. 

Cor.  III.  Hence  if  the  parts  of  this  system  move  in  ellipses  or  circles  vithout 
any  remarkable  perturbation,  it  is  manifest  that,  if  they  are  at  all  impelled  by 
accelerative  forces  tending  to  any  other  bodies,  the  impulse  is  very  weak,  or 
else  is  impressed  very  near  equally  and  in  parallel  directions  upon  all  of  them. 


118 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  G6.  Theorem  26 

If  three  bodies,  whose  forces  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  distances,  attract  each 
other;  and  the  accelerative  attractions  of  any  two  towards  the  third  be  between  them¬ 
selves  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances;  and  the  two  least  revolve  about  the 
greatest:  I  say,  that  the  interior  of  the  two  revolving  bodies  will,  by  radii  drawn  to 
the  innermost  and  greatest,  describe  round  that  body  areas  more  proportional  to  the 
times,  and  a  figure  more  approaching  to  that  of  an  ellipse  having  its  focus  in  the 
point  of  intersection  of  the  radii,  if  that  great  body  be  agitated  by  those  attractions, 
than  it  would  do  if  that  great  body  were  not  attracted  at  all  by  the  lesser,  but  re¬ 
mained  at  rest;  or  than  it  would  do  if  that  great  body  were  very  much  more  or  very 
much  less  attracted,  or  very  much  more  or  very  much  less  agitated,  by  the  attractions. 

This  appears  plainly  enough  from  the  demonstration  of  the  second  Corollary 
of  the  foregoing  Proposition;  but  it  may  be  made  out  after  this  manner  by  a 
way  of  reasoning  more  distinct  and  more  universally  convincing. 

Case  1.  Let  the  lesser  bodies  P  and  S  revolve  in  the  same  plane  about  the 
greatest  body  T,  the  body  P  describing  the  interior  orbit  PAB,  and  S  the 
exterior  orbit  ESE.  Let  SK  be  the  mean  distance  of  the  bodies  P  and  S;  and 
let  the  accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  P  towards  S,  at  that  mean  distance, 
be  expressed  by  that  line  SK.  Make  SL  to  SK  as  the  square  of  SK  to  the 
square  of  SP,  and  SL  will  be  the  accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  P  towards  S 
at  any  distance  SP.  Join  PT,  and  draw  LM  parallel  to  it  meeting  ST  in  M;  and 


the  attraction  SL  will  be  resolved  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws  of  Motion)  into  the 
attractions  SM,  LM.  And  so  the  body  P  will  be  urged  with  a  threefold  accel¬ 
erative  force.  One  of  these  forces  tends  towards  T,  and  arises  from  the  mutual 
attraction  of  the  bodies  T  and  P.  By  this  force  alone  the  body  P  would  describe 
round  the  body  T,  by  the  radius  PT,  areas  proportional  to  the  times,  and  an 
ellipse  whose  focus  is  in  the  centre  of  the  body  T;  and  this  it  would  do  whether 
the  body  T  remained  unmoved,  or  whether  it  were  agitated  by  that  attraction. 
This  appears  from  Prop.  11,  and  Cor.  ii  and  iii  of  Theor.  21.  The  other  force  is 
that  of  the  attraction  LM,  which,  because  it  tends  from  P  to  T,  will  be  super- 
added  to  and  coincide  with  the  former  force;  and  cause  the  areas  to  be  still 
proportional  to  the  times,  by  Cor.  iii,  Theor.  21.  But  because  it  is  not  inversely 
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  PT,  it  will  compose,  when  added  to 
the  former,  a  force  varying  from  that  proportion;  this  variation  vdll  be  the 
greater  by  as  much  as  the  proportion  of  this  force  to  the  former  is  greater, 
other  things  remaining  the  same.  Therefore,  since  by  Prop.  11,  and  by  Cor.  ii, 
Theor.  21,  the  force  with  which  the  ellipse  is  described  about  the  focus  T  ought 
to  be  directed  to  that  focus,  and  to  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of 
the  distance  PT,  that  compounded  force  varying  from  that  proportion  will 
make  the  orbit  PAB  vary  from  the  figure  of  an  ellipse  that  has  its  focus  in  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  119 

point  T;  and  so  much  the  more  by  as  much  as  the  variation  from  that  propor¬ 
tion  is  greater;  and  in  consequence  by  as  much  as  the  proportion  of  the  second 
force  LM  to  the  first  force  is  greater,  other  things  remaining  the  same.  But  now 
the  third  force  SM,  attracting  the  body  P  in  a  direction  parallel  to  ST,  com¬ 
poses  with  the  other  forces  a  new  force  which  is  no  longer  directed  from  P  to  T; 
and  this  varies  so  much  more  from  this  direction  by  as  much  as  the  proportion 
of  the  third  force  to  the  other  forces  is  greater,  other  things  remaining  the 
same;  and  therefore  causes  the  body  P  to  describe,  by  the  radius  TP,  areas  no 
longer  proportional  to  the  times;  and  therefore  makes  the  variation  from  that 
proportionality  so  much  greater  by  as  much  as  the  proportion  of  this  force  to 
the  others  is  greater.  But  this  third  force  will  increase  the  variation  of  the  orbit 
PAB  from  the  elliptical  figure  before  mentioned  upon  two  accounts;  first,  be¬ 
cause  that  force  is  not  directed  from  P  to  T ;  and,  secondly,  because  it  is  not 
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  PT.  These  things  being 
premised,  it  is  manifest  that  the  areas  are  then  most  nearly  proportional  to  the 
times,  when  that  third  force  is  the  least  possible,  the  rest  preserving  their  former 
quantity;  and  that  the  orbit  PAB  does  then  approach  nearest  to  the  elliptical 
figure  above  mentioned,  when  both  the  second  and  third,  but  especially  the 
third  force,  is  the  least  possible;  the  first  force  remaining  in  its  former  quantity. 

Let  the  accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  T  towards  S  be  expressed  by  the 
line  SN;  then  if  the  accelerative  attractions  SM  and  SN  were  equal,  these, 
attracting  the  bodies  T  and  P  equally  and  in  parallel  directions,  would  not  at 
all  change  their  situation  with  respect  to  each  other.  The  motions  of  the  bodies 
between  themselves  would  be  the  same  in  that  case  as  if  those  attractions  did 
not  act  at  all,  by  Cor.  vi  of  the  Laws  of  Motion.  And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  if  the 
attraction  SN  is  less  than  the  attraction  SM,  it  will  take  away  out  of  the  at¬ 
traction  SM  the  part  SN,  so  that  there  will  remain  only  the  part  (of  the  attrac¬ 
tion)  MN  to  disturb  the  proportionality  of  the  areas  and  times,  and  the  ellip¬ 
tical  figure  of  the  orbit.  And  in  like  manner  if  the  attraction  SN  be  greater 
than  the  attraction  SM,  the  perturbation  of  the  orbit  and  proportion  will  be 
produced  by  the  difference  MN  alone.  After  this  manner  the  attraction  SN 
reduces  always  the  attraction  SM  to  the  attraction  MN,  the  first  and  second 
attractions  remaining  perfectly  unchanged;  and  therefore  the  areas  and  times 
come  then  nearest  to  proportionality,  and  the  orbit  PAB  to  the  above-men¬ 
tioned  elliptical  figure,  when  the  attraction  MN  is  either  none,  or  the  least 
that  is  possible ;  that  is,  when  the  accelerative  attractions  of  the  bodies  P  and 
T  approach  as  near  as  possible  to  equality;  that  is,  w'hen  the  attraction  SN  is 
neither  none  at  all,  nor  less  than  the  least  of  all  the  attractions  SM,  but  is,  as 
it  were,  a  mean  betw^een  the  greatest  and  least  of  all  those  attractions  SM, 
that  is,  not  much  greater  nor  much  less  than  the  attraction  SK.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Let  now  the  lesser  bodies  P,  S  revolve  about  a  greater  T  in  different 
planes;  and  the  force  LM,  acting  in  the  direction  of  the  line  PT  situated  in  the 
plane  of  the  orbit  PAB,  will  have  the  same  effect  as  before;  neither  wall  it  draw 
the  body  P  from  the  plane  of  its  orbit.  But  the  other  force  NM,  acting  in  the 
direction  of  a  line  parallel  to  ST  (and  therefore,  when  the  body  S  is  without  the 
line  of  the  nodes,  inclined  to  the  plane  of  the  orbit  PAB) ,  besides  the  perturba¬ 
tion  of  the  motion  just  now  spoken  of  as  to  longitude,  introduces  another  per¬ 
turbation  also  as  to  latitude,  attracting  the  body  P  out  of  the  plane  of  its  orbit. 
And  this  perturbation,  in  any  given  situation  of  the  bodies  P  and  T  to  each 


120  Mathematical  Principles 

other,  ^^^ll  be  as  the  generating  force  MN ;  and  therefore  becomes  least  when 
the  force  MN  is  least,  that  is  (as  was  just  now  shown),  where  the  attraction 
SN  is  not  much  greater  nor  much  less  than  the  attraction  SK.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  it  may  be  easily  inferred,  that  if  several  less  bodies  P,  S,  R, 
&c,,  revolve  about  a  very  great  body  T,  the  motion  of  the  innermost  revolving 
body  P  mil  be  least  disturbed  by  the  attractions  of  the  others,  when  the  great 
body  is  as  well  attracted  and  agitated  by  the  rest  (according  to  the  ratio  of  the 
accelerative  forces)  as  the  rest  are  by  each  other. 

Cor.  II.  In  a  system  of  three  bodies  T,  P,  S,  if  the  accelerative  attractions 
of  any  two  of  them  towards  a  third  be  to  each  other  inversely  as  the  squares 
of  the  distances,  the  body  P,  by  the  radius  PT,  will  describe  its  area  about  the 
body  T  swifter  near  the  conjunction  A  and  the  opposition  B  than  it  mil  near 
the  quadratures  C  and  D.  For  every  force  with  which  the  body  P  is  acted  on 
and  the  body  T  is  not,  and  which  does  not  act  in  the  direction  of  the  line  PT, 
does  either  accelerate  or  retard  the  description  of  the  area,  according  as  its 
direction  is  the  same  as,  or  contrary  to  that  of  the  motion  of  the  body.  Such  is 
the  force  NM.  This  force  in  the  passage  of  the  body  P  from  C  to  A  tends  in  the 
direction  in  which  the  body  is  moving,  and  therefore  accelerates  it;  then  as  far 
as  D,  it  tends  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  retards  the  motion;  then  in  the 
direction  of  the  body,  as  far  as  B ;  and  lastly  in  a  contrary  direction,  as  it  moves 
from  B  to  C. 

Cor.  III.  And  from  the  same  reasoning  it  appears  that  the  body  P,  other 
things  remaining  the  same,  moves  more  smftly  in  the  conjunction  and  opposi¬ 
tion  than  in  the  quadratures. 

Cor.  IV.  The  orbit  of  the  body  P,  other  things  remaining  the  same,  is  more 
curved  at  the  quadratures  than  at  the  conjunction  and  opposition.  For  the 
swifter  bodies  move,  the  less  they  deflect  from  a  rectilinear  path.  And  besides, 
the  force  KL,  or  NM,  at  the  conjunction  and  opposition,  is  contrary  to  the 
force  mth  which  the  body  T  attracts  the  body  P,  and  therefore  diminishes  that 
force;  but  the  body  P  mil  deflect  the  less  from  a  rectilinear  path  the  less  it  is 
impelled  towards  the  body  T. 


Cor.  V.  Hence  the  body  P,  other  things  remaining  the  same,  goes  farther 
from  the  body  T  at  the  quadratures  than  at  the  conjunction  and  opposition. 
This  is  said,  however,  when  no  account  is  taken  of  the  variable  eccentricity. 
For  if  the  orbit  of  the  body  P  be  eccentric,  its  eccentricity  (as  mil  be  shown 
presently  by  Cor.  ix)  will  be  greatest  when  the  apsides  are  in  the  syzygies; 
and  thence  it  may  sometimes  come  to  pass  that  the  body  P,  in  its  near  approach 
to  the  farther  apse,  may  go  farther  from  the  body  T  at  the  syzygies  than  at  the 
quadratures. 

Cor.  VI.  Because  the  centripetal  force  of  the  central  body  T,  by  which  the 
body  P  is  retained  in  its  orbit,  is  increased  at  the  quadratures  by  the  addition 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  121 

caused  by  the  force  LM,  and  diminished  at  the  syzygies  by  the  subtraction 
of  the  force  KL,  and,  because  the  force  KL  is  greater  than  LM,  it  is  more 
diminished  than  increased;  and,  moreover,  since  that  centripetal  force  (by  Cor. 
II,  Prop.  4)  varies  directly  as  the  radius  TP,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 
periodical  time,  it  is  plain  that  the  resulting  ratio  is  diminished  by  the  action 
of  the  force  KL;  and  therefore  that  the  periodical  time,  supposing  the  radius 
of  the  orbit  PT  to  remain  the  same,  will  be  increased,  and  that  as  the  square 
root  of  that  ratio  in  which  the  centripetal  force  is  diminished;  and,  therefore, 
supposing  this  radius  increased  or  diminished,  the  periodical  time  will  be  in¬ 
creased  more  or  diminished  less  than  in  the  ^th  power  of  this  radius,  by  Cor. 
VI,  Prop.  4.  If  that  force  of  the  central  body  should  gradually  decay,  the  body 
P  being  less  and  less  attracted  would  go  farther  and  farther  from  the  centre  T ; 
and,  on  the  contrary,  if  it  were  increased,  it  would  draw  nearer  to  it.  Therefore 
if  the  action  of  the  distant  body  S,  by  which  that  force  is  diminished,  were  to 
increase  and  decrease  by  turns,  the  radius  TP  would  be  also  increased  and 
diminished  by  turns;  and  the  periodical  time  would  be  increased  and  dimin¬ 
ished  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ^th  power  of  the  ratio  of  the  radius,  and 
of  the  square  root  of  that  ratio  in  which  the  centripetal  force  of  the  central 
body  T  was  diminished  or  increased,  by  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  action 
of  the  distant  body  S. 

Cor.  VII.  It  also  follows,  from  what  was  before  laid  down,  that  the  axis  of 
the  ellipse  described  by  the  body  P,  or  the  line  of  the  apsides,  does  as  to  its 
angular  motion  go  forwards  and  backwards  by  turns,  but  more  forwards  than 
backwards,  and  by  the  excess  of  its  direct  motion  is  on  the  whole  carried  for¬ 


wards.  For  the  force  with  which  the  body  P  is  urged  to  the  body  T  at  the 
quadratures,  where  the  force  MN  vanishes,  is  compounded  of  the  force  LM 
and  the  centripetal  force  with  which  the  body  T  attracts  the  body  P.  The 
first  force  LM,  if  the  distance  PT  be  increased,  is  increased  in  nearly  the  same 
proportion  with  that  distance,  and  the  other  force  decreases  as  the  square 
of  the  ratio  of  the  distance;  and  therefore  the  sum  of  these  two  forces  de¬ 
creases  in  less  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distance  PT ;  and  therefore, 
by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  45,  will  make  the  line  of  the  apsides,  or,  which  is  the  same 
thing,  the  upper  apse,  to  go  backwards.  But  at  the  conjunction  and  opposition 
the  force  mth  which  the  body  P  is  urged  towards  the  body  T  is  the  difference 
of  the  force  KL,  and  of  the  force  udth  which  the  body  T  attracts  the  body  P; 
and  that  difference,  because  the  force  KL  is  very  nearly  increased  in  the  ratio 
of  the  distance  PT,  decreases  in  more  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  PT;  and  therefore,  by  Cor.  i,  Prop.  45,  causes  the  line  of  the  apsides  to 
go  forwards.  In  the  places  between  the  syzygies  and  the  quadratures,  the 
motion  of  the  line  of  the  apsides  depends  upon  both  of  these  causes  conjointly, 
so  that  it  either  goes  forwards  or  backwards  in  proportion  to  the  excess  of  one 


122  Mathematical  Principles 

of  these  causes  above  the  other.  Therefore  since  the  force  KL  in  the  syzygies 
is  almost  twice  as  great  as  the  force  LM  in  the  quadratures,  the  excess  will  be 
on  the  side  of  the  force  KL,  and  by  consequence  the  line  of  the  apsides  will  be 
carried  forwards.  The  truth  of  this  and  the  foregoing  Corollary  will  be  more 
easily  understood  by  conceiving  the  system  of  the  two  bodies  T  and  P  to  be 
surrounded  on  every  side  by  several  bodies  S,  S,  S,  &c.,  disposed  about  the 
orbit  ESE.  For  by  the  actions  of  these  bodies  the  action  of  the  body  T  vdll  be 
diminished  on  every  side,  and  decrease  in  more  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of 
the  distance. 

Cor.  VIII.  But  since  the  direct  or  retrograde  motion  of  the  apsides  depends 
upon  the  decrease  of  the  centripetal  force,  that  is,  upon  its  being  in  a  greater 
or  less  ratio  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distance  TP,  in  the  passage  of 
the  body  from  the  lower  apse  to  the  upper;  and  upon  a  like  increase  in  its 
return  to  the  lower  apse  again;  and  therefore  becomes  greatest  where  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  force  at  the  upper  apse  to  the  force  at  the  lower  apse  recedes 
farthest  from  the  inverse  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances;  it  is  plain  that, 
when  the  apsides  are  in  the  syzygies,  they  will,  by  reason  of  the  subtracted 
force  KL  or  NM-LM,  go  forwards  more  swiftly;  and  in  the  quadratures  by 
the  additional  force  LM  go  backwards  more  slowly.  Because  the  velocity  of  the 
progression  or  the  slowness  of  the  retrogression  is  continued  for  a  long  time, 
this  inequality  becomes  exceedingly  great. 

Cor.  IX.  If  a  body  is  obliged,  by  a  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  square 
of  its  distance  from  any  centre,  to  revolve  in  an  ellipse  round  that  centre;  and 
afterwards  in  its  descent  from  the  upper  apse  to  the  lower  apse,  that  force  by 
a  continual  accession  of  new  force  is  increased  in  more  than  the  square  of  the 
ratio  of  the  diminished  distance;  it  is  manifest  that  the  body,  being  impelled 
always  towards  the  centre  by  the  continual  accession  of  this  new  force,  will 
incline  more  towards  that  centre  than  if  it  were  urged  by  that  force  alone  which 
decreases  as  the  square  of  the  diminished  distance,  and  therefore  wall  describe 
an  orbit  interior  to  that  elliptical  orbit,  and  at  the  lower  apse  approaching 
nearer  to  the  centre  than  before.  Therefore  the  orbit  by  the  accession  of  this 
new  force  will  become  more  eccentric.  If  now,  while  the  body  is  returning  from 
the  lower  to  the  upper  apse,  it  should  decrease  by  the  same  degrees  by  which 
it  increased  before,  the  body  would  return  to  its  first  distance;  and  therefore  if 
the  force  decreases  in  a  yet  greater  ratio,  the  body,  being  now  less  attracted 
than  before,  will  ascend  to  a  still  greater  distance,  and  so,  the  eccentricity  of  the 
orbit  will  be  increased  still  more.  Therefore  if  the  ratio  of  the  increase  and 
decrease  of  the  centripetal  force  be  augmented  with  each  revolution,  the  eccen¬ 
tricity  will  be  augmented  also;  and,  on  the  contrary,  if  that  ratio  decrease,  it 
will  be  diminished. 

Now%  therefore,  in  the  system  of  the  bodies  T,  P,  S,  when  the  apsides  of  the 
orbit  PAB  are  in  the  quadratures,  the  ratio  of  that  increase  and  decrease  is 
least  of  all,  and  becomes  greatest  w^hen  the  apsides  are  in  the  syzygies.  If  the 
apsides  are  placed  in  the  quadratures,  the  ratio  near  the  apsides  is  less,  and 
near  the  syzygies  greater,  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances;  and 
from  that  greater  ratio  arises  a  direct  motion  of  the  line  of  the  apsides,  as  w^as 
just  now"  said.  But  if  we  consider  the  ratio  of  the  whole  increase  or  decrease  in 
the  progress  betw'een  the  apsides,  this  is  less  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the 
distances.  The  force  in  the  lower  is  to  that  in  the  upper  apse  in  less  than  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  123 

square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distance  of  the  upper  apse  from  the  focus  of  the  ellipse 
to  the  distance  of  the  lower  apse  from  the  same  focus;  and  conversely,  when 
the  apsides  are  placed  in  the  syzygies,  the  force  in  the  lower  apse  is  to  the  force 
in  the  upper  apse  in  a  greater  than  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances.  For 
the  forces  LM  in  the  quadratures  added  to  the  forces  of  the  body  T,  compose 
forces  in  a  less  ratio;  and  the  forces  KL  in  the  syzygies  subtracted  from  the 
forces  of  the  body  T,  leave  the  forces  in  a  greater  ratio.  Therefore  the  ratio  of 
the  whole  increase  and  decrease  in  the  passage  between  the  apsides  is  least  at 
the  quadratures  and  greatest  at  the  syzygies;  and  therefore  in  the  passage  of 
the  apsides  from  the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies  it  is  continually  augmented, 
and  increases  the  eccentricity  of  the  ellipse ;  and  in  the  passage  from  the  syzygies 
to  the  quadratures  it  is  continually  decreasing,  and  diminishes  the  eccentricity. 

Cor.  X.  That  we  may  give  an  account  of  the  errors  of  latitude,  let  us  suppose 
the  plane  of  the  orbit  EST  to  remain  immovable;  and  from  the  cause  of  the 
errors  above  explained,  it  is  manifest  that,  of  the  two  forces  NM,  ML,  which 
are  the  only  and  entire  cause  of  them,  the  force  ML  acting  always  in  the  plane 
of  the  orbit  PAB  never  disturbs  the  motions  as  to  latitude;  and  that  the  force 
NM,  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  syzygies,  acting  also  in  the  same  plane  of  the 
orbit,  does  not  at  that  time  affect  those  motions.  But  when  the  nodes  are  in  the 
quadratures,  it  disturbs  them  very  much,  and,  attracting  the  body  P  contin¬ 
ually  out  of  the  plane  of  its  orbit,  it  diminishes  the  inclination  of  the  plane  in 
the  passage  of  the  body  from  the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies,  and  again  in¬ 
creases  the  same  in  the  passage  from  the  syzygies  to  the  quadratures.  Hence  it 
comes  to  pass  that  when  the  body  is  in  the  syzygies,  the  inclination  is  then 
least  of  all,  and  returns  to  the  first  magnitude  nearly,  when  the  body  arrives 


at  the  next  node.  But  if  the  nodes  are  situated  at  the  octants  after  the  quad¬ 
ratures,  that  is,  between  C  and  A,  D  and  B,  it  will  appear,  from  what  was  just 
now  shown,  that  in  the  passage  of  the  body  P  from  either  node  to  the  ninetieth 
degree  from  thence,  the  inclination  of  the  plane  is  continually  diminished; 
then,  in  the  passage  through  the  next  45  degrees  to  the  next  quadrature,  the 
inclination  is  increased;  and  afterwards,  again,  in  its  passage  through  another 
45  degrees  to  the  next  node,  it  is  diminished.  Therefore  the  inclination  is  more 
diminished  than  increased,  and  is  therefore  always  less  in  the  subsequent  node 
than  in  the  preceding  one.  And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  the  inclination  is  more 
increased  than  diminished  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  other  octants  between 
A  and  D,  B  and  C.  The  inclination,  therefore,  is  the  greatest  of  all  when  the 
nodes  are  in  the  syzygies.  In  their  passage  from  the  syzygies  to  the  quadratures 
the  inclination  is  diminished  at  each  appulse  of  the  body  to  the  nodes;  and 
becomes  least  of  all  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadratures,  and  the  body  in  the 
syzygies;  then  it  increases  by  the  same  degrees  by  which  it  decreased  before ;  and, 
when  the  nodes  come  to  the  next  syzygies,  returns  to  its  former  magnitude. 


124 


Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  XI.  Because  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadratures  the  body  P  is  con¬ 
tinually  attracted  from  the  plane  of  its  orbit;  and  because  this  attraction  is 
made  towards  S  in  its  passage  from  the  node  C  through  the  conjunction  A  to 
the  node  D;  and  in  the  opposite  direction  in  its  passage  from  the  node  D 
through  the  opposition  B  to  the  node  C;  it  is  manifest  that,  in  its  motion  from 
the  node  C,  the  body  recedes  continually  from  the  former  plane  CD  of  its  orbit 
till  it  comes  to  the  next  node;  and  therefore  at  that  node,  being  now  at  its 
greatest  distance  from  the  first  plane  CD,  it  will  pass  through  the  plane  of  the 
orbit  EST  not  in  D,  the  other  node  of  that  plane,  but  in  a  point  that  lies  nearer 
to  the  body  S,  which  therefore  becomes  a  new  place  of  the  node  behind  its 
former  place.  And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  the  nodes  will  continue  to  recede  in 
their  passage  from  this  node  to  the  next.  The  nodes,  therefore,  when  situated 
in  the  quadratures,  recede  continually;  and  at  the  syzygies,  w'here  no  perturba¬ 
tion  can  be  produced  in  the  motion  as  to  latitude,  are  quiescent;  in  the  inter¬ 
mediate  places  they  partake  of  both  conditions,  and  recede  more  slowly;  and, 
therefore,  being  always  either  retrograde  or  stationary,  they  Avill  be  carried 
backwards,  or  made  to  recede  in  each  revolution. 

Cor.  XII.  All  the  errors  described  in  these  Corollaries  are  a  little  greater  at 
the  conjunction  of  the  bodies  P,  S  than  at  their  opposition;  because  the  gen¬ 
erating  forces  NM  and  ML  are  greater. 

Cor.  XIII.  And  since  the  causes  and  proportions  of  the  errors  and  variations 
mentioned  in  these  Corollaries  do  not  depend  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  body 
S,  it  follows  that  all  things  before  demonstrated  will  happen,  if  the  magnitude 
of  the  body  S  be  imagined  so  great  that  the  system  of  the  two  bodies  P  and  T 
may  revolve  about  it.  And  from  this  increase  of  the  body  S,  and  the  consequent 
increase  of  its  centripetal  force,  from  which  the  errors  of  the  body  P  arise,  it 
will  follow  that  all  these  errors,  at  equal  distances,  mil  be  greater  in  this  case, 
than  in  the  other  where  the  body  S  revolves  about  the  system  of  the  bodies  P 
and  T. 

Cor.  XIV.  But  since  the  forces  NM,  ML,  when  the  body  S  is  exceedingly 
distant,  are  very  nearly  as  the  force  SK  and  the  ratio  PT  to  ST  conjointly; 
that  is,  if  both  the  distance  PT  and  the  absolute  force  of  the  body  S  be  given, 
inversely  as  ST®;  and  since  those  forces  NM,  ML  are  the  causes  of  all  the  errors 
and  effects  treated  of  in  the  foregoing  Corollaries;  it  is  manifest  that  all  those 
effects,  if  the  system  of  bodies  T  and  P  continue  as  before,  and  only  the  dis¬ 
tance  ST  and  the  absolute  force  of  the  body  S  be  changed,  mil  be  very  nearly 
in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  direct  ratio  of  the  absolute  force  of  the  body  S, 
and  the  cubed  inverse  ratio  of  the  distance  ST.  Hence  if  the  system  of  bodies 
T  and  P  revolve  about  a  distant  body  S,  those  forces  NM,  ML,  and  their  ef¬ 
fects,  will  be  (by  Cor.  ii  and  vi.  Prop.  4)  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  periodical 
time.  And  thence,  also,  if  the  magnitude  of  the  body  S  be  proportional  to  its 
absolute  force,  those  forces  NM,  ML,  and  their  effects,  will  be  directly  as  the 
cube  of  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  distant  body  S  viewed  from  T ;  and  con¬ 
versely.  For  these  ratios  are  the  same  as  the  compounded  ratio  above  men¬ 
tioned. 

Cor.  XV.  If  the  orbits  ESE  and  PAB,  retaining  their  figure,  proportions,  and 
inclination  to  each  other,  should  alter  their  magnitude,  and  if  the  forces  of  the 
bodies  S  and  T  should  either  remain  unaltered  or  be  changed  in  any  given 
ratio,  then  these  forces  (that  is,  the  force  of  the  body  T,  which  obliges  the  body 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  125 

P  to  deflect  from  a  rectilinear  course  into  the  orbit  PAB,  and  the  force  of  the 
body  S,  which  causes  the  body  P  to  deviate  from  that  orbit)  will  act  always  in 
the  same  manner,  and  in  the  same  proportion.  Consequently  it  follows,  that 
all  the  effects  vill  be  similar  and  proportional,  and  the  times  of  those  effects 
will  be  proportional  also;  that  is,  that  all  the  linear  errors  mil  be  as  the  diam¬ 
eters  of  the  orbits,  the  angular  errors  the  same  as  before;  and  the  times  of 
similar  hnear  errors,  or  equal  angular  errors,  are  as  the  periodical  times  of  the 
orbits. 

Cor.  xvi.  Therefore  if  the  figures  of  the  orbits  and  their  inclination  to  each 
other  be  given,  and  the  magnitudes,  forces,  and  distances  of  the  bodies  be 
changed  in  any  manner,  we  may,  from  the  errors  and  times  of  those  errors  in 
one  case,  obtain  very  nearly  the  errors  and  times  of  the  errors  in  any  other 
case.  But  this  may  be  done  more  expeditiously  by  the  following  method.  The 
forces  NM,  ML,  other  things  remaining  unaltered,  are  as  the  radius  TP;  and 
their  periodical  effects  (by  Cor.  ii,  Lem.  10)  are  as  the  forces  and  the  square  of 
the  periodical  time  of  the  body  P  jointly.  These  are  the  linear  errors  of  the 
body  P;  and  hence  the  angular  errors  as  they  appear  from  the  centre  T  (that 
is,  the  motion  of  the  apsides  and  of  the  nodes,  and  all  the  apparent  errors  of 
longitude  and  latitude)  are  in  each  revolution  of  the  body  P  as  the  square  of 
the  time  of  the  revolution,  very  nearly.  Let  these  ratios  be  compounded  with 


the  ratios  in  Cor.  xiv,  and  in  any  system  of  bodies  T,  P,  S,  where  P  revolves 
about  T  very  near  to  it,  and  T  revolves  about  S  at  a  great  distance,  the  angular 
errors  of  the  body  P,  observed  from  the  centre  T,  will  be  in  each  revolution  of 
the  body  P  directly  as  the  square  of  the  periodical  time  of  the  body  P,  and  in¬ 
versely  as  the  square  of  the  periodical  time  of  the  body  T.  And  therefore  the 
mean  motion  of  the  line  of  the  apsides  mil  be  in  a  given  ratio  to  the  mean 
motion  of  the  nodes;  and  both  those  motions  mil  be  directly  as  the  periodical 
time  of  the  body  P,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  periodical  time  of  the 
body  T.  The  increase  or  diminution  of  the  eccentricity  and  inclination  of  the 
orbit  PAB  makes  no  sensible  variation  in  the  motions  of  the  apsides  and  nodes, 
unless  that  increase  or  diminution  be  very  great  indeed. 

Cor.  XVII.  Since  the  line  LM  becomes  sometimes  greater  and  sometimes  less 
than  the  radius  PT,  let  the  mean  quantity  of  the  force  LM  be  expressed  by 
that  radius  PT;  and  then  that  mean  force  will  be  to  the  mean  force  SK  or  SN 
(which  may  be  also  expressed  by  ST)  as  the  length  PT  to  the  length  ST.  But 
the  mean  force  SN  or  ST,  by  which  the  body  T  is  retained  in  the  orbit  it 
describes  about  S,  is  to  the  force  with  wLich  the  body  P  is  retained  in  its  orbit 
about  T  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  radius  ST  to  the  radius  PT, 
and  the  squared  ratio  of  the  periodical  time  of  the  body  P  about  T  to  the 
periodical  time  of  the  body  T  about  S.  And,  consequently,  the  mean  force  LM 
is  to  the  force  by  which  the  body  P  is  retained  in  its  orbit  about  T  (or  by  which 


126  Mathematical  Principles 

the  same  body  P  might  revolve  at  the  distance  PT  in  the  same  periodical  time 
about  any  immovable  point  T)  in  the  same  squared  ratio  of  the  periodical 
times.  The  periodical  times  therefore  being  given,  together  with  the  distance 
PT,  the  mean  force  LM  is  also  given;  and  that  force  being  given,  there  is 
given  also  the  force  MN,  very  nearly,  by  the  analogy  of  the  lines  PT  and  MN. 

Cor.  xviii.  By  the  same  laws  by  which  the  body  P  revolves  about  the  body 
T,  let  us  suppose  many  fluid  bodies  to  move  round  T  at  equal  distances  from 
it;  and  to  be  so  numerous,  that  they  may  all  become  contiguous  to  each  other, 
so  as  to  form  a  fluid  annulus,  or  ring,  of  a  round  figure,  and  concentric  to  the 
body  T;  and  the  several  parts  of  this  ring,  performing  their  motions  by  the 
same  law  as  the  body  P,  ^\'ill  draw  nearer  to  the  body  T,  and  move  swifter  in 
the  conjunction  and  opposition  of  themselves  and  the  body  S,  than  in  the 
quadratures.  And  the  nodes  of  this  ring  or  its  intersections  with  the  plane  of 
the  orbit  of  the  body  S  or  T,  will  rest  at  the  syzygies;  but  out  of  the  syzygies 
they  will  be  carried  backwards,  or  in  a  retrograde  direction,  with  the  greatest 
smftness  in  the  quadratures,  and  more  slowly  in  other  places.  The  inclination 
of  this  ring  also  will  vary,  and  its  axis  will  oscillate  in  each  revolution,  and  w^hen 
the  revolution  is  completed  will  return  to  its  former  situation,  except  only  that 
it  \vill  be  carried  round  a  little  by  the  precession  of  the  nodes. 

Cor.  XIX.  Suppose  now  the  spherical  body  T,  consisting  of  some  matter  not 
fluid,  to  be  enlarged,  and  to  extend  itself  on  every  side  as  far  as  that  ring,  and 
that  a  channel  were  cut  all  round  its  circumference  containing  water;  and  that 
this  sphere  revolves  uniformly  about  its  owm  axis  in  the  same  periodical  time. 
This  water  being  accelerated  and  retarded  by  turns  (as  in  the  last  Corollary), 
will  be  swifter  at  the  syzygies,  and  slow^er  at  the  quadratures,  than  the  surface 
of  the  globe,  and  so  will  ebb  and  flow  in  its  channel  after  the  manner  of  the  sea. 
If  the  attraction  of  the  body  S  were  taken  away,  the  water  would  acquire  no 
motion  of  flux  and  reflux  by  revolving  round  the  quiescent  centre  of  the  globe. 
The  case  is  the  same  of  a  globe  moving  uniformly  forwards  in  a  right  line,  and 
in  the  meantime  revolving  about  its  centre  (by  Cor.  v  of  the  Law^s  of  Motion), 
and  of  a  globe  uniformly  attracted  from  its  rectilinear  course  (by  Cor.  vi  of  the 
same  Laws).  But  let  the  body  S  come  to  act  upon  it,  and  by  its  varying  attrac¬ 
tion  the  water  will  receive  this  new  motion;  for  there  will  be  a  stronger  attrac¬ 
tion  upon  that  part  of  the  water  that  is  nearest  to  the  body,  and  a  weaker  upon 
that  part  which  is  more  remote.  And  the  force  LM  will  attract  the  water  down¬ 
wards  at  the  quadratures,  and  depress  it  as  far  as  the  syzygies;  and  the  force 
KL  mil  attract  it  upwards  in  the  syzygies,  and  withhold  its  descent,  and  make 
it  rise  as  far  as  the  quadratures;  except  only  so  far  as  the  motion  of  flux  and 
reflux  may  be  directed  by  the  channel,  and  be  a  little  retarded  by  friction. 

Cor.  XX.  If,  now,  the  ring  becomes  hard,  and  the  globe  is  diminished,  the 
motion  of  flux  and  reflux  will  cease ;  but  the  oscillating  motion  of  the  inclina¬ 
tion  and  the  precession  of  the  nodes  will  remain.  Let  the  globe  have  the  same 
axis  mth  the  ring,  and  perform  its  revolutions  in  the  same  times,  and  at  its 
surface  touch  the  ring  mthin,  and  adhere  to  it;  then  the  globe  partaking  of  the 
motion  of  the  ring,  this  whole  body  will  oscillate,  and  the  nodes  will  go  back¬ 
wards  for  the  globe,  as  we  shall  show  presently,  is  perfectly  indifferent  to  the 
receiving  of  all  impressions.  The  greatest  angle  of  the  inclination  of  the  ring 
alone  is  wLen  the  nodes  are  in  the  syzygies.  Thence  in  the  progress  of  the  nodes 
to  the  quadratures,  it  endeavors  to  diminish  its  inclination,  and  by  that  en- 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  127 

deavor  impresses  a  motion  upon  the  whole  globe.  The  globe  retains  this  motion 
impressed,  till  the  ring  by  a  contrary  endeavor  destroys  that  motion,  and  im¬ 
presses  a  new  motion  in  a  contrary  direction.  And  by  this  means  the  greatest 
motion  of  the  decreasing  inclination  happens  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadra¬ 
tures,  and  the  least  angle  of  inclination  in  the  octants  after  the  quadratures; 
and,  again,  the  greatest  motion  of  the  reclination  happens  when  the  nodes  are 
in  the  syzygies;  and  the  greatest  angle  of  inclination  in  the  octants  following. 
And  the  case  is  the  same  of  a  globe  vuthout  this  ring,  if  it  be  a  little  higher  or 
a  little  denser  in  the  equatorial  than  in  the  polar  regions;  for  the  excess  of  that 
matter  in  the  regions  near  the  equator  supplies  the  place  of  the  ring.  And  al¬ 


though  we  should  suppose  the  centripetal  force  of  this  globe  to  be  increased  in 
any  manner,  so  that  all  its  parts  tend  downwards,  as  the  parts  of  our  earth 
gravitate  to  the  centre,  yet  the  phenomena  of  this  and  the  preceding  Corollary 
would  scarce  be  altered ;  except  that  the  places  of  the  greatest  and  least  height 
of  the  water  will  be  different;  for  the  water  is  now  no  longer  sustained  and  kept 
in  its  orbit  by  its  centrifugal  force,  but  by  the  channel  in  w'hich  it  flows.  And, 
besides,  the  force  LM  attracts  the  water  downw’ards  most  in  the  quadratures, 
and  the  force  KL  or  NM-LM  attracts  it  upwards  most  in  the  syzygies.  And 
these  forces  conjoined  cease  to  attract  the  water  dowm wards,  and  begin  to  at¬ 
tract  it  up\vards  in  the  octants  before  the  syzygies;  and  cease  to  attract  the 
water  upwards,  and  begin  to  attract  the  w^ater  dowmvards  in  the  octants  after 
the  syzygies.  And  thence  the  greatest  height  of  the  w^ater  may  happen  about 
the  octants  after  the  syzygies;  and  the  least  height  about  the  octants  after  the 
quadratures;  excepting  only  so  far  as  the  motion  of  ascent  or  descent  im¬ 
pressed  by  these  forces  may  by  the  inertia  of  the  water  continue  a  little 
longer,  or  be  stopped  a  little  sooner  by  impediments  in  its  channel. 

Cor.  XXI.  For  the  same  reason  that  redundant  matter  in  the  equatorial 
regions  of  a  globe  causes  the  nodes  to  go  backw’ards,  and  therefore  by  the  in¬ 
crease  of  that  matter  that  retrograde  motion  is  increased,  by  the  diminution 
is  diminished,  and  by  the  removal  quite  ceases;  it  follow- s,  that,  if  more  than 
that  redundant  matter  be  taken  aw^ay,  that  is,  if  the  globe  be  either  more 
depressed,  or  of  a  rarer  consistence  near  the  equator  than  near  the  poles,  there 
will  arise  a  direct  motion  of  the  nodes. 

Cor.  XXII.  And  thence  from  the  motion  of  the  nodes  is  known  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  globe.  That  is,  if  the  globe  retains  unalterably  the  same  poles,  and 
the  motion  (of  the  nodes)  is  retrograde,  there  is  a  redundance  of  the  matter 
near  the  equator;  but  if  that  motion  is  direct,  a  deficiency.  Suppose  a  uniform 
and  exactly  spherical  globe  to  be  first  at  rest  in  a  free  space;  then  by  some 
impulse  made  obliquely  upon  its  surface  to  be  driven  from  its  place,  and  to 
receive  a  motion  partly  circular  and  partly  straight  forw^ard.  Since  this  globe 
is  perfectly  indifferent  to  all  the  axes  that  pass  through  its  centre,  nor  has  a 


128 


Mathematical  Principles 


greater  propensity  to  one  axis  or  to  one  situation  of  the  axis  than  to  any  other, 
it  is  manifest  that  by  its  own  force  it  will  never  change  its  axis,  or  the  inclina¬ 
tion  of  its  axis.  Let  now  this  globe  be  impelled  obliquely  by  a  new  impulse  in 
the  same  part  of  its  surface  as  before;  and  since  the  effect  of  an  impulse  is  not 
at  all  changed  by  its  coming  sooner  or  later,  it  is  manifest  that  these  two 
impulses,  successively  impressed,  will  produce  the  same  motion,  as  if  they  had 
been  impressed  at  the  same  time;  that  is,  the  same  motion,  as  if  the  globe  had 
been  impelled  by  a  simple  force  compounded  of  them  both  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the 
Laws),  that  is,  a  simple  motion  about  an  axis  of  a  given  inclination.  And  the 
case  is  the  same  if  the  second  impulse  were  made  upon  any  other  place  of  the 
equator  of  the  first  motion;  and  also  if  the  first  impulse  were  made  upon  any 
place  in  the  equator  of  the  motion  which  would  be  generated  by  the  second 
impulse  alone;  and  therefore,  also,  when  both  impulses  are  made  in  any  places 
whatsoever;  for  these  impulses  will  generate  the  same  circular  motion  as  if  they 
were  impressed  together,  and  at  once,  in  the  place  of  the  intersections  of  the 
equators  of  those  motions,  which  would  be  generated  by  each  of  them  sepa¬ 
rately.  Therefore,  a  homogeneous  and  perfect  globe  mil  not  retain  several 
motions  distinct,  but  mil  unite  all  those  that  are  impressed  on  it,  and  reduce 
them  into  one;  revolving,  as  far  as  in  it  lies,  always  with  a  simple  and  uniform 
motion  about  one  single  given  axis,  with  an  inclination  always  invariable.  And 
the  inclination  of  the  axis,  or  the  velocity  of  the  rotation,  will  not  be  changed  by 
centripetal  force.  For  if  the  globe  be  supposed  to  be  divided  into  two  hemi¬ 
spheres,  by  any  plane  whatsoever  passing  through  its  own  centre,  and  the 
centre  to  which  the  force  is  directed,  that  force  will  always  urge  each  hemi¬ 
sphere  equally;  and  therefore  mil  not  incline  the  globe  to  any  side  mth  respect 
to  its  motion  round  its  own  axis.  But  let  there  be  added  anywhere  between  the 
pole  and  the  equator  a  heap  of  new  matter  like  a  mountain,  and  this,  by  its 
continual  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  centre  of  its  motion,  mil  disturb  the 
motion  of  the  globe,  and  cause  its  poles  to  wander  about  its  surface  describing 
circles  about  themselves  and  the  points  opposite  to  them.  Neither  can  this 
enormous  deviation  of  the  poles  be  corrected  othermse  than  by  placing  that 
mountain  either  in  one  of  the  poles,  in  which  case,  by  Cor.  xxi,  the  nodes  of 
the  equator  will  go  forwards;  or  in  the  equatorial  regions,  in  which  case,  by 
Cor.  XX,  the  nodes  will  go  backwards;  or,  lastly,  by  adding  on  the  other  side 
of  the  axis  a  new  quantity  of  matter,  by  which  the  mountain  may  be  balanced 
in  its  motion;  and  then  the  nodes  mil  either  go  forwards  or  backwards,  as  the 
mountain  and  this  newly  added  matter  happen  to  be  nearer  to  the  pole  or  to 

the  equator.  Proposition  67.  Theorem  27 

The  same  laws  of  attraction  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  exterior  body  S  does,  by 
radii  drawn  to  the  point  0,  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  interior  bodies  P  and 
T,  describe  round  that  centre  areas  more  proportional  to  the  times,  and  an  orbit 
more  approaching  to  the  form  of  an  ellipse  having  its  focus  in  that  centre,  than  it 
can  describe  round  the  innermost  and  greatest  body 
T  by  radii  drawn  to  that  body. 

For  the  attractions  of  the  body  S  towards  T 
and  P  compose  its  absolute  attraction,  which  is  S(^- 
more  directed  towards  0,  the  common  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  bodies  T  and  P,  than  it  is  to  the 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  129 

greatest  body  T;  and  which  approaches  nearer  to  the  inverse  proportion  of  the 
square  of  the  distance  SO,  than  of  the  square  of  the  distance  ST ;  as  will  easily 
appear  by  a  little  consideration. 

Proposition  68.  Theorem  28 

The  same  laws  of  attraction  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  exterior  body  S  will,  by  radii 
drawn  to  0,  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  interior  bodies  P  and  T,  describe 
round  that  centre  areas  more  proportional  to  the  times,  and  an  orbit  more  approach¬ 
ing  to  the  form  of  an  ellipse  having  its  focus  in  that  centre,  if  the  innermost  and 
greatest  body  be  agitated  by  these  attractions  as  well  as  the  rest,  than  it  would  do  if 
that  body  either  were  at  rest  and  not  attracted  at  all,  or  were  much  more  or  much  less 
attracted,  or  were  much  more  or  much  less  agitated. 

This  may  be  demonstrated  after  the  same  manner  as  Prop.  66,  but  by  a 
more  prolix  reasoning,  which  I  therefore  pass  over.  It  \vill  be  sufficient  to  con¬ 
sider  it  after  this  manner.  From  the  demonstration  of  the  last  Proposition  it 
is  plain,  that  the  centre,  towards  which  the  body  S  is  urged  by  the  two  forces 
conjointly,  is  very  near  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  those  two  other 
bodies.  If  this  centre  were  to  coincide  with  that  common  centre,  and  moreover 
the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  three  bodies  were  at  rest,  the  body  S  on 

one  side,  and  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
other  two  bodies  on  the  other  side,  would  describe 
true  ellipses  about  that  quiescent  common  centre. 
This  appears  from  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  58,  compared 
mth  what  was  demonstrated  in  Props.  64  and  65. 
Now  this  accurate  elliptical  motion  -will  be  dis¬ 
turbed  a  little  by  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  the 
two  bodies  from  the  centre  towards  which  the  third  body  S  is  attracted.  Let 
there  be  added,  moreover,  a  motion  to  the  common  centre  of  the  three,  and 
the  perturbation  vdll  be  increased  yet  more.  Therefore  the  perturbation  is  least 
when  the  common  centre  of  the  three  bodies  is  at  rest;  that  is,  when  the  inner¬ 
most  and  greatest  body  T  is  attracted  according  to  the  same  law  as  the  rest 
are;  and  is  always  greatest  when  the  common  centre  of  the  three,  by  the  dimi¬ 
nution  of  the  motion  of  the  body  T,  begins  to  be  moved,  and  is  more  and  more 
agitated. 

Cor.  And  hence  if  several  smaller  bodies  revolve  about  the  great  one,  it  may 
easily  be  inferred  that  the  orbits  described  mil  approach  nearer  to  ellipses;  and 
the  descriptions  of  areas  will  be  more  nearly  uniform,  if  all  the  bodies  attract 
and  agitate  each  other  with  accelerative  forces  that  are  directly  as  their  abso¬ 
lute  forces,  and  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances,  and  if  the  focus  of 
each  orbit  be  placed  in  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  interior  bodies 
(that  is,  if  the  focus  of  the  first  and  innermost  orbit  be  placed  in  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  greatest  and  innermost  body;  the  focus  of  the  second  orbit  in 
the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  innermost  bodies;  the  focus  of  the 
third  orbit  in  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  three  innermost;  and  so  on), 
than  if  the  innermost  body  were  at  rest,  and  was  made  the  common  focus  of 
all  the  orbits. 


130 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  69.  Theorem  29 

In  a  system  of  several  bodies  A,  B,  C,  D,  ttc.,  if  any  one  of  those  bodies,  as  A, 
attract  all  the  rest,  B,  C,  D,  &c.,  with  accelerative  forces  that  are  inversely  as  the 
squares  of  the  distances  from  the  attracting  body;  and  another  body,  as  B,  attracts 
also  the  rest.  A,  C,  D,  etc.,  with  forces  that  are  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the 
distances  from  the  attracting  body;  the  absolute  forces  of  the  attracting  bodies  A  and 
B  will  be  to  each  other  as  those  very  bodies  A  and  B  to  which  those  forces  belong. 

For  the  accelerative  attractions  of  all  the  bodies  B,  C,  D,  towards  A,  are 
by  the  supposition  equal  to  each  other  at  equal  distances;  and  in  like  manner 
the  accelerative  attractions  of  all  the  bodies  towards  B  are  also  equal  to  each 
other  at  equal  distances.  But  the  absolute  attractive  force  of  the  body  A  is  to 
the  absolute  attractive  force  of  the  body  B  as  the  accelerative  attraction  of  all 
the  bodies  towards  A  is  to  the  accelerative  attraction  of  all  the  bodies  towards 
B  at  equal  distances;  and  so  is  also  the  accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  B 
towards  A  to  the  accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  A  towards  B.  But  the 
accelerative  attraction  of  the  body  B  towards  A  is  to  the  accelerative  attrac¬ 
tion  of  the  body  A  towards  B  as  the  mass  of  the  body  A  is  to  the  mass  of 
the  body  B;  because  the  motive  forces  which  (by  the  second,  seventh  and 
eighth  Definitions)  are  as  the  accelerative  forces  and  the  bodies  attracted  con¬ 
jointly  are  here  equal  to  one  another  by  the  third  Law.  Therefore  the  absolute 
attractive  force  of  the  body  A  is  to  the  absolute  attractive  force  of  the  body  B 
as  the  mass  of  the  body  A  is  to  the  mass  of  the  body  B.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  if  each  of  the  bodies  of  the  system  A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.,  does 
singly  attract  all  the  rest  with  accelerative  forces  that  are  inversely  as  the 
squares  of  the  distances  from  the  attracting  body,  the  absolute  forces  of  all 
those  bodies  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  bodies  themselves. 

Cor.  II.  By  a  like  reasoning,  if  each  of  the  bodies  of  the  system  A,  B,  C,  D, 
&c.,  does  singly  attract  all  the  rest  vdth  accelerative  forces,  which  are  either 
inversely  or  directly  in  the  ratio  of  any  power  whatever  of  the  distances  from 
the  attracting  body;  or  which  are  defined  by  the  distances  from  each  of  the 
attracting  bodies  according  to  any  common  law;  it  is  plain  that  the  absolute 
forces  of  those  bodies  are  as  the  bodies  themselves. 

Cor.  III.  In  a  system  of  bodies  whose  forces  decrease  as  the  square  of  the 
distances,  if  the  lesser  revolve  about  one  very  great  one  in  ellipses,  having  their 
common  focus  in  the  centre  of  that  great  body,  and  of  a  figure  exceedingly 
aceurate;  and  moreover  by  radii  drawn  to  that  great  body  describe  areas  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  times  exactly;  the  absolute  forces  of  those  bodies  to  each  other 
mtH  be  either  accurately  or  very  nearly  in  the  ratio  of  the  bodies.  And  so  con¬ 
versely.  This  appears  from  Cor.  of  Prop.  68,  compared  with  the  first  Corollary 
of  this  Proposition. 

Scholium 

These  Propositions  naturally  lead  us  to  the  analogy  there  is  between  centrip¬ 
etal  forces  and  the  central  bodies  to  wLich  those  forces  are  usually  directed; 
for  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  forces  which  are  directed  to  bodies  should 
depend  upon  the  nature  and  quantity  of  those  bodies,  as  w^e  see  they  do  in 
magnetical  experiments.  And  when  such  cases  occur,  we  are  to  compute  the 
attractions  of  the  bodies  by  assigning  to  each  of  their  particles  its  proper  force, 
and  then  finding  the  sum  of  them  all.  I  here  use  the  w'ord  attraction  in  general 


Book  I;  The  Motion  of  Bodies  131 

for  any  endeavor  whatever,  made  by  bodies  to  approach  to  each  other,  whether 
that  endeavor  arise  from  the  action  of  the  bodies  themselves,  as  tending  to 
each  other  or  agitating  each  other  by  spirits  emitted;  or  whether  it  arises  from 
the  action  of  the  ether  or  of  the  air,  or  of  any  medium  whatever,  whether  cor¬ 
poreal  or  incorporeal,  in  any  manner  impelling  bodies  placed  therein  towards 
each  other.  In  the  same  general  sense  I  use  the  word  impulse,  not  defining  in 
this  treatise  the  species  or  physical  qualities  of  forces,  but  investigating  the 
quantities  and  mathematical  proportions  of  them;  as  I  observed  before  in  the 
Definitions.  In  mathematics  we  are  to  investigate  the  quantities  of  forces  with 
their  proportions  consequent  upon  any  conditions  supposed;  then,  when  we 
enter  upon  physics,  we  compare  those  proportions  with  the  phenomena  of 
Nature,  that  we  may  know  what  conditions  of  those  forces  answer  to  the  sev¬ 
eral  kinds  of  attractive  bodies.  And  this  preparation  being  made,  we  argue 
more  safely  concerning  the  physical  species,  causes,  and  proportions  of  the 
forces.  Let  us  see,  then,  vdth  what  forces  spherical  bodies  consisting  of  particles 
endued  vith  attractive  powers  in  the  manner  above  spoken  of  must  act  upon 
one  another;  and  what  kind  of  motions  vdll  follow  from  them. 


SECTION  XII 


The  attractive  forces  of  spherical  bodies 
Proposition  70.  Theorem  30 

If  to  every  point  of  a  spherical  surface  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreasing 
as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  those  points,  I  say,  that  a  corpuscle  placed 
within  that  surface  will  not  be  attracted  by  those  forces  any  way. 

Let  HIKL  be  that  spherical  surface,  and  P  a  corpuscle  placed  vdthin. 
Through  P  let  there  be  drawn  to  this  surface  two  lines  HK,  IL,  intercepting 
very  small  arcs  HI,  KL;  and  because  (by  Cor.  iii,  Lem.  7)  the  triangles  HPI, 

LPK  are  alike,  those  arcs  vill  be  proportional  to  the 
distances  HP,  LP;  and  any  particles  at  HI  and  KL  of 
the  spherical  surface,  terminated  by  right  lines  passing 
through  P,  will  be  as  the  square  of  those  distances. 
Therefore  the  forces  of  these  particles  exerted  upon  the 
body  P  are  equal  between  themselves.  For  the  forces 
are  directly  as  the  particles,  and  inversely  as  the  square 
of  the  distances.  And  these  two  ratios  compose  the 
ratio  of  equality,  1:1.  The  attractions  therefore, 
being  equal,  but  exerted  in  opposite  directions,  de¬ 
stroy  each  other.  And  by  a  like  reasoning  all  the  attractions  through  the  whole 
spherical  surface  are  destroyed  by  contrary  attractions.  Therefore  the  body 
P  will  not  be  any  way  impelled  by  those  attractions.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  71.  Theorem  31 

The  same  things  supposed  as  above,  I  say,  that  a  corpuscle  placed  without  the 
spherical  surface  is  attracted  towards  the  centre  of  the  sphere  with  a  force  inversely 
proportional  to  the  square  of  its  distance  from  that  centre. 

Let  AHKB,  ahkb  be  two  equal  spherical  surfaces  described  about  the  centres 
S,  s;  their  diameters  AB,  ab;  and  let  P  and  p  be  two  corpuscles  situate  without 


132 


Mathematical  Principles 


the  spheres  iti  those  diameters  produced.  Let  there  be  drawn  from  the  cor¬ 
puscles  the  lines  PHK,  PIL,  phk,  pil,  cutting  off  from  the  great  circles  AHB, 
ahb,  the  equal  arcs  HK,  hk,  IL,  il;  and  to  those  lines  let  fall  the  perpendiculars 
SD,  sd,  SE,  .se,  IR,  zr;  of  which  let  SD,  sd,  cut  PL,  pi,  in  F  and/.  Let  fall  also 


to  the  diameters  the  perpendiculars  IQ,  iq.  Let  now  the  angles  DPE,  dpe 
vanish;  and  because  DS  and  ds,  ES  and  es  are  equal,  the  lines  PE,  PF,  and  pe, 
pf,  and  the  short  lines  DF,  df  may  be  taken  for  equal;  because  their  last  ratio, 
when  the  angles  DPE,  dpe  vanish  together,  is  the  ratio  of  equality.  These 
things  being  thus  determined,  it  follows  that 

PI  :  PF  =  RI  :  DF 

and  pf  :  pi  =  df  or  DF  :  ri. 

Multiplying  corresponding  terms, 

PI-p/  :  PF-pz  =  RI  :  n  =  arc  IH  :  arc  ih  (by  Cor.  iii,  Lem.  vii). 
Again,  PI:PS  =  IQ:SE 

and  ps  :  pi  =  se  or  SE  :  iq. 

Hence,  PI  •  ps  :  PS  •  pi  =  IQ  :  iq. 

Multiplying  together  corresponding  terms  of  this  and  the  similarly  derived 
preceding  proportion, 

PP  -pf-ps  :  pi^  •  PF  •  PS  =  HI  •  IQ  :  ih  •  iq, 
that  is,  as  the  circular  surface  which  is  described  by  the  arc  IH,  as  the  semi¬ 
circle  AKB  revolves  about  the  diameter  AB,  is  to  the  circular  surface  described 
by  the  arc  ih  as  the  semicircle  akb  revolves  about  the  diameter  ab.  And  the 
forces  with  which  these  surfaces  attract  the  corpuscles  P  and  p  in  the  direction 
of  lines  tending  to  those  surfaces  are  directly,  by  the  hypothesis,  as  the  surfaces 
themselves,  and  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  of  the  surfaces  from 
those  corpuscles;  that  is,  as  pf-ps  to  PF  -PS.  And  these  forces  again  are  to  the 
oblique  parts  of  them  which  (by  the  resolution  of  forces  as  in  Cor.  ii  of  the 
Laws)  tend  to  the  centres  in  the  directions  of  the  lines  PS,  ps,  as  PI  to  PQ,  and 
pi  to  pq;  that  is  (because  of  the  like  triangles  PIQ  and  PSF,  piq  and  psf),  as  PS 
to  PF  and  ps  to  pf.  Thence,  the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P  towards  S  is  to 

the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  p  towards  s  as  ^^~ps~’ 

is,  as  ps^  to  PS^.  And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  the  forces  \vith  which  the  surfaces 
described  by  the  revolution  of  the  arcs  KL,  kl  attract  those  corpuscles,  ^vill  be 
as  ps^  to  PS^.  And  in  the  same  ratio  vdll  be  the  forces  of  all  the  circular  surfaces 
into  which  each  of  the  spherical  surfaces  may  be  divided  by  taking  sd  always 
equal  to  SD,  and  se  equal  to  SE.  And  therefore,  by  composition,  the  forces  of 
the  entire  spherical  surfaces  exerted  upon  those  corpuscles  will  be  in  the  same 
ratio.  Q.E.D. 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


133 


Proposition  72.  Theorem  32 

If  to  the  several  points  of  a  sphere  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreasing  as 
the  square  of  the  distances  from  those  points;  and  there  be  given  both  the  density  of 
the  sphere  and  the  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  to  the  distance  of  the  corpuscle 
from  its  centre:  I  say,  that  the  force  with  which  the  corpuscle  is  attracted  is  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  sphere. 

For  conceive  two  corpuscles  to  be  severally  attracted  by  two  spheres,  one  by 
one,  the  other  by  the  other,  and  their  distances  from  the  centres  of  the  spheres 
to  be  proportional  to  the  diameters  of  the  spheres  respectively;  and  the  spheres 
to  be  resolved  into  like  particles,  disposed  in  a  like  situation  to  the  corpuscles. 
Then  the  attractions  of  one  corpuscle  towards  the  several  particles  of  one 
sphere  ^vill  be  to  the  attractions  of  the  other  towards  as  many  analogous  par¬ 
ticles  of  the  other  sphere  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  particles 
directly,  and  the  square  of  the  distances  inversely.  But  the  particles  are  as  the 
spheres,  that  is,  as  the  cubes  of  the  diameters,  and  the  distances  are  as  the 
diameters;  and  the  first  ratio  directly  ^vith  the  last  ratio  taken  t^vice  inversely, 
becomes  the  ratio  of  diameter  to  diameter.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  i.  Hence  if  corpuscles  revolve  in  circles  about  spheres  composed  of 
matter  equally  attracting,  and  the  distances  from  the  centres  of  the  spheres 
be  proportional  to  their  diameters,  the  periodic  times  will  be  equal. 

Cor.  II.  And,  vice  versa,  if  the  periodic  times  are  equal,  the  distances  will  be 
proportional  to  the  diameters.  These  two  Corollaries  appear  from  Cor.  iii. 
Prop.  4. 

Cor.  hi.  If  to  the  several  points  of  any  two  solids  whatever,  of  like  figure 
and  equal  density,  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreasing  as  the  square 
of  the  distances  from  those  points,  the  forces,  with  which  corpuscles  placed  in 
a  like  situation  to  those  two  solids  ^vill  be  attracted  by  them,  will  be  to  each 
other  as  the  diameters  of  the  solids. 


Proposition  73.  Theorem  33 

If  to  the  several  points  of  a  given  sphere  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreas¬ 
ing  as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  the  points,  I  say,  that  a  corpuscle  placed 
within  the  sphere  is  attracted  by  a  force  proportional  to  its  distance  from  the  centre. 

C  In  the  sphere  ACBD,  described  about  the  centre 

S,  let  there  be  placed  the  corpuscle  P ;  and  about  the 
same  centre  S,  with  the  interval  SP,  conceive  de¬ 
scribed  an  interior  sphere  PEQF.  It  is  plain  (by  Prop. 
70)  that  the  concentric  spherical  surfaces  of  which  the 
difference  AEBF  of  the  spheres  is  composed,  have 
no  effect  at  all  upon  the  body  P,  their  attractions 
being  destroyed  by  contrary  attractions.  There  re¬ 
mains,  therefore,  only  the  attraction  of  the  interior 
sphere  PEQF.  And  (by  Prop.  72)  this  is  as  the  dis- 

„  Q.E.D. 

Scholium 


B 


By  the  surfaces  of  which  I  here  imagine  the  solids  composed,  I  do  not  mean 
surfaces  purely  mathematical,  but  orbs  so  extremely  thin,  that  theit  thickness 
is  as  nothing;  that  is,  the  evanescent  orbs  of  which  the  sphere  will  at  last  con- 


134  Mathematical  Principles 

sist,  when  the  number  of  the  orbs  is  increased,  and  their  thickness  diminished 
without  end.  In  like  manner,  bj^  the  points  of  which  lines,  surfaces,  and  solids 
are  said  to  be  composed,  are  to  be  understood  equal  particles,  whose  magnitude 
is  perfectly  inconsiderable. 

Proposition  74.  Theorem  34 

The  same  things  supposed,  I  say,  that  a  corpuscle  situated  without  the  sphere  is 
attracted  with  a  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  distance  from  the 
centre. 

For  suppose  the  sphere  to  be  divided  into  innumerable  concentric  spherical 
surfaces,  and  the  attractions  of  the  corpuscle  arising  from  the  several  surfaces 
vnll  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  corpuscle 
from  the  centre  of  the  sphere  (by  Prop.  71).  And,  by  composition,  the  sum  of 
those  attractions,  that  is,  the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  towards  the  entire 
sphere,  will  be  in  the  same  ratio.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  attractions  of  homogeneous  spheres  at  equal  distances 
from  the  centres  will  be  as  the  spheres  themselves.  For  (by  Prop.  72)  if  the 
distances  be  proportional  to  the  diameters  of  the  spheres,  the  forces  will  be  as 
the  diameters.  Let  the  greater  distance  be  diminished  in  that  ratio;  and  the 
distances  now  being  equal,  the  attraction  wdll  be  increased  as  the  square  of 
that  ratio;  and  therefore  mil  be  to  the  other  attraction  as  the  cube  of  that 
ratio;  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  the  spheres. 

Cor.  II.  At  any  distances  whatever  the  attractions  are  as  the  spheres  applied 
to  the  squares  of  the  distances. 

Cor.  III.  If  a  corpuscle  placed  mthout  an  homogeneous  sphere  is  attracted 
by  a  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  distance  from  the  centre, 
and  the  sphere  consists  of  attractive  particles,  the  force  of  every  particle  will 
decrease  as  the  square  of  the  distance  from  each  particle. 

Proposition  75.  Theorem  35 

If  to  the  several  points  of  a  given  sphere  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreas¬ 
ing  as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  the  point,  I  say,  that  another  similar  sphere 
will  be  attracted  by  it  with  a  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance 
of  the  centres. 

For  the  attraction  of  every  particle  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  its  distance 
from  the  centre  of  the  attracting  sphere  (by  Prop.  74),  and  is  therefore  the 
same  as  if  that  whole  attracting  force  issued  from  one  single  corpuscle  placed 
in  the  centre  of  this  sphere.  But  this  attraction  is  as  great  as  on  the  other  hand 
the  attraction  of  the  same  corpuscle  would  be,  if  that  were  itself  attracted  by 
the  several  particles  of  the  attracted  sphere  with  the  same  force  with  which 
they  are  attracted  by  it.  But  that  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  would  be  (by 
Prop.  74)  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  distance  from  the  centre 
of  the  sphere;  therefore  the  attraction  of  the  sphere,  equal  thereto,  is  also  in 
the  same  ratio.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  The  attractions  of  spheres  towards  other  homogeneous  spheres  are 
as  the  attracting  spheres  applied  to  the  squares  of  the  distances  of  their  centres 
from  the  centres  of  those  which  they  attract. 

Cor. II.  The  case  is  the  same  when  the  attracted  sphere  does  also  attract. 
For  the  several  points  of  the  one  attract  the  several  points  of  the  other  with 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  135 

the  same  force  with  which  they  themselves  are  attracted  by  the  others  again; 
and  therefore  since  in  all  attractions  (by  Law  iii)  the  attracted  and  attracting 
point  are  both  equally  acted  on,  the  force  vill  be  doubled  by  their  mutual 
attractions,  the  proportions  remaining. 

Cor.  III.  Those  several  truths  demonstrated  above  concerning  the  motion 
of  bodies  about  the  focus  of  the  conic  sections  vill  take  place  when  an  attract¬ 
ing  sphere  is  placed  in  the  focus,  and  the  bodies  move  without  the  sphere. 

Cor.  IV.  Those  things  which  were  demonstrated  before  of  the  motion  of 
bodies  about  the  centre  of  the  conic  sections  take  place  when  the  motions  are 
performed  ^^Tthin  the  sphere. 

Proposition  76.  Theorem  36 

If  spheres  he  however  dissimilar  {as  to  density  of  matter  and  attractive  force)  in 
the  same  ratio  onwards  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference;  hut  everywhere  similar, 
at  every  given  distance  from  the  centre,  on  all  sides  round  about;  and  the  attractive 
force  of  every  point  decreases  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  body  attracted: 
I  say,  that  the  whole  force  with  which  one  of  these  spheres  attracts  the  other  will  be 
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  centres. 

Imagine  several  concentric  similar  spheres  AB,  CD,  EF,  &c.,  the  innermost 
of  which  added  to  the  outermost  may  compose  a  matter  more  dense  towards 
the  centre,  or  subtracted  from  them  may  leave  the  same  more  lax  and  rare. 

Then,  by  Prop.  75,  these  spheres  •will 
attract  other  similar  concentric 
spheres  GH,  IK,  LM,  &c.,  each  the 
other,  's^Tth  forces  inversely  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  square  of  the  distance 
SP.  And,  by  addition  or  subtraction, 
the  sum  of  all  those  forces,  or  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  any  of  them  above  the  others; 
that  is,  the  entire  force  with  which  the 
whole  sphere  AB  (composed  of  any 
concentric  spheres  or  of  their  differences)  will  attract  the  whole  sphere  GH 
(composed  of  any  concentric  spheres  or  their  differences)  in  the  same  ratio.  Let 
the  number  of  the  concentric  spheres  be  increased  in  infinitum,  so  that  the 
density  of  the  matter  together  'sHth  the  attractive  force  may,  in  the  progress 
from  the  circumference  to  the  centre,  increase  or  decrease  according  to  any 
given  law;  and  by  the  addition  of  matter  not  attractive,  let  the  deficient  den¬ 
sity  be  supplied,  that  so  the  spheres  may  acquire  any  form  desired;  and  the 
force  \vith  which  one  of  these  attracts  the  other  vdll  be  still,  by  the  former 
reasoning,  in  the  same  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distance.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  many  spheres  of  this  kind,  similar  in  all  respects,  attract 
each  other,  the  accelerative  attractions  of  each  to  each,  at  any  equal  distances 
of  the  centres,  ■sHll  be  as  the  attracting  spheres. 

Cor.  II.  And  at  any  unequal  distances,  as  the  attracting  spheres  divided  by 
the  squares  of  the  distances  between  the  centres. 

Cor.  III.  The  motive  attractions,  or  the  weights  of  the  spheres  towards  one 
another,  "^Hll  be  at  equal  distances  of  the  centres  conjointly  as  the  attracting 
and  attracted  spheres;  that  is,  as  the  products  arising  from  multiplying  the 
spheres  into  each  other. 


A 


B 


136  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  IV.  And  at  unequal  distances  directly  as  those  products  and  inversely 
as  the  squares  of  the  distances  between  the  centres. 

Cor.  V.  These  proportions  hold  true  also  when  the  attraction  arises  from 
the  attractive  power  of  both  spheres  exerted  upon  each  other.  For  the  attrac¬ 
tion  is  only  doubled  by  the  conjunction  of  the  forces,  the  proportions  remain¬ 
ing  as  before. 

Cor.  VI.  If  spheres  of  this  kind  revolve  about  others  at  rest,  each  about 
each,  and  the  distances  between  the  centres  of  the  quiescent  and  revolving 
bodies  are  proportional  to  the  diameters  of  the  quiescent  bodies,  the  periodic 
times  will  be  equal. 

Cor.  VII.  And,  again,  if  the  periodic  times  are  equal,  the  distances  will  be 
proportional  to  the  diameters. 

Cor.  VIII.  All  those  truths  above  demonstrated,  relating  to  the  motions  of 
bodies  about  the  foci  of  conic  sections,  ^vill  take  place  when  an  attracting 
sphere,  of  any  form  and  condition  like  that  above  described,  is  placed  in  the 
focus. 

Cor.  IX.  And  also  when  the  revolving  bodies  are  also  attracting  spheres  of 
any  condition  like  that  above  described. 


Proposition  77.  Theorem  37 

If  to  the  several  'points  of  spheres  there  tend  centripetal  forces  proportional  to  the 
distances  of  the  points  from  the  attracted  bodies,  I  say,  that  the  compounded  force 
'with  which  two  spheres  attract  each  other  is  as  the  distance  between  the  centres  of 
the  spheres. 

Case  1.  Let  AEBF  be  a  sphere;  S  its  centre;  P  a  corpuscle  attracted;  PASB 
the  axis  of  the  sphere  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  corpuscle;  EF,  ef  two 
planes  cutting  the  sphere,  and  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  and  equidistant,  one 
on  one  side,  the  other  on  the  other,  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere;  G  and  g  the 
intersections  of  the  planes  and  the  axis; 
and  H  any  point  in  the  plane  EF.  The  cen¬ 
tripetal  force  of  the  point  H  upon  the  cor¬ 
puscle  P,  exerted  in  the  direction  of  the 
line  PH,  is  as  the  distance  PH;  and  (by  B 
Cor.  II  of  the  Laws)  the  same  exerted  in 
the  direction  of  the  line  PG,  or  towards 
the  centre  S,  is  as  the  length  PG.  Therefore 
the  force  of  all  the  points  in  the  plane  EF 
(that  is,  of  that  whole  plane)  by  which  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted  towards 
the  centre  S  is  as  the  distance  PG  multiplied  by  the  number  of  those  points, 
that  is,  as  the  solid  contained  under  that  plane  EF  and  the  distance  PG.  And 
in  like  manner  the  force  of  the  plane  ef,  by  which  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted 
towards  the  centre  S,  is  as  that  plane  multiplied  by  its  distance  Vg,  or  as  the 
equal  plane  EF  multiplied  by  that  distance  Pgr;  and  the  sum  of  the  forces  of 
both  planes  as  the  plane  EF  multiplied  by  the  sum  of  the  distances  PG+Pgr, 
that  is,  as  that  plane  multiplied  by  twice  the  distance  PS  of  the  centre  and  the 
corpuscle;  that  is,  as  twice  the  plane  EF  multiplied  by  the  distance  PS,  or  as 
the  sum  of  the  equal  planes  EF+e/  multiplied  by  the  same  distance.  And,  by 
a -like  reasoning,  the  forces  of  all  the  planes  in  the  whole  sphere,  equidistant 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  137 

on  each  side  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  are  as  the  sum  of  those  planes  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  the  distance  PS,  that  is,  as  the  whole  sphere  and  the  distance  PS 
conjointly.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Let  now  the  corpuscle  P  attract  the  sphere  AEBF.  And,  by  the 
same  reasoning,  it  mil  appear  that  the  force  with  which  the  sphere  is  attracted 
is  as  the  distance  PS.  q.e.d. 

Case  3.  Imagine  another  sphere  composed  of  innumerable  corpuscles  P;  and 
because  the  force  mth  which  every  corpuscle  is  attracted  is  as  the  distance  of 
the  corpuscle  from  the  centre  of  the  first  sphere,  and  as  the  same  sphere  con¬ 
jointly,  and  is  therefore  the  same  as  if  it  all  proceeded  from  a  single  corpuscle 
situated  in  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  the  entire  force  with  which  all  the  cor¬ 
puscles  in  the  second  sphere  are  attracted,  that  is,  with  which  that  whole 
sphere  is  attracted,  will  be  the  same  as  if  that  sphere  were  attracted  by  a  force 
issuing  from  a  single  corpuscle  in  the  centre  of  the  first  sphere;  and  is  therefore 
proportional  to  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  spheres.  q.e.d. 

Case  4.  Let  the  spheres  attract  each  other,  and  the  force  will  be  doubled, 
but  the  proportion  mil  remain.  q.e.d. 

Case  5.  Let  the  corpuscle  p  be  placed  mthin  the  sphere  AEBF;  and  because 
the  force  of  the  plane  ef  upon  the  corpuscle  is  as  the  solid  contained  under  that 
plane  and  the  distance  pg;  and  the  contrary  force  of  the  plane  EF  as  the  solid 

contained  under  that  plane  and  the  distance  pG ;  the 
force  compounded  of  both  will  be  as  the  difference  of 
the  solids,  that  is,  as  the  sum  of  the  equal  planes 
multiplied  by  half  the  difference  of  the  distances; 
that  is,  as  that  sum  multiplied  by  pS,  the  distance  of 
the  corpuscle  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  And,  by 
a  like  reasoning,  the  attraction  of  all  the  planes  EF, 
ef,  throughout  the  whole  sphere,  that  is,  the  attrac¬ 
tion  of  the  whole  sphere,  is  conjointly  as  the  sum  of 
all  the  planes,  or  as  the  whole  sphere,  and  as  pS,  the  distance  of  the  corpuscle 
from  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  q.e.d. 

Case  6.  And  if  there  be  composed  a  new  sphere  out  of  innumerable  corpus¬ 
cles  such  as  p,  situated  mthin  the  first  sphere  AEBF,  it  may  be  proved,  as 
before,  that  the  attraction,  whether  single  of  one  sphere  towards  the  other,  or 
mutual  of  both  towards  each  other,  mil  be  as  the  distance  pS  of  the  centres. 

Q.E.D. 


Proposition  78.  Theorem  38 

If  spheres  in  the  progress  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  be  however  dissimilar 
and  unequable,  but  similar  on  every  side  round  about  at  all  given  distances  from 
the  centre;  and  the  attractive  force  of  every  point  be  as  the  distance  of  the  attracted 
body:  I  say,  that  the  entire  force  with  which  two  spheres  of  this  kind  attract  each 
other  mutually  is  proportional  to  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  spheres. 

This  is  demonstrated  from  the  foregoing  Proposition,  in  the  same  manner 
as  Prop.  76  was  demonstrated  from  Prop.  75. 

Cor.  Those  things  that  were  above  demonstrated  in  Props.  10  and  64,  of 
the  motion  of  bodies  round  the  centres  of  conic  sections,  take  place  when  all 
the  attractions  are  made  by  the  force  of  spherical  bodies  of  the  condition  above 
described,  and  the  attracted  bodies  are  spheres  of  the  same  kind. 


138 


Mathematical  Principles 
Scholium 

I  have  now  explained  the  two  principal  cases  of  attractions;  to  wit,  when 
the  centripetal  forces  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances,  or 
increase  in  a  simple  ratio  of  the  distances,  causing  the  bodies  in  both  cases  to 
revolve  in  conic  sections,  and  composing  spherical  bodies  whose  centripetal 
forces  observe  the  same  law  of  increase  or  decrease  in  the  recess  from  the 
centre  as  the  forces  of  the  particles  themselves  do;  which  is  very  remarkable. 
It  would  be  tedious  to  run  over  the  other  cases,  whose  conclusions  are  less 
elegant  and  important,  so  particularly  as  I  have  done  these.  I  choose  rather  to 
comprehend  and  determine  them  all  by  one  general  method  as  follows. 

Lemma  29 

If  about  the  centre  S  there  he  described  any  circle  as  AEB,  and  about  the  centre  P 
there  be  also  described  two  circles  EF,  ef,  cutting  the  first  in  E  aiid  e,  and  the  line 
PS  in  F  and  f;  and  there  be  let  fall  to  PS  the  perpendiculars  ED,  ed:  I  say,  that  if 


the  distance  of  the  arcs  EF,  ef  be  supposed  to  be  infinitely  diminished,  the  last  ratio 
of  the  evanescent  line  Dd  to  the  evanescent  line  Ff  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  line  PE 
to  the  line  PS. 

For  if  the  line  Pe  cut  the  arc  EF  in  g;  and  the  right  line  Ee,  which  coincides 
with  the  evanescent  arc  Ee,  be  produced,  and  meet  the  right  line  PS  in  T;  and 
there  be  let  fall  from  S  to  PE  the  perpendicular  SG;  then,  because  of  the  like 
triangles  DTE,  dTe,  DES, 

m  :  Ee  =  DT  :  TE  =  DE  :  ES; 

and  because  the  triangles,  Eeg,  ESG  (by  Lem.  8,  and  Cor.  iii,  Lem.  7)  are 
similar,  Ee  :  eg  or  F/=Es  :  SG. 

Multiplying  together  corresponding  terms  of  the  two  proportions, 

Dd  :  F/=DE  :  SG  =  PE  :  PS 

(because  of  the  similar  triangles  PDE,  PGS).  q.e.d. 

Proposition  79.  Theorem  39 

Suppose  a  surface  as  EFfe  to  have  its  breadth  infinitely  diminished,  and  to  be  just 
vanishing;  and  that  the  same  surface  by  its  revolution  round  the  axis  PS  describes  a 
spherical  concavoconvex  solid,  to  the  several  equal  particles  of  which  there  tend  equal 
centripetal  forces:  I  say,  that  the  force  with  which  that  solid  attracts  a  corpuscle 
situated  in  P  is  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  solid  DE^  •  Ff  and  the  ratio 
of  the  force  with  which  the  given  particle  in  the  place  Ff  would  attract  the  same 
corpuscle. 

For  if  we  consider,  first,  the  force  of  the  spherical  surface  FE  which  is  gen¬ 
erated  by  the  revolution  of  the  arc  FE,  and  is  cut  anywhere,  as  in  r,  by  the  line 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  139 

de,  the  annular  part  of  the  surface  generated  by  the  revolution  of  the  arc  rE 
mil  be  as  the  short  line  Dd,  the  radius  of  the  sphere  PE  remaining  the  same; 
as  Archimedes  has  demonstrated  in  his  Book  on  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder.  And 
the  force  of  this  surface  exerted  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  PE  or  Pr  situated 

all  round  in  the  conical  surface,  will  be  as 
this  annular  surface  itself;  that  is,  as  the 
short  line  Dd,  or,  which  is  the  same,  as  the 
rectangle  under  the  given  radius  PE  of  the 
sphere  and  the  short  line  Dd;  but  that  force, 
exerted  in  the  direction  of  the  line  PS  tend¬ 
ing  to  the  centre  S,  mil  be  less  in  the  ratio 
PD  to  PE,  and  therefore  will  be  as  PD  •  Dd. 
Suppose  now  the  line  DF  to  be  divided 
into  innumerable  little  equal  particles,  each 
of  which  call  Dd,  and  then  the  surface  FE 
mil  be  divided  into  so  many  equal  annuli,  whose  forces  will  be  as  the  sum 
of  all  the  rectangles  PD-Dd,  that  is,  as  3^PF2  — and  therefore  as  DE^. 
Let  now  the  surface  FE  be  multiplied  by  the  altitude  F/;  and  the  force  of  the 
solid  EF/e  exerted  upon  the  corpuscle  P  mil  be  as  DE^-F/;  that  is,  if  the  force 
be  given  which  any  given  particle  as  F/  exerts  upon  the  corpuscle  P  at  the 
distance  PF.  But  if  that  force  be  not  given,  the  force  of  the  solid  EF/e  will  be 
conjointly  as  the  solid  DE^-Ff  and  that  force  not  given.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  80.  Theorem  40 


If  to  the  several  equal  parts  of  a  sphere  ABE  described  about  the  centre  S  there  tend 
equal  centripetal  forces;  and  from  the  several  points  D  in  the  axis  of  the  sphere  AB 
in  which  a  corpuscle,  as  P,  is  placed,  there  be  erected  the  perpendiculars  DE  meet¬ 
ing  the  sphere  in  E,  and  if  in  those  perpendiculars  the  lengths  DN  be  taken  as  the 
•  PS 

quantity  — — ,  and  as  the  force  which  a  particle  of  the  sphere  situated  in  the 

axis  exerts  at  the  distance  PE  upon  the  corpuscle  P  conjointly:  I  say,  that  the  whole 
force  with  which  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted  towards  the  sphere  is  as  the  area  ANB, 
comprehended  under  the  axis 
of  the  sp/iere  AB,  and  the  curved 
line  ANB,  the  locus  of  the 
point  N. 

For  supposing  the  con¬ 
struction  in  the  last  Lemma 

and  Theorem  to  stand,  con-  B 

ceive  the  axis  of  the  sphere 
AB  to  be  divided  into  innu¬ 
merable  equal  particles  Dd, 
and  the  whole  sphere  to  be 
divided  into  so  many  spheri¬ 
cal  concavoconvex  laminae  EF/e;  and  erect  the  perpendicular  dn.  By  the  last 
Theorem,  the  force  with  which  the  laminae  EF/e  attract  the  corpuscle  P  is  as 
DE^-F/  and  the  force  of  one  particle  exerted  at  the  distance  PE  or  PF,  con¬ 
jointly.  But  (by  the  last  Lemma)  Dd  is  to  F/  as  PE  to  PS,  and  therefore  F/  is 


140 


Mathematical  Principles 

DE^PS 


equal  to  ^  ;  and  DE^  •  Ff  is  equal  to  Dd 

rtj 


PE 


;  and  therefore  the  force 


DE^PS 

of  the  lamina  EF/e  is  as  Dd — ™ —  and  the  force  of  a  particle  exerted  at 

1  iii 

the  distance  PF  conjointly;  that  is,  by  the  supposition,  as  DN -Dd,  or  as  the 
evanescent  area  DNnd.  Therefore  the  forces  of  all  the  lamin®  exerted  upon  the 
corpuscle  P  are  as  all  the  areas  DN?id,  that  is,  the  whole  force  of  the  sphere  will 
be  as  the  whole  area  ANB.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  several  particles  remain 

DE“  •  PS 

ahvays  the  same  at  all  distances,  and  DN  be  made  as  — — ,  the  whole  force 

with  w'hich  the  corpuscle  is  attracted  by  the  sphere  is  as  the  area  ANB. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  centripetal  force  of  the  particles  be  inversely  as  the  distance 

DE^  •  PS 

of  the  corpuscle  attracted  by  it,  and  DN  be  made  as  — — ,  the  force  with 

wEich  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted  by  the  whole  sphere  will  be  as  the  area  ANB. 
Cor.  III.  If  the  centripetal  force  of  the  particles  be  inversely  as  the  cube  of 

DE^ .  pg 

the  distance  of  the  corpuscle  attracted  by  it,  and  DN  be  made  as  — — ,  the 

force  with  which  the  corpuscle  is  attracted  by  the  whole  sphere  will  be  as  the 
area  ANB. 

Cor.  IV.  And  universally  if  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  several  par¬ 
ticles  of  the  sphere  be  supposed  to  be  inversely  as  the  quantity  V ;  and  DN  be 

P)E2  .  pg 

made  as  at  i  force  Avith  w'hich  a  corpuscle  is  attracted  by  the  whole 
sphere  will  be  as  the  area  ANB. 


Proposition  81.  Problem  41 


The  things  remaining  as  above,  it  is  required  to  measure  the  area  ANB. 

From  the  point  P  let  there  be  drawm  the  right  line  PH  touching  the  sphere  in 
H;  and  to  the  axis  PAB,  letting  fall  the  perpendicular  HI,  bisect  PI  in  L;  and 
(by  Prop.  12,  Book  ii,  Elements  of  Euclid)  PE^  is  equal  to  PS“-|-SE^+2PS-SD. 
But  because  the  triangles  SPH, 

SHI  are  alike,  SE^  or  SH^  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  PS -IS. 

Therefore  PE^  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  contained  under  PS 
and  PS-I-SI-1-2SD;  that  is, 
under  PS  and  2LS+2SD;  that 
is,  under  PS  and  2LD.  More¬ 
over  DE^  is  equal  to  SE-  —  SD^, 
or 

SE2  -  LS2-b  2LS  •  LD  -  LD^, 
that  is, 

2LSLD-LD2-LALB. 


l 

- - 

L  M 

s 

D 

N 


For  LS^  — SE2  or  LS^  — SA^  (by  Prop.  6,  Book  ii,  Elements  of  Euclid)  is  equal  to 
the  rectangle  LA -LB.  Therefore  if  instead  of  DE^  w^e  Avrite 

2LS  •  LD  -  LD2  -  LA  •  LB, 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


141 


the  quantity 


DE2.PS 


, which  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  foregoing  Prop.)  is  as  the  length 


PEV 

of  the  ordinate  DN,  ’wall  now  resolve  itself  into  three  parts 

2SLD-PS  LD2.PS  ALB -PS 
PE-V  PE  V  PE-V  ’ 

where  if  instead  of  V  we  write  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  centripetal  force,  and 
instead  of  PE  the  mean  proportional  between  PS  and  2LD,  those  three  parts 
A\dll  become  ordinates  to  so  many  curved  lines,  whose  areas  are  discovered  by 
the  common  methods.  q.e.d. 

Exam.  1.  If  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  several  particles  of  the  sphere 
be  inversely  as  the  distance;  instead  of  V  write  PE  the  distance,  then  2PS-LD 

for  PE^;  and  DN  vdll  become  as  SL  — 3^LD  — 

LA -LB 


Suppose  DN  equal  to  its  double  2SL  — LD  — 


LD 


and  2SL  the  given  part  of  the  ordinate  drawn  into  the 
length  AB  wall  describe  the  rectangular  area  2SL-AB; 
and  the  indefinite  part  LD,  drawn  perpendicularly  into 
the  same  length  with  a  continued  motion,  in  such  sort  as 
in  its  motion  one  way  or  another  it  may  either  by  in¬ 
creasing  or  decreasing  remain  ahvays  equal  to  the  length  LD,  will  describe 
LB2  — LA^ 

the  area - - - ,  that  is,  the  area  SL  •  AB ;  wLich  taken  from  the  former  area 


2SL' AB,  leaves  the  area  SL-AB.  But  the  third  part 


LA  LB 
LD  ’ 


drawm  after  the 


same  manner  with  a  continued  motion  perpendicularly  into  the  same  length, 
will  describe  the  area  of  an  hyperbola,  which  subtracted  from  the  area  SL  •  AB 
will  leave  ANB  the  area  sought.  Whence  arises  this  construction  of  the  Prob¬ 
lem.  At  the  points  L,  A,  B,  erect  the  perpendiculars  hi,  Aa,  B&;  making  Aa 
equal  to  LB,  and  B6  equal  to  LA.  Making  hi  and  LB  asymptotes,  describe 
through  the  points  a,  b  the  hyperbolic  curve  ah.  And  the  chord  ba  being  drawm, 
will  inclose  the  area  aba  equal  to  the  area  sought  ANB. 

Exam.  2.  If  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  several  particles  of  the  sphere 
be  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  or  (which  is  the  same  thing)  as  that 

PE® 

cube  applied  to  any  given  plane;  write  — for  V, 

and  2PS-LD  for  PE^;  and  DN  will  become  as 
SL-AS®  AS2  LA-LB-AS2 
PS  LD  2PS  2PS  LD2  ’ 
that  is  (because  PS,  AS,  SI  are  continually  propor¬ 
tional),  as 

LSI  LA -LB -SI 

LD  2LD2  • 

If  w-e  draw^  then  these  three  parts  into  the  length  AB,  the  first 


SLSI 

LD 


will 


generate  the  area  of  an  hyperbola;  the  second  J^SI  the  area  J^AB  •  SI;  the  third 
LALBSI,  LALBSI  LALBSI  ^  , 

— 2LD2 —  - 2LA - 2LB - ’  72^^  •  SI.  From  the  first 

subtract  the  sum  of  the  second  and  third,  and  there  will  remain  ANB  the  area 


142 


Mathematical  Principles 

sought.  Whence  arises  this  construction  of  the  Problem.  At  the  points  L,  A,  S, 
B,  erect  the  perpendiculars  li,  Aa,  Ss,  Bb,  of  which  suppose  Ss  equal  to  SI; 
and  through  the  point  s,  to  the  asymptotes  12,  LB,  describe  the  hyperbola  asb 
meeting  the  perpendiculars  Aa,  Bb  in  a  and  b;  and  the  rectangle  2SA-SI  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  hyperbolic  area  AasbB,  will  leave  AXB  the  area  sought. 

Exam.  3.  If  the  centripetal  force  tending  to  the  several  particles  of  the 
spheres  decrease  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  distance  from  the  particles;  write 
PE^ 

2j^^3  then  V(2PS-f-LD)  tor  PE,  and  DX  will  become  as 

SP-SL  1  SP  1  SP-LA-LB  1 
VSSIVLD^  2V2SrVLD  2V2SI  VLIW 


These  three  parts  drawn  into  the  length  AB,  produce  so  many  areas,  viz., 
2SP-SL.  ,  /  1  1  \  SP 


V2SI 

SPLALB 


into 


into 


\^VLA  VLB/V2SI 
1  1 


into  V(LB  — VLA);  and 


And  these  after  due  reduction  come  forth 


3\/2SI  V'LB^/ 

SI-,  and  SP+-rYy.  And  these  by  subtracting  the  last  from  the  first. 


LI 
become 


4SP 

3LI- 


3Lr 

Therefore  the  entire  force  with  which  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted 

SP 


towards  the  centre  of  the  sphere  is  as  that  is,  inversely  as  PS^-PI.  q.e.i- 

By  the  same  method  one  may  determine  the  attraction  of  a  corpuscle  sit¬ 
uated  within  the  sphere,  but  more  expeditiously  by  the  following  Theorem. 


Proposition  82.  Theorem  41 

In  a  sphere  described  about  the  centre  S  with  the  radius  SA,  if  there  be  taken  SI, 
SA,  SP  continually  proportional:  I  say,  that  the  attraction  of  a  corpuscle  within  the 
sphere  in  any  place  I  is  to  its  attraction  without  the  sphere  in  the  place  P  in  a  ratio 
compounded  of  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  IS,  PS,  the  distances  from  the  centre, 
and  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  centripetal  forces  tending  to  the  centre  in  those 
places  P  and  1. 

As,  if  the  centripetal  forces  of  the  particles  of  the  sphere  be  inversely  as  the 
distances  of  the  corpuscle  attracted  by  them,  the  force  with  which  the  cor¬ 
puscle  situated  in  I  is  attracted  by  the  entire  sphere  will  be  to  the  force  with 
which  it  is  attracted  in  P  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of  the  ratio 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


143 


of  the  distance  SI  to  the  distance  SP,  and  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the 
centripetal  force  in  the  place  I  arising  from  any  particle  in  the  centre  to  the 
centripetal  force  in  the  place  P  arising  from  the  same  particle  in  the  centre; 
that  is,  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  distances  SI,  SP  to  each 

other.  These  two  square  roots 
of  ratios  compose  the  ratio  of 
equality,  and  therefore  the  at¬ 
tractions  in  I  and  P  produced 
by  the  whole  sphere  are  equal. 
By  the  like  calculation,  if  the 
forces  of  the  particles  of  the 
sphere  are  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  ratio  of  the  dis¬ 
tances,  it  vdll  be  found  that  the 
attraction  in  I  is  to  the  attrac¬ 
tion  in  P  as  the  distance  SP  to 
the  semidiameter  SA  of  the  sphere.  If  those  forces  are  inversely  as  the  cube  of 
the  ratio  of  the  distances,  the  attractions  in  I  and  P  will  be  to  each  other  as 
SP^  to  SA^;  if  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  ratio,  as  SP®  to  SA®.  Therefore  since 
the  attraction  in  P  was  found  in  this  last  case  to  be  inversely  as  PS® -PI,  the 
attraction  in  I  will  be  inversely  as  SA®-PI,  that  is,  because  SA®  is  given,  in¬ 
versely  as  PL  And  the  progression  is  the  same  in  infinitum.  The  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  this  Theorem  is  as  follows: 

The  things  remaining  as  above  constructed,  and  a  corpuscle  being  in  any 


E 


place  P,  the  ordinate  DN  was  found  to  be  as 


DE^.PS 

PEV 


.  Therefore  if  IE  be 


drawn,  that  ordinate  for  any  other  place  of  the  corpuscle,  as  I,  vdll  become 


(other  things  being  equal)  as 


DE2-IS 
lE  V  • 


Suppose  the  centripetal  forces  flowing 


from  any  point  of  the  sphere,  as  E,  to  be  to  each  other  at  the  distances  IE  and 
PE  as  PE"  to  IE"  (where  the  number  n  denotes  the  index  of  the  powers  of  PE 


and  IE),  and  those  ordinates  will  become  as 


DE^PS 
PE  PE" 


and 


DE2-IS 
IE -IE"’ 


whose  ratio 


to  each  other  is  as  PS  •  IE  •  IE"  to  IS  •  PE  •  PE".  Because  SI,  SE,  SP  are  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion,  the  triangles  SPE,  SEI  are  alike;  and  thence  IE  is  to  PE  as 
IS  to  SE  or  SA.  For  the  ratio  of  IE  to  PE  write  the  ratio  of  IS  to  SA;  and  the 
ratio  of  the  ordinates  becomes  that  of  PS  •  IE"  to  SA  •  PE".  But  the  ratio  of  PS 
to  SA  is  the  square  root  of  that  of  the  distances  PS,  SI;  and  the  ratio  of  IE"  to 
PE"  (because  IE  is  to  PE  as  IS  to  SA)  is  the  square  root  of  that  of  the  forces  at 
the  distances  PS,  IS.  Therefore  the  ordinates,  and  consequently  the  areas 
which  the  ordinates  describe,  and  the  attractions  proportional  to  them,  are  in  a 
ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of  those  ratios.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  83.  Problem  42 

To  find  the  force  with  which  a  corpuscle  placed  in  the  centre  of  a  sphere  is  attracted 
towards  any  segment  of  that  sphere  whatsoever. 

Let  P  be  a  body  in  the  centre  of  that  sphere,  and  RBSD  a  segment  thereof 
contained  under  the  plane  RDS  and  the  spherical  surface  RBS.  Let  DB  be  cut 
in  F  by  a  spherical  surface  EFG  described  from  the  centre  P,  and  let  the  seg- 


144 


Mathematical  Principles 


ment  be  divided  into  the  parts  BREFGS,  FEDG.  Let  us  suppose  that  segment 
to  be  not  a  purely  mathematical  but  a  physical  surface,  having  some,  but  a 
perfectly  inconsiderable  thickness.  Let  that  thickness 
be  called  O,  and  (by  what  Archimedes  hath  dem¬ 
onstrated)  that  surface  will  be  as  PF  -DF  -0.  Let  us 
suppose,  besides,  the  attractive  forces  of  the  particles 
of  the  sphere  to  be  inversely  as  that  power  of  the  dis¬ 
tances,  of  which  11  is  index;  and  the  force  with  which 
the  surface  EFG  attracts  the  body  P  will  be  (by 

„  DE2.0  .  2DF  0  DF^  O  ,  ^ 

Prop.  79)  as  that  is,  as  - Let 

the  perpendicular  FN  multiplied  by  0  be  propor¬ 
tional  to  this  quantity;  and  the  curvilinear  area 
BDI,  which  the  ordinate  FN,  drawn  through  the 
length  DB  with  a  continued  motion  will  describe,  will 
be  as  the  w'hole  force  ^vith  wLich  the  wLole  segment 
RBSD  attracts  the  body  P.  q.e.i. 

Proposition  84.  Problem  43 

To  find  the  force  with  which  a  corpuscle,  placed  without  the  centre  of  a  sphere  in  the 
axis  of  any  segment,  is  attracted  by  that  segment. 

Let  the  body  P  placed  in  the  axis  ADB 
of  the  segment  EBK  be  attracted  by  that 
segment.  About  the  centre  P,  with  the  ra¬ 
dius  PE,  let  the  spherical  surface  EFK  be 
described;  and  let  it  divide  the  segment 
into  tw^o  parts  EBKFE  and  EFKDE. 

Find  the  force  of  the  first  of  those  parts 
by  Prop.  81,  and  the  force  of  the  latter 
part  by  Prop.  83,  and  the  sum  of  the 
forces  will  be  the  force  of  the  w'hole  seg¬ 
ment  EBKDE.  Q.E.I. 


Scholium 

The  attractions  of  spherical  bodies  being  now'  explained,  it  comes  next  in 
order  to  treat  of  the  law's  of  attraction  in  other  bodies  consisting  in  like  man¬ 
ner  of  attractive  particles;  but  to  treat  of  them  particularly  is  not  necessary  to 
my  design.  It  wdll  be  sufficient  to  add  some  general  Propositions  relating  to  the 
forces  of  such  bodies,  and  the  motions  thence  arising,  because  the  know'ledge  of 
these  will  be  of  some  little  use  in  philosophical  inquiries. 


SECTION  XIII 

The  attractive  forces  of  bodies  which  are  not  spherical 
Proposition  85.  Theorem  42 

If  a  body  be  attracted  by  another,  and  its  attraction  be  vastly  stronger  when  it  is 
contiguous  to  the  attracting  body  than  when  they  are  separated  from  each  other  by  a 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  145 

very  small  interval;  the  forces  of  the  'particles  of  the  attracting  body  decrease,  m  the 
recess  of  the  body  attracted,  in  more  than  the  squared  ratio  of  the  distance  of  the 
particles. 

For  if  the  forces  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  the  particles, 
the  attraction  towards  a  spherical  body  being  (by  Prop.  74)  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance  of  the  attracted  body  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  will 
not  be  sensibly  increased  by  the  contact,  and  it  will  be  still  less  increased  by  it, 
if  the  attraction,  in  the  recess  of  the  body  attracted,  decreases  in  a  still  less 
proportion.  The  Proposition,  therefore,  is  evident  concerning  attractive  spheres. 
And  the  case  is  the  same  of  concave  spherical  orbs  attracting  external  bodies. 
And  much  more  does  it  appear  in  orbs  that  attract  bodies  placed  within  them, 
because  there  the  attractions  diffused  through  the  cavities  of  those  orbs  are  (by 
Prop.  70)  destroyed  by  contrary  attractions,  and  therefore  have  no  effect  even 
in  the  place  of  contact.  Now  if  from  these  spheres  and  spherical  orbs  we  take 
away  any  parts  remote  from  the  place  of  contact,  and  add  new  parts  anywhere 
at  pleasure,  we  may  change  the  figures  of  the  attractive  bodies  at  pleasure ;  but 
the  parts  added  or  taken  away,  being  remote  from  the  place  of  contact,  will 
cause  no  remarkable  excess  of  the  attraction  arising  from  the  contact  of  the 
two  bodies.  Therefore  the  Proposition  holds  good  in  bodies  of  all  figures,  q.e.d. 

Proposition  86.  Theorem  43 

If  the  forces  of  the  particles  of  which  an  attractive  body  is  composed  decrease,  in  the 
recession  of  the  attractive  body,  as  the  third  or  more  than  the  third  power  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  particles,  the  attraction  will  be  vastly  stronger  in  the  point  of  contact 
than  when  the  attracting  and  attracted  bodies  are  separated  from  each  other,  though 
by  ever  so  small  an  interval. 

For  that  the  attraction  is  infinitely  increased  when  the  attracted  corpuscle 
comes  to  touch  an  attracting  sphere  of  this  kind,  appears,  by  the  solution  of 
Problem  41,  exhibited  in  the  second  and  third  Examples.  The  same  will  also 
appear  (by  comparing  those  Examples  and  Theor.  41  together)  of  attractions 
of  bodies  made  towards  concavoconvex  orbs,  whether  the  attracted  bodies  be 
placed  without  the  orbs,  or  in  the  cavities  within  them.  And  by  adding  to  or 
taking  from  those  spheres  and  orbs  any  attractive  matter  anywhere  without 
the  place  of  contact,  so  that  the  attractive  bodies  may  receive  any  assigned 
figure,  the  Proposition  will  hold  good  of  all  bodies  universally.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  87.  Theorem  44 

If  two  bodies  similar  to  each  other,  and  consisting  of  matter  equally  attractive, 
attract  separately  two  corpuscles  proportional  to  those  bodies,  and  in  a  like  situation 
to  them,  the  accelerative  attractions  of  the  corpuscles  towards  the  entire  bodies  will 
be  as  the  accelerative  attractions  of  the  corpuscles  towards  particles  of  the  bodies 
proportional  to  the  wholes,  and  similarly  situated  in  them. 

For  if  the  bodies  are  divided  into  particles  proportional  to  the  wholes,  and 
alike  situated  in  them,  it  mil  be,  as  the  attraction  towards  any  particle  of  one 
of  the  bodies  to  the  attraction  towards  the  correspondent  particle  in  the  other 
body,  so  are  the  attractions  towards  the  several  particles  of  the  first  body,  to 
the  attractions  towards  the  several  correspondent  particles  of  the  other  body; 
and,  by  composition,  so  is  the  attraction  tow^ards  the  first  whole  body  to  the 
attraction  towards  the  second  whole  body.  q.e.d. 


146 


Mathematical  Principles 


Cor.  I.  Therefore  if,  as  the  distances  of  the  corpuscles  attracted  increase,  the 
attractive  forces  of  the  particles  decrease  in  the  ratio  of  any  power  of  the  dis¬ 
tances,  the  accelerative  attractions  towards  the  whole  bodies  will  be  directly  as 
the  bodies,  and  inversely  as  those  powers  of  the  distances.  As  if  the  forces  of 
the  particles  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  the  corpuscles  at¬ 
tracted,  and  the  bodies  are  as  and  B^,  and  therefore  both  the  cubic  sides  of 
the  bodies,  and  the  distance  of  the  attracted  corpuscles  from  the  bodies,  are  as 

A^ 

A  and  B ;  the  accelerative  attractions  towards  the  bodies  will  be  as  ^  and 


that  is,  as  A  and  B  the  cubic  sides  of  those  bodies.  If  the  forces  of  the  particles 
decrease  as  the  cube  of  the  distances  from  the  attracted  corpuscles,  the  ac- 

A®  B^ 

celerative  attractions  towards  the  whole  bodies  will  be  as  ^  and  jp,  that  is, 

equal.  If  the  forces  decrease  as  the  fourth  power,  the  attractions  towards  the 
A3  33 

bodies  mil  be  as  ^  and  that  is,  inversely  as  the  cubic  sides  A  and  B.  And  so 


in  other  cases. 

Cor.  II.  Hence,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  forces  with  which  like  bodies 
attract  corpuscles  similarly  situated,  may  be  obtained  the  ratio  of  the  decrease 
of  the  attractive  forces  of  the  particles  as  the  attracted  corpuscle  recedes  from 
them;  if  only  that  decrease  is  directly  or  inversely  in  any  ratio  of  the  distances. 


zo- 


Proposition  88.  Theorem  45 

If  the  attractive  forces  of  the  equal  particles  of  any  body  be  as  the  distance  of  the 
places  from  the  particles,  the  force  of  the  whole  body  will  tend  to  its  centre  of  gravity; 
and  will  be  the  same  with  the  force  of  a  globe,  consisting  of  similar  and  equal  matter, 
and  having  its  centre  in  the  centre  of  gravity. 

Let  the  particles  A,  B  of  the  body  RSTV  attract  any  corpuscle  Z  mth  forces 
which,  supposing  the  particles  to  be  equal  between  themselves,  are  as  the 
distances  AZ,  BZ;  but,  if  they  are  supposed  unequal,  are  as  those  particles  and 
their  distances  AZ,  BZ  conjointly,  or  (if  I  may  so  speak)  as  those  particles 
multiplied  by  their  distances  AZ,  BZ  respec¬ 
tively.  And  let  those  forces  be  expressed  by 
the  contents  under  A-AZ,  and  B-BZ.  Join 
AB,  and  let  it  be  cut  in  G,  so  that  AG  may 
be  to  BG  as  the  particle  B  to  the  particle  A; 
and  G  will  be  the  common  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  particles  A  and  B.  The  force  A-AZ 
will  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws)  be  resolved  into 
the  forces  A-GZ  and  A -AG;  and  the  force 
B  •  BZ  into  the  forces  B  •  GZ  and  B  •  BG.  Now 

the  forces  A -AG  and  B-BG,  because  A  is  proportional  to  B,  and  BG  to  AG, 
are  equal,  and  therefore  having  contrary  directions  destroy  one  another.  There 
remain  then  the  forces  A  •  GZ  and  B  •  GZ.  These  tend  from  Z  towards  the 
centre  G,  and  compose  the  force  (A-l-B)  -  GZ;  that  is,  the  same  force  as  if  the 
attractive  particles  A  and  B  were  placed  in  their  common  centre  of  gravity  G, 
composing  there  a  little  globe. 

By  the  same  reasoning,  if  there  be  added  a  third  particle  C,  and  the  force  of 
it  be  compounded  with  the  force  (A-l-B)  •  GZ  tending  to  the  centre  G,  the  force 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  147 

thence  arising  will  tend  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  that  globe  in  G  and 
of  the  particle  C;  that  is,  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  three  particles 
A,  B,  C;  and  will  be  the  same  as  if  that  globe  and  the  particle  C  were  placed  in 
that  common  centre  composing  a  greater  globe  there;  and  so  we  may  go  on  in 
infinitum.  Therefore  the  whole  force  of  all  the  particles  of  anj"  body  whatever 
RSTV  is  the  same  as  if  that  body,  without  removing  its  centre  of  gravity,  were 
to  put  on  the  form  of  a  globe.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  the  motion  of  the  attracted  body  Z  will  be  the  same  as  if  the 
attracting  body  RSTV  were  spherical;  and  therefore  if  that  attracting  body  be 
either  at  rest,  or  proceed  uniformly  in  a  right  line,  the  body  attracted  will  move 
in  an  ellipse  having  its  centre  in  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  attracting  body. 

Proposition  89.  Theorem  46 

If  there  he  several  bodies  consisting  of  equal  'particles  whose  forces  are  as  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  the  places  from  each,  the  force  compounded  of  all  the  forces  hy  which  any 
corpuscle  is  attracted  will  tend  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  attracting 
bodies;  and  will  he  the  same  as  if  those  attracting  bodies,  preserving  their  common 
centre  of  gravity,  should  unite  there,  and  be  formed  into  a  globe. 

This  is  demonstrated  after  the  same  manner  as  the  foregoing  Proposition. 

Cor.  Therefore  the  motion  of  the  attracted  body  vdll  be  the  same  as  if  the 
attracting  bodies,  preserving  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  should  unite 
there,  and  be  formed  into  a  globe.  And,  therefore,  if  the  common  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  attracting  bodies  be  either  at  rest,  or  proceed  uniformly  in  a 
right  line,  the  attracted  body  will  move  in  an  ellipse  having  its  centre  in  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  attracting  bodies. 

Proposition  90.  Problem  44  - 

If  to  the  several  points  of  any  circle  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces,  increasing  or 
decreasing  in  any  ratio  of  the  distances;  it  is  required  to  find  the  force  with  which  a 
corpuscle  is  attracted,  that  is,  situated  anywhere  in  a  right  line  which  stands  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  at  its  centre. 

Suppose  a  circle  to  be  described  about  the  centre  A  with  any  radius  AD  in  a 
plane  to  w^hich  the  right  line  AP  is  perpendicular;  and  let  it  be  required  to  find 

the  force  with  which  a  corpuscle  P  is  attracted 
towards  the  same.  From  any  point  E  of  the 
circle,  to  the  attracted  corpuscle  P,  let  there  be 
drawn  the  right  line  PE.  In  the  right  line  PA 
take  PF  equal  to  PE,  and  make  a  perpendicular 
FK,  erected  at  F,  to  be  as  the  force  with  wEich 
the  point  E  attracts  the  corpuscle  P.  And  let 
the  curved  line  IKL  be  the  locus  of  the  point 
K.  Let  that  curve  meet  the  plane  of  the  circle 
in  L.  In  PA  take  PH  equal  to  PD,  and  erect  the 
perpendicular  HI  meeting  that  curve  in  I;  and 
the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P  towards  the 
circle  will  be  as  the  area  AHIL  multiplied  by  the  altitude  AP.  q.e.i. 

For  let  there  be  taken  in  AE  a  very  small  line  Ee.  Join  Pe,  and  in  PE,  PA 
take  PC,  P/,  both  equal  to  Pe.  And  because  the  force,  with  w’hich  any  point  E 
of  the  ring  described  about  the  centre  A  with  the  radius  AE  in  the  aforesaid 


148 


Mathematical  Principles 


plane  attracts  to  itself  the  body  P,  is  supposed  to  be  as  FK;  and,  therefore,  the 

AP  •  FK 

force  with  which  that  point  attracts  the  body  P  towards  A  is  as  — — ;  and 
the  force  with  which  the  whole  ring  attracts  the  body  P  towards  A  is  as  the 
ring  and  — —  conjointly;  and  that  ring  also  is  as  the  rectangle  under  the 

X  ili 

radius  AE  and  the  breadth  Ee,  and  this  rectangle  (because  PE  and  AE,  Ee  and 
CE  are  proportional)  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  PE  •  CE  or  PE  •  F/;  the  force  with 

AP  *  FK 

which  that  ring  attracts  the  body  P  towards  A  will  be  as  PE  •  F/  and  — pp — 

conjointly;  that  is,  as  the  content  under  F/-FK- AP,  or  as  the  area  ¥Kkf  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  AP.  And  therefore  the  sum  of  the  forces  with  which  all  the  rings,  in 
the  circle  described  about  the  centre  A  with  the  radius  AD,  attract  the  body  P 
towards  A,  is  as  the  whole  area  AHIKL  multiplied  by  AP.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  forces  of  the  points  decrease  as  the  square  of  the  dis¬ 
tances,  that  is,  if  FK  be  as  p^,  and  therefore  the  area  AHIKL  as 
the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P  towards  the  circle  will  be  as 

1  pjj  ’  that  IS,  as  pjj- 

Cor.  II.  And  universally  if  the  forces  of  the  points  at  the  distances  D  be 
inversely  as  any  power  D"  of  the  distances;  that  is,  if  FK  be  as  and  there¬ 
fore  the  area  AHIKL  as  p^„_i  — pj^„_i;  the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P 

1  PA 

tow^ards  the  circle  vull.be  as  p  _ 2  PH^ _ 

Cor.  III.  And  if  the  diameter  of  the  circle  be  increased  in  infinitum,  and  the 
number  n  be  greater  than  unity ;  the  attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P  towards  the 

PA 

whole  infinite  plane  will  be  inversely  as  PA""^,  because  the  other  term  p^^_^ 
vanishes. 


Proposition  91.  Problem  45 

To  find  the  attraction  of  a  corpuscle  situated  in  the  axis  of  a  round  solid,  to  whose 
several  points  there  tend  equal  centripetal  forces  decreasing  in  any  ratio  of  the 
distances  whatsoever. 

Let  the  corpuscle  P,  situated  in  the  axis 
AB  of  the  solid  DECG,  be  attracted  towards 
that  solid.  Let  the  solid  be  cut  by  any  circle 
as  RFS,  perpendicular  to  the  axis;  and  in  its 
semidiameter  FS,  in  any  plane  PALKB  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  axis,  let  there  be  taken  (by 
Prop.  90)  the  length  FK  proportional  to  the 
force  with  which  the  corpuscle  P  is  attracted 
towards  that  circle.  Let  the  locus  of  the  point 
K  be  the  curved  line  LKI,  meeting  the  planes 
of  the  outermost  circles  AL  and  BI  in  L  and 
puscle  P  towards  the  solid  will  be  as  the  area  LABI.  q.e.i. 


R 


I ;  and  the  attraction  of  the  cor- 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


149 


Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  solid  be  a  cylinder  described  by  the  parallelogram 
ADEB  revolved  about  the  axis  AB,  and  the  centripetal  forces  tending  to  the 
several  points  be  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  points;  the 

attraction  of  the  corpuscle  P  towards  this 
cylinder  will  be  as  AB  — PE+PD.  For  the 
ordinate  FK  (by  Cor.  i,  Prop.  90)  vail  be  as 
PF 

1  — The  part  1  of  this  quantity,  multi- 


•■•**“* . . 

F 

B  PR- 

I  plied  by  the  length  AB,  describes  the  area 

PF 

1  •  AB ;  and  the  other  part  ™ ,  multiplied  by 

c 

the  length  PB,  describes  the  area  1- (BE¬ 
AD)  (as  may  be  easily  shown  from  the  quad¬ 
rature  of  the  curve  LKI) ;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  same  part  multiplied  by 
the  length  PA  describes  the  area  1-(PD  — AD),  and  multiplied  by  AB,  the 
difference  of  PB  and  PA,  describes  1-(PE  — PD),  the  difference  of  the  areas. 
From  the  first  content  1-AB  take  away  the  last  content  1-(PE  — PD),  and 
there  will  remain  the  area  LABI  equal  to  1  •  (AB  — PE-j-PD).  Therefore  the 
force,  being  proportional  to  this  area,  is  as  AB  —  PE-I-PD. 

Cor.  ii.  Hence  also  is  known  the  force  by  which  a  spheroid  AGBC  attracts 
any  body  P  situate  externally  in  its  axis  AB.  Let  XKRM  be  a  conic  section 
whose  ordinate  ER  perpendicular  to 
PE  may  be  always  equal  to  the 
length  of  the  line  PD,  continually 
drawn  to  the  point  D  in  which  that 
ordinate  cuts  the  spheroid.  From  the 
vertices  A,  B  of  the  spheroid,  let 
there  be  erected  to  its  axis  AB  the 
perpendiculars  AK,  BM,  respective¬ 
ly  equal  to  AP,  BP,  and  therefore 
meeting  the  conic  section  in  K  and 
M;  and  join  KM  cutting  off  from  it 
the  segment  KMRK.  Let  S  be  the 
centre  of  the  spheroid,  and  SC  its 
greatest  semidiameter;  and  the  force  with  which  the  spheroid  attracts  the 
body  P  mil  be  to  the  force  mth  which  a  sphere  described  with  the  diameter 

AB  attracts  the  same  body  as - pg2_j_Qg2_^g2 —  SPS"^'  ^ 


calculation  founded  on  the  same  principles  may  be  found  the  forces  of  the  seg¬ 
ments  of  the  spheroid. 

Cor.  III.  If  the  corpuscle  be  placed  vithin  the  spheroid  and  in  its  axis,  the 
attraction  m\\  be  as  its  distance  from  the  centre.  This  may  be  easily  inferred 
from  the  following  reasoning,  whether  the  particle  be  in  the  axis  or  in  any  other 
given  diameter.  Let  AGOF  be  an  attracting  spheroid,  S  its  centre,  and  P  the 
body  attracted.  Through  the  body  P  let  there  be  drawn  the  semidiameter  SPA, 
and  two  right  lines  DE,  FG  meeting  the  spheroid  in  D  and  E,  F  and  G;  and  let 
PCM,  HLN  be  the  surfaces  of  two  interior  spheroids  similar  and  concentric  to 
the  exterior,  the  first  of  which  passes  through  the  body  P,  and  cuts  the  right 
lines  DE,  FG  in  B  and  C;  the  latter  cuts  the  same  right  lines  in  H  and  I,  K  and 


150  Mathematical  Principles 

L.  Let  the  spheroids  have  all  one  common  axis, 
and  the  parts  of  the  right  lines  intercepted  on 
both  sides  DP  and  BE,  FP  and  CG,  DH  and  IE, 

FK  and  LG,  will  be  mutually  equal;  because  the 
right  lines  DE,  PB,  and  HI  are  bisected  in  the 
same  point,  as  are  also  the  right  lines  FG,  PC, 
and  KL.  Conceive  now  DPF,  EPG  to  represent 
opposite  cones  described  with  the  infinitely  small 
vertical  angles  DPF,  EPG,  and  the  lines  DH, 

El  to  be  infinitely  small  also.  Then  the  particles  of  the  cones  DHKF,  GLIE, 
cut  off  by  the  spheroidal  surfaces,  by  reason  of  the  equality  of  the  lines  DH 
and  El,  will  be  to  one  another  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  body  P, 
and  will  therefore  attract  that  corpuscle  equally.  And  by  a  like  reasoning  if  the 
spaces  DPF,  EGCB  be  divided  into  particles  by  the  surfaces  of  innumerable 
similar  spheroids  concentric  to  the  former  and  having  one  common  axis,  all 
these  particles  will  equally  attract  on  both  sides  the  body  P  towards  contrary 
parts.  Therefore  the  forces  of  the  cone  DPF,  and  of  the  conic  segment  EGCB, 
are  equal,  and  by  their  opposed  actions  destroy  each  other.  And  the  case  is 
the  same  of  the  forces  of  all  the  matter  that  lies  without  the  interior  spheroid 
PCBM.  Therefore  the  body  P  is  attracted  by  the  interior  spheroid  PCBM 
alone,  and  therefore  (by  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  72)  its  attraction  is  to  the  force  vith 
which  the  body  A  is  attracted  by  the  whole  spheroid  AGOD  as  the  distance 
PS  is  to  the  distance  AS.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  92.  Problem  46 

An  attracting  body  being  given,  it  is  required  to  find  the  ratio  of  the  decrease  of  the 
centripetal  forces  tending  to  its  several  points. 

The  body  given  must  be  formed  into  a  sphere,  a  cylinder,  or  some  regular 
figure,  whose  law  of  attraction  answering  to  any  ratio  of  decrease  may  be  found 
by  Props.  80,  81,  and  91.  Then,  by  experiments,  the  force  of  the  attractions 
must  be  found  at  several  distances,  and  the  law  of  attraction  towards  the 
whole,  made  known  by  that  means,  will  give  the  ratio  of  the  decrease  of  the 
forces  of  the  several  parts;  which  was  to  be  found. 

Proposition  93.  Theorem  47 

If  a  solid  be  plane  on  one  side,  and  infinitely  extended  on  all  other  sides,  and  consist 
of  equal  particles  equally  attractive,  whose  forces  decrease,  in  receding  from  the 
solid,  in  the  ratio  of  any  power  greater  than  the  square  of  the  distances;  and  a 
corpuscle  placed  towards  either  part  of  the  plane  is  attracted  by  the  force  of  the 
whole  solid:  I  say,  that  the  attractive  force  of  the  whole  solid,  in  receding  from  its 
plane  surface  will  decrease  in  the  ratio  of  a  power  whose  side  is  the  distance  of  the 
corpuscle  from  the  plane,  and  its  index  less  by  3  than  the  index  of  the  power  of  the 
distances. 

Case  1.  Let  LG^  be  the  plane  by  which  the  solid  is  terminated.  Let  the  solid 
lie  on  that  side  of  the  plane  that  is  towards  I ,  and  let  it  be  resolved  into  innumer¬ 
able  planes  7?iHM,  nIN,  oKO,  &c.,  parallel  to  GL.  And  first  let  the  attracted 
body  C  be  placed  without  the  solid.  Let  there  be  drawn  CGHI  perpendicular  to 
those  innumerable  planes,  and  let  the  attractive  forces  of  the  points  of  the  solid 
decrease  in  the  ratio  of  a  pow'er  of  the  distances  'whose  index  is  the  number  n 


DF 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


151 


...M 


not  less  than  3.  Therefore  (by  Cor.  iii, 
Prop.  90)  the  force  with  which  any 
N  _  plane  mHM  attracts  the  point  C  is  in¬ 
versely  as  In  the  plane  mHM 

take  the  length  HM  inversely  propor- 
H  I  K  tional  to  and  that  force  vill  be 

as  HM.  In  like  manner  in  the  several 
planes  ZGL,  nIN,  oKO,  &c.,  take  the 
lengths  GL,  IN,  KO,  &c.,  inversely 
m  n  0  proportional  to  CG"“^,  CI”~^,  CK"”^, 

&c.,  and  the  forces  of  those  planes  will 
be  as  the  lengths  so  taken,  and  therefore  the  sum  of  the  forces  as  the  sum  of 
the  lengths,  that  is,  the  force  of  the  whole  solid  as  the  area  GLOK  produced 
infinitely  towards  OK.  But  that  area  (by  the  known  methods  of  quadratures) 
is  inversely  as  CG”~®,  and  therefore  the  force  of  the  whole  solid  is  inversely  as 

CG"~®.  Q.E.D. 

Case  2.  Let  the  corpuscle  C  be  now  placed  on  that  side  of  the  plane  ZGL  that 
is  within  the  solid,  and  take  the  distance  CK  equal  to  the  distance  CG.  And  the 
part  of  the  solid  LGZoKO  terminated  by  the  par¬ 
allel  planes  ZGL,  oKO,  will  attract  the  corpuscle 
C,  situated  in  the  middle,  neither  one  way  nor 
another,  the  contrary  actions  of  the  opposite  points 
destroying  one  another  by  reason  of  their  equality. 

Therefore  the  corpuscle  C  is  attracted  by  the  force 
only  of  the  solid  situated  beyond  the  plane  OK. 

But  this  force  (by  Case  1)  is  inversely  as  CK"“®, 
that  is  (because  CG,  CK  are  equal),  inversely  as 
CG”“®.  Q.E.D. 


N  O 

c 

I  K 

0 

CoR.  i.  Hence  if  the  solid  LGIN  be  terminated  on  each  side  by  two  infinite 
parallel  planes  LG,  IN,  its  attractive  force  is  known,  subtracting  from  the 
attractive  force  of  the  whole  infinite  solid  LGKO  the  attractive  force  of  the 
more  distant  part  NIKO  infinitely  produced  towards  KO. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  more  distant  part  of  this  solid  be  rejected,  because  its  attrac¬ 
tion  compared  mth  the  attraction  of  the  nearer  part  is  inconsiderable,  the 
attraction  of  that  nearer  part  Avill,  as  the  distance  increases,  decrease  nearly  in 
the  ratio  of  the  power  CG”“®. 

Cor.  III.  And  hence  if  any  finite  body,  plane  on  one  side,  attract  a  corpuscle 
situated  over  against  the  middle  of  that  plane,  and  the  distance  between 
the  corpuscle  and  the  plane  compared  with  the  dimensions  of  the  attracting 
body  be  extremely  small;  and  the  attracting  body  consist  of  homogen¬ 
eous  particles,  whose  attractive  forces  decrease  in  the  ratio  of  any  power 
of  the  distances  greater  than  the  fourth;  the  attractive  force  of  the  whole 
body  will  decrease  very  nearly  in  the  ratio  of  a  power  whose  side  is  that 
very  small  distance,  and  the  index  less  by  3  than  the  index  of  the  former 
power.  This  assertion  does  not  hold  good,  however,  of  a  body  consisting  of 
particles  whose  attractive  forces  decrease  in  the  ratio  of  the  third  power  of 
the  distances ;  because,  in  that  case,  the  attraction  of  the  remoter  part  of  the 
infinite  body  in  the  second  Corollary  is  always  infinitely  greater  than  the 
attraction  of  the  nearer  part. 


152 


Mathematical  Principles 


Scholium 


If  a  body  is  attracted  perpendicularly  towards  a  given  plane,  and  from  the 
law  of  attraction  given,  the  motion  of  the  body  be  required;  the  Problem  Mill 
be  solved  by  seeking  (by  Prop.  39)  the  motion  of  the  body  descending  in  a  right 
line  towards  that  plane,  and  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws)  compounding  that  motion 
wdth  an  uniform  motion  performed  in  the  direction  of  lines  parallel  to  that 
plane.  And,  on  the  contrary,  if  there  be  required  the  law  of  the  attraction  tend¬ 
ing  towards  the  plane  in  perpendicular  directions,  by  which  the  body  may  be 
caused  to  move  in  any  given  curved  line,  the  Problem  will  be  solved  by  working 
after  the  manner  of  the  third  Problem. 

But  the  operations  may  be  contracted  by  resolving  the  ordinates  into  con¬ 
verging  series.  As  if  to  a  base  A  the  length  B  be  ordinately  applied  in  any  given 

m 

angle,  and  that  length  be  as  any  power  of  the  base  A  " ;  and  there  be  sought  the 
force  MTth  which  a  body,  either  attracted  towards  the  base  or  driven  from  it  in 
the  direction  of  that  ordinate,  may  be  caused  to  move  in  the  curved  line  which 
that  ordinate  always  describes  wdth  its  superior  extremity;  I  suppose  the  base 


to  be  increased  by  a  very  small  part  0,  and  I  resolve  the  ordinate  (A+0) "  into 
an  infinite  series  „  _ 

&c.. 


A'"-f-  OA' 
n 


mm  —  mn 


2nn 


OOA' 


and  I  suppose  the  force  proportional  to  the  term  of  this  series  in  which  0  is  of 

yyiyjl  —  JYITI  m  — 

two  dimensions,  that  is,  to  the  term  — — OOA  "  Therefore  the  force 


,  ,  .  mm  —  mn  .  mm  —  mn 

sought  IS  as - A  "  ,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  as - B  "  As 

if  the  ordinate  describe  a  parabola,  m  being  =2,  and  n  =  1,  the  force  will  be  as 
the  given  quantity  2B°,  and  therefore  is  given.  Therefore  vdth  a  given  force  the 
body  mtII  move  in  a  parabola,  as  Galileo  hath  demonstrated.  If  the  ordinate 
describe  an  hyperbola,  m  being  =0  —  1,  and  n  =  \,  the  force  mil  be  as  2A“®  or 
2B®;  and  therefore  a  force  which  is  as  the  cube  of  the  ordinate  mil  cause  the 
body  to  move  in  an  hyperbola.  But  leaving  Propositions  of  this  kind,  I  shall  go 
on  to  some  others  relating  to  motion  which  I  have  not  yet  touched  upon. 


SECTION  XIV 

The  motion  of  very  small  bodies  when  agitated  by  centripetal  forces 

TENDING  TO  THE  SEVERAL  PARTS  OF  ANY  VERY  GREAT  BODY 

Proposition  94.  Theorem  48 

If  two  similar  mediums  he  separated  from  each  other  by  a  space  terminated  on  both 
sides  by  parallel  planes,  and  a  body  in  its  passage  through  that  space  be  attracted  or 
impelled  perpendicularly  towards  either  of  those  mediums,  and  not  agitated  or 
hindered  by  any  other  force;  and  the  attraction  be  everywhere  the  same  at  equal 
distances  from  either  plane,  taken  towards  the  same  side  of  the  plane:  I  say,  that 
the  sine  of  incidence  upon  either  plane  will  he  to  the  sine  of  emergence  from  the  other 
plane  in  a  given  ratio. 

Case  1.  Let  Aa  and  Bh  be  two  parallel  planes,  and  let  the  body  light  upon  the 
first  plane  Aa  in  the  direction  of  the  line  GH,  and  in  its  whole  passage  through 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  153 

the  intermediate  space  let  it  be  attracted 
or  impelled  towards  the  medium  of  inci¬ 
dence,  and  by  that  action  let  it  be  made  to 
describe  a  curved  line  HI,  and  let,  it  emerge 
in  the  direction  of  the  line  IK.  Let  there  be 
erected  IM  perpendicular  to  B6  the  plane 
of  emergence,  and  meeting  the  line  of  in¬ 
cidence  GH  prolonged  in  M,  and  the  plane 
of  incidence  Aa  in  R;  and  let  the  line  of 
emergence  KI  be  produced  and  meet  HM 
in  L.  About  the  centre  L,  vdth  the  radius 
LI,  let  a  circle  be  described  cutting  both 
HM  in  P  and  Q,  and  MI  produced  in  N; 
and,  first,  if  the  attraction  or  impulse  be  supposed  uniform,  the  curve  HI  (by 
what  Galileo  hath  demonstrated)  vill  be  a  parabola,  whose  property  is  that  of 
a  rectangle  under  its  given  latus  rectum,  and  the  line  IM  equal  to  the  square  of 
HM;  and  moreover  the  line  HM  vfill  be  bisected  in  L.  Hence  if  to  MI  there  be 
let  fall  the  perpendicular  LO,  then  MO,  OR  will  be  equal;  and  adding  the  equal 
lines  ON,  01,  the  wholes  MN,  IR  vdll  be  equal  also.  Therefore  since  IR  is 
given,  MN  is  also  given,  and  the  rectangle  MI  •  MN  is  to  the  rectangle  under 
the  latus  rectum  and  IM,  that  is,  to  HM^  in  a  given  ratio.  But  the  rectangle 
MI  •  MN  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  MP  •  MQ,  that  is,  to  the  difference  of  the 
squares  ML^,  and  PL^  or  LP;  and  HM^  hath  a  given  ratio  to  its  fourth  part 
ML^;  therefore  the  ratio  of  ML^  — LP  to  ML^  is  given,  and  by  conversion  the 
ratio  of  LP  to  ML^,  and  its  square  root,  the  ratio  of  LI  to  ML.  But  in  every 
triangle,  as  LMI,  the  sines  of  the  angles  are  proportional  to  the  opposite  sides. 
Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  incidence  LMR  to  the  sine  of  the 
angle  of  emergence  LIR  is  given.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Let  now  the  body  pass  successively  through  several  spaces  termi¬ 
nated  \vith  parallel  planes  Aa6B,  B6cC,  &c.,  and  let  it  be  acted  on  by  a  force 
which  is  uniform  in  each  of  them  separately,  but  different  in  the  different 

spaces;  and  by  what  was  just  demonstrated,  the 
sine  of  the  angle  of  incidence  on  the  first  plane 
Aa  is  to  the  sine  of  emergence  from  the  second 
plane  B6  in  a  given  ratio;  and  this  sine  of  inci¬ 
dence  upon  the  second  plane  B6  vfill  be  to  the 
sine  of  emergence  from  the  third  plane  Cc  in  a 
given  ratio;  and  this  sine  to  the  sine  of  emergence 
from  the  fourth  plane  Dd  in  a  given  ratio;  and  so  on  in  infinitum;  and,  by 
multiplication  of  equals,  the  sine  of  incidence  on  the  first  plane  is  to  the  sine 
of  emergence  from  the  last  plane  in  a  given  ratio.  Let  now  the  intervals  of  the 
planes  be  diminished,  and  their  number  be  infinitely  increased,  so  that  the 
action  of  attraction  or  impulse,  exerted  according  to  any  assigned  law,  may 
become  continual,  and  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  incidence  on  the  first  plane  to 
the  sine  of  emergence  from  the  last  plane  being  all  along  given,  vdll  be  given 
then  also.  q.e.d. 


154 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  95.  Theorem  49 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  velocity  of  the  body  before  its 
incidence  is  to  its  velocity  after  emergence  as  the  sine  of  emergence  to  the  sine  of 
incidence. 

Make  AH  and  Id  equal,  and  erect  the  perpendiculars  AG,  dK  meeting  the 
lines  of  incidence  and  emergence  GH,  IK  in  G  and  K.  In  GH  take  TH  equal  to 
IK.  and  to  the  plane  Aa  let  fall  a  perpendicular  Tr.  And  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws 
of  Motion)  let  the  motion  of  the  body  be  re¬ 
solved  into  two,  one  perpendicular  to  the 
planes  Aa,  B5,  Cc,  &c.,  and  another  parallel 
to  them.  The  force  of  attraction  or  impulse, 
acting  in  directions  perpendicular  to  those 
planes,  does  not  at  all  alter  the  motion  in  par¬ 
allel  directions;  and  therefore  the  body  pro¬ 
ceeding  with  this  motion  will  in  equal  times 
go  through  those  equal  parallel  intervals  that 
lie  between  the  line  AG  and  the  point  H,  and 
between  the  point  I  and  the  line  dK;  that  is,  they  mil  describe  the  lines  GH, 
IK  in  equal  times.  Therefore  the  velocity  before  incidence  is  to  the  velocity 
after  emergence  as  GH  to  IK  or  TH,  that  is,  as  AH  or  Id  to  i^H,  that  is  (suppo¬ 
sing  TH  or  IK  radius),  as  the  sine  of  emergence  to  the  sine  of  incidence,  q.e.d. 


Proposition  96.  Theorem  50 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  and  that  the  motion  before  incidence  is  swifter 
than  afterwards:  I  say,  that  if  the  line  of  incidence  be  inclined  continually,  the  body 
will  be  at  last  reflected,  and  the  angle  of  reflection  will  be  equal  to  the  angle  of 
incidence. 

For  conceive  the  body  passing  between  the  parallel  planes  Aa,  B&,  Cc,  &c., 
to  describe  parabolic  arcs  as  above;  and  let  those  arcs  be  HP,  PQ,  QR,  &c.  And 
let  the  obliquity  of  the  line  of  incidence  GH  to  the  first  plane  Aa  be  such  that 
the  sine  of  incidence  may  be  to  the  radius  of  the  circle  whose  sine  it  is,  in  the 
same  ratio  which  the  same  sine  of  incidence  hath  to  the  sine  of  emergence  from 
the  plane  Dd  into  the  space  DdcE;  and  because  the  sine  of  emergence  is  now 
become  equal  to  the  radius,  the  angle  of  emergence  will  be  a  right  one,  and 
therefore  the  line  of  emergence  will  coincide  with  the  plane  Dd.  Let  the  body 
come  to  this  plane  in  the  point  R;  and  because  the  line  of  emergence  coincides 
with  that  plane,  it  is  manifest  that  the  body  can  proceed  no  farther  towards  the 

plane  Ee.  But  neither  can  it  proceed  in 
the  line  of  emergence  Rd;  because  it  is 
perpetually  attracted  or  impelled  to¬ 
wards  the  medium  of  incidence.  It  will 
return,  therefore,  between  the  planes 
Cc,  Dd,  describing  an  arc  of  a  parabola 
QRg,  whose  principal  vertex  (by  what  Galileo  hath  demonstrated)  is  in  R, 
cutting  the  plane  Cc  in  the  same  angle  at  q,  that  it  did  before  at  Q;  then  going 
on  in  the  parabolic  arcs  qp,  ph,  &c.,  similar  and  equal  to  the  former  arcs  QP, 
PH,  &c.,  it  will  cut  the  rest  of  the  planes  in  the  same  angles  at  p,  h,  &c.,  as  it 


Book  I:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  155 

did  before  in  P,  H,  &c.,  and  will  emerge  at  last  mth  the  same  obliquity  at  h 
with  which  it  first  impinged  on  that  plane  at  H.  Conceive  now  the  intervals  of 
the  planes  Aa,  B6,  Cc,  Dd,  Ee,  &c.,  to  be  infinitely  diminished,  and  the  number 
infinitely  increased,  so  that  the  action  of  attraction  or  impulse,  exerted  accord¬ 
ing  to  any  assigned  law,  may  become  continual;  and,  the  angle  of  emergence 
remaining  all  along  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence,  will  be  equal  to  the  same 
also  at  last.  q.e.d. 


Scholium 

These  attractions  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  the  reflections  and  refractions 
of  light  made  in  a  given  ratio  of  the  secants,  as  was  discovered  by  Snell;  and 

consequently  in  a  given  ratio  of  the  sines,  as  was 
exhibited  by  Descartes.  For  it  is  now  certain 
from  the  phenomena  of  Jupiter’s  satellites,  con¬ 
firmed  by  the  observations  of  different  astron¬ 
omers,  that  light  is  propagated  in  succession, 
and  requires  about  seven  or  eight  minutes  to 
travel  from  the  sun  to  the  earth.  Moreover,  the 
rays  of  light  that  are  in  our  air  (as  lately  was 
discovered  by  Grimaldi,  by  the  admission  of  light  into  a  dark  room  through 
a  small  hole,  which  I  have  also  tried)  in  their  passage  near  the  angles  of 
bodies,  whether  transparent  or  opaque  (such  as  the  circular  and  rectangular 
edges  of  gold,  silver,  and  brass  coins,  or  of  knives,  or  broken  pieces  of  stone  or 
glass),  are  bent  or  inflected  round  those  bodies  as  if  they  were  attracted  to 
them;  and  those  rays  which  in  their  passage  come  nearest  to  the  bodies  are 
the  most  inflected,  as  if  they  were  most  attracted;  which  thing  I  myself  have 
also  carefully  observed.  And  those  which  pass  at  greater  distances  are  less  in¬ 
flected;  and  those  at  still  greater  distances  are  a  little  inflected  the  contrary 
way,  and  form  three  fringes  of  colors.  In  the  figure  s  represents  the  edge  of  a 
knife,  or  any  kind  of  wedge  AsB;  and  gowog,  fnunf,  emtme,  dlsld  are  rays  in¬ 
flected  towards  the  knife  in  the  arcs  owo,  nun,  mtm,  Isl;  which  inflection  is 
greater  or  less  according  to  their  distance  from  the  knife.  Now  since  this  in¬ 
flection  of  the  rays  is  performed  in  the  air  without  the  knife,  it  follows  that  the 
rays  which  fall  upon  the  knife  are  first  inflected  in  the  air  before  they  touch  the 
knife.  And  the  case  is  the  same  of  the  rays  falling  upon  glass.  The  refraction, 
therefore,  is  made  not  in  the  point  of  incidence,  but 
gradually,  by  a  continual  inflection  of  the  rays; 
which  is  done  partly  in  the  air  before  they  touch 
the  glass,  partly  (if  I  mistake  not)  ■within  the  glass, 
after  they  have  entered  it;  as  is  represented  in  the 
rays  ckzc,  high,  ahxa,  falling  upon  r,  q,  p,  and  in¬ 
flected  between  k  and  z,  i  and  y,  h  and  x.  Therefore 
because  of  the  analogy  there  is  between  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  the  rays  of  light  and  the  motion  of  bodies, 

I  thought  it  not  amiss  to  add  the  following  Propo¬ 
sitions  for  optical  uses;  not  at  all  considering  the  nature  of  the  rays  of  light, 
or  inquiring  whether  they  are  bodies  or  not  ;  but  only  determining  the  curves 
of  bodies  w'hich  are  extremely  like  the  curves  of  the  rays. 


c  b  a 


ky-iy-h. 


z;  y/  X/ 


^  b  d 


156 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  97.  Problem  47 

Siipposing  the  sine  of  incidence  upon  any  surface  to  be  in  a  given  ratio  to  the  sine 
of  emergence;  and  that  the  inflection  of  the  paths  of  those  bodies  near  that  surface  is 
performed  in  a  very  short  space,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  point;  it  is  required 
to  determine  such  a  surface  as  may  cause  all  the  corpuscles  issuing  from  any  one 
given  place  to  converge  to  another  given  place. 

Let  A  be  the  place  from  whence  the  corpuscles  diverge;  B  the  place  to  which 
they  should  converge;  CDE  the  curved  line  which  by  its  revolution  round  the 
axis  AB  describes  the  surface  sought;  D,  E  any  two  points  of  that  curve;  and 
EF,  EG  perpendiculars  let  fall  on  the 
paths  of  the  bodies  AD,  DB.  Let  the 
point  D  approach  to  and  coalesce  with 
the  point  E;  and  the  ultimate  ratio  of 
the  line  DF  by  which  AD  is  increased, 
to  the  line  DG  by  which  DB  is  dimin¬ 
ished,  mtU  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  emergence. 
Therefore  the  ratio  of  the  increment  of  the  line  AD  to  the  decrement  of  the 
line  DB  is  given;  and  therefore  if  in  the  axis  AB  there  be  taken  anywhere  the 
point  C  through  which  the  curve  CDE  must  pass,  and  CM  the  increment  of 
AC  be  taken  in  that  given  ratio  to  CN  the  decrement  of  BC,  and  from  the 
centres  A,  B,  with  the  radii  AM,  BN,  there  be  described  two  circles  cutting 
each  other  in  D ;  that  point  D  will  touch  the  curve  sought  CDE,  and,  by  touch¬ 
ing  it  anywhere  at  pleasure,  mtU  determine  that  curve.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  By  causing  the  point  A  or  B  to  go  off  sometimes  in  infinitum,  and 
sometimes  to  move  towards  other  parts  of  the  point  C,  vill  be  obtained  all 
those  figures  which  Descartes  has  exhibited  in  his  Optics  and  Geometry  relating 
to  refractions.  The  invention  of  which  Descartes  having  thought  fit  to  conceal 
is  here  laid  open  in  this  Proposition. 

Cor.  II.  If  a  body  lighting  on  any  surface 
CD  in  the  direction  of  a  right  line  AD,  drawn 
according  to  any  law,  should  emerge  in  the 
direction  of  another  right  line  DK;  and  from 
the  point  C  there  be  drawn  curved  lines  CP, 

CQ,  always  perpendicular  to  AD,  DK;  the 
increments  of  the  lines  PD,  QD,  and  there¬ 
fore  the  lines  themselves  PD,  QD,  generated  by  those  increments,  vnll  be  as 
the  sines  of  incidence  and  emergence  to  each  other,  and  conversely. 


Proposition  98.  Problem  48 

The  same  things  supposed;  if  round  the  axis  AB  any  attractive  surface  be  described, 
as  CD,  regular  or  irregular,  through  which  the  bodies  issuing  from  the  given  place 
A  must  pass;  it  is  required  to  find  a  second  attractive  surface  EF,  which  may  make 
those  bodies  converge  to  a  given  place  B. 

Let  a  line  joining  AB  cut  the  first  surface  in  C  and  the  second  in  E,  the  point 
D  being  taken  in  any  manner  at  pleasure.  And  supposing  the  sine  of  incidence 
on  the  first  surface  to  the  sine  of  emergence  from  the  same,  and  the  sine  of 
emergence  from  the  second  surface  to  the  sine  of  incidence  on  the  same,  to  be 
as  any  given  quantity  M  to  another  given  quantity  N ;  then  produce  AB  to  G,  so 


Book  I :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  157 

that  BG  may  be  to  CE  as  M  —  N  to  N ;  and  AD  to  H,  so  that  AH  may  be  equal 
to  AG;  and  DF  to  K,  so  that  DK  may  be  to  DH  as  N  to  M.  Join  KB,  and  about 
the  centre  D  ^^^th  the  radius  DH  describe  a  circle  meeting  KB  produced  in  L, 


and  draw  BF  parallel  to  DL;  and  the  point  F  will  touch  the  line  EF,  which, 
being  turned  round  the  axis  AB,  mil  describe  the  surface  sought.  q.e.f. 

For  conceive  the  lines  CP,  CQ  to  be  everywhere  perpendicular  to  AD,  DF, 
and  the  lines  ER,  ES  to  FB,  FD  respectively,  and  therefore  QS  to  be  always 
equal  to  CE;  and  (by  Cor.  ii,  Prop.  97)  PD  mil  be  to  QD  as  M  to  N,  and  there¬ 
fore  as  DL  to  DK,  or  FB  to  FK;  and  by  subtraction,  as  DL  —  FB  or  PH  —  PD  — 
FB  to  FD  or  FQ  — QD;  and  by  addition  as  PH  — FB  to  FQ,  that  is  (because 
PH  and  CG,  QS  and  CE,  are  equal),  as  CE-I-BG  — FR  to  CE  — FS.  But  (be¬ 
cause  BG  is  to  CE  as  M  —  N  to  N)  it  comes  to  pass  also  that  CE-l-BG  is  to  CE 
as  M  to  N ;  and  therefore,  by  subtraction,  FR  is  to  FS  as  M  to  N;  and  therefore 
(by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  97)  the  surface  EF  compels  a  body,  falling  upon  it  in  the 
direction  DF,  to  go  on  in  the  line  FR  to  the  place  B.  q.e.d. 

Scholium 

In  the  same  manner  one  may  go  on  to  three  or  more  surfaces.  But  of  all 
figures  the  spherical  is  the  most  proper  for  optical  uses.  If  the  object  glasses  of 
telescopes  were  made  of  two  glasses  of  a  spherical  figure,  containing  water  be¬ 
tween  them,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  errors  of  the  refractions  made  in  the 
extreme  parts  of  the  surfaces  of  the  glasses  may  be  accurately  enough  corrected 
by  the  refractions  of  the  water.  Such  object  glasses  are  to  be  preferred  before 
elliptic  and  hyperbolic  glasses,  not  only  because  they  may  be  formed  mth  more 
ease  and  accuracy,  but  because  the  pencils  of  rays  situated  mthout  the  axis  of 
the  glass  \vould  be  more  accurately  refracted  by  them.  But  the  different  re- 
frangibility  of  different  rays  is  the  real  obstacle  that  hinders  optics  from  being 
made  perfect  by  spherical  or  any  other  figures.  Unless  the  errors  thence  arising 
can  be  corrected,  all  the  labor  spent  in  correcting  the  others  is  quite  thrown 
away. 


V* 


'  iW-,  , 

,.."  .  f!:  ^  ■■  , 


m 


,^'t 


-I 


V 


IttAl  5^^  , 

toip» 4x1 1««»  jHikl  CtAi>eu^(  jXoJ  W■^^^#l306i«dYAaI0ff  .in/it 

^  niodi^  bms  M'4  M W  IPTWiClVKvirW^  0*30  biM;OA o* 


r 


jrnrP'iiitmiOn^  ,.'i4'^'t4r>'*' 

t/Q  A  -  r<^v-:  A#'  ■^«^';4»>|f‘-  .  ,  '.'  ■  ?!'■■■•  ;  >  'i  anu  KfiUi 

E^'  ' .  |j«  A  I**.*  >4**  *1'  *  ?' I)  ,tW'  Vt>  w'liich 

iWy  r^**ofeii4«a  tbe 


«n:iw,  <■  ■  ■  ■ .  .,  ?*»>, , .?  ’ 


"4 


V”  ilo»w  iiiw  3  'wjf*  ba^  ;  JGt  i>t  fefti^^3a  rtertb  boA 

'  bii^T BilamlMiscI 


u. 


m 


^'^'’'■.,4.1 


,/  ,.^3  o*  ^^,33  «^iiiJ  &di  b/tu 

(iiiilftAf  “ssiM  sfaatiittf Jifelskw’  ®'3?3mt  i83 


j 


y  j-14  it*  M  »a03  btei^i*kr<olilfi)|p 

. .  ■ 


"f1 


',nVJ 


^auitvl 


■'5 


**4 


*r^}i^iO'j4i'/*0ffj-0if4^4^^  A  Vj  iXMBAls  owt  "lo  objsffi  9taw  gOqa'W'jfe* 


-  -Il 

'-  'U 


^  4»j|fetij^r^bd^0r»r^>l<>d;t«fji*0f(i'W^AW®ij>vrinQ*Oir  ,3^ 


^p4o<9^dud  Yi!(j^iJf3f3(A  boji  oaA9 


•i 


fe'  ^  eAi:Jw  li>  '^*jIidi:|OAil 


■v,'. . 


1J/ 


■'V’-t*'  \' 


fiF"‘ii'ji^  fti»m  ^4pCit  ''  ■’' 


f.  i  ^ ittii^(-':;|.:4!jl^  «V 

, ,, ,  .  ar#  b^'ni  .,»m|'‘-^'^ '■*•'"  ,t’'lv' .tit^'fc  V;:.4»-;.s^k^>-.--,  istd  t)te'iftii»«  <if  ■ 

i 'it; '  ■“'  «3|^  AnocSpY'  to  0pm'  ^  m 

ri  ...  .^V'-,.'  ^  >ly  V-  ,.^,  .,  '  ,  ,  ‘  -  ■  .  ^ t.  ,  i  I  -■  ■  ;  .,v\^ 

/'  Y I 

^':  '.-■  kfe  f  k ;  ■  jittf j 


BOOK  TWO 


THE  MOTION  OF  BODIES 

IN  RESISTING  MEDIUMS 
SECTION  I 

The  motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  the  velocity 

Proposition  1.  Theorem  1 

If  a  body  is  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  its  velocity,  the  motion  lost  by  resistance  is  as  the 
space  gone  over  in  its  motion. 

For  since  the  motion  lost  in  each  equal  interval  of  time  is  as  the  velocity, 
that  is,  as  the  small  increment  of  space  gone  over,  then,  by  composition,  the 
motion  lost  in  the  whole  time  Avill  be  as  the  whole  space  gone  over.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Therefore  if  the  body,  destitute  of  all  gravity,  move  by  its  innate  force 
only  in  free  spaces,  and  there  be  given  both  its  whole  motion  at  the  beginning, 
and  also  the  motion  remaining  after  some  part  of  the  way  is  gone  over,  there 
will  be  given  also  the  whole  space  which  the  body  can  describe  in  an  infinite 
time.  For  that  space  mil  be  to  the  space  now  described  as  the  whole  motion  at 
the  beginning  is  to  the  part  lost  of  that  motion. 

Lemma  1 

Quantities  proportional  to  their  differences  are  continually  proportional. 

Let  A  :  A-B=B  :  B-C  =  C  :  C-D  =  &c.; 

then,  by  subtraction, 

A  :  B  =  B  :  C  =  C  :  D  =  &c.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  2.  Theorem  2 

If  a  body  is  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  its  velocity,  and  moves,  by  its  inertia  only, 
through  an  homogeneous  medium,  and  the  times  be  taken  equal,  the  velocities  in  the 
beginning  of  each  of  the  times  are  in  a  geometrical  progression,  and  the  spaces 
described  in  each  of  the  times  are  as  the  velocities. 

Case  1.  Let  the  time  be  divided  into  equal  intervals;  and  if  at  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  of  each  interval  we  suppose  the  resistance  to  act  with  one  single  impulse 
which  is  as  the  velocity,  the  decrement  of  the  velocity  in  each  of  the  intervals 
of  time  mil  be  as  the  same  velocity.  Therefore  the  velocities  are  proportional  to 
their  differences,  and  therefore  (by  Lem.  1,  Book  ii)  continually  proportional. 
Therefore  if  out  of  an  equal  number  of  intervals  there  be  compounded  any 
equal  portions  of  time,  the  velocities  at  the  beginning  of  those  times  will  be  as 
terms  in  a  continued  progression,  which  are  taken  by  jumps,  omitting  every¬ 
where  an  equal  number  of  intermediate  terms.  But  the  ratios  of  these  terms  are 

159 


160  Mathematical  Principles 

compounded  of  the  equal  ratios  of  the  intermediate  terms  equally  repeated, 
and  therefore  are  equal.  Therefore  the  velocities,  being  proportional  to  those 
terms,  are  in  geometrical  progression.  Let  those  equal  intervals  of  time  be 
diminished,  and  their  number  increased  in  infinitum,  so  that  the  impulse  of 
resistance  may  become  continual;  and  the  velocities  at  the  beginnings  of  equal 
times,  always  continually  proportional,  mil  be  also  in  this  case  continually 
proportional.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  And,  by  division,  the  differences  of  the  velocities,  that  is,  the  parts 
of  the  velocities  lost  in  each  of  the  times,  are  as  the  wholes;  but  the  spaces 
described  in  each  of  the  times  are  as  the  lost  parts  of  the 
velocities  (by  Prop.  1,  Book  i),  and  therefore  are  also  as 
the  wholes.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  if  to  the  rectangular  asymptotes  AC,  CH, 
the  hyperbola  BG  is  described,  and  AB,  DG  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  the  asymptote  AC,  and  both  the  velo¬ 
city  of  the  body,  and  the  resistance  of  the  medium,  at 
the  very  beginning  of  the  motion,  be  expressed  by  any  given  line  AC,  and, 
after  some  time  is  elapsed,  by  the  indefinite  line  DC;  the  time  may  be  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  area  ABGD,  and  the  space  described  in  that  time  by  the  line 
AD.  For  if  that  area,  by  the  motion  of  the  point  D,  be  uniformly  increased  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  time,  the  right  line  DC  mil  decrease  in  a  geometrical 
ratio  in  the  same  manner  as  the  velocity;  and  the  parts  of  the  right  line  AC, 
described  in  equal  times,  mil  decrease  in  the  same  ratio. 


Proposition  3.  Problem  1 

To  define  the  motion  of  a  body  which,  in  an  homogeneous  medium,  ascends  or 
descends  in  a  right  line,  and  is  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  its  velocity,  and  acted  upon  by 
an  uniform  force  of  gravity. 

The  body  ascending,  let  the  gravity  be  represented  by  any  given  rectangle 
BACH;  and  the  resistance  of  the  medium,  at  the  beginning  of  the  ascent,  by 

the  rectangle  BADE,  taken  on  the  contrary 
side  of  the  right  line  AB.  Through  the  point 
B,  with  the  rectangular  asymptotes  AC, 
CH,  describe  an  hyperbola,  cutting  the  per¬ 
pendiculars  DE,  de  in  G,  g]  and  the  body 
ascending  mil  in  the  time  DGgd  describe 
the  space  EGgre;  in  the  time  DGBA,  the 
■  ^  space  of  the  whole  ascent  EGB ;  in  the  time 
ABKI,  the  space  of  descent  BFK;  and  in 
the  time  IKA-f  the  space  of  descent  KFfk; 
and  the  velocities  of  the  bodies  (propor¬ 
tional  to  the  resistance  of  the  medium)  in  these  periods  of  time  will  be  ABED, 
ABed,  o,  ABFI,  ABfi  respectively;  and  the  greatest  velocity  which  the  body 
can  acquire  by  descending  mil  be  BACH. 

For  let  the  rectangle  BACH  be  resolved  into  innumerable  rectangles  Ak,  KZ, 
Lm,  Mn,  &c.,  which  shall  be  as  the  increments  of  the  velocities  produced  in  so 
many  equal  times;  then  mil  o,  Ak,  Al,  Am,  An,  &c.,  be  as  the  whole  velocities, 
and  therefore  (by  supposition)  as  the  resistances  of  the  medium  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  each  of  the  equal  times.  Make  AC  to  AK,  or  ABHC  to  ABA-K,  as  the 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


161 


LMN 


force  of  gravity  to  the  resistance  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  time ;  then  from 
the  force  of  gravity  subtract  the  resistances,  and  ABHC,  KA’HC,  LZHC,  Mm- 
HC,  &c.,  will  be  as  the  absolute  forces  with  which  the  body  is  acted  upon  in  the 
beginning  of  each  of  the  times,  and  therefore  (by  Law  i)  as  the  increments  of 
the  velocities,  that  is,  as  the  rectangles  \k,  Kl,  Lw,  Mn,  &c.,  and  therefore  (by 
Lem.  1,  Book  ii)  in  a  geometrical  progression.  Therefore,  if  the  right  lines  Kk, 
LI,  Mw,  Nn,  &c.,  are  produced  so  as  to  meet  the  hyperbola  in  q,  r,  s,  t,  &g.,  the 
areas  AB^K,  KgrL,  LrsM,  MsiN,  &c.,  will  be  equal,  and  therefore  analogous  to 

the  equal  times  and  equal  gravitating  forces. 
But  the  area  ABg'K  (by  Cor.  iii,  Lems.  7  and 
8,  Book  i)  is  to  the  area  Bkq  as  Kq  to 
or  AC  to  3^AK,  that  is,  as  the  force  of  grav¬ 
ity  to  the  resistance  in  the  middle  of  the  first 
time.  And  by  the  like  reasoning,  the  areas 
gKLr,  rLMs,  sMN^,  &c.,  are  to  the  areas  qklr, 
rims,  smnt,  &c.,  as  the  gravitating  forces  to 
the  resistances  in  the  middle  of  the  second, 
third,  fourth  time,  and  so  on.  Therefore  since 
the  equal  areas  BAKg,  ^KLr,  rLMs,  sMN^,  &c.,  are  analogous  to  the  gravi¬ 
tating  forces,  the  areas  Bkq,  qklr,  rims,  smnt,  &c.,  vill  be  analogous  to  the 
resistances  in  the  middle  of  each  of  the  times,  that  is  (by  supposition),  to  the 
velocities,  and  so  to  the  spaces  described.  Take  the  sums  of  the  analogous 
quantities,  and  the  areas  Bkq,  Blr,  Bms,  Bn^,  &c.,  vdll  be  analogous  to  the 
whole  spaces  described;  and  also  the  areas  ABgK,  ABrL,  ABsM,  AB^N,  &c., 
to  the  times.  Therefore  the  body,  in  descending,  vdll  in  any  time  ABrL  de¬ 
scribe  the  space  Blr,  and  in  the  time  LrtN  the  space  rlnt.  q.e.d.  And  the  like 
demonstration  holds  in  ascending  motion. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  greatest  velocity  that  the  body  can  acquire  by  falling 
is  to  the  velocity  acquired  in  any  given  time  as  the  given  force  of  gravity  which 
continually  acts  upon  it  to  the  resisting  force  which  opposes  it  at  the  end  of 
that  time. 

Cor.  II.  But  the  time  being  augmented  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  the 
sum  of  that  greatest  velocity  and  the  velocity  in  the  ascent,  and  also  their 
difference  in  the  descent,  decreases  in  a  geometrical  progression. 

Cor.  III.  Also  the  differences  of  the  spaces,  which  are  described  in  equal 
differences  of  the  times,  decrease  in  the  same  geometrical  progression. 

Cor.  IV.  The  space  described  by  the  body  is  the  difference  of  two  spaces, 
whereof  one  is  as  the  time  taken  from  the  beginning  of  the  descent,  and  the 
other  as  the  velocity;  which  [spaces]  also  at  the  beginning  of  the  descent  are 
equal  among  themselves. 


Proposition  4.  Problem  2 

Supposing  the  force  of  gravity  in  any  homogeneous  medium  to  he  uniform,  and  to 
tend  perpendicularly  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon:  to  define  the  motion  of  a  projectile 
therein,  which  suffers  resistance  proportional  to  its  velocity. 

Let  the  projectile  go  from  any  place  D  in  the  direction  of  any  right  line  DP, 
and  let  its  velocity  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion  be  represented  by  the  length 
DP.  From  the  point  P  let  fall  the  perpendicular  PC  on  the  horizontal  line  DC, 
and  cut  DC  in  A,  so  that  DA  may  be  to  AC  as  the  vertical  component  of  the 


162 


jNIathematical  Principles 


resistance  of  the  medium  arising  from  the 
motion  upwards  at  the  beginning,  to  the 
force  of  gravity;  or  (which  comes  to  the 
same)  so  that  the  rectangle  under  DA  and 
DP  may  be  to  that  under  AC  and  CP  as 
the  whole  resistance  at  the  beginning  of 
the  motion,  to  the  force  of  gravity.  With 
the  asymptotes  DC,  CP  describe  any  hy¬ 
perbola  GTBS  cutting  the  perpendiculars 
DG,  AB  in  G  and  B;  complete  the  paralle¬ 
logram  DGKC,  and  let  its  side  GK  cut  AB 
in  Q.  Take  a  line  N  in  the  same  ratio  to  QB 
as  DC  is  in  to  CP;  and  from  any  point  R 
of  the  right  line  DC  erect  RT  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  it,  meeting  the  hyperbola  in  T,  and 
the  right  lines  EH,  GK,  DP  in  I,  and  V ; 
in  that  perpendicular  take  Vr  equal  to 
/GT 

-Tj^,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  take  Rr 
GTIE 

equal  to  — — ;  and  the  projectile  in  the 

time  DRTG  will  arrive  at  the  point  r,  de¬ 
scribing  the  curved  line  DraF,  the  locus  of 
the  point  r;  thence  it  will  come  to  its  greatest  height  a  in  the  perpendicular 
AB;  and  afterwards  ever  approach  to  the  asymptote  PC.  And  its  velocity  in 
any  point  r  will  be  as  the  tangent  rL  to  the  curve.  q.e.i. 

For  N  :  QB  =  DC  :  CP  =  DR  :  RV, 

and  therefore  RV  is  equal  to  — ,  and  Rr 


( 


that  is,  RV  — Vr,  or 


N 

DRQB-iGT 


is  equal  to 


DRAB-RDGT 


Now  let 


N  )  N 

the  time  be  represented  by  the  area  RDGT,  and  (by  Laws,  Cor.  ii)  distinguish 
the  motion  of  the  body  into  two  others,  one  of  ascent,  the  other  lateral.  And 
since  the  resistance  is  as  the  motion,  let  that  also  be  distinguished  into  two 
parts  proportional  and  contrary  to  the  parts  of  the  motion:  and  therefore  the 
length  described  by  the  lateral  motion  will  be  (by  Prop.  2,  Book  ii)  as  the  line 
DR,  and  the  height  (by  Prop.  3,  Book  ii)  as  the  area  DR- AB  — RDGT,  that  is, 
as  the  line  Rr.  But  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  motion  the  area  RDGT  is  equal 

DR-AB-DR-AQ 


to  the  rectangle  DR  •  AQ,  and  therefore  that  line  Rr  (  or 


( 


N 


) 


vail  then  be  to  DR  as  AB  —  AQ  or  QB  to  N,  that  is,  as  CP  to  DC;  and  therefore 
as  the  motion  upwards  to  the  motion  lengthwise  at  the  beginning.  Since,  there¬ 
fore,  Rr  is  always  as  the  height,  and  DR  always  as  the  length,  and  Rr  is  to  DR 
at  the  beginning  as  the  height  to  the  length,  it  follows,  that  Rr  is  always  to  DR 
as  the  height  to  the  length;  and  therefore  that  the  body  will  move  in  the  line 
DraF,  which  is  the  locus  of  the  point  r.  q.e.d. 

n  mu  f  T?  •  1  .  dr  ab  RDGT 

Cor.  I.  therefore  Rr  is  equal  to 


N 


N 


and  therefore  if  RT  be 


163 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


produced  to  X  so  that  RX  may  be  equal  to 


DRAB 
N  ’ 


that  is,  if  the  parallel¬ 


ogram  ACPY  be  completed,  and  DY  cutting  CP  in  Z  be  drawn,  and  RT  be 

R/DGT 

produced  till  it  meets  DY  in  X;  Xr  will  be  equal  to  — — ,  and  therefore 
proportional  to  the  time. 

Cor.  II.  Whence  if  innumerable  lines  CR,  or,  which  is  the  same,  innumerable 
lines  ZX,  be  taken  in  a  geometrical  progression  , there  will  be  as  many  lines  Xr 
in  an  arithmetical  progression.  And  hence  the  curve  DraF  is  easily  delineated 
by  the  table  of  logarithms. 

Cor.  III.  If  a  parabola  be  constructed  to  the  vertex  D,  and  the  diameter  DG 
produced  downwards,  and  its  latus  rectum  is  to  2DP  as  the  whole  resistance  at 
the  beginning  of  the  motion  to  the  gravitating  force,  the  velocity  with  which 
the  body  ought  to  go  from  the  place  D,  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  DP,  so 

as  in  an  uniform  resisting  medium  to  de¬ 
scribe  the  curve  DmF,  vnW  be  the  same  as 
that  mth  which  it  ought  to  go  from  the 
same  place  D  in  the  direction  of  the  same 
right  line  DP,  so  as  to  describe  a  parabola 
in  a  nonresisting  medium.  For  the  latus 
rectum  of  this  parabola,  at  the  very  be- 

DV^ 

ginning  of  the  motion,  is  -rr-  :  and  Vr  is 


^GT  DR-Ti 
or 


Vr 

But  a  right  line  which, 


DC 


and  X  is 


QBDC 


N  2N 
if  drawn,  would  touch  the  hyperbola  GTS 
in  G,  is  parallel  to  DK,  and  therefore  T^  is 

DR2CKCP 


.  And  therefore  Vr  is  equal  to 


,  that  is 


2DC2QB 

DV^  •  CK  •  CP 

(because  DR  and  DC,  DV  and  DP  are  proportionals),  to  ~  — > 

DV^  2DP“*0B 

and  the  latus  rectum  comes  out  Qp  >  (because  QB  and  CK, 


DA  and  AC  are  proportionals). 


2DP2DA 
AC  CP  ’ 


and  therefore  is  to  2DP  as  DP  •  DA 


to  CP- AC;  that  is,  as  the  resistance  to  the  gravity.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  IV.  Hence  if  a  body  be  projected  from  any  place  D  wth  a  given  velocity, 
in  the  direction  of  a  right  line  DP  given  by  position,  and  the  resistance  of  the 
medium,  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion,  be  given,  the  curve  DraF,  which  that 
body  will  describe,  may  be  found.  For  the  velocity  being  given,  the  latus  rec¬ 
tum  of  the  parabola  is  given,  as  is  well  known.  And  taking  2DP  to  that  latus 
rectum,  as  the  force  of  gravity  to  the  resisting  force,  DP  is  also  given.  Then 
cutting  DC  in  A,  so  that  CP -AC  may  be  to  DP -DA  in  the  same  ratio  of 
the  gravity  to  the  resistance,  the  point  A  vill  be  given.  And  hence  the  curve 
DraF  is  also  given. 

Cor.  V.  And  conversely,  if  the  curve  DraF  be  given,  there  will  be  given  both 
the  velocity  of  the  body  and  the  resistance  of  the  medium  in  each  of  the  places 
r.  For  the  ratio  of  CP- AC  to  DP -DA  being  given,  there  is  given  both  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  medium  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion,  and  the  latus  rectum  of 


Y 

X 

^  / 

/  z' 

/ 

I 

/ 

T 

/ 

\ 

H 


P  A 


164  Mathematical  Principles 

the  parabola;  and  thence  the  velocity  at 
the  beginning  of  the  motion  is  given  also. 

Then  from  the  length  of  the  tangent  rL 
there  is  given  both  the  velocity  propor¬ 
tional  to  it.  and  the  resistance  proportional 
to  the  velocity  in  any  place  r. 

Cor.  VI.  But  since  the  length  2DP  is  to 
the  latiis  rectum  of  the  parabola  as  the 
gravity  to  the  resistance  in  D,  and,  from 
the  velocity  augmented,  the  resistance  is 
augmented  in  the  same  ratio,  but  the  latus 
rectum  of  the  parabola  is  augmented  as 
the  square  of  that  ratio,  it  is  plain  that 
the  length  2DP  is  augmented  in  that 
simple  ratio  only;  and  is  therefore  always 
proportional  to  the  velocity;  nor  will  it  be 
augmented  or  diminished  by  the  change 
of  the  angle  CDP,  unless  the  velocity  be 
also  changed.  B 

Cor.  VII.  Hence  appears  the  method  of 
determining  the  curve  DroF  nearly  from  G 
the  phenomena,  and  thence  finding  the  re- 
sistance  and  velocity  with  which  the  body 
is  projected.  Let  tw^o  similar  and  equal  bodies  be  projected  wdth  the  same  ve¬ 
locity,  from  the  place  D,  in  different  angles  CDP,  CDp;  and  let  the  places 
F,  /,  w'here  they  fall  upon  the  horizontal  plane  DC,  be  knowm.  Then  taking 
any  length  for  DP  or  Dp  suppose  the  resistance  in  D  to  be  to  the  gravity  in  any 
ratio  whatsoever,  and  let  that  ratio  be  represented  by  any  length  SM.  Then, 
by  computation,  from  that  assumed  length  DP,  find  the  lengths  DF,  D/; 

and  from  the  ratio  found  by  calcu- 

lation,  subtract  the  same  ratio  as  found 
by  experiment;  and  let  the  difference  be 
represented  by  the  perpendicular  MN. 
Repeat  the  same  a  second  and  a  third 
time,  by  assuming  always  a  new  ratio 
SM  of  the  resistance  to  the  gravity,  and 
collecting  a  new  difference  MN.  Draw 
the  positive  differences  on  one  side  of  the 
right  line  SM,  and  the  negative  on  the 
other  side;  and  through  the  points  N,  N, 
N,  draw  a  regular  curve  NNN,  cutting 
the  right  line  SMMM  in  X,  and  SX  will 
be  the  true  ratio  of  the  resistance  to  the 
gravity,  which  was  to  be  found.  From 
this  ratio  the  length  DF  is  to  be  found 
by  calculation;  and  a  length,  which  is  to 
the  assumed  length  DP  as  the  length  DF 
knowm  by  experiment  to  the  length  DF 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  165 

just  now  found,  mil  be  the  true  length  DP.  This  being  known,  you  will  have 
both  the  curved  line  DmF  which  the  body  describes,  and  also  the  velocity  and 
resistance  of  the  body  in  each  place. 

Scholium 

However,  that  the  resistance  of  bodies  is  in  the  ratio  of  the  velocity,  is  more 
a  mathematical  hypothesis  than  a  physical  one.  In  mediums  void  of  all  tenac¬ 
ity,  the  resistances  made  to  bodies  are  as  the  square  of  the  velocities.  For  by 
the  action  of  a  smfter  body,  a  greater  motion  in  proportion  to  a  greater  veloc¬ 
ity  is  communicated  to  the  same  quantity  of  the  medium  in  a  less  time ;  and  in 
an  equal  time,  by  reason  of  a  greater  quantity  of  the  disturbed  medium,  a 
motion  is  communicated  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  greater;  and  the  resistance 
(by  Laws  ii  and  iii)  is  as  the  motion  communicated.  Let  us,  therefore,  see  what 
motions  arise  from  this  law  of  resistance. 


SECTION  II 


The  motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  as  the  square 

OF  THEIR  VELOCITIES 

Proposition  5.  Theorem  3 

If  a  body  is  resisted  as  the  square  of  its  velocity,  and  moves  by  its  innate  force  only 
through  an  homogeneous  medium;  and  the  times  be  taken  in  a  geometrical  progres¬ 
sion,  proceeding  from  less  to  greater  terms:  I  say,  that  the  velocities  at  the  beginning 
of  each  of  the  times  are  in  the  same  geometrical  progression  inversely;  and  that  the 
spaces  are  equal,  which  are  described  in  each  of  the  times. 

For  since  the  resistance  of  the  medium  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the 
velocity,  and  the  decrement  of  the  velocity  is  proportional  to  the  resistance: 
if  the  time  be  divided  into  innumerable  equal  intervals,  the  squares  of  the 
velocities  at  the  beginning  of  each  of  the  times  will  be  proportional  to  the  dif¬ 
ferences  of  the  same  velocities.  Let  those  inter¬ 
vals  of  time  be  AK,  KL,  LM,  &c.,  taken  in  the 
right  line  CD ;  and  erect  the  perpendiculars  AB, 
KA",  L/,  Mw,  &c.,  meeting  the  hyperbola  BArZwG, 
described  with  the  centre  C,  and  the  rectangular 
asymptotes  CD,  CH,  in  B,  k,  I,  m,  &c.;  then  AB 
will  be  to  Kk  as  CK  to  CA,  and,  by  division, 
AB  — KA"  to  KA"  as  AK  to  CA,  and  alternately, 
AB  — KAr  to  AK  as  KAr  to  CA;  and  therefore  as 
AB-KAr  to  AB-CA.  Therefore  since  AK  and 
AB-CA  are  given,  AB  — KAr  will  be  as  AB-KAr;  and,  lastly,  w'hen  AB  and  KAr 
coincide,  as  AB^  And,  by  the  like  reasoning,  KAr  — LA,  LA  — Mm,  &c.,  mil  be  as 
KAr^,  LA^,  &c.  Therefore  the  squares  of  the  lines  AB,  KAr,  LA,  Mm,  &c.,  are  as 
their  differences;  and,  therefore,  since  the  squares  of  the  velocities  w'ere  showm 
above  to  be  as  their  differences,  the  progression  of  both  will  be  alike.  This  being 
demonstrated  it  follows  also  that  the  areas  described  by  these  lines  are  in  a  like 
progression  with  the  spaces  described  by  these  velocities.  Therefore  if  the  ve¬ 
locity  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  time  AK  be  represented  by  the  line  AB,  and 


166  Mathematical  Principles 

the  velocity  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  time  KL  by  the  line  KA',  and  the 
length  described  in  the  first  time  by  the  area  AKArB,  all  the  following  velocities 
will  be  represented  by  the  following  lines  LA,  Mm,  &c.,  and  the  lengths  de¬ 
scribed  by  the  areas  Kl,  L/«,  &c.  And,  by  composition,  if  the  whole  time  be 
represented  by  AM,  the  sum  of  its  parts,  the  whole  length  described  will  be 
represented  by  AM^izB,  the  sum  of  its  parts.  Now  conceive  the  time  AM  to  be 
divided  into  the  parts  AK,  KL,  LM,  &c.,  so  that  CA,  CK,  CL,  CM,  &c.,  may 
be  in  a  geometrical  progression;  and  those  parts  will  be  in  the  same  progression, 
and  the  velocities  AB,  KA*,  LA,  Mm,  &c.,  mil  be  in  the  same  progression  in¬ 
versely,  and  the  spaces  described  AAr,  KA,  L?!?,  &c.,  mil  be  equal.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  it  appears,  that  if  the  time  be  represented  by  any  part  AD  of 
the  asymptote,  and  the  velocity  in  the  beginning  of  the  time  by  the  ordinate 
AB,  the  velocity  at  the  end  of  the  time  will  be  represented  by  the  ordinate  DG ; 
and  the  whole  space  described  by  the  adjacent  hyperbolic  area  ABGD;  and  the 
space  which  any  body  can  describe  in  the  same  time  AD,  mth  the  first  velocity 
AB,  in  a  nonresisting  medium,  by  the  rectangle  AB  •  AD. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  the  space  described  in  a  resisting  medium  is  given,  by  taking 
it  to  the  space  described  with  the  uniform  velocity  AB  in  a  nonresisting  me¬ 
dium,  as  the  hyperbolic  area  ABGD  to  the  rectangle  AB-AD. 

Cor.  III.  The  resistance  of  the  medium  is  also  given,  by  making  it  equal,  in 
the  very  beginning  of  the  motion,  to  an  uniform  centripetal  force,  which  could 
generate,  in  a  body  falling  through  a  nonresisting  medium,  the  velocity  AB  in 
the  time  AC.  For  if  BT  be  drawn  touching  the  hyperbola  in  B,  and  meeting  the 
asymptote  in  T,  the  right  line  AT  will  be  equal  to  AC,  and  mil  express  the  time 
in  which  the  first  resistance,  uniformly  continued,  may  take  away  the  whole 
velocity  AB. 

Cor.  IV.  And  thence  is  also  given  the  proportion  of  this  resistance  to  the 
force  of  gravity,  or  any  other  given  centripetal  force. 

Cor.  V.  And,  conversely,  if  there  is  given  the  proportion  of  the  resistance  to 
any  given  centripetal  force,  the  time  AC  is  also  given,  in  which  a  centripetal 
force  equal  to  the  resistance  may  generate  any  velocity  as  AB ;  and  thence  is 
given  the  point  B,  through  which  the  hyperbola,  having  CH,  CD  for  its  asymp¬ 
totes,  is  to  be  described;  as  also  the  space  ABGD,  which  a  body,  by  beginning 
its  motion  with  that  velocity  AB,  can  describe  in  any  time  AD,  in  an  homo¬ 
geneous  resisting  medium. 


Proposition  6.  Theorem  4 

Homogeneous  and  equal  spherical  bodies,  opposed  by  resistances  that  are  as  the 
square  of  the  velocities,  and  moving  on  by  their  innate  force  only,  will,  in  times 
which  are  inversely  as  the  velocities  at  the  beginning, 
describe  equal  spaces,  and  lose  parts  of  their  veloc¬ 
ities  proportional  to  the  wholes. 

To  the  rectangular  asymptotes  CD,  CH  des¬ 
cribe  any  hyperbola  B6Ee,  cutting  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  AB,  ab,  DE,  de  in  B,  6,  E,  e;  let  the  ini¬ 
tial  velocities  be  represented  by  the  perpendiculars 
AB,  DE,  and  the  times  by  the  lines  Aa,  DcA. 

Therefore  as  Aa  is  to  Dd,  so  (by  the  hypothesis) 
is  DE  to  AB,  and  so  (from  the  nature  of  the  hy- 


c 


D  d 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  167 

perbola)  is  CA  to  CD;  and,  by  composition,  so  is  Ca  to  Cd.  Therefore  the 
areas  AB6a,  DEed,  that  is,  the  spaces  described,  are  equal  among  themselves, 
and  the  first  velocities  AB,  DE  are  proportional  to  the  last  ab,  de;  and  there¬ 
fore,  by  subtraction,  proportional  to  the  parts  of  the  velocities  lost,  AB  — a6, 
DE— de.  Q.E.D. 


Proposition  7.  Theorem  5 

If  spherical  bodies  are  resisted  as  the  squares  of  their  velocities,  in  times  which  are 
directly  as  the  first  motions,  and  inversely  as  the  first  resistances,  they  will  lose  parts 
of  their  motions  proportional  to  the  wholes,  and  will  describe  spaces  proportional 
to  the  product  of  those  times  and  the  first  velocities. 

For  the  parts  of  the  motions  lost  are  as  the  product  of  the  resistances  and 
times.  Therefore,  that  those  parts  may  be  proportional  to  the  wholes,  the 
product  of  the  resistance  and  time  ought  to  be  as  the  motion.  Therefore  the 
time  \vill  be  as  the  motion  directly  and  the  resistance  inversely.  Therefore  the 
intervals  of  the  times  being  taken  in  that  ratio,  the  bodies  Avill  always  lose  parts 
of  their  motions  proportional  to  the  wholes,  and  therefore  ^vill  retain  velocities 
always  proportional  to  their  first  velocities.  And  because  of  the  given  ratio  of 
the  velocities,  they  mil  always  describe  spaces  which  are  as  the  product  of  the 
first  velocities  and  the  times.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  if  bodies  equally  swift  are  resisted  as  the  square  of  their 
diameters,  homogeneous  globes  moving  mth  any  velocities  whatsoever,  by 
describing  spaces  proportional  to  their  diameters,  mil  lose  parts  of  their  mo¬ 
tions  proportional  to  the  wholes.  For  the  motion  of  each  globe  mil  be  as  the 
product  of  its  velocity  and  mass,  that  is,  as  the  product  of  the  velocity  and  the 
cube  of  its  diameter;  the  resistance  (by  supposition)  will  be  as  the  product  of 
the  square  of  the  diameter  and  the  square  of  the  velocity;  and  the  time  (by 
this  Proposition)  is  in  the  former  ratio  directly,  and  in  the  latter  inversely,  that 
is,  as  the  diameter  directly  and  the  velocity  inversely;  and  therefore  the  space, 
which  is  proportional  to  the  time  and  velocity,  is  as  the  diameter. 

Cor.  II.  If  bodies  equally  smft  are  resisted  as  the  ^th  power  of  their  diam¬ 
eters,  homogeneous  globes,  moving  with  any  velocities  whatsoever,  by  describ¬ 
ing  spaces  that  are  as  the  ^th  power  of  the  diameters,  will  lose  parts  of  their 
motions  proportional  to  the  wholes. 

Cor.  III.  And  universally,  if  equally  smft  bodies  are  resisted  in  the  ratio  of 
any  power  of  the  diameters,  the  spaces,  in  which  homogeneous  globes,  moving 
with  any  velocity  whatsoever,  will  lose  parts  of  their  motions  proportional  to 
the  wholes,  will  be  as  the  cubes  of  the  diameters  applied  to  that  power.  Let 
those  diameters  be  D  and  E;  and  if  the  resistances,  where  the  velocities  are 
supposed  equal,  are  as  D”  and  E”;  the  spaces  in  which  the  globes,  moving  with 
any  velocities  whatsoever,  mil  lose  parts  of  their  motions  proportional  to  the 
wholes,  mil  be  as  D®“"  and  E®“".  And  therefore  homogeneous  globes,  in  de¬ 
scribing  spaces  proportional  to  D®“"  and  E®“",  mil  retain  their  velocities  in  the 
same  ratio  to  one  another  as  at  the  beginning. 

Cor.  IV.  Now  if  the  globes  are  not  homogeneous,  the  space  described  by  the 
denser  globe  must  be  augmented  in  the  ratio  of  the  density.  For  the  motion, 
mth  an  equal  velocity,  is  greater  in  the  ratio  of  the  density,  and  the  time  (by 
this  Proposition)  is  augmented  in  the  ratio  of  motion  directly,  and  the  space 
described  in  the  ratio  of  the  time. 


168  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  V.  And  if  the  globes  move  in  different  mediums,  the  space,  in  a  medium 
which,  other  things  being  equal,  resists  the  most,  must  be  diminished  in  the 
ratio  of  the  greater  resistance.  For  the  time  (by  this  Proposition)  will  be  dimin¬ 
ished  in  the  ratio  of  the  augmented  resistance,  and  the  space  in  the  ratio  of 
the  time. 

Lemma  2 

The  moment  of  any  genitum  is  equal  to  the  moments  of  each  of  the  generating  sides 
multiplied  by  the  indices  of  the  powers  of  those  sides,  and  by  their  coefficients 
continually. 

I  call  any  quantity  a  genitum  which  is  not  made  by  addition  or  subtraction 
of  divers  parts,  but  is  generated  or  produced  in  arithmetic  by  the  multiplica¬ 
tion,  division,  or  extraction  of  the  root  of  any  terms  whatsoever;  in  geometry 
by  the  finding  of  contents  and  sides,  or  of  the  extremes  and  means  of  propor¬ 
tionals.  Quantities  of  this  kind  are  products,  quotients,  roots,  rectangles,  squares, 
cubes,  square  and  cubic  sides,  and  the  like.  These  quantities  I  here  consider  as 
variable  and  indetermined,  and  increasing  or  decreasing,  as  it  were,  by  a  con¬ 
tinual  motion  or  flux;  and  I  understand  their  momentary  increments  or  decre¬ 
ments  by  the  name  of  moments;  so  that  the  increments  may  be  esteemed  as 
added  or  affirmative  moments;  and  the  decrements  as  subtracted  or  negative 
ones.  But  take  care  not  to  look  upon  finite  particles  as  such.  Finite  particles 
are  not  moments,  but  the  very  quantities  generated  by  the  moments.  We  are 
to  conceive  them  as  the  just  nascent  principles  of  finite  magnitudes.  Nor  do  we 
in  this  Lemma  regard  the  magnitude  of  the  moments,  but  their  first  propor¬ 
tion,  as  nascent.  It  wiW  be  the  same  thing,  if,  instead  of  moments,  we  use  either 
the  velocities  of  the  increments  and  decrements  (which  may  also  be  called  the 
motions,  mutations,  and  fluxions  of  quantities),  or  any  finite  quantities  pro¬ 
portional  to  those  velocities.  The  coefficient  of  any  generating  side  is  the  quan¬ 
tity  which  arises  by  applying  the  genitum  to  that  side. 

Wherefore  the  sense  of  the  Lemma  is,  that  if  the  moments  of  any  quantities 
A,  B,  C,  &c.,  increasing  or  decreasing  by  a  continual  flux,  or  the  velocities  of 
the  mutations  which  are  proportional  to  them,  be  called  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  the  moment 
or  mutation  of  the  generated  rectangle  AB  will  be  aB  +  6A;  the  moment  of  the 
generated  content  ABC  will  be  aBC  +  6AC+cAB;  and  the  moments  of  the 
generated  powers  A^,  A®,  A'*,  A^^^,  A®/^,  A^/®,  A^/®,  A“b  A'^,  A"^/^  will  be  2aA, 
3aA2,  4aA^  VsaA-^'^  -aA-\  -2aA-\ 

n 

respectively;  and,  in  general,  that  the  moment  of  any  power  A™  will  be 

H  n~m 

—  aAm  ,  Also,  that  the  moment  of  the  generated  quantity  A^B  will  be 

'tYt 

2aAB-\-bA^;  the  moment  of  the  generated  quantity  A^B'^C^  vdll  be  SaA^B^C^T 

A3 

46A®B®C2-|-2cA®B‘‘C;  and  the  moment  of  the  generated  quantity  ^  or  A^B"^ 

will  be  SdA^B""  — 26A®B“®;  and  so  on.  The  Lemma  is  thus  demonstrated. 

Case  1.  Any  rectangle,  as  AB,  augmented  by  a  continual  flux,  when,  as  yet, 
there  wanted  of  the  sides  A  and  B  half  their  moments  3^a  and  3^6,  was 
A  — 3^a  into  B  —  f/^b,  or  AB  — B  —  f/fb  A-\-}4(ib;  but  as  soon  as  the  sides 
A  and  B  are  augmented  by  the  other  half-moments,  the  rectangle  becomes 
A+3^a  into  B  +  3^6,  or  AB-f  A-\-}/iab.  From  this  rectangle  sub¬ 

tract  the  former  rectangle,  and  there  vdll  remain  the  excess  aB+6A.  There- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


169 


fore  Avith  the  whole  increments  a  and  h  of  the  sides,  the  increment  aB+6A  of 
the  rectangle  is  generated.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Suppose  AB  always  equal  to  G,  and  then  the  moment  of  the  content 
ABC  or  GC  (by  Case  1)  ^^Tll  be  gC+cG,  that  is  (putting  AB  and  aB+6A  for 
G  and  g),  aBC+6AC+cAB.  And  the  reasoning  is  the  same  for  contents  under 
ever  so  many  sides.  q.e.d. 

Case  3.  Suppose  the  sides  A,  B,  and  C,  to  be  always  equal  among  them¬ 
selves;  and  the  moment  aB  +  6A,  of  A^,  that  is,  of  the  rectangle  AB,  will  be  2aA; 
and  the  moment  aBC + 6 AC + cAB  of  A®,  that  is,  of  the  content  ABC,  will  be  3a A-. 
And  by  the  same  reasoning  the  moment  of  any  power  A"  is  naA"~b  q.e.d. 

Case  4.  Therefore  since  ^  A  is  1,  the  moment  of  ^  multiplied  by  A, 


together  vdth  ^  multiplied  by  a,  vdll  be  the  moment  of  1,  that  is,  nothing. 
A 


Therefore  the  moment  of  or  of  A“^,  is  -jy-  generally  since  into 


A”  is  1,  the  moment  of  ^  multiplied  by  A"  together  vith  into  naA^~^  will 
be  nothing.  And,  therefore,  the  moment  of  or  A“"  will  be  —  q.e.d. 


Case  5.  And  since  A^^^  into  A^/^  is  A,  the  moment  of  A^/^  multiplied  by 
2A1/2  \\dll  be  a  (by  Case  3);  and,  therefore,  the  moment  of  A^/^  vill  be 

m 

or  3^aA“^/^  And  generally,  putting  A'*  equal  to  B,  then  A*"  will  be  equal  to 
B",  and  therefore  equal  to  n&B"~b  and  maA~^  equal  to  nbB~^,  or 

_m  m  n~m 

nbA  ^ ;  and  therefore  ”aA  ”  is  equal  to  b,  that  is,  equal  to  the  moment  of 

m 

A”.  Q.E.D. 

Case  6.  Therefore  the  moment  of  any  generated  quantity  A”*B"  is  the 
moment  of  A™  multiplied  by  B",  together  vdth  the  moment  of  B”  multiplied 
by  A™,  that  is,  maA“~^  B"4-w6B"~^  A“;  and  that  whether  the  indices  m  and  n 
of  the  powers  be  whole  numbers  or  fractions,  affirmative  or  negative.  And  the 
reasoning  is  the  same  for  higher  powers.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  in  quantities  continually  proportional,  if  one  term  is  given, 
the  moments  of  the  rest  of  the  terms  will  be  as  the  same  terms  multiplied  by 
the  number  of  intervals  between  them  and  the  given  term.  Let  A,  B,  C,  D, 
E,  F  be  continually  proportional;  then  if  the  term  C  is  given,  the  moments  of 
the  rest  of  the  terms  will  be  among  themselves  as  —  2A,  —  B,  D,  2E,  3F. 

Cor.  II.  And  if  in  four  proportionals  the  tw'o  means  are  given,  the  moments 
of  the  extremes  will  be  as  those  extremes.  The  same  is  to  be  understood  of  the 
sides  of  any  given  rectangle. 

Cor.  III.  And  if  the  sum  or  difference  of  two  squares  is  given,  the  moments 
of  the  sides  Avill  be  inversely  as  the  sides. 


Scholium 

In  a  letter  of  mine  to  Mr.  .1.  Collins,  dated  December  10,  1672,  having  de¬ 
scribed  a  method  of  tangents,  which  I  suspected  to  be  the  same  with  Sluse’s 
method,  wffiich  at  that  time  w^as  not  made  public,  I  added  these  words :  This  is 
one  'particular^  or  rather  a  Corollary^  of  a  general  method,  which  extends  itself, 


170  Mathematical  Principles 

without  any  troublesome  ealeulation,  not  only  to  the  drawing  of  tangents  to  any 
curved  lines,  whether  geometrical  or  mechanical  or  in  any  manner  respecting  right 
lines  or  other  curves,  hid  also  to  the  resolving  other  abstruser  kinds  of  problems 
about  the  crookedness,  areas,  lengths,  centres  of  gravity  of  curves,  &c.;  nor  is  it 
(as  Hudden’s  method  de  maximis  et  minimis)  limited  to  equations  which  are  free 
from  surd  quantities.  This  method  1  have  interwoven  with  that  other  of  working  in 
equations,  by  reducing  them  to  infinite  series.  So  far  that  letter.  And  these  last 
words  relate  to  a  treatise  I  composed  on  that  subject  in  the  year  1671.  The 
foundation  of  that  general  method  is  contained  in  the  preceding  Lemma. 

Proposition  8.  Theorem  6 

If  a  body  in  an  uniform  medium,  being  uniformly  acted  upon  by  the  force  of 
gravity,  ascends  or  descends  in  a  right  line;  and  the  whole  space  described  be 
divided  into  equal  parts,  and  in  the  beginning  of  each  of  the  parts  (by  adding  or 
subtracting  the  resisting  force  of  the  medium  to  or  from  the  force  of  gravity,  when 
the  body  ascends  or  descends)  you  derive  the  absolute  forces:  I  say,  that  those 
absolute  forces  are  in  a  geometrical  progression. 

Let  the  force  of  gravity  be  represented  by  the  given  line  AC;  the  force  of 
resistance  by  the  indefinite  line  AK;  the  absolute  force  in  the  descent  of  the 
body  by  the  difference  KC;  the  velocity  of  the  body  by  a  line  AP,  which  shall 
be  a  mean  proportional  between  AK  and  AC,  and  therefore  as  the  square  root 
of  the  resistance;  the  increment  of  the  re¬ 
sistance  made  in  a  given  interval  of  time 
by  the  short  line  KL,  and  the  contempora¬ 
neous  increment  of  the  velocity  by  the 
short  line  PQ;  and  \vith  the  centre  C,  and 
rectangular  asymptotes  CA,  CH,  describe 
any  hyperbola  BNS  meeting  the  erected 
perpendiculars  AB,  KN,  LO  in  B,  N,  and 
O.  Because  AK  is  as  AP^,  the  moment  KL 
of  the  one  will  be  as  the  moment  2AP-PQ  of  the  other,  that  is,  as  AP-KC;  for 
the  increment  PQ  of  the  velocity  is  (by  Law  ii)  proportional  to  the  generating 
force  KC.  Let  the  ratio  of  KL  be  multiplied  by  the  ratio  KN,  and  the  rectangle 
KL  •  KN  will  become  as  AP  •  KC  •  KN ;  that  is  (because  the  rectangle  KC  •  KN 
is  given),  as  AP.  But  the  ultimate  ratio  of  the  hyperbolic  area  KNOL  to  the 
rectangle  KL-KN  becomes,  when  the  points  K  and  L  coincide,  the  ratio  of 
equality.  Therefore  that  hyperbolic  evanescent  area  is  as  AP.  Therefore  the 
whole  hyperbolic  area  ABOL  is  composed  of  intervals  KNOL  which  are  always 
proportional  to  the  velocity  AP;  and  therefore  is  itself  proportional  to  the  space 
described  with  that  velocity.  Let  that  area  be  now  divided  into  equal  parts,  as 
ABMI,  IMNK,  KNOL,  &c.,  and  the  absolute  forces  AC,  IC,  KC,  LC,  &c., 
■will  be  in  a  geometrical  progression,  q.e.d.  And  by  a  like  reasoning,  in  the  ascent 
of  the  body,  taking,  on  the  contrary  side  of  the  point  A,  the  equal  areas  ABmi, 
imnk,  knol,  &c.,  it  will  appear  that  the  absolute  forces  AC,  iC,  kC,  IC,  &c.,  are 
continually  proportional.  Therefore  if  all  the  spaces  in  the  ascent  and  descent 
are  taken  equal,  all  the  absolute  forces  IC,  kC,  iC,  AC,  IC,  KC,  LC,  &c.,  will 
be  continually  proportional.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  space  described  be  represented  by  the  hyperbolic  area 
ABNK,  the  force  of  gravity,  the  velocity  of  the  body,  and  the  resistance  of  the 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  171 

medium,  may  be  represented  by  the  lines  AC,  AP,  and  AK  respectively;  and 
conversely. 

Cor.  II.  And  the  greatest  velocity  which  the  body  can  ever  acquire  in  an 
infinite  descent  will  be  represented  by  the  line  AC. 

Cor.  III.  Therefore  if  the  resistance  of  the  medium  answering  to  any  given 
velocity  be  known,  the  greatest  velocity  vill  be  found,  by  taking  it  to  that 
given  velocity,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  which  the  force  of  gravity  bears 
to  that  known  resistance  of  the  medium. 


Proposition  9.  Theorem  7 


Supposing  what  is  above  demonstrated,  I  say,  that  if  the  tangents  of  the  angles  of 
the  sector  of  a  circle,  and  of  an  hyperbola,  be  taken  proportional  to  the  velocities, 
the  radius  being  of  a  fit  magnitude,  all  the  time  of  the  ascent  to  the  highest  place  will 
be  as  the  sector  of  the  circle,  and  all  the  time  of  descending  from  the  highest  place 
as  the  sector  of  the  hyperbola. 

To  the  right  line  AC,  which  expresses  the  force  of  gravity,  let  AD  be  dravm 
perpendicular  and  equal.  From  the  centre  D,  vith  the  semidiameter  AD 
describe  as  well  the  quadrant  A^E  of  a  circle,  as  the  rectangular  hyperbola 
AVZ,  whose  axis  is  AK,  principal  vertex  A,  and  asymptote  DC.  Let  Dp,  DP 


be  draMTi;  and  the  circular  sector  A®  vdll  be  as  all  the  time  of  the  ascent  to  the 
highest  place;  and  the  hyperbolic  sector  ATD  as  all  the  time  of  descent  from 
the  highest  place;  if  so  be  that  the  tangents  Ap,  AP  of  those  sectors  be  as  the 
velocities. 

Case  1.  Draw  T)vq  cutting  off  the  moments  or  least  intervals  tDv  and  gDp, 
described  in  the  same  time,  of  the  sector  AD^  and  of  the  triangle  ADp.  Since 
those  intervals  (because  of  the  common  angle  D)  are  as  the  square  of  the  sides. 


the  interval  tDv  will  be  as 


qDp  ^D  ^  (because  ®  is  given),  as 


But 


, -  V — 

pD^  is  AD^+Ap^,  that  is,  AD^+AD-A/r,  or  AD-CAq  and  qDp  is  3^AD-pg 


Therefore  tDv,  the  interval  of  the  sector,  is  as  that  is,  directly  as  the  least 


decrement  pq  of  the  velocity,  and  inversely  as  the  force  Ck  which  diminishes 
the  velocity;  and  therefore  as  the  interval  of  time  answering  to  the  decrement 


172  Mathematical  Principles 

of  the  velocity.  And,  by  composition,  the  sum  of  all  the  intervals  tDv  in  the 
sector  AD/  will  be  as  the  sum  of  the  intervals  of  time  answering  to  each  of  the 
lost  intervals  pq  of  the  decreasing  velocity  Ap,  till  that  velocity,  being  dimin¬ 
ished  into  nothing,  vanishes;  that  is,  the  whole  sector  AD/  is  as  the  whole  time 
of  ascent  to  the  highest  place.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  Draw  DQV  cutting  off  the  least  intervals  TDV  and  PDQ  of  the 
sector  DAV,  and  of  the  triangle  DAQ;  and  these  intervals  wall  be  to  each  other 
as  DT’  to  DP2,  that  is  (if  TX  and  AP  are  parallel),  as  DX^  to  DA^  or  TX^  to 


AP^;  and,  by  subtraction,  as  DX^  — TX^  to  DA^— AP^.  But,  from  the  nature 
of  the  hyperbola,  DX^  — TX^  is  AD^;  and,  by  the  supposition,  AP^  is  AD-AK. 
Therefore  the  intervals  are  to  each  other  as  AD^  to  AD^  — AD-AK;  that  is, 
as  AD  to  AD  — AK  or  AC  to  CK;  and  therefore  the  interval  TDV  of  the  sector 

PDO-AC  •  PQ 

is  — — ;  and  therefore  (because  AC  and  AD  are  given)  as  that  is, 
CK  VxV 


directly  as  the  increment  of  the  velocity,  and  inversely  as  the  force  generating 
the  increment;  and  therefore  as  the  interval  of  the  time  answering  to  the  incre¬ 
ment.  And,  by  composition,  the  sum  of  the  intervals  of  time,  in  which  all  the 
intervals  PQ  of  the  velocity  AP  are  generated,  \vill  be  as  the  sum  of  the  in¬ 
tervals  of  the  sector  ATD;  that  is,  the  whole  time  will  be  as  the  whole  sector. 


Q.E.D. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  AB  be  equal  to  a  fourth  part  of  AC,  the  space  which  a  body 
will  describe  by  falling  in  any  time  will  be  to  the  space  which  the  body  could 
describe,  by  moving  uniformly  on  in  the  same  time  with  its  greatest  velocity 
AC,  as  the  area  ABNK,  which  expresses  the  space  described  in  falling  to  the 
area  ATD,  which  expresses  the  time.  For  since 

AC  :  AP  =  AP  :  AK, 
and  by  Cor.  i,  Lem.  2,  of  this  Book, 

LK  :  PQ  =  2AK  :  AP  =  2AP  :  AC, 
therefore  LK  :  3^PQ  =  AP  :  3^AC  or  AB, 

and  since  KN  :  AC  or  AD  =  AD  :  CK, 

multiplying  together  corresponding  terms, 

LKNO  :  DPQ  =  AP  :  CK. 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


173 


As  shown  above, 

DPQ  :  DTV  =  CK  :  AC. 

Hence,  LKXO  :  DTV  =  AP  :  AC ; 

that  is.  as  the  velocity  of  the  falling  body  to  the  greatest  velocity  which  the 
body  by  falling  can  acquire.  Since,  therefore,  the  moments  LKXO  and  DTV 
of  the  areas  ABXK  and  ATD  are  as  the  velocities,  all  the  parts  of  those  areas 
generated  in  the  same  time  vill  be  as  the  spaces  described  in  the  same  time; 
and  therefore  the  whole  areas  ABXK  and  ADT,  generated  from  the  beginning, 
will  be  as  the  whole  spaces  described  from  the  beginning  of  the  descent,  q.e.d. 

Cor.  II.  The  same  is  true  also  of  the  space  described  in  the  ascent.  That  is  to 
say,  that  all  that  space  is  to  the  space  described  in  the  same  time,  vith  the 
uniform  velocity  AC,  as  the  area  ABnA’  is  to  the  sector  ADi. 

Cor.  III.  The  velocity  of  the  body,  falling  in  the  time  ATD,  is  to  the  velocity 
which  it  would  acquire  in  the  same  time  in  a  nonresisting  space,  as  the  triangle 
APD  to  the  hyperbolic  sector  ATD.  For  the  velocity  in  a  nonresisting  medium 
would  be  as  the  time  ATD,  and  in  a  resisting  medium  is  as  AP,  that  is,  as  the 
triangle  APD.  And  those  velocities,  at  the  beginning  of  the  descent,  are  equal 
among  themselves,  as  well  as  those  areas  ATD,  APD. 

Cor.  IV.  By  the  same  argument,  the  velocity  in  the  ascent  is  to  the  velocity 
with  which  the  body  in  the  same  time,  in  a  nonresisting  space,  would  lose  all 
its  motion  of  ascent,  as  the  triangle  ApD  to  the  circular  sector  AiD;  or  as  the 
right  line  Ap  to  the  arc  At. 

Cor.  V.  Therefore  the  time  in  which  a  body,  by  falling  in  a  resisting  medium, 
would  acquire  the  velocity  AP,  is  to  the  time  in  which  it  would  acquire  its 
greatest  velocity  AC,  by  falling  in  a  nonresisting  space,  as  the  sector  ADT  to 
the  triangle  ADC;  and  the  time  in  which  it  would  lose  its  velocity  Ap,  by 
ascending  in  a  resisting  medium,  is  to  the  time  in  which  it  would  lose  the  same 
velocity  by  ascending  in  a  nonresisting  space,  as  the  arc  At  to  its  tangent  Ap. 

Cor.  VI.  Hence  from  the  given  time  there  is  given  the  space  described  in  the 
ascent  or  descent.  For  the  greatest  velocity  of  a  body  descending  in  infinitum 
is  given  (by  Cor.  ii  and  iii,  Theor.  6,  of  this  book) ;  and  thence  the  time  is  given 
in  which  a  body  would  acquire  that  velocity  by  falling  in  nonresisting  space. 
Taking  the  sector  ADT  or  AD^  to  the  triangle  ADC  in  the  ratio  of  the  given 
time  to  the  time  just  found,  there  will  be  given  both  the  velocity  AP  or  Ap,  and 
the  area  ABXK  or  ABn/r,  which  is  to  the  sector  ADT,  or  AD^  as  the  space 
sought  to  that  which  would,  in  the  given  time,  be  uniformly  described  vith 
that  greatest  velocity  found  just  before. 

Cor.  vii.  And  by  going  backwards,  from  the  given  space  of  ascent  or  descent 
ABnk  or  ABXK,  there  will  be  given  the  time  AD^  or  ADT. 

Proposition  10.  Problem  3 

Suppose  the  uniform  force  of  gravity  to  tend  directly  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon,  and 
the  resistance  to  he  as  the  product  of  the  density  of  the  medium  and  the  square  of 
the  velocity:  it  is  proposed  to  find  the  density  of  the  mediurn  in  each  place,  which 
shall  make  the  body  move  in  any  given  curved  line,  the  velocity  of  the  body,  and  the 
resistance  of  the  medium  in  each  place. 

Let  PQ  be  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  scheme  itself;  PFHQ 
a  curved  line  meeting  that  plane  in  the  points  P  and  Q;  G,  H,  I  ,K  four  places 
of  the  body  going  on  in  this  curve  from  F  to  Q;  and  GB,  HC,  ID,  KE  four 


174 


Mathematical  Principles 


parallel  ordinates  let  fall  from  these  points  to  the  horizon,  and  standing  on  the 
horizontal  line  PQ  at  the  points  B,  C,  D,  E;  and  let  the  distances  BC,  CD,  DE 
of  the  ordinates  be  equal  among  themselves.  From  the  points  G  and  H  let  the 
right  lines  GL,  HN  be  drawn  touching  the 
curve  in  G  and  H,  and  meeting  the  ordi¬ 
nates  CH,  DI,  produced  upwards,  in  L  and 
N ;  and  complete  the  parallelogram  HCDM. 

And  the  times  in  which  the  body  describes 
the  arcs  GH,  HI,  will  be  as  the  square 
root  of  the  altitudes  LH,  NI,  which  the 
bodies  would  describe  in  those  times,  by 
falling  from  the  tangents ;  and  the  velocities 
will  be  directly  as  the  lengths  described 
GH,  HI,  and  inversely  as  the  times.  Let  the  times  be  represented  by  T  and  t, 

GH  HI 

and  the  velocities  by  and  — ;  and  the  decrement  of  the  velocity  produced 

in  the  time  t  Avill  be  represented  by  This  decrement  arises  from  the 

resistance  which  retards  the  body,  and  from  the  gravity  which  accelerates  it. 
Gravity,  in  a  falling  body,  which  in  its  fall  describes  the  space  NI,  produces  a 
velocity  Avith  which  it  would  be  able  to  describe  twice  that  space  in  the  same 

2NI 

time,  as  Galileo  hath  demonstrated ;  that  is,  the  velocity  — — :  but  if  the  body 

V 

describes  the  arc  HI,  it  augments  that  arc  only  by  the  length  HI  — HN  or 

;  and  therefore  generates  only  the  velocity  Let  this  velocity 

be  added  to  the  before-mentioned  decrement,  and  we  shall  have  the  decrement 

of  the  velocity  arising  from  the  resistance  alone,  that  is,  — 

i  t  LHl 

Therefore  since,  in  the  same  time,  the  action  of  gravity  generates,  in  a  falling 
body,  the  velocity  the  resistance  will  be  to  the  gravity  as 


t 

GH  HI  ,  2MI-NI  ,  2NI  ^  GH 


-HI  + 


2MINI 

HI 


to  2NI. 


t  -  T 

Now,  for  the  abscissas  CB,  CD,  CE,  put  — o,  o,  2o.  For  the  ordinate  CH 
put  P;  and  for  MI  put  any  series  Qo+Ro^+So®+,  &c.  And  all  the  terms  of  the 
series  after  the  first,  that  is,  Ro^+So®+,  &c.,  mil  be  NI;  and  the  ordinates  DI, 
EK,  and  BG  mil  be  P-Qo-Ro^-So^-,  &c.,  F-2Qo-4Ro^-8So^- ,  &c., 
and  P+Qo  — Ro^+So®— ,  &c.,  respectively.  And  by  squaring  the  differences  of 
the  ordinates  BG  — CH  and  CH  — DI,  and  to  the  squares  thence  produced 
adding  the  squares  of  BC  and  CD  themselves,  you  will  have  oo-j-QQoo  — 
2QRo®+,  &c.,  and  oo+QQoo+2QRo®+,  &c.,  the  squares  of  the  arcs  GH,  HI; 

whose  roots  o\/(l  +QQ)  -  and  qV(1+QQ)  +  are  the 

arcs  GH  and  HI.  Moreover,  if  from  the  ordinate  CH  there  be  subtracted  half 
the  sum  of  the  ordinates  BG  and  DI,  and  from  the  ordinate  DI  there  be  sub¬ 
tracted  half  the  sum  of  the  ordinates  CH  and  EK,  there  mil  remain  Roo  and 
Roo+SSo®,  the  versed  sines  of  the  arcs  GI  and  HK.  And  these  are  proportional 
to  the  short  lines  LH  and  NI,  and  therefore  are  as  the  squares  of  the  infiniteh'^ 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 
small  times  T  and  t:  and  thence  the  ratio  ^  varies  as  the  square  root  of 


or 


175 
R  -|“3So 
R 

R+^^ .  ^XGH  _  jjj _[_21MIXXI  substituting  the  values  of  GH. 
K  1  ili  i 


HI,  MI,  and  XI  just  found,  becomes 


3Soo 


V(1+QQ)-  And  since  2X'I  is  2Roc», 
3Soo 


the  resistance  will  be  now  to  the  gra\dty  as  -77^  V(1  +QQ)  to  2Roo,  that  is,  as 
3S\/(1TQQ)  to  4RR. 

And  the  velocity  will  be  such,  that  a  body  going  off  therewith  from  any  place 
H,  in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  HX,  Avould  describe,  in  a  vacuum,  a  parabola, 

whose  diameter  is  HC,  and  its  latus  rectum  or 

X  i  R 

And  the  resistance  is  as  the  product  of  the  density  of  the  medium  and  the 

square  of  the  velocity;  and  therefore  the 
density  of  the  medium  is  directly  as  the  re¬ 
sistance,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 

3SV(1+QQ) 


velocity;  that  is,  directly  as 
and  ^~bQQ. 


inversely 

S 


as 


R 


4RR 
that  is, 


as 


R\/(l+QQ)‘ 

Cor.  I.  If  the  tangent  HX  be  produced 
HT 

both  ways,  so  as  to  meet  any  ordinate  AF  in  T,  vill  be  equal  to  \/(l  + 

QQ),  and  therefore  in  what  has  gone  before  may  be  put  for  \/(l+QQ)-  By 

this  means  the  resistance  vdll  be  to  the  gravity  as  3S-HT  to  4RR-AC;  the 

HT  S’ AC 

velocity  vdll  be  as  ,  and  the  density  of  the  medium  will  be  as  ^  . 

ACvR  K-Hi 

Cor.  II.  And  hence,  if  the  curved  line  PFHQ  be  defined  by  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  base  or  abscissa  AC  and  the  ordinate  CH,  as  is  usual,  and  the  value 
of  the  ordinate  be  resolved  into  a  converging  series,  the  Problem  will  be  ex¬ 
peditiously  solved  by  the  first  terms  of  the  series;  as  in  the  following  Examples. 

Exam.  1.  Let  the  fine  PFHQ  be  a  semicircle  described  upon  the  diameter 
PQ;  to  find  the  density  of  the  medium  that  shall  make  a  projectile  move  in 
that  fine. 

Bisect  the  diameter  PQ  in  A;  and  call  AQ,  n;  AC,  a;  CH,  e;  and  CD,  0;  then 
DP  or  AQ^— AD2  =  nn  — oa  — 2ao  — 00,  or  ee—2ao  —  oo;  and  the  root  being 
extracted  by  our  method,  vill  give 

nnnrk 

&c. 


ao  00  aaoo  ao^ 


2e^  2e^  2e^ 


Here  put  nn  for  ee+aa,  and  DI  vdll  become  =ee  — 


ao  nnoo  anno^ 


—  ,&c. 


e  2e®  2e° 

In  such  a  series  I  distinguish  the  successive  terms  after  this  manner :  I  call 
that  the  first  term  in  which  the  infinitely  small  quantity  0  is  not  found;  the 
second,  in  which  that  quantity  is  of  one  dimension  only;  the  third,  in  which 
it  arises  to  two  dimensions;  the  fourth,  in  which  it  is  of  three;  and  so  ad 
infinitum.  And  the  first  term,  which  here  is  e,  will  always  denote  the  length  of 


176 


Mathematical  Principles 


the  ordinate  CH,  erected  at  the  starting  point  of  the  indefinite  quantity  o.  The 

second  term,  which  here  is  will  denote  the  difference  between  CH  and  DN ; 

e 

that  is,  the  short  line  MX  which  is  cut  off  by  completing  the  parallelogram 
HCDM;  and  therefore  always  determines  the  position  of  the  tangent  HN;  as, 

in  this  case,  by  taking  MX  :  HM  =  — ;  o  =  a  :  e.  The  third  term,  which  here  is 


nnoo 

'W 


,  ^^^ll  represent  the  short  line  IX,  which  lies  between  the  tangent  and  the 


curve;  and  therefore  determines  the  angle  of  contact  IHX,  or  the  curvature 
which  the  curved  line  has  in  H.  If  that  short  line  IX  is  of  a  finite  magnitude,  it 
will  be  expressed  by  the  third  term,  to¬ 
gether  with  those  that  follow  in  infinitum. 

But  if  that  short  line  be  diminished  in  in¬ 
finitum,  the  terms  following  become  infin¬ 
itely  less  than  the  third  term,  and  there¬ 
fore  may  be  neglected.  The  fourth  term 
determines  the  variation  of  the  curvature; 
the  fifth,  the  variation  of  the  variation;  and 
so  on.  From  this,  by  the  way,  appears  the 
use,  not  to  be  disdained,  which  may  be 
made  of  these  series  in  the  solution  of  problems  that  depend  upon  tangents, 
and  the  curvature  of  curves. 

Xow  compare  the  series 


ao  nnoo  anno'‘ 


2e^ 


2& 


—  &c.. 


mth  the  series 


and  for  P,  Q,  R  and  S,  put  and 


P  —  Qo  —  Roo  —  So®  —  &c., 

and  for  \/(l  +  QQ)  put 


Tl  .  .  .  CL 

or  -;  and  the  density  of  the  medium  will  come  out  as  — ;  that  is  (because  n  is 

C  TIC 

a  AC 

given),  as  -  or  7^,  that  is,  as  that  length  of  the  tangent  HT,  which  is  term- 

inated  at  the  semidiameter  AF  standing  perpendicularly  on  PQ:  and  the 
resistance  ^vill  be  to  the  gravity  as  3a  to  2n,  that  is,  as  SAC  to  the  diameter 
PQ  of  the  circle;  and  the  velocity  will  be  as  VCH.  Therefore  if  the  body  goes 
from  the  place  F,  with  a  due  velocity,  in  the  direction  of  a  line  parallel  to  PQ, 
and  the  density  of  the  medium  in  each  of  the  places  H  is  as  the  length  of  the 
tangent  HT,  and  the  resistance  also  in  any  place  H  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  as 
SAC  to  PQ,  that  body  will  describe  the  quadrant  FHQ  of  a  circle.  q.e.i. 

But  if  the  same  body  should  go  from  the  place  P,  in  the  direction  of  a  line 
perpendicular  to  PQ,  and  should  begin  to  move  in  an  arc  of  the  semicircle 
PFQ,  we  must  take  AC  or  a  on  the  contrary  side  of  the  centre  A;  and  therefore 
its  sign  must  be  changed,  and  we  must  put— a  for-|-a.  Then  the  density  of  the 

medium  would  come  out  as  — But  Xature  does  not  admit  of  a  negative 

e 

density,  that  is,  a  density  which  accelerates  the  motion  of  bodies;  and  therefore 
it  cannot  naturally  come  to  pass  that  a  body  by  ascending  from  P  should 


Book  II  :  The  Motion*  of  Bodies  177 

describe  the  quadrant  PF  of  a  circle.  To  produce  such  an  effect,  a  body  ought 
to  be  accelerated  by  an  impelling  medium,  and  not  impeded  by  a  resisting  one. 

Exam.  2.  Let  the  line  PFQ  be  a  parabola,  having  its  axis  AF  perpendicular 
to  the  horizon  PQ;  to  find  the  density  of  the  medium,  which  \\t11  make  a  pro¬ 
jectile  move  in  that  line. 

From  the  nature  of  the  parabola,  the  rectangle  — PD- DQ  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  under  the  ordinate  DI  and  some  given  right  line;  that  is,  if  that  right 
line  be  called  h;  PC,  a;  PQ,  c;  CH,  e;  and  CD,  o;  the  rectangle 
(a+o)  {c  —  a  —  o)=ac  —  aa  —  2ao-\-co  —  oo  =  h-Dl; 

ac  —  aa  ,  c  —  2a 


therefore 


DT 


00 

•O-J. 


Q _ 

Now  the  second  term  — ^ —  o  of  this  series  is  to  be  put 

for  Qo,  and  the  third  term  ^  for  Roo.  But  since  there 

0 

are  no  more  terms,  the  coefficient  S  of  the  fourth  term 

S 

■will  vanish;  and  therefore  the  quantity  15 — 77,  "1 

Rv  (1+QQ) 

to  which  the  density  of  the  medium  is  proportional,  vill  be  nothing  There¬ 
fore,  where  the  medium  is  of  no  density,  the  projectile  vill  move  in  a  parabola; 
as  Galileo  hath  heretofore  demonstrated.  q.e.i. 

Ex.\m.  3.  Let  the  line  AGK  be  an  hyperbola,  having  its  asymptote  NX  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  horizontal  plane  AK:  to  find  the  density  of  the  medium  that 
vill  make  a  projectile  move  in  that  line. 

Let  MX  be  the  other  asymptote,  meeting  the  ordinate  DG  produced  in  V ; 
and  from  the  nature  of  the  hyperbola,  the  rectangle  of  XV  into  VG  M’ill  be 
given.  There  is  also  given  the  ratio  of  DN  to  VX,  and  therefore  the  rectangle 
of  DN  into  VG  is  given.  Let  that  be  hh;  and,  completing  the  parallelogram 
DNXZ,  let  BN  be  called  a;  BD,  0;  NX,  c;  and  let  the  given  ratio  of  VZ  to  ZX 

or  DN  be  — .  Then  DN  -snll  be  equal  to  a  —  o,  VG  equal  to 


n 


a  —  o 


,  VZ  equal  to 


m 


—  •(a  —  o)  and  GD  or  NX  — VZ  — VG  equal  to 
n 


m  ,  m 

c - a-\ — 0- 

n  n 


hh 


Let  the  term 


a  —  o 


a—o 

be  resolved  into  the  con¬ 


verging  senes 

hh  ,  hh  ,  hh  ,  66  ,  . 
a  aa  a}  a^  ’  ’ 

and  GD  will  become  equal  to 
m  hh  ,  m  hh  hh 


nv  171/  liv 

c - a - 1 — 0  — 


n 


a 


n 


aa 


3 

0 - - T0^ 


&c. 


The  second  term  —  o  — — o  of  this  series  is  to 


n 


aa 


hh 


be  used  for  Qo;  the  third  ^Yiih  its  sign 

a 

hh 

changed  for  Ro^;  and  the  fourth  ~^o^,  with 


178 


Mathematical  Principles 


are  the  squares  of  XZ  and  ZY.  But  the  ratio  of  the  resistance  to  gravity  is 
found  to  be  that  of  3XY  to  2YG;  and  the  velocity  is  that  ^vith  which  the  body 
would  describe  a  parabola,  whose  vertex  is  G,  diameter  DG,  latus  rectum 
XY^ 

Suppose,  therefore,  that  the  densities  of  the  medium  in  each  of  the  places 
V(jr 

G  are  inversely  as  the  distances  XY,  and  that  the  resistance  in  any  place  G  is 
to  the  gravity  as  3XY  to  2YG;  and  a  body  let  go  from  the  place  A,  with  a  due 
velocity,  mil  describe  that  hyperbola  AGK.  q.e.i. 

Exam.  4.  Suppose,  indefinitely,  the  line  AGK  to  be  an  hyperbola  described 
with  the  centre  X,  and  the  asymptotes  MX,  NX,  so  that,  having  constructed 
the  rectangle  XZDN,  whose  side  ZD  cuts  the  hyperbola  in  G  and  its  asymptote 
in  V,  VG  may  be  inversely  as  any  power  DN"  of  the  line  ZX  or  DN,  whose 
index  is  the  number  n:  to  find  the  density  of  the  medium  in  which  a  projected 
body  mil  describe  this  curve. 

For  BN,  BD,  NX,  put  A,  0,  C,  respectively,  and  let  VZ  be  to  XZ  or  DN  as 
d  to  e,  and  VG  be  equal  to  f^en  DN  mil  be  equal  to  A  — O,  VG  = 

VZ=-(A-0)  and  GD  or  NX-VZ-VG  equal  to 

bh 


hh 


Let  the  term 

and  GD  will  be  equal  to 


(A-0)” 
nbb  Q 


(k-or- 

be  resolved  into  an  infinite  series 

&c.. 


C-^A-^+^0. 

6  A^  6 


nhh 


O- 


-\-nn-\-n 


The  second  term  -0 
e 

nn-\-n 
2A^ 


A”"*"^  2A"'’"^ 

nhh 


hhO^ 


6A”+® 

+n®+3nn+2n 


hbO^  &c. 


A"+i 


6A”+3 

0  of  this  series  is  to  be  used  for  Qo,  the  third 


hbO^  for  Roo,  the  fourth 


n®+3nw+2n 

GA""*-® 


hhO  for  So®.  And  thence  the  density 


of  the  medium 


Book  II: 
S 


RV(l+QQ)’ 


The  Motion  of  Bodies 

in  any  place  G,  will  be 
n+2 


179 


A2+— A2- 

ee 


2dnbh 


eA" 


A- 


nn¥\ 
'  A2"  / 


and  therefore  if  in  VZ  you  take  VY  equal  to  n  •  VG,  that  density  is  reciprocally 

as  XY.  For  A-  and  — A^  —  A + are  the  squares  of  XZ  and  ZY.  But 

ee  eA"  A/" 

XY 

the  resistance  in  the  same  place  G  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  3S  •  — ^  to  4RR, 


that  is,  as  XY  to 


2nn+2n 

n~\-2 


A 

VG.  And  the  velocity  there  is  the  same  wherewith 


the  projected  body  would  move  in  a  parabola,  whose  vertex  is  G,  diameter 

/-TV  ^  1  f  f  1  +  QQ  2XY2 

GD,  and  latus  rectum- 


R 


or 


(nn+n)  •  VG 
Scholium 


Q.E.I. 


In  the  same  manner  that  the  density  of 

the  medium  comes  out  to  be  as  in 

K'M  i 

Cor.  I,  if  the  resistance  is  put  as  any  power 
V"  of  the  velocity  V,  the  density  of  the 
medium  mil  come  out  to  be  as 


s  /Acy-i 

■  W) 


R 

And  therefore,  if  a  curve  can  be  found,  such 

S2 

>  or  of  =7^  to  (H-QQ)"“^  may  be  given;  the 

body,  in  an  uniform  medium,  whose  resistance  is  as  the  power  V"  of  the  velocity 
V,  will  move  in  this  curve.  But  let  us  return  to  more  simple  curves. 

Since  there  can  be  no  motion  in  a  parabola  except  in  a  nonresisting  medium, 
but  in  the  hyperbolas  here  described  it  is  produced  by  a  continual  resistance; 
it  is  evident  that  the  line  which  a  projectile  describes  in  an  uniformly  resisting 

medium  approaches  nearer  to  these  hyper¬ 
bolas  than  to  a  parabola.  That  line  is  certain¬ 
ly  of  the  hyperbolic  kind,  but  about  the  vertex 
it  is  more  distant  from  the  asymptotes,  and 
in  the  parts  remote  from  the  vertex  draws 
nearer  to  them  than  these  hyperbolas  here 
described.  The  difference,  however,  is  not  so 
great  between  the  one  and  the  other  but 
that  these  latter  may  be  commodiously 
enough  used  in  practice  instead  of  the  for¬ 
mer.  And  perhaps  these  may  prove  more 
useful  than  an  hyperbola  that  is  more  ac¬ 
curate,  and  at  the  same  time  more  com¬ 
plex.  They  may  be  made  use  of,  then,  in 
this  manner. 


180 


Mathematical  Principles 


Complete  the  parallelogram  XYGT,  and  the  right  line  GT  mil  touch  the 
hyperbola  in  G,  and  therefore  the  density  of  the  medium  in  G  is  inversely  as 

Igt^ 

the  tangent  GT,  and  the  velocity  there  as  -W- 

„  .  2nn-\-2n 

force  of  gravity  as  Gi  to 


GV’ 


and  the  resistance  is  to  the 


n+2 


■GV. 


Therefore  if  a  body  projected  from  the  place  A,  in  the  direction  of  the  right 
line  AH,  describes  the  hyperbola  AGK,  and  AH  produced  meets  the  asymptote 
NX  in  H,  and  AI  drawn  parallel  to  it  meets  the  other  asymptote  MX  in  I;  the 
density  of  the  medium  in  A  mil  be  inversely  as  AH  and  the  velocity  of  the 
AW 


body  as 
2nn-\-2n 


4 


AI 


and  the  resistance  there  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  AH  to 


AI.  Hence  the  following  Rules  are  deduced. 


n~\~2 

Rule  1.  If  the  density  of  the  me¬ 
dium  at  A,  and  the  velocity  with 
which  the  body  is  projected,  remain 
the  same,  and  the  angle  NAH  be 
changed;  the  lengths  AH,  AI,  HX 
mil  remain.  Therefore  if  those 
lengths,  in  any  one  case,  are  found, 
the  hyperbola  may  afterwards  be 
easily  determined  from  any  given 
angle  NAH. 

Rule  2.  If  the  angle  NAH,  and 
the  density  of  the  medium  at  A,  re¬ 
main  the  same,  and  the  velocity  mth 
which  the  body  is  projected  be 
changed,  the  length  AH  will  continue 
the  same ;  and  AI  will  be  changed  in¬ 
versely  as  the  square  of  the  velocity. 

Rule  3.  If  the  angle  NAH,  the  velocity  of  the  body  at  A,  and  the  accelera¬ 
tive  gravity  remain  the  same,  and  the  proportion  of  the  resistance  at  A  to  the 
motive  gravity  be  augmented  in  any  ratio;  the  proportion  of  AH  to  AI  will  be 
augmented  in  the  same  ratio,  the  latus  rectum  of  the  above-mentioned  parab- 

AH^ 

ola  remaining  the  same,  and  also  the  length  proportional  to  it;  and  there¬ 


fore  AH  mil  be  diminished  in  the  same  ratio,  and  AI  will  be  diminished  as  the 
square  of  that  ratio.  But  the  proportion  of  the  resistance  to  the  weight  is  aug¬ 
mented,  when  either  the  specific  gravity  is  made  less,  the  magnitude  remaining 
equal,  or  when  the  density  of  the  medium  is  made  greater,  or  when,  by  dimin¬ 
ishing  the  magnitude,  the  resistance  becomes  diminished  in  a  less  ratio  than 
the  weight. 

Rule  4.  Because  the  density  of  the  medium  is  greater  near  the  vertex  of  the 
hyperbola  than  it  is  in  the  place  A,  that  a  mean  density  may  be  preserved,  the 
ratio  of  the  least  of  the  tangents  GT  to  the  tangent  AH  ought  to  be  found,  and 
the  density  in  A  augmented  in  a  ratio  a  little  greater  than  that  of  half  the  sum 
of  those  tangents  to  the  least  of  the  tangents  GT. 

Rule  5.  If  the  lengths  AH,  AI  are  given,  and  the  figure  AGK  is  to  be  de- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  181 

scribed,  produce  HN  to  X,  so  that  HX  may  be  to  AI  as  n+1  to  1;  and  with 
the  centre  X,  and  the  asymptotes  MX,  NX,  describe  an  hyperbola  through  the 
point  A,  such  that  AI  may  be  to  any  of  the  lines  VG  as  XV”  to  XI". 


Rule  6.  By  how  much  the  greater  the  number  n  is,  so  much  the  more  accu¬ 
rate  are  these  hyperbolas  in  the  ascent  of  the  body  from  A,  and  less  accurate 
in  its  descent  to  K;  and  conversely.  The  conic  hyperbola  keeps  a  mean  ratio 
between  these,  and  is  more  simple  than  the  rest.  Therefore  if  the  hyperbola  be 
of  this  kind,  and  you  are  to  find  the  point  K,  where  the  projected  body  falls 
upon  any  right  line  AN  passing  through  the  point  A,  let  AN  produced  meet  the 
asymptotes  MX,  NX  in  M  and  N,  and  take  NK  equal  to  AM. 

Rule  7.  And  hence  appears  an  expeditious  method  of  determining  this  hy¬ 
perbola  from  the  phenomena.  Let  two  similar  and  equal  bodies  be  projected 
with  the  same  velocity,  in  different  angles  HAK,  hkk,  and  let  them  fall  upon 
the  plane  of  the  horizon  in  K  and  k]  and  note  the  proportion  of  AK  to  Kk.  Let 
it  be  as  d  to  e.  Then  erecting  a  perpendicular  AI  of  any  length,  assume  any 

length  AH  or  Ah,  and  thence  graph¬ 
ically,  or  by  scale  and  compass, 
collect  the  lengths  AK,  Ak  (by  Rule 
6).  If  the  ratio  of  AK  to  Ak  be  the 
same  Avith  that  of  d  to  e,  the  length 
of  AH  was  rightly  assumed.  If  not, 
take  on  the  indefinite  right  line  SM, 
the  length  SM  equal  to  the  assumed 
AH;  and  erect  a  perpendicular  MN 

equal  to  the  difference  ^ 


Ak 


-  of  the 
e 


ratios  multiplied  by  any  given  right 
line.  By  the  like  method,  from  several 
assumed  lengths  AH,  you  may  find 
several  points  N ;  and  draw"  through 
them  all  a  regular  curve  NNXN, 
cutting  the  right  line  SMMM  in  X. 


182  Mathematical  Principles 

Lastly,  assume  AH  equal  to  the  abscissa  SX,  and  thence  find  again  the  length 
AK;  and  the  lengths,  which  are  to  the  assumed  length  AI,  and  this  last  AH, 
as  the  length  AK  known  by  experiment,  to  the  length  AK  last  found,  will  be 
the  true  lengths  AI  and  AH,  which  were  to  be  found.  But  these  being  given, 
there  will  be  given  also  the  resisting  force  of  the  medium  in  the  place  A,  it 
being  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  AH  to  5^AI.  Let  the  density  of  the  medium  be 
increased  by  Rule  4,  and  if  the  resisting  force  just  found  be  increased  in  the 
same  ratio,  it  will  become  still  more  accurate. 

Rule  8.  The  lengths  AH,  HX  being  found;  let  there  be  now’  required  the 
position  of  the  line  AH,  according  to  w  hich  a  projectile  throwm  with  that  given 
velocity  shall  fall  upon  any  point  K.  At  the  points  A  and  K,  erect  the  lines  AC, 
KF  perpendicular  to  the  horizon;  whereof  let  AC  be  drawn  downw'ards,  and 
be  equal  to  AI  or  )^HX.  With  the  asymptotes  AK,  KF,  describe  an  hyperbola, 
whose  conjugate  shall  pass  through  the  point  C;  and  from  the  centre  A,  with 
the  interval  AH,  describe  a  circle  cutting  that  hyperbola  in  the  point  H;  then 
the  projectile  throwm  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  AH  will  fall  upon  the 
point  K.  Q.E.i.  For  the  point  H,  because  of  the  given  length  AH,  must  be  some¬ 
where  in  the  circumference  of  the  described  circle.  Draw’  CH  meeting  AK  and 
KF  in  E  and  F;  and  because  CH,  MX  are  parallel,  and  AC,  AI  equal,  AE  will 
be  equal  to  AM,  and  therefore  also  equal  to  KN.  But  CE  is  to  AE  as  FH  to 
KN,  and  therefore  CE  and  FH  are  equal.  Therefore  the  point  H  falls  upon  the 
hyperbolic  curve  described  with  the  asymptotes  AK,  KF  w’hose  conjugate 
passes  through  the  point  C;  and  is  therefore  found  in  the  common  intersection 
of  this  hyperbolic  curve  and  the  circumference  of  the  described  circle,  q.e.d. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  operation  is  the  same,  whether  the  right  line  AKN 
be  parallel  to  the  horizon,  or  inclined  thereto  in  any  angle;  and  that  from  two 
intersections  H,  h,  there  arise  tw’o  angles  NAH,  NA/i;  and  that  in  mechanical 
practice  it  is  sufficient  once  to  describe  a  circle,  then  to  apply  a  ruler  CH,  of  an 
indeterminate  length,  so  to  the  point  C,  that  its  part  FH,  intercepted  betw’een 
the  circle  and  the  right  line  FK,  may  be  equal  to  its  part  CE  placed  between 
the  point  C  and  the  right  line  AK. 

What  has  been  said  of  hyperbolas  may  be  easily 
applied  to  parabolas.  For  if  a  parabola  be  represented 
by  XAGK,  touched  by  a  right  line  XV  in  the  vertex  X, 
and  the  ordinates  lA,  VG  be  as  any  powders  XI",  XV", 
of  the  abscissas  XI,  XV;  draw’  XT,  GT,  AH,  whereof 
let  XT  be  parallel  to  VG,  and  let  GT,  AH  touch  the 
parabola  in  G  and  A:  and  a  body  projected  from  any 
place  A,  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  AH,  w'ith  a 
due  velocity,  w’ill  describe  this  parabola,  if  the  den¬ 
sity  of  the  medium  in  each  of  the  places  G  be  inversely 
as  the  tangent  GT.  In  that  case  the  velocity  in  G  wdll 
be  the  same  as  w’ould  cause  a  body,  moving  in  a  nonresisting  space,  to  describe 
a  conic  parabola,  having  G  for  its  vertex,  VG  produced  dow’nw’ards  for  its 
2GT^ 

diameter,  and  7 - for  its  latus  rectum.  And  the  resisting  force  in  G 

(nn  — n)-VG 

wll  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  GT  to  ^  VG.  Therefore  if  NAK  repre¬ 
sent  an  horizontal  line,  and  both  the  density  of  the  medium  at  A,  and  the 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  183 

velocity  with  which  the  body  is  projected,  remaining  the  same,  the  angle  NAH 
be  anyhow  altered,  the  lengths  AH,  AI,  HX  will  remain;  and  thence  mil  be 
given  the  vertex  X  of  the  parabola,  and  the  position  of  the  right  line  XI;  and 
by  taking  VG  to  lA  as  XV"  to  XI",  there  will  be  given  all  the  points  G  of  the 
parabola,  through  which  the  projectile  will  pass. 


SECTION  III 


The  motion  of  bodies  that  are  resisted  pa.rtly  in  the  ratio  of  the 

VELOCITIES,  AND  PARTLY  AS  THE  SQUARE  OF  THE  SAME  RATIO 

Proposition  11.  Theorem  8 

If  a  body  he  resisted  'partly  in  the  ratio  and  partly  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  its 
velocity,  and  moves  in  a  similar  medium  by  its  innate  force  only;  and  the  times  be 
taken  in  arithmetical  progression:  then  quantities  inversely  proportional  to  the 
velocities,  increased  by  a  certain  given  quantity,  'will  be  in  geometrical  progression. 

With  the  centre  C,  and  the  rectangular  asymptotes  CADd  and  CH,  describe 
an  hyperbola  BEe,  and  let  AB,  DE,  de  be  parallel  to  the  asymptote  CH.  In 

the  asymptote  CD  let  A,  G  be  given  points;  and  if 
the  time  be  represented  by  the  hyperbolic  area 
ABED  uniformly  increasing,  I  say,  that  the  velocity 
may  be  expressed  by  the  length  DF,  whose  reciprocal 
GD,  together  with  the  given  line  CG,  compose  the 
length  CD  increasing  in  a  geometrical  progression. 

For  let  the  small  area  DEed  be  the  least  given 
increment  of  the  time,  and  Dc?  mil  be  inversely  as 
DE,  and  therefore  directly  as  CD.  Therefore  the  decre- 

m  .„  ,  ,  CD 


ment  of  which  (by  Lem.  2,  Book  ii)  is 

(jrJJ  (jrJJ 


will  be  also  as 


GD2 


or 


CG+GD 


that  is,  as 


1 


+ 


CG 


GD2  ’  - - ’  GD  '  GD2 

creasing  by  the  addition  of  the  given  intervals  EDrfe,  it  follows  that 


Therefore,  the  time  ABED  uniformly  in- 

1 


GD 


de¬ 


creases  in  the  same  ratio  with  the  velocity.  For  the  decrement  of  the  velocity 
is  as  the  resistance,  that  is  (by  the  supposition),  as  the  sum  of  two  quantities, 
whereof  one  is  as  the  velocity,  and  the  other  as  the  square  of  the  velocity;  and 

1  1  CG 

the  decrement  of  is  as  the  sum  of  the  quantities  7TT=r  and  whereof  the 


1 


CG 


first  is  itself,  and  the  last  p™-,  is  as 


1 


therefore 


1 


GD2’ 
is  as  the  velocity. 


the  decrements  of  both  being  analogous.  And  if  the  quantity  GD  inversely 
proportional  to  be  augmented  by  the  given  quantity  CG;  the  sum  CD, 

the  time  ABED  uniformly  increasing,  will  increase  in  a  geometrical  progres¬ 
sion.  Q.E.D. 

Cor.  i.  Therefore,  if,  having  the  points  A  and  G  given,  the  time  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  hyperbolic  area  ABED,  the  velocity  may  be  represented  by  ^ 


GD 


the  reciprocal  of  GD. 


184  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  II.  And  by  taking  GA  to  GD  as  the  reciprocal  of  the  velocity  at  the 
beginning  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  velocity  at  the  end  of  any  time  ABED,  the 
point  G  will  be  found.  And  that  point  being  found,  the  velocity  may  be  found 
from  any  other  time  given. 

Proposition  12.  Theorem  9 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  1  say,  that  if  the  spaces  described  are  taken  in 
arithmetical  progression,  the  velocities  augmented  by  a  certain  given  q\tantity  will 
be  in  geometrical  progression. 

In  the  asymptote  CD  let  there  be  given  the  point  R,  and,  erecting  the 
perpendicular  RS  meeting  the  hyperbola  in  S,  h 
let  the  space  described  be  represented  by  the 
hyperbolic  area  RSED;  and  the  velocity  will 
be  as  the  length  GD,  which,  together  ^\^th  the 
given  line  CG,  composes  a  length  CD  decreasing 
in  a  geometrical  progression,  while  the  space 
RSED  increases  in  an  arithmetical  progression. 

For,  because  the  increment  EDde  of  the  space  ^  G  A 
is  given,  the  short  line  Drf,  which  is  the  decrement  of  GD,  ^vill  be  reciprocally 
as  ED,  and  therefore  directly  as  CD;  that  is,  as  the  sum  of  the  same  GD  and 
the  given  length  CG.  But  the  decrement  of  the  velocity,  in  a  time  inversely 
proportional  thereto,  in  which  the  given  interval  of  space  DdeE  is  described, 
is  as  the  resistance  and  the  time  conjointly,  that  is,  directly  as  the  sum  of  two 
quantities,  whereof  one  is  as  the  velocity,  the  other  as  the  square  of  the  velocity, 
and  inversely  as  the  velocity ;  and  therefore  directly  as  the  sum  of  two  quantities, 
one  of  which  is  given,  the  other  is  as  the  velocity.  Therefore  the  decrement  both 
of  the  velocity  and  of  the  line  GD  is  as  a  given  quantity  and  a  decreasing  quan¬ 
tity  conjointly ;  and,  because  the  decrements  are  analogous,  the  decreasing  quan¬ 
tities  mil  always  be  analogous;  viz.,  the  velocity,  and  the  line  GD.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  If  the  velocity  be  represented  by  the  length  GD,  the  space  described 
will  be  as  the  hyperbolic  area  DESR. 

Cor.  II.  And  if  the  point  R  be  assumed  anywhere,  the  point  G  mil  be  found, 
by  taking  GR  to  GD  as  the  velocity  at  the  beginning  to  the  velocity  after  any 
space  RSED  is  described.  The  point  G  being  given,  the  space  is  given  from  the 
given  velocity;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  III.  Whence  since  (by  Prop.  11)  the  velocity  is  given  from  the  given 
time,  and  (by  this  Proposition)  the  space  is  given  from  the  given  velocity,  the 
space  mil  be  given  from  the  given  time;  and  conversely. 

Proposition  13.  Theorem  10 

Supposing  that  a  body  attracted  downwards  by  an  uniform  gravity  ascends  or 
descends  in  a  right  line;  and  that  the  same  is  resisted  partly  in  the  ratio  of  its 
velocity,  and  partly  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  thereof:  I  say,  that,  if  right  lines 
parallel  to  the  diameters  of  a  circle  and  an  hyperbola  be  drawn  through  the  ends  of 
the  conjugate  diameters,  and  the  velocities  be  as  some  segments  of  those  parallels 
drawn  from  a  given  point,  the  times  will  be  as  the  sectors  of  the  areas  cut  off  by 
right  lines  drawn  from  the  centre  to  the  ends  of  the  segments;  and  conversely. 

Case  1.  Suppose  first  that  the  body  is  ascending,  and  from  the  centre  D, 
mth  any  semidiameter  DB,  describe  a  quadrant  BETF  of  a  circle,  and  through 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


185 


the  end  B  of  the  semidiameter  DB  draw  the  indefinite 
line  BAP,  parallel  to  the  semidiameter  DF.  In  that  line 
let  there  be  given  the  point  A,  and  take  the  segment 
AP  proportional  to  the  velocity.  And  since  one  part  of 
the  resistance  is  as  the  velocity,  and  another  part  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  let  the  whole  resistance  be  as 
AP^+2BA-AP.  Join  DA,  DP,  cutting  the  circle  in  E  and 
T,  and  let  the  gravity  be  represented  by  DA-,  so  that 
the  gravity  shall  be  to  the  resistance  in  P  as  DA-  to 
AP^+2BA- AP;  and  the  time  of  the  whole  ascent  mil  be  as  the  sector  EDT  of 
the  circle. 

For  draw  DVQ,  cutting  off  the  moment  PQ  of  the  velocity  AP,  and  the 
moment  DTV  of  the  sector  DET  answering  to  a  given  moment  of  time;  and 
that  decrement  PQ  of  the  velocity  mil  be  as  the  sum  of  the  forces  of  gravity 
DA^  and  of  resistance  AP^+2BA-AP;  that  is  (by  Prop.  12,  Book  ii.  Elements 
of  Euclid),  as  DP^.  Then  the  area  DPQ,  proportional  to  PQ,  is  as  DP^,  and  the 
area  DTV,  which  is  to  the  area  DPQ  as  DT^  to  DP^,  is  as  the  given  quantity 
DT^.  Therefore  the  area  EDT  decreases  uniformly  according  to  the  rate  of  the 
future  time,  by  subtraction  of  given  intervals  DTV,  and  is  therefore  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  time  of  the  whole  ascent.  q.e.d. 

Case  2.  If  the  velocity  in  the  ascent  of  the  body  be  represented  by  the  length 
AP  as  before,  and  the  resistance  be  made  as 
Ap2-|-2BA- AP;  and  if  the  force  of  gravity  be 
less  than  can  be  expressed  by  DA^;  take  BD 
of  such  a  length,  that  AB^  — BD^  may  be  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  gravity,  and  let  DF  be  per¬ 
pendicular  and  equal  to  DB,  and  through 
the  vertex  F  describe  the  hyperbola  FTVE, 
whose  conjugate  semidiameters  are  DB  and 
DF,  and  which  cuts  DA  in  E,  and  DP,  DQ  in 
T  and  V ;  and  the  time  of  the  whole  ascent  mil  be  as  the  hyperbolic  sector  TDE. 

For  the  decrement  PQ  of  the  velocity,  produced  in  a  given  interval  of  time, 
is  as  the  sum  of  the  resistance  AP^-t-2BA-AP  and  of  the  gravity  AB^  — BD^, 
that  is,  as  BP^— BD^.  But  the  area  DTV  is  to  the  area  DPQ  as  DT^  to  DP^; 
and,  therefore,  if  GT  be  drawm  perpendicular  to  DF,  as  GT^  or  GD^  — DF^  to 
BD^,  and  as  GD^  to  BP^,  and,  by  subtraction,  as  DF^  to  BP^  — BD^.  Therefore 
since  the  area  DPQ  is  as  PQ,  that  is,  as  BP^  — BD^,  the  area  DTV  mil  be  as  the 
given  quantity  DF^.  Therefore  the  area  EDT  decreases  uniformly  in  each  of 
the  equal  intervals  of  time,  by  the  subtraction  of  so  many  given  intervals  DTV, 
and  therefore  is  proportional  to  the  time.  q.e.d. 

Case  3.  Let  AP  be  the  velocity  in  the  descent  of  the  body,  and  AP2-t-2BA* 
AP  the  force  of  resistance,  and  BD^  — AB^  the  force  of  gravity,  the  angle  DBA 
being  a  right  one.  And  if  with  the  centre  D,  and  the  principal  vertex  B,  there 
be  described  a  rectangular  hyperbola  BETV  cutting  DA,  DP,  and  DQ  pro¬ 
duced  in  E,  T,  and  V ;  the  sector  DET  of  this  hyperbola  mil  be  as  the  whole 
time  of  descent. 

For  the  increment  PQ  of  the  velocity,  and  the  area  DPQ  proportional  to  it, 
is  as  the  excess  of  the  gravity  above  the  resistance,  that  is,  as 

BD2  -  AB2  -  2B  A  •  AP  -  AP^ 


186 


Mathematical  Principles 


or  BD^  — BP^.  And  the  area  DTV  is  to  the  area  DPQ 
as  DT-  to  DP2;  and  therefore  as  GT^  or  GD^-BD^  to 
BP^;  and  as  GD^  to  BD-,  and,  by  subtraction,  as  BD^  to 
BD^  — BP^.  Therefore  since  the  area  DPQ  is  as  BD-  — 

BP^  the  area  DTV  will  be  as  the  given  quantity  BDl 
Therefore  the  area  EDT  increases  uniformly  in  the  several 
equal  intervals  of  time  by  the  addition  of  as  many  given 
intervals  DTV,  and  therefore  is  proportional  to  the  time 
of  the  descent.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  If  with  the  centre  D  and  the  semidiameter  DA 
there  be  drawn  through  the  vertex  A  an  arc  A^  similar  to  the  arc  ET,  and 
similarly  subtending  the  angle  ADT,  the  velocity  AP  vill  be  to  the  velocity 
which  the  body  in  the  time  EDT,  in  a  nonresisting  space,  can  lose  in  its  as¬ 
cent,  or  acquire  in  its  descent,  as  the  area  of  the  triangle  DAP  to  the  area  of 
the  sector  DAZ;  and  therefore  is  given  from  the  time  given.  For  the  velocity 
in  a  nonresisting  medium  is  proportional  to  the  time,  and  therefore  to  this 
sector;  in  a  resisting  medium,  it  is  as  the  triangle;  and  in  both  mediums, 
where  it  is  least,  it  approaches  to  the  ratio  of  equality,  as  the  sector  and 
triangle  do. 


Scholium 

One  may  demonstrate  also  that  case  in  the  ascent  of  the  body,  where  the 
force  of  gravity  is  less  than  can  be  expressed  by  DA^  or  AB^-j-BD^,  and  greater 
than  can  be  expressed  by  AB^  — DB^,  and  must  be  expressed  by  AB^.  But  I 
hasten  to  other  things. 


Proposition  14.  Theorem  11 


The  same  things  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  space  described  in  the  ascent  or 
descent  is  as  the  difference  of  the  area  by  which  the  time  is  expressed,  and  of  some 
other  area  which  is  augmented  or  diminished  in  an  arithmetical  progression;  if 
the  forces  compounded  of  the  resistance  and  the  gravity  be  taken  in  a  geometrical 
progression. 

Take  AC  (in  these  three  figures)  proportional  to  the  gravity,  and  AK  to  the 
resistance;  but  take  them  on  the  same  side  of  the  point  A,  if  the  body  is  de¬ 
scending,  otherwise  on  the  contrary.  Erect  Kb,  which  make  to  DB  as  DB^  to 
4BA-CA;  and  to  the  rectangular  asymptotes  CK,  CH,  describe  the  hyperbola 
6N ;  and,  erecting  KN  perpendicular  to  CK,  the  area  A6NK  vill  be  augmented 
or  diminished  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  while  the  forces  CK  are  taken  in 
a  geometrical  progression.  I  say,  therefore,  that  the  distance  of  the  body  from 
its  greatest  altitude  is  as  the  excess  of  the  area  A6NK  above  the  area  DET. 

For  since  AK  is  as  the  resistance,  that  is,  as  AP^-2BA-AP;  assume  any 


given  quantity  Z,  and  put  AK  equal  to 


AP-f2BAAP 

Z 


;  then  (by  Lem.  2  of 


this  book)  the  moment  KL  of  AK  vdll  be  equal  to 


2PQAP-b2BAPQ 

Z 


or 


2PQBP 


2PQBP-LO 

Z 


and  the  moment  KLOK  of  the  area  A6NK  will  be  equal  to 
PQBPBD® 

nr  — — - 

2Z  CK  AB  ' 


Book  TI:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  187 

Case  1.  Now  if  the  body  ascends,  and  the  gravity  be  as  AB'+BD^,  BET 
being  a  circle,  the  line  AC,  which  is  proportional  to  the  gravity,  will  be 

and  DP2  or  AP2+2BA- AP+AB^+BD^  vnW  be  AK-Z+AC  Z  or 
Zj 

CK-Z;  and  therefore  the  area  DTV  vill  be  to  the  area  DPQ  as  DT‘^  or  DB^ 
to  CK  Z. 


Case  2.  If  the  body  ascends,  and  the  gravity  be  as  AB^  — BD^,  the  line  AC 

AT}2_-DT^2 

will  be  ^  ,  and  DT^  ^xi\\  be  to  DP^  as  DF^  or  DB^  to  BP^-BD^  or 

Zj 


AP^+2BA- AP+AB^  — BD^,  that  is,  to  AK-Z+AC-Z  or  CK-Z.  And  therefore 
the  area  DTV  will  be  to  the  area  DPQ  as  DB^  to  CK-Z. 

Case  3.  And  by  the  same  reasoning,  if  the  body  descends,  and  therefore  the 

gravity  is  as  BD^  — AB^,  and  the  line  AC  becomes  equal  to  ^  the 

Zj 


area  DTV  Avill  be  to  the  area  DPQ  as  DB^  to  CK  -  Z :  as  above. 

Since,  therefore,  these  areas  are  always  in  this  ratio,  if  for  the  area  DTV,  by 
which  the  moment  of  the  time,  always  equal  to  itself,  is  expressed,  there  be 
put  any  determinate  rectangle,  as  BD-w,  the  area  DPQ,  that  is,  j^BD-PQ, 
Avill  be  to  BD-m  as  CK-Z  to  BD^.  And  thence  PQ-BD®  becomes  equal  to 
2BD-m-CK-Z,  and  the  moment  KLON  of  the  area  A6NK,  found  before, 

I  )  •  'lYi, 

becomes - - .  From  the  area  DET  subtract  its  moment  DTV  or  BD  -  w, 


and  there  vill  remain 


AP-BD-m 

AB 


Therefore  the  difference  of  the  moments. 


that  is,  the  moment  of  the  difference  of  the  areas,  is  equal  to 


AP-BD-m 

AB 


;  and 


188 


Mathematical  Principles 


therefore  (because  of  the  given  quantity 


BD-m 

AB 


)  as  the  velocity  AP;  that  is, 


as  the  moment  of  the  space  which  the  body  describes  in  its  ascent  or  descent. 
And  therefore  the  difference  of  the  areas,  and  that  space,  increasing  or  de¬ 
creasing  by  proportional  moments,  and  beginning  together  or  vanishing  to¬ 
gether,  are  proportional.  q.e.d 


Cor.  If  the  length,  which  arises  by  applying  the  area  DET  to  the  line  BD, 
be  called  M;  and  another  length  V  be  taken  in  that  ratio  to  the  length  M, 
which  the  line  DA  has  to  the  line  DE;  the  space  which  a  body,  in  a  resisting 
medium,  describes  in  its  whole  ascent  or  descent,  will  be  to  the  space  which  a 
body,  in  a  nonresisting  medium,  falling  from  rest,  can  describe  in  the  same 

BDV^ 

time,  as  the  difference  of  the  aforesaid  areas  to  therefore  is  given 

from  the  time  given.  For  the  space  in  a  nonresisting  medium  is  as  the  square 

BD  •  V“ 

of  the  time,  or  as  V^;  and,  because  BD  and  AB  are  given,  as  — .  This  area 

At) 

DA^BD-M^ 

is  equal  to  the  area  — ^  ^ —  and  the  moment  of  M  is  w;  and  therefore  the 


moment  of  this  area  is 


DE2.AB 
DA^‘BD-2M  -m 
DE2-AB  ■ 


But  this  moment  is  to  the  moment  of 


D  *  TTh 

the  difference  of  the  aforesaid  areas  DET  and  AbNK,  viz.,  to - ^^5 - ,  as 


AB 


DA^BDM 


DA2. 


to  3^BD  •  AP,  or  as  into  DET  to  DAP;  and,  therefore,  when 


the  areas  DET  and  DAP  are  least,  in  the  ratio  of  equality.  Therefore  the  area 
BD  • 

—  and  the  difference  of  the  areas  DET  and  A6NK,  when  all  these  areas 
AB 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


189 


are  least,  have  equal  moments;  and  are  therefore  equal.  Therefore  since  the 
velocities,  and  therefore  also  the  spaces  in  both  mediums  described  together, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  descent,  or  the  end  of  the  ascent,  approach  to  equality, 

BD- 

and  therefore  are  then  one  to  another  as  the  area  — rw-j  and  the  difference  of 

AB 

the  areas  DET  and  A6NK;  and  moreover  since  the  space,  in  a  nonresisting 

BDV^ 

medium,  is  continually  as  — ^5 — ,  and  the  space,  in  a  resisting  medium,  is 

Aid 

continually  as  the  difference  of  the  areas  DET  and  A6NK;  it  necessarily  fol¬ 
lows,  that  the  spaces,  in  both  mediums,  described  in  any  equal  times,  are  one 

BDV^ 

,  and  the  difference  of  the  areas  DET  and 


to  another  as  that  area 
A6NK. 


AB 


Q.E.D. 


Scholium 

The  resistance  of  spherical  bodies  in  fluids  arises  partly  from  the  tenacity, 
partly  from  the  attrition,  and  partly  from  the  density  of  the  medium.  And  that 
part  of  the  resistance  which  arises  from  the  density  of  the  fluid  is,  as  I  said,  as 
the  square  of  the  velocity;  the  other  part,  which  arises  from  the  tenacity  of 
the  fluid,  is  uniform,  or  as  the  moment  of  the  time;  and,  therefore,  we  might 
now  proceed  to  the  motion  of  bodies,  which  are  resisted  partly  by  an  uniform 
force,  or  in  the  ratio  of  the  moments  of  the  time,  and  partly  as  the  square  of 
the  velocity.  But  it  is  sufficient  to  have  cleared  the  way  to  this  speculation  in 
Props.  8  and  9  foregoing,  and  their  Corollaries.  For  in  those  Propositions,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  uniform  resistance  made  to  an  ascending  body  arising  from  its 
gravity,  one  may  substitute  the  uniform  resistance  which  arises  from  the  te¬ 
nacity  of  the  medium,  when  the  body  moves  by  its  inertia  alone ;  and  when  the 
body  ascends  in  a  right  hne,  add  this  uniform  resistance  to  the  force  of  gravity, 
and  subtract  it  when  the  body  descends  in  a  right  line.  One  might  also  go  on 
to  the  motion  of  bodies  which  are  resisted  in  part  uniformly,  in  part  in  the 
ratio  of  the  velocity,  and  in  part  as  the  square  of  the  same  velocity.  And  I 
have  opened  a  way  to  this  in  Props.  13  and  14  foregoing,  in  which  the  uniform 
resistance  arising  from  the  tenacity  of  the  medium  may  be  substituted  for  the 
force  of  gravity,  or  be  compounded  with  it  as  before.  But  I  hasten  to  other 
things. 


SECTION  IV 

The  circular  motion  of  bodies  in  resisting  mediums 

Lemma  3 

Let  PQR  be  a  spiral  cutting  all  the  radii  SP,  SQ,  SR,  &c.,  in  equal  angles.  Draw 
the  right  line  PT  touching  the  spiral  in  any  point  P,  and  cutting  the  radius  SQ  in 
T;  draw  PO,  QO  perpendicular  to  the  spiral,  and  meeting  in  0,  and  join  SO:  I 
say,  that  if  the  points  P  and  Q  approach  and  coincide,  the  angle  PSO  will  become 
a  right  angle,  and  the  ultimate  ratio  of  the  rectangle  TQ  •  2PS  to  PQ^  will  be  the 
ratio  of  equality. 

For,  from  the  right  angles  OPQ,  OQR,  subtract  the  equal  angles  SPQ,  SQR, 
and  there  wall  remain  the  equal  angles  OPS,  OQS.  Therefore  a  circle  which 


190 


Mathematical  Principles 


Q.E.D, 


passes  through  the  points  OSP  will  pass  also  through  the  point  Q,  Let  the 
points  P  and  Q  coincide,  and  this  circle  will  touch  the  spiral  in  the  place  of 
coincidence  PQ,  and  \\ill  therefore  cut  the  right  line  OP  perpendicularly. 
Therefore  OP  will  become  a  diameter  of  this  circle,  and  the  angle  OSP,  being 
in  a  semicircle,  becomes  a  right  one. 

Draw'  QD,  SE  perpendicular  to  OP,  and 
the  ultimate  ratios  of  the  lines  will  be  as 
follow'^s: 

TQ  :  PD  =  TS  or  PS  :  PE  =  2PO  :  2PS; 
and  PD  :  PQ  =  PQ  :  2PO; 
multiplying  together  corresponding  terms 
of  equal  ratios, 

TQ  :  PQ  =  PQ  :  2PS. 

Whence  PQ^  becomes  equal  to  TQ-2PS. 

Q.E.D. 


Proposition  15.  Theorem  12 

If  the  density  of  a  medium  in  each  place  thereof  be  inversely  as  the  distance  of  the 
places  from  an  immovable  centre,  and  the  centripetal  force  be  as  the  square  of  the 
density:  I  say,  that  a  body  may  revolve  in  a  spiral  which  cuts  all  the  radii  drawn 
from  that  centre  in  a  given  angle. 

Suppose  everything  to  be  as  in  the  foregoing  Lemma,  and  produce  SQ  to  V 
so  that  SV  may  be  equal  to  SP.  In  any  time  let  a  body,  in  a  resisting  medium, 
describe  the  least  arc  PQ,  and  in  double  the  time  the  least  arc  PR;  and  the 
decrements  of  those  arcs  arising  from  the  resistance,  or  their  differences  from 

the  arcs  which  would  be  described  in  a  non¬ 
resisting  medium  in  the  same  times,  mil  be 
to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the  times  in 
w'hich  they  are  generated;  therefore  the 
decrement  of  the  arc  PQ  is  the  fourth  part 
of  the  decrement  of  the  arc  PR.  Whence  also 
if  the  area  QSr  be  taken  equal  to  the  area 
PSQ,  the  decrement  of  the  arc  PQ  will  be 
equal  to  half  the  short  lineRr;  and  therefore 
the  force  of  resistance  and  the  centripetal 
force  are  to  each  other  as  the  short  line 
J^Rr  and  TQ  which  they  generate  in  the  same  time.  Because  the  centripetal 
force  with  which  the  body  is  urged  in  P  is  inversely  as  SP^,  and  (by  Lem.  10, 
Book  i)  the  short  line  TQ,  which  is  generated  by  that  force,  is  in  a  ratio  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  ratio  of  this  force  and  the  squared  ratio  of  the  time  in  which  the 
arc  PQ  is  described  (for  in  this  case  I  neglect  the  resistance,  as  being  infinitely 
less  than  the  centripetal  force),  it  follows  that  TQ-SP^,  that  is  (by  the  last 
Lemma),  ^PQ^-SP,  will  be  as  the  square  of  the  time,  and  therefore  the  time  is 
as  PQ*  VSP;  and  the  velocity  of  the  body,  -with  which  the  arc  PQ  is  described 

PQ  1 


in  that  time,  as 


or  ,g,„,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  SP. 


PQ-VSP  VSP’ 

And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  the  velocity  wdth  w'hich  the  arc  QR  is  described,  is 
inversely  as  the  square  root  of  SQ.  Now'  those  arcs  PQ  and  QR  are  as  the 
describing  velocities  to  each  other;  that  is,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


191 


SQ  to  SP,  or  as  SQ  to  \/(SP‘SQ);  and,  because  of  the  equal  angles  SPQ,  SQr, 
and  the  equal  areas  PSQ,  QSr,  the  arc  PQ  is  to  the  arc  Qr  as  SQ  to  SP.  Take  the 
differences  of  the  proportional  consequents,  and  the  arc  PQ  be  to  the  arc 
Rr  as  SQ  to  SP  —  V (SP-SQ),  or  3^VQ.  For,  the  points  P  and  Q  coinciding,  the 
ultimate  ratio  of  SP- V(SP-SQ)  to  3^VQ  is  the  ratio  of  equality.  Since  the 
decrement  of  the  arc  PQ  arising  from  the  resistance,  or  its  double  Rr,  is  as  the 
resistance  and  the  square  of  the  time  conjointly,  the  resistance  will  be  as 

.  But  PQ  was  to  Rr  as  SQ  to  3^VQ,  and  thence 


PQ2SP 

3^vq 


PQ^SP 


becomes  as 


PQ'SP'SQ^  OP  •  SP^"  the  points  P  and  Q  coinciding,  SP  and  SQ 

coincide  also,  and  the  angle  PVQ  becomes  a  right  one;  and,  because  of  the 
similar  triangles  PVQ,  PSO,  PQ  becomes  to  3^  VQ  as  OP  to  3^0S.  Therefore 
OS 

OP  SP^  resistance,  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  medium 

in  P  and  the  squared  ratio  of  the  velocity  conjointly.  Subtract  the  squared 
ratio  of  the  velocity,  namely,  the  ratio  and  there  will  remain  the  density  of 

OS 

the  medium  in  P,  as  QpT^-  the  spiral  be  given,  and,  because  of  the  given 

ratio  of  OS  to  OP,  the  density  of  the  medium  in  P  will  be  as  Therefore  in  a 

medium  whose  density  is  inversely  as  SP  the  distance  from  the  centre,  a  body 
will  revolve  in  this  spiral.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  The  velocity  in  any  place  P,  is  always  the  same  wherewith  a  body  in 
a  nonresisting  medium  with  the  same  centripetal  force  would  revolve  in  a 
circle,  at  the  same  distance  SP  from  the  centre. 

OS 

Cor.  II.  The  density  of  the  medium,  if  the  distance  SP  be  given,  is  as  ^p,  but 

OS 

if  that  distance  is  not  given,  as  gp.  And  thence  a  spiral  may  be  fitted  to 
any  density  of  the  medium. 

Cor.  III.  The  force  of  the  resistance  in  any  place  P  is  to  the  centripetal  force 
in  the  same  place  as  3^0S  to  OP.  For  those  forces  are  to  each  other  as  3^Rr  and 

TQ,  or  as  — and  that  is,  as  3^VQ  and  PQ,  or  3^0S  and  OP.  The 


SP 


spiral  therefore  being  given,  there  is  given 
the  proportion  of  the  resistance  to  the  cen¬ 
tripetal  force;  and,  conversely,  from  that 
proportion  given  the  spiral  is  given. 

Cor.  IV.  Therefore  the  body  cannot  re¬ 
volve  in  this  spiral,  except  where  the  force 
of  resistance  is  less  than  half  the  centripetal 
force.  Let  the  resistance  be  made  equal  to 
half  the  centripetal  force,  and  the  spiral 
will  coincide  with  the  right  line  PS,  and  in 
that  right  line  the  body  -will  descend  to  the 
centre  with  a  velocity  that  is  to  the  velocity  with  which  it  was  proved  before 
in  the  case  of  the  parabola  (Theor.  10,  Book  i)  that  the  descent  would  be  made 


192 


Mathematical  Principles 


in  a  nonresisting  medium,  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  unity  to  the  num¬ 
ber  2.  And  the  times  of  the  descent  will  be  here  inversely  as  the  velocities,  and 
therefore  given. 

Cor.  V.  And  because  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre  the  velocity  is  the 
same  in  the  spiral  PQR  as  it  is  in  the  right  line  SP,  and  the  length  of  the  spiral 
is  to  the  length  of  the  right  line  PS  in  a  given  ratio,  namely,  in  the  ratio  of  OP 
to  OS ;  the  time  of  the  descent  in  the  spiral  vdll  be  to  the  time  of  the  descent  in 
the  right  line  SP  in  the  same  given  ratio,  and  therefore  given. 

Cor.  VI.  If  from  the  centre  S,  with  any  two  given  radii,  two  circles  are  de¬ 
scribed;  and  these  circles  remaining,  the  angle  which  the  spiral  makes  with  the 
radius  PS  be  changed  in  any  manner;  the  number  of  revolutions  which  the  body 
can  complete  in  the  space  between  the  circumferences  of  those  circles,  going 

PS 

round  in  the  spiral  from  one  circumference  to  another,  will  be  as  or  as  the 


tangent  of  the  angle  which  the  spiral  makes  with  the  radius  PS;  and  the  time  of 

OP 

the  same  revolutions  vdll  be  as  that  is,  as  the  secant  of  the  same  angle,  or 


inversely  as  the  density  of  the  medium. 

Cor.  VII.  If  a  body,  in  a  medium  whose  density  is  inversely  as  the  distances 
of  places  from  the  centre,  revolves  in  any  curve  AEB  about  that  centre,  and 
cuts  the  first  radius  AS  in  the  same  angle  in  B  as  it  did  before  in  A,  and  that 
Mith  a  velocity  that  shall  be  to  its  first  velocity  in  A  inversely  as  the  square 
root  of  the  distances  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  (that  is,  as  AS  to  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  AS  and  BS), 
that  body  mil  continue  to  de¬ 
scribe  innumerable  similar  revolu¬ 
tions  BFC,  CGD,  &c.,  and  by  its 
intersections  mil  divide  the  radius 
AS  into  parts  AS,  BS,  CS,  DS, 

&c.,  that  are  continually  propor¬ 
tional.  But  the  times  of  the  revo¬ 
lutions  mil  be  directly  as  the  per¬ 
imeters  of  the  orbits  AEB,  BFC, 

CGD,  &c.,  and  inversely  as  the 
velocities  at  the  beginnings  A,  B, 

C  of  those  orbits;  that  is,  as  AS^^^, 

BS®/^,  CS®^®.  And  the  whole  time 
in  which  the  body  will  arrive  at  the  centre,  will  be  to  the  time  of  the  first  rev¬ 
olution  as  the  sum  of  all  the  continued  proportionals  AS®/-,  BS®/^,  CS®/^,  going 
on  ad  infinitum,  is  to  the  first  term  AS®/®;  that  is,  as  the  first  term  AS®/®  is  to  the 
difference  of  the  two  first  AS®/®  — BS®/®,  or  as  %AS  is  to  AB,  very  nearly.  Whence 
the  whole  time  may  be  easily  found. 

Cor.  VIII.  From  hence  also  may  be  deduced,  near  enough,  the  motions  of 
bodies  in  mediums  whose  density  is  either  uniform,  or  observes  any  other  as¬ 
signed  law.  From  the  centre  S,  with  radii  SA,  SB,  SC,  &c.,  continually  propor¬ 
tional,  describe  as  many  circles;  and  suppose  the  time  of  the  revolutions  be¬ 
tween  the  perimeters  of  any  two  of  those  circles,  in  the  medium  whereof  we 
treated,  to  be  to  the  time  of  the  revolutions  between  the  same  in  the  medium 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  193 

proposed  as  the  mean  density  of  the  proposed  medium  between  those  circles  is 
to  the  mean  density  of  the  medium  whereof  we  treated,  between  the  same  cir¬ 
cles,  nearly;  and  that  the  secant  of  the  angle  in  which  the  spiral  above  deter¬ 
mined,  in  the  medium  whereof  we  treated,  cuts  the  radius  AS,  is  in  the  same 
ratio  to  the  secant  of  the  angle  in  which  the  new  spiral,  in  the  proposed  medi¬ 
um,  cuts  the  same  radius;  and  also  that  the  number  of  all  the  revolutions 
between  the  same  two  circles  is  nearly  as  the  tangents  of  those  angles.  If  this 
be  done  everywhere  between  every  two  circles,  the  motion  will  be  continued 
through  all  the  circles.  And  by  this  means  one  may  without  difficulty  ascertain 
at  what  rate  and  in  what  time  bodies  ought  to  revolve  in  any  regular  medium. 

Cor.  IX.  And  although  these  motions  becoming  eccentric  should  be  per¬ 
formed  in  spirals  approaching  to  an  oval  figure,  yet,  assuming  the  several 
revolutions  of  those  spirals  to  be  at  the  same  distances  from  each  other,  and  to 
approach  to  the  centre  by  the  same  degrees  as  the  spiral  above  described,  we 
may  also  understand  how  the  motions  of  bodies  may  be  performed  in  spirals  of 
that  kind. 


Proposition  16.  Theorem  13 

If  the  density  of  the  medium  in  each  of  the  places  be  inversely  as  the  distance  of  the 
places  from  the  immovable  centre,  and  the  centripetal  force  be  inversely  as  any 
power  of  the  same  distance:  1  say,  that  the  body  may  revolve  in  a  spiral  intersecting 
all  the  radii  drawn  from  that  centre  in  a  given  angle. 

This  is  demonstrated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  foregoing  Proposition.  For 
if  the  centripetal  force  in  P  be  inversely  as  any  power  SP"+^  of  the  distance  SP 

whose  index  is  n+1;  it  will  be  concluded, 
as  above,  that  the  time  in  which  the  body 
describes  any  arc  PQ,  will  be  as  PQ-PS^^^"; 

Rr  . 

and  the  resistance  in  P  as  „„„  ,  or  as 

PQ^SP"’ 

and  therefore  as 

PQ-SP"-SQ’  *  OP-SP’'-+'  ’ 

that  is  (because  ^  given 

quantity),  inversely  as  SP”+^  And  there¬ 
fore,  since  the  velocity  is  inversely  as  SP^/^",  the  density  in  P  will  be  recipro¬ 
cally  as  SP. 

Cor.  I.  The  resistance  is  to  the  centripetal  force  as  (1  — 3^n)-OS  to  OP. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  centripetal  force  be  inversely  as  SP®,  1  —  'will  be  =0;  and 
therefore  the  resistance  and  density  of  the  medium  mil  be  nothing,  as  in  Prop. 
9,  Book  I. 

Cor.  III.  If  the  centripetal  force  be  inversely  as  any  power  of  the  radius  SP, 
whose  index  is  greater  than  the  number  3,  the  positive  resistance  mil  be  changed 
into  a  negative. 


Scholium 

This  Proposition  and  the  former,  which  relate  to  mediums  of  unequal  den¬ 
sity,  are  to  be  understood  as  applying  only  to  the  motion  of  bodies  that  are  so 
small,  that  the  greater  density  of  the  medium  on  one  side  of  the  body  above 
that  on  the  other  is  not  to  be  considered.  I  suppose  also  the  resistance,  other 


194  Mathematical  Principles 

things  being  equal,  to  be  proportional  to  its  density.  Hence,  in  mediums  whose 
force  of  resistance  is  not  as  the  density,  the  density  must  be  so  much  aug¬ 
mented  or  diminished,  that  either  the  excess  of  the  resistance  may  be  taken 
away,  or  the  defect  supplied. 

Proposition  17.  Problem  4 

To  find  the  ceyifripetal  force  and  the  resisting 
force  of  the  medium,  by  which  a  body,  the  law 
of  the  velocity  being  given,  shall  revolve  in  a 
given  spiral. 

Let  that  spiral  be  PQR.  From  the  veloc¬ 
ity,  with  which  the  body  goes  over  the  very 
small  arc  PQ,  the  time  will  be  given;  and 
from  the  altitude  TQ,  which  is  as  the  cen-  P 
tri petal  force,  and  the  square  of  the  time, 
that  force  will  be  given.  Then  from  the  dif-  t 
ference  RSr  of  the  areas  PSQ  and  QSR  de¬ 
scribed  in  equal  intervals  of  time,  the  retar¬ 
dation  of  the  body  will  be  given;  and  from 
the  retardation  will  be  found  the  resisting 
force  and  density  of  the  medium. 

Proposition  18.  Problem  5 

The  law  of  centripetal  force  being  given,  to  find  the  density  of  the  medium  in  each  of 
the  places  thereof,  by  which  a  body  may  describe  a  given  spiral. 

From  the  centripetal  force  the  velocity  in  each  place  must  be  found;  then 
from  the  retardation  of  the  velocity  the  density  of  the  medium  is  found,  as  in 
the  foregoing  Proposition. 

But  I  have  explained  the  method  of  managing  these  Problems  in  the  tenth 
Proposition  and  second  Lemma  of  this  book;  and  will  no  longer  detain  the 
reader  in  these  complicated  investigations.  I  shall  now  add  some  things  relating 
to  the  forces  of  progressive  bodies,  and  to  the  density  and  resistance  of  those 
mediums  in  which  the  motions  hitherto  discussed,  and  those  akin  to  them,  are 
performed. 


SECTION  V 

The  density  and  compression  of  fluids;  hydrostatics, 
the  definition  of  a  fluid 

A  FLUID  IS  ANY  BODY  WHOSE  PARTS  YIELD  TO  ANY  FORCE  IMPRESSED  ON  IT,  AND, 
BY  YIELDING,  ARE  EASILY  MOVED  AMONG  THEMSELVES 

Proposition  19.  Theorem  14 

All  the  parts  of  an  homogeneous  and  unmoved  fluid  included  in  any  unmoved 
vessel,  and  compressed  on  every  side  {setting  aside  the  consideration  of  condensa¬ 
tion,  gravity,  and  all  centripetal  forces) ,  will  be  equally  pressed  on  every  side,  and 
remain  in  their  places  without  any  motion  arising  froyn  that  pressure. 

Case  1.  Let  a  fluid  be  included  in  the  spherical  vessel  ABC,  and  uniformly 
compressed  on  every  side :  I  say,  that  no  part  of  it  mil  be  moved  by  that  pres- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  195 

sure.  For  if  any  part,  as  D,  be  moved,  all  such  parts  at  the  same  distance  from 
the  centre  on  every  side  must  necessarily  be  moved  at  the  same  time  bj"  a  like 

motion ;  because  the  pressure  of  them  all  is  similar  and 
equal;  and  all  other  motion  is  excluded  that  does  not 
arise  from  that  pressure.  But  if  these  parts  come  all  of 
them  nearer  to  the  centre,  the  fluid  must  be  condensed 
towards  the  centre,  contrary  to  the  supposition.  If  they 
recede  from  it,  the  fluid  must  be  condensed  towards 
the  circumference;  which  is  also  contrary  to  the  suppo¬ 
sition.  Neither  can  they  move  in  any  one  direction  re¬ 
taining  their  distance  from  the  centre,  because,  for  the 
same  reason,  they  may  move  in  a  contrary  direction; 
but  the  same  part  cannot  be  moved  contrary  ways  at  the  same  time.  Therefore 
no  part  of  the  fluid  vill  be  moved  from  its  place.  q.e.d. 

Case  2. 1  say  now,  that  all  the  spherical  parts  of  this  fluid  are  equally  pressed 
on  every  side.  For  let  EF  be  a  spherical  part  of  the  fluid;  if  this  be  not  pressed 
equally  on  every  side,  augment  the  lesser  pressure  till  it  be  pressed  equally  on 
every  side;  and  its  parts  (by  Case  1)  vill  remain  in  their  places.  But  before  the 
increase  of  the  pressure,  they  would  remain  in  their  places  (by  Case  1) ;  and  b}"- 
the  addition  of  a  new  pressure  they  will  be  moved,  by  the  definition  of  a  fluid, 
from  those  places.  Now  these  two  conclusions  contradict  each  other.  Therefore 
it  was  false  to  say  that  the  sphere  EF  was  not  pressed  equally  on  every  side. 

Q.E.D. 

Case  3. 1  say  besides,  that  different  spherical  parts  have  equal  pressures.  For 
the  contiguous  spherical  parts  press  each  other  mutually  and  equally  in  the 
point  of  contact  (by  Law  iii) .  But  (by  Case  2)  they  are  pressed  on  every  side 
with  the  same  force.  Therefore  any  two  spherical  parts  not  contiguous,  since 
an  intermediate  spherical  part  can  touch  both,  vnW  be  pressed  vith  the  same 
force.  Q.E.D. 

Case  4.  I  say  now,  that  all  the  parts  of  the  fluid  are  everywhere  pressed 
equally.  For  any  two  parts  may  be  touched  by  spherical  parts  in  any  points 
whatever;  and  there  they  will  equally  press  those  spherical  parts  (by  Case  3), 
and  are  in  reaction  equally  pressed  by  them  (by  Law  iii).  q.e.d. 

Case  5.  Since,  therefore,  any  part  GHI  of  the  fluid  is  inclosed  by  the  rest  of 
the  fluid  as  in  a  vessel,  and  is  equally  pressed  on  every  side;  and  also  its  parts 
equally  press  one  another,  and  are  at  rest  among  themselves;  it  is  naanifest  that 
all  the  parts  of  any  fluid  as  GHI,  which  is  pressed  equally  on  every  side,  do 
press  each  other  mutually  and  equally,  and  are  at  rest  among  themselves. 

Q.E.D. 

Case  6.  Therefore  if  that  fluid  be  included  in  a  vessel  of  a  yielding  substance, 
or  that  is  not  rigid,  and  be  not  equally  pressed  on  every  side,  the  same  will  give 
way  to  a  stronger  pressure,  by  the  definition  of  fluidity. 

Case  7.  And  therefore,  in  an  inflexible  or  rigid  vessel,  a  fluid  will  not  sustain 
a  stronger  pressure  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  but  vdll  give  way  to  it,  and 
that  in  a  moment  of  time;  because  the  rigid  side  of  the  vessel  does  not  follow 
the  yielding  liquor.  But  the  fluid,  by  thus  yielding,  vill  press  against  the  op¬ 
posite  side,  and  so  the  pressure  vill  tend  on  every  side  to  equality.  And  because 
the  fluid,  as  soon  as  it  endeavors  to  recede  from  the  part  that  is  most  pressed, 
is  withstood  by  the  resistance  of  the  vessel  on  the  opposite  side,  the  pressure 


A 


196  Mathematical  Principles 

will  on  every  side  be  reduced  to  equality,  in  a  moment  of  time,  without  any 
local  motion;  and  from  thence  the  parts  of  the  fluid  (by  Case  5)  will  press  each 
other  mutually  and  equally,  and  be  at  rest  among  themselves.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  neither  will  a  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  among  themselves 
be  changed  by  a  pressure  communicated  to  the  external  surface,  except  so  far 
as  either  the  figure  of  the  surface  may  be  somewhere  altered,  or  that  all  the 
parts  of  the  fluid,  by  pressing  one  another  more  intensely  or  remissly,  may  slide 
with  more  or  less  difficulty  among  themselves. 


Proposition  20.  Theorem  15 


If  all  the  parts  of  a  spherical  fluid,  homogeneous  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre, 
lying  on  a  spherical  concentric  hottojn,  gravitate  towards  the  centre  of  the  whole,  the 
bottom  will  sustain  the  weight  of  a  cylinder,  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the 
bottom,  and  whose  altitude  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  incumbent  fluid. 

Let  DHM  be  the  surface  of  the  bottom,  and  AEI  the  upper  surface  of  the 
fluid.  Let  the  fluid  be  divided  into  concentric  orbs  of  equal  thickness,  by  the 
innumerable  spherical  surfaces  BFK,  CGL;  and  conceive  the  force  of  gravity 
to  act  only  in  the  upper  surface  of  every  orb,  and  the  actions  to  be  equal  on  the 
equal  parts  of  the  surfaces.  Therefore  the  upper  surface  AE  is  pressed  by  the 
single  force  of  its  own  gravity,  by  which  all  the  parts  of  the  upper  orb,  and  the 
second  surface  BFK,  will  (by  Prop.  19),  according  to  its  measure,  be  equally 
pressed.  The  second  surface  BFK  is  pressed 
likewise  by  the  force  of  its  own  gravity,  which, 
added  to  the  former  force,  makes  the  pressure 
double.  The  third  surface  CGL  is,  according  to 
its  measure,  acted  on  by  this  pressure  and  the 
force  of  its  own  gravity  besides,  which  makes  its 
pressure  triple.  And  in  like  manner  the  fourth 
surface  receives  a  quadruple  pressure,  the  fifth 
surface  a  quintuple,  and  so  on.  Therefore  the 
pressure  acting  on  every  surface  is  not  as  the 
solid  quantity  of  the  incumbent  fluid,  but  as  the 
number  of  the  orbs  reaching  to  the  upper  sur¬ 
face  of  the  fluid;  and  is  equal  to  the  gravity  of  the  lowest  orb  multiplied  by 
the  number  of  orbs;  that  is,  to  the  gravity  of  a  solid  whose  ultimate  ratio  to 
the  cylinder  above  mentioned  (when  the  number  of  the  orbs  is  increased  and 
their  thickness  diminished,  ad  infinitum,  so  that  the  action  of  gravity  from  the 
lowest  surface  to  the  uppermost  may  become  continued)  is  the  ratio  of  equal¬ 
ity.  Therefore  the  lowest  surface  sustains  the  weight  of  the  cylinder  above 
determined,  q.e.d.  And  by  a  like  reasoning  the  Proposition  Avill  be  evident, 
where  the  gravity  of  the  fluid  decreases  in  any  assigned  ratio  of  the  distance 
from  the  centre,  and  also  where  the  fluid  is  more  rare  above  and  denser  below. 


Q.E.D. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  bottom  is  not  pressed  by  the  whole  weight  of  the  in¬ 
cumbent  fluid,  but  only  sustains  that  part  of  it  which  is  described  in  the  Prop¬ 
osition;  the  rest  of  the  weight  being  sustained  arch  vise  by  the  spherical  figure 
of  the  fluid. 

Cor.  II.  The  quantity  of  the  pressure  is  the  same  always  at  equal  distances 
from  the  centre,  whether  the  surface  pressed  be  parallel  to  the  horizon,  or 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  197 

perpendicular,  or  oblique;  or  whether  the  fluid,  continued  upwards  from  the 
compressed  surface,  rises  perpendicularly  in  a  rectilinear  direction,  or  creeps 
obliquely  through  crooked  cavities  and  canals,  whether  those  passages  be  reg¬ 
ular  or  irregular,  vide  or  narrow.  That  the  pressure  is  not  altered  by  any  of 
these  circumstances,  may  be  inferred  by  applying  the  demonstration  of  this 
Theorem  to  the  several  cases  of  fluids. 

Cor.  III.  From  the  same  demonstration  it  may  also  be  concluded  (by  Prop. 
19),  that  the  parts  of  a  heavy  fluid  acquire  no  motion  among  themselves  by  the 
pressure  of  the  incumbent  weight,  except  that  motion  which  arises  from  con¬ 
densation. 

Cor.  IV.  And  therefore  if  another  body  of  the  same  specific  gravity,  incapable 
of  condensation,  be  immersed  in  this  fluid,  it  ^vill  acquire  no  motion  by  the 
pressure  of  the  incumbent  weight:  it  mil  neither  descend  nor  ascend,  nor 
change  its  figure.  If  it  be  spherical,  it  mil  remain  so,  notmthstanding  the  pres¬ 
sure;  if  it  be  square,  it  mil  remain  square;  and  that,  whether  it  be  soft  or  fluid; 
whether  it  swims  freely  in  the  fluid,  or  lies  at  the  bottom.  For  any  internal  part 
of  a  fluid  is  in  the  same  state  mth  the  submersed  body;  and  the  case  of  all  sub¬ 
mersed  bodies  that  have  the  same  magnitude,  figure,  and  specific  gravity,  is 
alike.  If  a  submersed  body,  retaining  its  weight,  should  dissolve  and  put  on  the 
form  of  a  fluid,  this  body,  if  before  it  should  have  ascended,  descended,  or  from 
any  pressure  assumed  a  new  figure,  would  now  likemse  ascend,  descend,  or  put 
on  a  new  figure;  and  that,  because  its  gravity  and  the  other  causes  of  its 
motion  remain.  But  (by  Case  5,  Prop.  19)  it  would  now  be  at  rest,  and  retain 
its  figure.  Therefore  also  in  the  former  case. 

Cor.  V.  Therefore  a  body  that  is  specifically  heavier  than  a  fluid  contiguous 
to  it  mil  sink ;  and  that  which  is  specifically  lighter  mil  ascend,  and  attain  so 
much  motion  and  change  of  figure  as  that  excess  or  defect  of  gravity  is  able  to 
produce.  For  that  excess  or  defect  is  the  same  thing  as  an  impulse,  by  which  a 
body,  otherwise  in  equilibrium  mth  the  parts  of  the  fluid,  is  acted  on;  and  may 
be  compared  mth  the  excess  or  defect  of  a  weight  in  one  of  the  scales  of  a 
balance. 

Cor.  VI.  Therefore  bodies  placed  in  fluids  have  a  twofold  gravity:  the  one 
true  and  absolute,  the  other  apparent,  common,  and  comparative.  Absolute 
gravity  is  the  whole  force  mth  which  the  body  tends  dowmw^ards;  relative  and 
common  gravity  is  the  excess  of  gravity  mth  w'hich  the  body  tends  downw’ards 
more  than  the  ambient  fluid.  By  the  first  kind  of  gravity  the  parts  of  all  fluids 
and  bodies  gravitate  in  their  proper  places;  and  therefore  their  w’eights  taken 
together  compose  the  weight  of  the  w'hole.  For  the  w'hole  taken  together  is 
heavy,  as  may  be  experienced  in  vessels  full  of  liquor;  and  the  w'^eight  of  the 
whole  is  equal  to  the  w'^eights  of  all  the  parts,  and  is  therefore  composed  of 
them.  By  the  other  kind  of  gravity  bodies  do  not  gravitate  in  their  places;  that 
is,  compared  with  one  another,  they  do  not  preponderate,  but,  hindering  one 
another’s  endeavor  to  descend,  remain  in  their  proper  places  as  if  they  were 
not  heavy.  Those  things  w'hich  are  in  the  air,  and  do  not  preponderate,  are 
commonly  looked  on  as  not  heavy.  Those  which  do  preponderate  are  com¬ 
monly  reckoned  heavy,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  sustained  by  the  weight  of 
the  air.  The  common  weights  are  nothing  else  but  the  excess  of  the  true  weights 
above  the  w^eight  of  the  air.  Hence  also,  commonly,  those  things  are  called 
light  w'hich  are  less  heavy,  and,  by  yielding  to  the  preponderating  air,  mount 


198  Mathematical  Principles 

upwards.  But  these  are  only  comparatively  light,  and  not  truly  so,  because  they 
descend  in  a  vacuum.  Thus,  in  water,  bodies  which,  by  their  greater  or  less 
gravity,  descend  or  ascend,  are  comparatively  and  apparently  heavy  or  light; 
and  their  comparative  and  apparent  gravity  or  levity  is  the  excess  or  defect  by 
which  their  true  gravity  either  exceeds  the  gravity  of  the  water  or  is  exceeded 
by  it.  But  those  things  which  neither  by  preponderating  descend,  nor,  by 
yielding  to  the  preponderating  fluid,  ascend,  although  by  their  true  weight 
they  do  increase  the  weight  of  the  whole,  yet  comparatively,  and  as  commonly 
understood,  they  do  not  gravitate  in  the  water.  For  these  cases  are  alike 
demonstrated. 

Cor.  VII.  These  things  which  have  been  demonstrated  concerning  gravity 
take  place  in  any  other  centripetal  forces. 

Cor.  VIII.  Therefore  if  the  medium  in  which  any  body  moves  be  acted  on 
either  by  its  own  gravity,  or  by  any  other  centripetal  force,  and  the  body  be 
urged  more  powerfully  by  the  same  force;  the  difference  of  the  forces  is  that 
very  motive  force,  which,  in  the  foregoing  Proposition,  I  have  considered  as  a 
centripetal  force.  But  if  the  body  be  more  lightly  urged  by  that  force,  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  forces  becomes  a  centrifugal  force,  and  is  to  be  considered  as  such. 

Cor.  IX.  But  since  fluids  by  pressing  the  included  bodies  do  not  change  their 
external  figures,  it  appears  also  (by  Cor.,  Prop.  19)  that  they  will  not  change 
the  situation  of  their  internal  parts  in  relation  to  one  another;  and  therefore  if 
animals  were  immersed  therein,  and  if  all  sensation  did  arise  from  the  motion 
of  their  parts,  the  fluid  would  neither  hurt  the  immersed  bodies,  nor  excite  any 
sensation,  unless  so  far  as  those  bodies  might  be  condensed  by  the  compression. 
And  the  case  is  the  same  of  any  system  of  bodies  encompassed  vith  a 
compressing  fluid.  All  the  parts  of  the  system  will  be  agitated  with  the  same 
motions  as  if  they  were  placed  in  a  vacuum,  and  would  only  retain  their  com¬ 
parative  gravity;  unless  so  far  as  the  fluid  may  somewhat  resist  their  motions, 
or  be  requisite  to  unite  them  by  compression. 


Proposition  21.  Theorem  16 


Let  the  density  of  any  fluid  he  proportional  to  the  compression,  and  its  parts  he 
attracted  downwards  hy  a  centripetal  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  distances 
from  the  centre:  I  say,  that,  if  those  distances  he  taken  continually  proportional,  the 
densities  of  the  fluid  at  the  same  distances  will  he  also  continually  proportional. 

Let  ATV  denote  the  spherical  bottom  of  the  fluid,  S  the  centre,  SA,  SB,  SC, 
SD,  SE,  SF,  &c.,  distances  continually  proportional.  Erect  the  perpendiculars 
AH,  BI,  CK,  DL,  EM,  FN,  &c.,  which  shall  be  as  the  densities  of  the  medium 
in  the  places  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F;  and  the  specific  gravities  in  those  places  will  be 


as 


AH  BI  CK 
AS’  BS’  CS 


,  &c.,  or,  w’hich  is  all  one,  as 


AH  BI  CK 
AB’  BC’  CD’ 


&c.  Suppose,  first, 


these  gravities  to  be  uniformly  continued  from  A  to  B,  from  B  to  C,  from  C  to 
D,  &c.,  the  decrements  in  the  points  B,  C,  D,  &c.,  being  taken  by  steps.  And 
these  gravities  multiplied  by  the  altitudes  AB,  BC,  CD,  &c.,  ^vill  give  the 
pressures  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  by  wKich  the  bottom  ATV  is  acted  on  (by  Theor. 
15).  Therefore  the  particle  A  sustains  all  the  pressures  AH,  BI,  CK,  DL,  &c., 
proceeding  in  infinitum;  and  the  particle  B  sustains  the  pressures  of  all  but  the 
first  AH;  and  the  particle  C  all  but  the  tw'o  first  AH,  BI;  and  so  on:  and  there¬ 
fore  the  density  AH  of  the  first  particle  A  is  to  the  density  BI  of  the  second 


Book  II;  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


199 


particle  B  as  the  sum  of  all  AH+BI  +  CK+DL,  in  in¬ 
finitum,  to  the  sum  of  all  BI+CK+DL,  &c.  And  BI 
the  density  of  the  second  particle  B  is  to  CK  the  den¬ 
sity  of  the  third  C,  as  the  sum  of  all  BI-f-CK-fDL, 
&c.,  to  the  sum  of  all  CK-j-DL,  &c.  Therefore  these 
sums  are  proportional  to  their  differences  AH,  BI,  CK, 
&c.,  and  therefore  continually  proportional  (by  Lem. 
1  of  this  book);  and  therefore  the  differences  AH,  BI, 
CK,  &c.,  proportional  to  the  sums,  are  also  continually 
proportional.  Therefore  since  the  densities  in  the  places 
A,  B,  C,  &c.,  are  as  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  they  will  also 
be  continually  proportional.  Proceed  intermissively, 
and,  at  the  distances  SA,  SC,  SE,  continually  propor¬ 
tional,  the  densities  AH,  CK,  EM  will  be  continually 
proportional.  And  by  the  same  reasoning,  at  any  dis¬ 
tances  SA,  SD,  SG,  continually  proportional,  the  den¬ 
sities  AH,  DL,  GO  ^vill  be  continually  proportional.  Let  now  the  points  A,  B, 
C,  D,  E,  &c.,  coincide,  so  that  the  progression  of  the  specific  gravities  from 
the  bottom  A  to  the  top  of  the  fluid  may  be  made  continual;  and  at  any  dis¬ 
tances  SA,  SD,  SG,  continually  proportional,  the  densities  AH,  DL,  GO,  being 
all  along  continually  proportional,  will  still  remain  continually  proportional. 

Q.E.D. 

Cor.  Hence  if  the  density  of  the  fluid  in  two  places,  as  A  and  E,  be  given,  its 
density  in  any  other  place  Q  may  be  obtained.  With  the  centre  S,  and  the 
rectangular  asymptotes  SQ,  SX,  describe  an  hyperbola  cutting  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  AH,  EM,  QT  in  a,  e,  and  q,  as  also  the 
perpendiculars  HX,  MY,  TZ,  let  fall  upon  the 
as5Tnptote  SX,  in  h,  m,  and  t.  Make  the  area  YmtZ 
to  the  given  area  Ym/iX  as  the  given  area  EegQ 
to  the  given  area  EeaA;  and  the  line  Zt  produced 
vdll  cut  off  the  line  QT  proportional  to  the  den¬ 
sity.  For  if  the  lines  SA,  SE,  SQ  are  continually 
proportional,  the  areas  EegQ,  EeaA  will  be  equal, 
and  thence  the  areas  YmtZ,  X/iwY,  proportional 
to  them,  wall  be  also  equal ;  and  the  lines  SX,  SY, 
SZ,  that  is,  AH,  EM,  QT  continually  proportional, 
as  they  ought  to  be.  And  if  the  lines  SA,  SE,  SQ 
obtain  any  other  order  in  the  series  of  continued  proportionals,  the  lines  AH, 
EM,  QT,  because  of  the  proportional  hyperbolic  areas,  will  obtain  the  same 
order  in  another  series  of  quantities  continually  proportional. 


Proposition  22.  Theorem  17 

Let  the  density  of  any  fluid  he  proportional  to  the  compression,  and  its  parts  be 
attracted  downwards  by  a  gravitation  inversely  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the 
distances  from  the  centre:  I  say,  that  if  the  distances  he  taken  in  harmonic  progres¬ 
sion,  the  densities  of  the  fluid  at  those  distances  will  be  in  a  geometrical  progression. 

Let  S  denote  the  centre,  and  SA,  SB,  SC,  SD,  SE  the  distances  in  geometrical 
progression.  Erect  the  perpendiculars  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  which  shall  be  as  the 
densities  of  the  fluid  in  the  places  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  &c.,  and  the  specific  gravities 


200 


Mathematical  Principles 


thereof  in  those  places  will  be  as 


AH  BI  CK 
SA2'  SB2’  SC2’ 


&c.  Suppose  these  gravities  to 


be  uniformly  continued,  the  first  from  A  to  B,  the  second  from  B  to  C,  the 
third  from  C  to  D,  &c.  And  these  multiplied  by  the  altitudes  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE, 
<fec.,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  by  the  distances  SA,  SB,  SC,  &c.,  proportional 


to  those  altitudes,  will  give 


AH  BI  CK 
SA’  SB’  SC’ 


&c.,  representing  the  pressures. 


Therefore  since  the  densities  are  as  the  sums  of  those  pressures,  the  differences 
AH  — BI,  BI  — CK,  &c.,  of  the  densities  will  be  as  the  differences  of  those  sums 


AH  BI  CK 
SA’  SB’  SC’ 


&c.  With  the  centre  S,  and  the  asymptotes  SA,  Sa;,  describe  any 


hyperbola,  cutting  the  perpendiculars  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  in  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  and  the 


perpendiculars  H/,  Iw,  Kw,  let  fall  upon  the  asymptote  Sa:,  in  /i,  i,  k;  and  the 

differences  of  the  densities,  tu,  uw,  &c.,  vdll  be  as  4^,  &c.  And  the  rec- 

oA  bii 

tangles  tu-th,  uw-ui,  &c.,  or  tp,  uq,  &c.,  as  &c.,  that  is,  as  Aa, 

bA  bjD 

Bh,  &c.  For,  by  the  nature  of  the  hyperbola,  SA  is  to  AH  or  Si  as  th  to  Aa,  and 
therefore  is  equal  to  Aa.  And,  by  a  like  reasoning,  is  equal  to  B6, 


SA 


SB 


&c.  But  Aa,  B6,  Cc,  &c.,  are  continually  proportional,  and  therefore  propor¬ 
tional  to  their  differences  Aa  — B6,  Bb  —  Cc,  &c.,  therefore  the  rectangles  tp,  uq, 
&c.,  are  proportional  to  those  differences;  as  also  the  sums  of  the  rectangles 
tp-]-uq  or  tp-{-uq-{-wr  to  the  sums  of  the  differences  Aa  — Cc  or  Aa  — Dd.  Sup¬ 
pose  several  of  these  terms,  and  the  sum  of  all  the  differences,  as  Aa  —  F/,  will 
be  proportional  to  the  sum  of  all  the  rectangles,  as  zthn.  Increase  the  number  of 
terms,  and  diminish  the  distances  of  the  points  A,  B,  C,  &c.,  in  infinitum,  and 
those  rectangles  will  become  equal  to  the  hyperbolic  area  zthn,  and  therefore 
the  difference  Aa  — F/  is  proportional  to  this  area.  Take  now  any  distances,  as 
SA,  SD,  SF,  in  harmonic  progression,  and  the  differences  A.a  —  Dd,  Dd  —  F/  will 
be  equal;  and  therefore  the  areas  thlx,  xlnz,  proportional  to  those  differences, 
will  be  equal  among  themselves,  and  the  densities  S^,  Sx,  S2,  that  is,  AH,  DL, 
FN,  continually  proportional.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  if  any  two  densities  of  the  fluid,  as  AH  and  BI,  be  given,  the 
area  thiu,  answering  to  their  difference  tu,  will  be  given;  and  thence  the  density 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  201 

FN  mil  be  found  at  any  height  SF,  by  taking  the  area  thnz  to  that  given  area 
thiu  as  the  difference  Aa  — F/  to  the  difference  Aa  — B6. 


Scholium 


By  a  like  reasoning  it  may  be  proved,  that  if  the  gravity  of  the  particles  of  a 
fluid  diminishes  as  the  cube  of  the  distances  from  the  centre,  and  the  recipro- 

CAS  CAS  GAS 

cals  of  the  squares  of  the  distances  SA,  SB,  SC,  &c.,  (namely, 


be  taken  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  the  densities  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  will  be  in 
a  geometrical  progression.  And  if  the  gravity  be  diminished  as  the  fourth  poAver 


of  the  distances,  and  the  reciprocals  of  the  cubes  of  the  distances  (as 


SA-*  SA4 
SA^’  SB^’ 


SA^ 

SC^’ 


&c.)  be  taken  in  arithmetical  progression,  the  densities  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.. 


will  be  in  geometrical  progression.  And  so  in  infinitum.  Again;  if  the  gravity  of 
the  particles  of  the  fluid  be  the  same  at  all  distances,  and  the  distances  be  in 
arithmetical  progression,  the  densities  Avill  be  in  a  geometrical  progression,  as 
Dr.  Halley  hath  found.  If  the  gravity  be  as  the  distance,  and  the  squares  of  the 
distances  be  in  arithmetical  progression,  the  densities  Avill  be  in  geometrical 
progression.  And  so  in  infinitum.  These  things  will  be  so,  when  the  density  of 
the  fluid  condensed  by  compression  is  as  the  force  of  compression;  or,  which  is 
the  same  thing,  when  the  space  possessed  by  the  fluid  is  inversely  as  this  force. 
Other  laws  of  condensation  may  be  supposed,  as  that  the  cube  of  the  compress¬ 
ing  force  may  be  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  density,  or  the  cube  of  the  ratio  of 
the  force  the  same  with  the  fourth  power  of  the  ratio  of  the  density:  in  which 
case,  if  the  gravity  be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  centre, 
the  density  will  be  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance.  Suppose  that  the  cube 
of  the  compressing  force  be  as  the  fifth  power  of  the  density;  and  if  the  gravity 
be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  the  density  will  be  inversely  as  the 
5^th  power  of  the  distance.  Suppose  the  compressing  force  to  be  as  the  square 
of  the  density,  and  the  gravity  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  then  the 
density  will  be  inversely  as  the  distance.  To  run  over  all  the  cases  that  might 
be  offered  would  be  tedious.  But  as  to  our  own  air,  this  is  certain  from  experi¬ 
ment,  that  its  density  is  either  accurately,  or  very  nearly  at  least,  as  the  com¬ 
pressing  force;  and  therefore  the  density  of  the  air  in  the  atmosphere  of  the 
earth  is  as  the  weight  of  the  whole  incumbent  air,  that  is,  as  the  height  of  the 
mercury  in  the  barometer. 


Proposition  23.  Theorem  18 

//  a  fluid  be  composed  of  particles  fleeing  from  each  other,  and  the  density  be  as  the 
compression,  the  centrifugal  forces  of  the  particles  will  be  inversely  proportional  to 
the  distances  of  their  centres.  And,  conversely,  particles  fleeing  from  each  other, 
with  forces  that  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  distances  of  their  centres,  compose 
an  elastic  fluid,  whose  density  is  as  the  compression. 

Let  the  fluid  be  supposed  to  be  included  in  a  cubic  space  ACE,  and  then  to 
be  reduced  by  compression  into  a  lesser  cubic  space  ace;  and  the  distances  of 
the  particles  retaining  a  like  situation  with  respect  to  each  other  in  both  the 
spaces,  A\dll  be  as  the  sides  AB,  ab  of  the  cubes;  and  the  densities  of  the  medi¬ 
ums  will  be  inversely  as  the  containing  spaces  AB^,  ab^.  In  the  plane  side  of  the 


202  Mathematical  Principles 

greater  cube  ABCD  take  the  square  DP 
equal  to  the  plane  side  db  of  the  lesser  cube; 
and,  by  the  supposition,  the  pressure  with 
which  the  square  DP  urges  the  inclosed  fluid 
will  be  to  the  pressure  ^vdth  which  that  square 
db  urges  the  inclosed  fluid  as  the  densities  of 
the  mediums  are  to  each  other,  that  is,  as  ab^ 
to  AB^.  But  the  pressure  with  which  the  square  DB  urges  the  included  fluid  is 
to  the  pressure  with  which  the  square  DP  urges  the  same  fluid  as  the  square  DB 
to  the  square  DP,  that  is,  as  AB^  to  ab^.  Therefore,  multiplying  together  cor¬ 
responding  terms  of  the  proportions,  the  pressure  with  which  the  square  DB 
urges  the  fluid  is  to  the  pressure  with  which  the  square  db  urges  the  fluid  as  ab 
to  AB.  Let  the  planes  YGIl,fgh  be  drawn  through  the  interior  of  the  two  cubes, 
and  divide  the  fluid  into  two  parts.  These  parts  will  press  each  other  with  the 
same  forces  Avith  which  they  are  themselves  pressed  by  the  planes  AC,  ac,  that 
is,  in  the  proportion  of  ab  to  AB:  and  therefore  the  centrifugal  forces  by  Avhich 
these  pressures  are  sustained  are  in  the  same  ratio.  The  number  of  the  particles 
being  equal,  and  the  situation  alike,  in  both  cubes,  the  forces  which  all  the 
particles  exert,  according  to  the  planes  FGH,  fgh,  upon  all,  are  as  the  forces 
which  each  exerts  on  each.  Therefore  the  forces  Avhich  each  exerts  on  each, 
according  to  the  plane  FGH  in  the  greater  cube,  are  to  the  forces  which  each 
exerts  on  each,  according  to  the  plane  fgh  in  the  lesser  cube,  as  ab  to  AB,  that 
is,  inversely  as  the  distances  of  the  particles  from  each  other.  q.e.d. 

And,  conversely,  if  the  forces  of  the  single  particles  are  inversely  as  the 
distances,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  sides  of  the  cubes  AB,  ab;  the  sums  of  the 
forces  Avill  be  in  the  same  ratio,  and  the  pressures  of  the  sides  DB,  db  as  the 
sums  of  the  forces;  and  the  pressure  of  the  square  DP  to  the  pressure  of 
the  side  DB  as  a¥  to  AB^.  And,  multiplying  together  corresponding  terms 
of  the  proportions,  one  obtains  the  pressure  of  the  square  DP  to  the  pressure  of 
the  side  db  as  ab^  to  AB®;  that  is,  the  force  of  compression  in  the  one  is  to  the 
force  of  compression  in  the  other  as  the  density  in  the  former  to  the  density 
in  the  latter.  q.e.d. 


Scholium 

By  a  like  reasoning,  if  the  centrifugal  forces  of  the  particles  are  inversely  as 
the  square  of  the  distances  between  the  centres,  the  cubes  of  the  compressing 
forces  will  be  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  densities.  If  the  centrifugal  forces  be 
inversely  as  the  third  or  fourth  power  of  the  distances,  the  cubes  of  the  com¬ 
pressing  forces  will  be  as  the  fifth  or  sixth  power  of  the  densities.  And  univer¬ 
sally,  if  D  be  put  for  the  distance,  and  E  for  the  density  of  the  compressed  fluid, 
and  the  centrifugal  forces  be  inversely  as  any  poAver  D"  of  the  distance,  Avhose 
index  is  the  number  n,  the  compressing  forces  Avill  be  as  the  cube  roots  of  the 
poAver  E"+®,  Avhose  index  is  the  number  n+2;  and  conversely.  All  these  things 
are  to  be  understood  of  particles  Avhose  centrifugal  forces  terminate  in  those 
particles  that  are  next  them,  or  are  diffused  not  much  farther.  We  have  an 
example  of  this  in  magnetic  bodies.  Their  attractive  force  is  terminated  nearly 
in  bodies  of  their  OAA'n  kind  that  are  next  them.  The  force  of  the  magnet  is 
reduced  by  the  interposition  of  an  iron  plate,  and  is  almost  terminated  at  it: 
for  bodies  farther  off  are  not  attracted  by  the  magnet  so  much  as  by  the  iron 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  203 

plate.  If  in  this  manner  particles  repel  others  of  their  own  kind  that  lie  next 
them,  but  do  not  exert  their  force  on  the  more  remote,  particles  of  this  kind  will 
compose  such  fluids  as  are  treated  of  in  this  Proposition.  If  the  force  of  any 
particle  diffuse  itself  every  way  in  infinitum,  there  will  be  required  a  greater 
force  to  produce  an  equal  condensation  of  a  greater  quantity  of  the  fluid.  But 
whether  elastic  fluids  do  really  consist  of  particles  so  repelling  each  other,  is  a 
physical  question.  We  have  here  demonstrated  mathematically  the  property  of 
fluids  consisting  of  particles  of  this  kind,  that  hence  philosophers  may  take 
occasion  to  discuss  that  question. 


SECTION  VI 


The  motion  and  eesistance  of  pendulous  bodies 
Proposition  24.  Theorem  19 

The  quantities  of  matter  in  pendulous  bodies,  whose  centres  of  oscillation  are 
equally  distant  from  the  centre  of  suspension,  are  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the 
ratio  of  the  weights  and  the  squared  ratio  of  the  times  of  the  oscillations  in  a 
vacuum. 

For  the  velocity  which  a  given  force  can  generate  in  a  given  matter  in  a 
given  time  is  directly  as  the  force  and  the  time,  and  inversely  as  the  matter. 
The  greater  the  force  or  the  time  is,  or  the  less  the  matter,  the  greater  the 
velocity  generated.  This  is  manifest  from  the  second  Law  of  Motion.  Now  if 
pendulums  are  of  the  same  length,  the  motive  forces  in  places  equally  distant 
from  the  perpendicular  are  as  the  weights:  and  therefore  if  two  bodies  by 
oscillating  describe  equal  arcs,  and  those  arcs  are  divided  into  equal  parts; 
since  the  times  in  which  the  bodies  describe  each  of  the  correspondent  parts  of 
the  arcs  are  as  the  times  of  the  whole  oscillations,  the  velocities  in  the  corres¬ 
pondent  parts  of  the  oscillations  will  be  to  each  other  directly  as  the  motive 
forces  and  the  whole  times  of  the  oscillations,  and  inversely  as  the  quantities 
of  matter :  and  therefore  the  quantities  of  matter  are  directly  as  the  forces  and 
the  times  of  the  oscillations,  and  inversely  as  the  velocities.  But  the  velocities 
are  inversely  as  the  times,  and  therefore  the  times  are  directly  and  the  veloci¬ 
ties  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  times;  and  therefore  the  quantities  of  mat¬ 
ter  are  as  the  motive  forces  and  the  squares  of  the  times,  that  is,  as  the  weights 
and  the  squares  of  the  times.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  if  the  times  are  equal,  the  quantities  of  matter  in  each  of 
the  bodies  are  as  the  weights. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  weights  are  equal,  the  quantities  of  matter  vill  be  as  the 
squares  of  the  times. 

Cor.  III.  If  the  quantities  of  matter  are  equal,  the  weights  vill  be  inversely 
as  the  squares  of  the  times. 

Cor.  IV.  Since  the  squares  of  the  times,  other  things  being  equal,  are  as  the 
lengths  of  the  pendulums,  therefore  if  both  the  times  and  the  quantities  of 
matter  are  equal,  the  weights  vdll  be  as  the  lengths  of  the  pendulums. 

Cor.  V.  And,  in  general,  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  pendulous  body  is 
directly  as  the  weight  and  the  square  of  the  time,  and  inversely  as  the  length  of 
the  pendulum. 


204  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  VI.  But  in  a  nonresisting  medium,  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  pen¬ 
dulous  body  is  directly  as  the  comparative  weight  and  the  square  of  the  time, 
and  inversely  as  the  length  of  the  pendulum.  For  the  comparative  weight  is  the 
motive  force  of  the  body  in  any  heavy  medium,  as  was  shown  above;  and 
therefore  does  the  same  thing  in  such  a  nonresisting  medium  as  the  absolute 
weight  does  in  a  vacuum. 

Cor.  VII.  And  hence  appears  a  method  both  of  comparing  bodies  one  wth 
another,  as  to  the  quantity  of  matter  in  each;  and  of  comparing  the  weights  of 
the  same  body  in  different  places,  to  know  the  variation  of  its  gravity.  And  by 
experiments  made  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  I  have  always  found  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  matter  in  bodies  to  be  proportional  to  their  weight. 

Proposition  25.  Theorem  20 

Pendulous  bodies  that  are,  in  any  medium,  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  the  moments  of 
time,  and  'pendulous  bodies  that  move  in  a  nonresisting  medium  of  the  same  specific 
gravity,  perform  their  oscillations  in  a  cycloid  in  the  same  time,  and  describe 
proportional  parts  of  arcs  together. 

Let  AB  be  an  arc  of  a  cycloid,  which  a  body  D,  by  vibrating  in  a  nonresisting 
medium,  shall  describe  in  any  time.  Bisect  that  arc  in  C,  so  that  C  may  be  the 
lowest  point  thereof ;  and  the  accelerative  force  with  which  the  body  is  urged  in 
any  place  D,  or  d,  or  E,  Avill  be  as  the  length  of  the  arc  CD,  or  Cd,  or  CE.  Let 
that  force  be  expressed  by  that  same  arc;  and  since  the  resistance  is  as  the 
moment  of  the  time,  and  therefore  given,  let  it  be  expressed  by  the  given  part 
CO  of  the  cycloidal  arc,  and  take  the  arc  Od  in  the  same  ratio  to  the  arc  CD 
that  the  arc  OB  has  to  the  arc  CB :  and  the  force  with  which  the  body  in  d  is 
urged  in  a  resisting  medium,  being  the  excess  of  the  force  Cd  above  the  resist¬ 
ance  CO,  will  be  expressed  by  the  arc  Od,  and  will  therefore  be  to  the  force  with 
which  the  body  D  is  urged  in  a  non¬ 
resisting  medium  in  the  place  D, 
as  the  arc  Od  to  the  arc  CD;  and 
therefore  also  in  the  place  B,  as  the 
arc  OB  to  the  arc  CB.  Therefore  if 
two  bodies  D,  d  go  from  the  place 
B,  and  are  urged  by  these  forces; 
since  the  forces  at  the  beginning 
are  as  the  arcs  CB  and  OB,  the  first 
velocities  and  arcs  first  described 
will  be  in  the  same  ratio.  Let  those 
arcs  be  BD  and  Bd,  and  the  remain¬ 
ing  arcs  CD,  Od  will  be  in  the  same  ratio.  Therefore  the  forces,  being  propor¬ 
tional  to  those  arcs  CD,  Od,  will  remain  in  the  same  ratio  as  at  the  beginning, 
and  therefore  the  bodies  will  continue  describing  together  arcs  in  the  same 
ratio.  Therefore  the  forces  and  velocities  and  the  remaining  arcs  CD,  Od,  will 
be  always  as  the  whole  arcs  CB,  OB,  and  therefore  those  remaining  arcs  will 
be  described  together.  Therefore  the  two  bodies  D  and  d  will  arrive  together 
at  the  places  C  and  0;  that  which  moves  in  the  nonresisting  medium,  at  the 
place  C,  and  the  other,  in  the  resisting  medium,  at  the  place  0.  Now  since  the 
velocities  in  C  and  0  are  as  the  arcs  CB,  OB,  the  arcs  which  the  bodies  describe 
when  they  go  farther  mil  be  in  the  same  ratio.  Let  those  arcs  be  CE  and  Oe. 


Book  II :  The  Motion*  of  Bodies  205 

The  force  which  the  body  D  in  a  nonresisting  medium  is  retarded  in  E 
is  as  CE.  and  the  force  \nth  which  the  body  d  in  the  resisting  medium  is  re¬ 
tarded  in  e,  is  as  the  sum  of  the  force  Ce  and  the  resistance  CO,  that  is,  as  Oe; 
and  therefore  the  forces  with  which  the  bodies  are  retarded  are  as  the  arcs  CB, 
OB.  proportional  to  the  arcs  CE,  Oe;  and  therefore  the  velocities,  retarded  in 
that  given  ratio,  remain  in  the  same  given  ratio.  Therefore  the  velocities  and 
the  arcs  described  with  those  velocities  are  always  to  each  other  in  that  given 
ratio  of  the  arcs  CB  and  OB;  and  therefore  if  the  entire  arcs  AB,  aB  are  taken 
in  the  same  ratio,  the  bodies  D  and  d  will  describe  those  arcs  together,  and  in 
the  places  A  and  a  will  lose  all  their  motion  together.  Therefore  the  whole  oscil¬ 
lations  are  isochronal,  or  are  performed  in  equal  times;  and  any  parts  of  the 
arcs,  as  BD,  Bd,  or  BE,  Be,  that  are  described  together,  are  proportional  to 
the  w'hole  arcs  BA,  Ba.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Therefore  the  swiftest  motion  in  a  resisting  medium  does  not  fall  upon 
the  low*est  point  C,  but  is  found  in  that  point  0,  in  which  the  whole  arc  de¬ 
scribed  Ba  is  bisected.  And  the  body,  proceeding  from  thence  to  a,  is  retarded 
at  the  same  rate  with  w*hich  it  was  accelerated  before  in  its  descent  from  B  to  0. 

Proposition  26.  Theorem  21 

Pendulous  bodies,  that  are  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  the  velocity,  have  their  oscillations 
in  a  cycloid  isochronal. 

For  if  tw*o  bodies,  equally  distant  from  their  centres  of  suspension,  describe, 
in  oscillating,  unequal  arcs,  and  the  velocities  in  the  correspondent  parts  of  the 
arcs  be  to  each  other  as  the  whole  arcs;  the  resistances,  proportional  to  the 
velocities,  will  be  also  to  each  other  as  the  same  arcs.  Therefore  if  these  resist¬ 
ances  be  subtracted  from  or  added  to  the  motive  forces  arising  from  gravity 
which  are  as  the  same  arcs,  the  differences  or  sums  will  be  to  each  other  in  the 
same  ratio  of  the  arcs;  and  since  the  increments  and  decrements  of  the  veloci¬ 
ties  are  as  these  differences  or  sums,  the  velocities  will  be  always  as  the  w*hole 
arcs;  therefore  if  the  velocities  are  in  any  one  case  as  the  w*hole  arcs,  they  will 
remain  ahvays  in  the  same  ratio.  But  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion,  w*hen  the 
bodies  begin  to  descend  and  describe  those  arcs,  the  forces,  w*hich  at  that  time 
are  proportional  to  the  arcs,  will  generate  velocities  proportional  to  the  arcs. 
Therefore  the  velocities  will  be  always  as  the  w'hole  arcs  to  be  described,  and 
therefore  those  arcs  will  be  described  in  the  same  time.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  27.  Theorem  22 

If  ■pendulous  bodies  are  resisted  as  the  square  of  their  velocities,  the  differences 

between  the  times  of  the  oscillations 
in  a  resisting  medium,  and  the  times 
of  the  oscillations  in  a  nonresisting 
medium  of  the  same  specific  gravity, 
will  be  proportional  to  the  arcs  de¬ 
scribed  in  oscillating,  nearly. 

For  let  equal  pendulums  in  a  re¬ 
sisting  medium  describe  the  un¬ 
equal  arcs  A,  B ;  and  the  resistance 
of  the  body  in  the  arc  A  will  be  tc 
the  resistance  of  the  body  in  the 


206  Mathematical  Principles 

correspondent  part  of  the  arc  B  as  the  square  of  the  velocities,  that  is,  as  AA  to 
BB,  nearly.  If  the  resistance  in  the  arc  B  \Yere  to  the  resistance  in  the  arc  A  as 
AB  to  AA,  the  times  in  the  arcs  A  and  B  would  be  equal  (by  the  last  Proposi¬ 
tion).  Therefore  the  resistance  AA  in  the  arc  A,  or  AB  in  the  arc  B,  causes  the 
excess  of  the  time  in  the  arc  A  above  the  time  in  a  nonresisting  medium ;  and 
the  resistance  BB  causes  the  excess  of  the  time  in  the  arc  B  above  the  time  in  a 
nonresisting  medium.  But  those  excesses  are  as  the  efficient  forces  AB  and  BB 
nearly,  that  is,  as  the  arcs  A  and  B.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  from  the  times  of  the  oscillations  in  unequal  arcs  in  a  resisting 
medium,  may  be  known  the  times  of  the  oscillations  in  a  nonresisting  medium 
of  the  same  specific  gravity.  For  the  difference  of  the  times  will  be  to  the  excess 
of  the  time  in  the  shorter  arc  above  the  time  in  a  nonresisting  medium  as  the 
difference  of  the  arcs  is  to  the  shorter  arc. 

Cor.  II.  The  shorter  oscillations  are  more  isochronal,  and  very  short  ones  are 
performed  nearly  in  the  same  times  as  in  a  nonresisting  medium.  But  the  times 
of  those  which  are  performed  in  greater  arcs  are  a  little  greater,  because  the 
resistance  in  the  descent  of  the  body,  by  which  the  time  is  prolonged,  is  greater, 
in  proportion  to  the  length  described  in  the  descent  than  the  resistance  in  the 
subsequent  ascent,  by  which  the  time  is  contracted.  But  the  time  of  the  oscil¬ 
lations,  both  short  and  long,  seems  to  be  prolonged  in  some  measure  by  the 
motion  of  the  medium.  For  retarded  bodies  are  resisted  somewhat  less  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  velocity,  and  accelerated  bodies  somewhat  more  than  those  that 
proceed  uniformly  forwards;  because  the  medium,  by  the  motion  it  has  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  bodies,  going  forwards  the  same  way  mth  them,  is  more  agi¬ 
tated  in  the  former  case,  and  less  in  the  latter;  and  so  conspires  more  or  less 
with  the  bodies  moved.  Therefore  it  resists  the  pendulums  in  their  descent 
more,  and  in  their  ascent  less,  than  in  proportion  to  the  velocity;  and  these  two 
causes  concurring  prolong  the  time. 


Proposition  28.  Theorem  23 

If  a  'pendulous  body,  oscillating  in  a  cycloid,  be  resisted  in  the  ratio  of  the  moments 
of  the  time,  its  resistance  'will  be  to  the  force  of  gravity,  as  the  excess  of  the  arc  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  whole  descent  above  the  arc  described  in  the  subsequent  ascent  is  to 
twice  the  length  of  the  pendidum. 

Let  BC  represent  the  arc  described  in  the  descent,  Ca  the  arc  described  in 
the  ascent,  and  Aa  the  difference 
of  the  arcs:  and  things  remaining 
as  they  were  constructed  and  de¬ 
monstrated  in  Prop.  25,  the  force 
with  which  the  oscillating  body  is 
urged  in  any  place  D  will  be  to 
the  force  of  resistance  as  the  arc 
CD  to  the  arc  CO,  which  is  half  of 
that  difference  Aa.  Therefore  the 
force  with  which  the  oscillating 
body  is  urged  at  the  beginning  or 
the  highest  point  of  the  cycloid, 
that  is,  the  force  of  gravity,  will  be  to  the  resistance  as  the  arc  of  the  cycloid, 
between  that  highest  point  and  the  lowest  point  C,  is  to  the  arc  CO;  that  is 


Book  II :  The  Motion  op  Bodies  207 

(doubling  those  arcs),  as  the  whole  cycloidal  arc,  or  twice  the  length  of  the 
pendulum,  is  to  the  arc  Aa.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  29.  Problem  6 

Supposing  that  a  body  oscillating  in  a  cycloid  is  resisted  as  the  square  of  the 
velocity;  to  find  the  resistance  in  each  place. 

Let  Ba  be  an  arc  described  in  one  entire  oscillation,  C  the  lowest  point  of  the 
cycloid,  and  CZ  half  the  whole  cycloidal  arc,  equal  to  the  length  of  the  pen¬ 
dulum;  and  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  resistance  of  the  body  in  any  place  D. 
Cut  the  indefinite  right  line  OQ  in  the  points  0,  S,  P,  Q,  so  that  (erecting  the 
perpendiculars  OK,  ST,  PI,  QE,  and  with  the  centre  0,  and  the  asymptotes 
OK,  OQ,  describing  the  hyperbola  TIGE  cutting  the  perpendiculars  PI, 
QE  in  T,  I,  and  E,  and  through  the  point  I  drawing  KF,  parallel  to  the  asymp¬ 
tote,  OQ,  meeting  the  asymptote  OK  in  K,  and  the  perpendiculars  ST  and  QE 
in  L  and  F)  the  hyperbolic  area  PIEQ  may  be  to  the  hyperbolic  area  PITS  as 
the  arc  BC,  described  in  the  descent  of  the  body,  is  to  the  arc  Ca  described  in 
the  ascent;  and  that  the  area  lEF  may  be  to  the  area  ILT  as  OQ  to  OS.  Then 


with  the  perpendicular  MN  cut  off  the  hyperbolic  area  PINM,  and  let  that 
area  be  to  the  hyperbolic  area  PIEQ  as  the  arc  CZ  to  the  arc  BC  described  in 
the  descent.  And  if  the  perpendicular  RG  cuts  off  the  hyperbolic  area  PIGR, 
which  shall  be  to  the  area  PIEQ  as  any  arc  CD  is  to  the  arc  BC  described  in  the 
whole  descent,  the  resistance  in  any  place  D  will  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  as 


the  area  lEF  — IGH  is  to  the  area  PINM. 

For  since  the  forces  arising  from  gravity  wth  which  the  body  is  urged  in  the 
places  Z,  B,  D,  a  are  as  the  arcs  CZ,  CB,  CD,  Ca,  and  those  arcs  are  as  the  areas 
PINM,  PIEQ,  PIGR,  PITS;  let  those  areas  represent  both  the  arcs  and  the 
forces  respectively.  Let  Dd  be  a  very  small  space  described  by  the  body  in  its 
descent;  and  let  it  be  expressed  by  the  very  small  area  RG^r,  comprehended 
between  the  parallels  RG,  rg",  and  produce  rg  to  h,  so  that  GH%  and  RG^r  may 
be  the  contemporaneous  decrements  of  the  areas  IGH,  PIGR.  And  the  incre¬ 
ment  GP%-^  lEF,  or  Rr-HG-^  lEF,  of  the  area  ^  lEF-IGH  will 

lEF 

be  to  the  decrement  RGg'r,  or  Rr-RG,  of  the  area  PIGR,  as  HG  — is  to 


RG;  and  therefore  as  OR-HG  — lEF  is  to  OR-GR  or  OP -PI,  that  is  (be¬ 
cause  of  the  equal  quantities  OR-HG,  OR -HR  — OR-GR,  ORHK  — OPIK, 


208 


Mathematical  Principles 


OP 

PIHR  and  PIGR+IGH),  as  PIGR+IGH  — ^  lEF  is  to  OPIK.  Therefore  if 
OP 

the  area  lEF  — IGH  be  called  Y,  and  RGg^r  the  decrement  of  the  area 

PIGR  be  given,  the  increment  of  the  area  Y  vill  be  as  PIGR— Y. 

Then  if  V  represent  the  force  arising  from  the  gravity,  proportional  to  the 
arc  CD  to  be  described,  by  which  the  body  is  acted  upon  in  D,  and  R  be  put 
for  the  resistance,  V  — R  will  be  the  whole  force  with  which  the  body  is  urged 
in  D.  Therefore  the  increment  of  the  velocity  is  as  V  — R  and  the  interval  of 
time  in  which  it  is  generated  conjointly.  But  the  velocity  itself  is  directly  as  the 
contemporaneous  increment  of  the  space  described  and  inversely  as  the  same 
interval  of  time.  Therefore,  since  the  resistance  is,  by  the  supposition,  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  the  increment  of  the  resistance  will  (by  Lem.  2)  be  as 
the  velocity  and  the  increment  of  the  velocity  conjointly,  that  is,  as  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  space  and  V  — R  conjointly;  and,  therefore,  if  the  moment  of  the 
space  be  given,  as  V  — R;  that  is,  if  for  the  force  V  we  put  its  expression  PIGR, 
and  the  resistance  R  be  expressed  by  any  other  area  Z,  as  PIGR  — Z. 

Therefore  the  area  PIGR  uniformly  decreasing  by  the  subtraction  of  given 
moments,  the  area  Y  increases  in  proportion  of  PIGR  — Y,  and  the  area  Z  in 
proportion  of  PIGR  — Z.  And  therefore  if  the  areas  Y  and  Z  begin  together,  and 
at  the  beginning  are  equal,  these,  by  the  addition  of  equal  moments,  will  con¬ 
tinue  to  be  equal;  and  in  like  manner  decreasing  by  equal  moments,  will  vanish 
together.  And,  conversely,  if  they  together  begin  and  vanish,  they  will  have 
equal  moments  and  be  always  equal.  For,  if  the  resistance  Z  be  augmented, 
then  the  velocity  together  with  the  arc  Ca,  described  in  the  ascent  of  the  body, 
wdll  be  diminished;  and,  the  point  in  which  all  the  motion  together  with  the 
resistance  ceases,  coming  nearer  to  the  point  C,  then  the  resistance  vanishes 
sooner  than  the  area  Y.  And  the  contrary  will  happen  when  the  resistance  is 


diminished. 

Now  the  area  Z  begins  and  ends  where  the  resistance  is  nothing,  that  is,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  motion  where  the  arc  CD  is  equal  to  the  arc  CB,  and  the 
right  line  RG  falls  upon  the  right  line  QE;  and  at  the  end  of  the  motion  where 
the  arc  CD  is  equal  to  the  arc  Ca,  and  RG  falls  upon  the  right  line  ST.  And  the 

area  Y  or  lEF  — IGH  begins  and  ends  also  where  the  resistance  is  nothing, 

OR 

and  therefore  where  lEFand  IGH  are  equal;  that  is  (by  the  construction), 

where  the  right  line  RG  falls  successively  upon  the  right  lines  QE  and  ST. 
Therefore  those  areas  begin  and  vanish  together,  and  are  therefore  always 


209 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 
OR 

equal.  Hence,  the  area  lEF  — IGH  is  equal  to  the  area  Z,  by  which  the 

resistance  is  expressed,  and  therefore  is  to  the  area  PINM,  by  which  the  gravity 
is  expressed,  as  the  resistance  is  to  the  gravity.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  resistance  in  the  lowest  place  C  is  to  the  force  of 
OP 

gravity  as  the  area  lEF  is  to  the  area  PINM. 

Cor.  II.  But  it  becomes  greatest  where  the  area  PIHR  is  to  the  area  lEF  as 
OR  is  to  OQ.  For  in  that  case  its  moment  (that  is,  PIGR  — Y)  becomes  nothing. 

Cor.  III.  Hence  also  may  be  known  the  velocity  in  each  place,  as  varying  as 
the  square  root  of  the  resistance,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  motion  being 
equal  to  the  velocity  of  the  body  oscillating  in  the  same  cycloid  mthout  any 
resistance. 

However,  by  reason  of  the  difficulty  of  the  calculation  by  which  the  resist¬ 
ance  and  the  velocity  are  found  by  this  Proposition,  we  have  thought  fit  to 
subjoin  the  Proposition  following. 


Proposition  30.  Theorem  24 

If  a  right  line  aB  he  equal  to  the  arc  of  a  cycloid  which  an  oscillating  body  describes, 
and  at  each  of  its  points  D  the  perpendiculars  DK  he  erected,  which  shall  be  to  the 
length  of  the  pendulum  as  the  resistance  of  the  body  in  the  corresponding  points  of 
the  arc  is  to  the  force  of  gravity:  I  say,  that  the  difference  between  the  arc  described 
in  the  whole  descent  and  the  arc  described  in  the  whole  subsequent  ascent  multiplied 
by  half  the  sum  of  the  same  arcs  will  be  equal  to  the  area  BKa  which  all  those 
perpendiculars  take  up. 

Let  the  arc  of  the  cycloid,  described  in  one  entire  oscillation,  be  expressed  by 
the  right  line  aB,  equal  to  it,  and  the  arc  which  would  have  been  described  in  a 
vacuum  by  the  length  AB.  Bisect  AB  in  C,  and  the  point  C  will  represent  the 
lowest  point  of  the  cycloid,  and  CD  will  be  as  the  force  arising  from  gravity, 
with  which  the  body  in  D  is  urged  in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  of  the  cycloid, 
and  mil  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum  as  the  force  in  D  has 

to  the  force  of  gravity.  Let  that 
force,  therefore,  be  expressed  by  that 
length  CD,  and  the  force  of  gravity 
by  the  length  of  the  pendulum ;  and  if 
in  DE  you  take  DK  in  the  same  ratio 
to  the  length  of  the  pendulum  as  the 
resistance  is  to  the  gravity,  DK  Avill 
g  be  the  exponent  of  the  resistance. 
From  the  centre  C  mth  the  interval 
CA  or  CB  describe  a  semicircle  BEeA.  Let  the  body  describe,  in  the  least  time, 
the  space  Dd;  and,  erecting  the  perpendiculars  DE,  de,  meeting  the  circum¬ 
ference  in  E  and  e,  they  mil  be  as  the  velocities  which  the  body  descending 
in  a  vacuum  from  the  point  B  would  acquire  in  the  places  D  and  d.  This  ap¬ 
pears  by  Prop.  52,  Book  i.  Let,  therefore,  these  velocities  be  expressed  by  those 
perpendiculars  DE,  de)  and  let  DF  be  the  velocity  which  it  acquires  in  D  by 
falling  from  B  in  the  resisting  medium.  And  if  from  the  centre  C  with  the  in¬ 
terval  CF  we  describe  the  circle  F/M  meeting  the  right  lines  de  and  AB  in  /  and 
M,  then  M  will  be  the  place  to  which  it  would  thenceforward,  without  further 


210  Mathematical  Principles 

resistance,  ascend,  and  df  the  velocity  it  would  acquire  in  d.  Hence,  also,  if 
represent  the  moment  of  the  velocity  which  the  body  D,  in  describing  the 
least  space  Dd,  loses  by  the  resistance  of  the  medium;  and  CN  be  taken  equal 
to  C^;  then  will  N  be  the  place  to  which  the  body,  if  it  met  no  further  resis¬ 
tance,  would  thenceforward  ascend,  and  MN  will  be  the  decrement  of  the 
ascent  arising  from  the  loss  of  that  velocity.  Draw  Fm  perpendicular  to  df,  and 
the  decrement  Fgr  of  the  velocity  DF  generated  by  the  resistance  DK  will  be  to 
the  increment  fm  of  the  same  velocity,  generated  by  the  force  CD,  as  the  gen¬ 
erating  force  DK  to  the  generating  force  CD.  But  because  of  the  similar  tri¬ 
angles  Fm/,  Fhg,  FDC,  fm  is  to  Fm  or  Dd  as  CD  to  DF ;  and,  by  multiplication 
of  corresponding  terms,  Fjif  to  Dd  as  DK  to  DF.  Also  Fk  is  to  Fg  as  DF  to  CF; 
and,  again  by  multiplication  of  corresponding  terms,  Fh  or  MN  to  Dd  as  DK 
to  CF  or  CM;  and  therefore  the  sum  of  all  the  MN  -CM  will  be  equal  to  the 
sum  of  all  the  Dd-DK.  At  the  movable  point  M  suppose  always  a  rectangular 
ordinate  erected  equal  to  the  indeterminate  CM,  which  by  a  continual  motion 
is  multiplied  by  the  whole  length  Aa;  and  the  trapezium  described  by  that 
motion,  or  its  equal,  the  rectangle  Aa'3^aB,  will  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the 
MN-CM,  and  therefore  to  the  sum  of  all  the  Dd-DK,  that  is,  to  the  area 
BKVTa.  Q.E.D. 

Cor.  Hence  from  the  law  of  resistance,  and  the  difference  Aa  of  the  arcs 
Ca,  CB,  may  be  derived  the  proportion  of  the  resistance  to  the  gravity, 
nearly. 

For  if  the  resistance  DK  be  uniform,  the  figure  BKTa  will  be  a  rectangle 
under  Ba  and  DK;  and  hence  the  rectangle  under  /^Ba  and  Aa  mil  be  equal  to 
the  rectangle  under  Ba  and  DK,  and  DK  will  be  equal  to  3^Aa.  Therefore  since 
DK  represents  the  resistance,  and  the  length  of  the  pendulum  represents  the 
gravity,  the  resistance  will  be  to  the  gravity  as  3^Aa  is  to  the  length  of  the 
pendulum;  altogether  as  in  Prop.  28  is  demonstrated. 

If  the  resistance  be  as  the  velocity,  the  figure  BKTa  will  be  nearly  an  ellipse. 
For  if  a  body,  in  a  nonresisting  medium,  by  one  entire  oscillation,  should  de¬ 
scribe  the  length  BA,  the  velocity  in  any  place  D  would  be  as  the  ordinate  DE 
of  the  circle  described  on  the  diameter  AB.  Therefore  since  Ba  in  the  resisting 
medium,  and  BA  in  the  nonresisting  one,  are  described  nearly  in  the  same 
times;  and  therefore  the  velocities  in  each  of  the  points  of  Ba  are  to  the  vel¬ 
ocities  in  the  corresponding  points  of  the  length  BA  nearly  as  Ba  is  to  BA,  the 
velocity  in  the  point  D  in  the  resisting  medium  will  be  as  the  ordinate  of  the 
circle  or  ellipse  described  upon  the  diameter  Ba;  and  therefore  the  figure 
BKVTa  will  be  nearly  an  ellipse.  Since  the  resistance  is  supposed  proportional 
to  the  velocity,  let  OV  represent  the  resistance  in  the  middle  point  0 ;  and  an 
ellipse  BRVSa  described  with  the  centre  0,  and  the  semiaxes  OB,  OV,  will  be 
nearly  equal  to  the  figure  BKVTa,  and  to  its  equal  the  rectangle  Aa-BO. 
Therefore  Aa  •  BO  is  to  OV  •  BO  as  the  area  of  this  ellipse  to  OV  •  BO;  that  is,  Aa 
is  to  OV  as  the  area  of  the  semicircle  is  to  the  square  of  the  radius,  or  as  1 1  to  7 
nearly;  and,  therefore,  Aa  is  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum  as  the  resistance 
of  the  oscillating  body  in  0  is  to  its  gravity. 

Now  if  the  resistance  DK  varies  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  the  figure 
BKVTa  will  be  almost  a  parabola  having  V  for  its  vertex  and  OV  for  its  axis, 
and  therefore  will  be  nearly  equal  to  the  rectangle  under  %Ba  and  OV.  There¬ 
fore  the  rectangle  under  3^Ba  and  Aa  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  %Ba  •  OV,  and 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  211 

therefore  OV  is  equal  to  MAa;  and  therefore  the  resistance  in  O  made  to  the 
oscillating  body  is  to  its  gravity  as  ^Aa  is  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum. 
And  I  take  these  conclusions  to  be  accurate  enough  for  practical  uses.  For 
since  an  ellipse  or  parabola  BRVSa  falls  in  with  the  figure  BKVTa  in  the 
middle  point  V,  that  figure,  if  greater  towards  the  part  BRV  or  VSa,  is  less 
towards  the  contrary  part,  and  is  therefore  nearly  equal  to  it. 


A  Mn 


Proposition  31.  Theorem  25 

If  the  resistance  made  to  an  oscillating  body  in  each  of  the  'proportional  parts  of  the 
arcs  described  be  augmented  or  diminished  in  a  given  ratio,  the  difference  between 
the  arc  described  in  the  descent  and  the  arc  described  in  the  subsequent  ascent  will  be 
augmented  or  diminished  in  the  same  ratio. 

For  that  difference  arises  from  the  retardation  of  the  pendulum  by  the  resist¬ 
ance  of  the  medium,  and  therefore  is  as  the  whole  retardation  and  the  retarding 

resistance  proportional  thereto.  In  the 
foregoing  Proposition  the  rectangle 
under  the  right  line  3^aB  and  the 
difference  Aa  of  the  arcs  CB,  Ca,  was 
equal  to  the  area  BKTa.  And  that 
area,  if  the  length  aB  remains,  is  aug¬ 
mented  or  diminished  in  the  ratio  of 
13  the  ordinates  DK;  that  is,  in  the  ratio 
of  the  resistance,  and  is  therefore  as 
the  length  aB  and  the  resistance  conjointly.  And  therefore  the  rectangle  under 
Aa  and  3^aB  is  as  aB  and  the  resistance  conjointly,  and  therefore  Aa  is  as 
the  resistance.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  resistance  be  as  the  velocity,  the  difference  of  the  arcs  in 
the  same  medium  Avill  be  as  the  whole  arc  described;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  resistance  varies  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  that  difference 
will  vary  as  the  square  of  the  whole  arc;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  III.  And  generally,  if  the  resistance  varies  as  the  third  or  any  other 
power  of  the  velocity,  the  difference  will  vary  as  the  same  power  of  the  whole 
arc;  and  conversely. 

Cor.  IV.  If  the  resistance  varies  partly  as  the  first  power  of  the  velocity  and 
partly  as  the  square  of  the  same,  the  difference  will  vary  partly  as  the  first 
power  and  partly  as  the  square  of  the  whole  arc;  and  conversely.  So  that  the 
law  and  ratio  of  the  resistance  will  be  the  same  for  the  velocity  as  the  law  and 
ratio  of  that  difference  for  the  length  of  the  arc. 

Cor.  V.  And  therefore  if  a  pendulum  describe  successively  unequal  arcs,  and 
we  can  find  the  ratio  of  the  increment  or  decrement  of  this  difference  for  the 
length  of  the  arc  described,  there  will  be  had  also  the  ratio  of  the  increment  or 
decrement  of  the  resistance  for  a  greater  or  less  velocity. 


General  Scholium 

From  these  Propositions  we  may  find  the  resistance  of  mediums  by  pendu¬ 
lums  oscillating  therein.  I  found  the  resistance  of  the  air  by  the  following 
experiments.  I  suspended  a  wooden  globe  or  ball  weighing  57^2  ounces  troy, 
its  diameter  6J^  London  inches,  by  a  fine  thread  on  a  firm  hook,  so  that  the 
distance  between  the  hook  and  the  centre  of  oscillation  of  the  globe  was  103^^ 


212  Mathematical  Principles 

feet.  I  marked  on  the  thread  a  point  10  feet  and  1  inch  distant  from  the  centre 
of  suspension;  and  even  with  that  point  I  placed  a  ruler  divided  into  inches,  by 
the  help  of  which  I  observed  the  lengths  of  the  arcs  described  by  the  pendulum. 
Then  I  numbered  the  oscillations  in  which  the  globe  would  lose  part  of  its 
motion.  If  the  pendulum  was  drawn  aside  from  the  perpendicular  to  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  2  inches,  and  then  let  go,  so  that  in  its  whole  descent  it  described  an 
arc  of  2  inches,  and  in  the  first  whole  oscillation,  compounded  of  the  descent 
and  subsequent  ascent,  an  arc  of  almost  4  inches,  the  pendulum  in  164  oscilla¬ 
tions  lost  ^  part  of  its  motion,  so  as  in  its  last  ascent  to  describe  an  arc  of  1^ 
inches.  If  in  the  first  descent  it  described  an  arc  of  4  inches,  it  lost  3^  part  of  its 
motion  in  121  oscillations,  so  as  in  its  last  ascent  to  describe  an  arc  of  334 
inches.  If  in  the  first  descent  it  described  an  arc  of  8,  16,  32,  or  64  inches,  it  lost 
part  of  its  motion  in  69,  3534,  1834,  oscillations,  respectively.  Therefore 
the  difference  between  the  arcs  described  in  the  first  descent  and  the  last  ascent 
was  in  the  1st,  2d,  3d,  4th,  5th,  6th  cases,  34,3^,  1,  2,  4,  8  inches,  respectively. 
Divide  those  differences  by  the  number  of  oscillations  in  each  case,  and  in  one 
mean  oscillation,  in  which  an  arc  of  3^,  734,  15,  80,  60,  120  inches  was  de¬ 
scribed,  the  difference  of  the  arcs  described  in  the  descent  and  subsequent  as¬ 
cent  will  be  3456, 3^42, 349, 34i,  347,  ^349  parts  of  an  inch,  respectively.  But  these 
differences  in  the  greater  oscillations  are  as  the  square  of  the  arcs  described, 
nearly,  but  in  lesser  oscillations  somewhat  greater  than  in  that  ratio;  and  there¬ 
fore  (by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  31  of  this  Book)  the  resistance  of  the  globe,  when  it 
moves  very  svviftly,  varies  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  nearly;  and  when  it 
moves  slowly,  in  a  somewhat  greater  ratio. 

Now  let  V  represent  the  greatest  velocity  in  any  oscillation,  and  let  A,  B, 
and  C  be  given  quantities,  and  let  us  suppose  the  difference  of  the  arcs  to  be 
AV+BV®/^-l-CV^.  Since  the  greatest  velocities  are  in  the  cycloid  as  34  ^^cs 
described  in  oscillating,  and  in  the  circle  as  34  fhe  chords  of  those  arcs;  and 
therefore  in  equal  arcs  are  greater  in  the  cycloid  than  in  the  circle  in  the  ratio 
of  34  fhe  arcs  to  their  chords;  but  the  times  in  the  circle  are  greater  than  in  the 
cycloid,  in  a  ratio  inversely  as  the  velocity;  it  is  plain  that  the  differences  of  the 
arcs  (which  are  as  the  resistance  and  the  square  of  the  time  conjointly)  are 
nearly  the  same  in  both  curves:  for  in  the  cycloid  those  differences  must  be  on 
the  one  hand  augmented,  with  the  resistance,  in  about  the  squared  ratio  of  the 
arc  to  the  chord,  because  of  the  velocity  augmented  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the 
same;  and  on  the  other  hand  diminished,  with  the  square  of  the  time,  in  the 
same  squared  ratio.  Therefore  to  reduce  these  observations  to  the  cycloid,  we 
must  take  the  same  differences  of  the  arcs  as  were  observed  in  the  circle,  and 
suppose  the  greatest  velocities  analogous  to  the  half,  or  the  whole  arcs,  that  is, 
to  the  numbers  34,  1,2,  4,  8,  16.  Therefore  in  the  2d,  4th,  and  6th  cases  put  1, 4, 
and  16  for  V ;  and  the  difference  of  the  arcs  in  the  2d  case  \vill  become  t§t  =  A 
-f-B-l-C;  in  the  4th  case,  =4A-|-8B-|-16C;  in  the  6th  case,  9%  =  16A-f  64B 
+256C.  These  equations  reduced  give  A  =  0.0000916,  B  =0.0010847,  and  C  = 
0.0029558.  Therefore  the  difference  of  the  arcs  is  as  0.0000916V  -f- 0. 001 0847 
-1-0.0029558V^;  and  therefore  since  (by  Cor.,  Prop.  30,  applied  to  this  case)  the 
resistance  of  the  globe  in  the  middle  of  the  arc  described  in  oscillating,  where 
the  velocity  is  V,  is  to  its  weight  as  34iAV  -|-34oBV®/2+MCV^  is  to  the  length 
of  the  pendulum,  if  for  A,  B,  and  C  you  put  the  numbers  found,  the  resistance 
of  the  globe  will  be  to  its  weight  as  0.0000583V+0.0007593V^^^-|-0.0022169V^ 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  213 

is  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum  between  the  centre  of  suspension  and  the 
ruler,  that  is,  to  121  inches.  Therefore  since  V  in  the  second  case  represents  1, 
in  the  4th  case  4  and  in  the  6th  case  16,  the  resistance  will  be  to  the  weight  of 
the  globe,  in  the  2d  case,  as  0.0030345  is  to  121;  in  the  4th,  as  0.041748  is  to 
121;  in  the  6th,  as  0.61705  is  to  121. 

The  arc,  which  the  point  marked  in  the  thread  described  in  the  6th  case,  was 
120  — or  IIQ^V  inches.  And  therefore  since  the  radius  was  121  inches,  and 
the  length  of  the  pendulum  between  the  point  of  suspension  and  the  centre  of 
the  globe  was  126  inches,  the  arc  which  the  centre  of  the  globe  described  was 
124^  inches.  Because  the  greatest  velocity  of  the  oscillating  body,  by  reason 
of  the  resistance  of  the  air,  does  not  fall  on  the  lowest  point  of  the  arc  described, 
but  near  the  middle  place  of  the  whole  arc,  this  velocity  will  be  nearly  the  same 
as  if  the  globe  in  its  whole  descent  in  a  nonresisting  medium  should  describe 
62^  inches,  the  half  of  that  arc,  and  that  in  a  cycloid,  to  which  we  have  above 
reduced  the  motion  of  the  pendulum ;  and  therefore  that  velocity  will  be  equal 
to  that  which  the  globe  would  acquire  by  falling  perpendicularly  from  a  height 
equal  to  the  versed  sine  of  that  arc.  But  that  versed  sine  in  the  cycloid  is  to 
that  arc  62 A  as  the  same  arc  to  twice  the  length  of  the  pendulum  252,  and 
therefore  equal  to  15.278  inches.  Therefore  the  velocity  of  the  pendulum  is  the 
same  which  a  body  would  acquire  by  falling,  and  in  its  fall  describing  a  space 
of  15.278  inches.  Therefore  with  such  a  velocity  the  globe  meets  with  a  resist¬ 
ance  which  is  to  its  weight  as  0.61705  is  to  121,  or  (if  we  take  that  part  only  of 
the  resistance  which  is  in  the  squared  ratio  of  the  velocity)  as  0.56752  to  121. 

I  found,  by  an  hydrostatical  experiment,  that  the  weight  of  this  wooden 
globe  was  to  the  weight  of  a  globe  of  water  of  the  same  magnitude  as  55  to  97 ; 
and  therefore  since  121  is  to  213.4  in  the  same  ratio,  the  resistance  made  to  this 
globe  of  water,  moving  forwards  with  the  above-mentioned  velocity,  will  be  to 
its  weight  as  0.56752  to  213.4,  that  is,  as  1  to  376-5V.  Since  the  weight  of  a  globe 
of  water,  in  the  time  in  which  the  globe  with  a  velocity  uniformly  continued 
describes  a  length  of  30.556  inches,  will  generate  all  that  velocity  in  the  falling 
globe,  it  is  manifest  that  the  force  of  resistance  uniformly  continued  in  the  same 
time  will  take  away  a  velocity,  which  wll  be  less  than  the  other  in  the  ratio  of 
1  to  3765V,  that  is,  the  3T6!^  part  of  the  whole  velocity.  And  therefore  in  the 
time  that  the  globe,  with  the  same  velocity  uniformly  continued,  would  de¬ 
scribe  the  length  of  its  semidiameter,  or  3iV  inches,  it  would  lose  the  wo-  part 
of  its  motion. 

I  also  counted  the  oscillations  in  which  the  pendulum  lost  34  part  of  its 
motion.  In  the  following  table  the  upper  numbers  denote  the  length  of  the  arc 
described  in  the  first  descent,  expressed  in  inches  and  parts  of  an  inch;  the 
middle  numbers  denote  the  length  of  the  arc  described  in  the  last  ascent;  and 
in  the  lowest  place  are  the  numbers  of  the  oscillations.  I  give  an  account  of  this 
experiment,  as  being  more  accurate  than  that  in  which  only  34  part  of  the 
motion  was  lost.  I  leave  the  calculation  to  such  as  are  disposed  to  make  it. 


First  descent 

2 

4 

8  16 

32 

64 

Last  ascent 

3 

6  12 

24 

48 

No.  of  oscillations 

374 

272 

16234  83K 

41% 

22% 

I  afterwards  suspended 

a  leaden  globe  of  2  inches  in  diameter,  weighing  2634 

ounces  troy  by  the  same  thread,  so  that  between  the  centre  of  the  globe  and 


214  Mathematical  Principles 

the  point  of  suspension  there  was  an  interval  of  103^  feet,  and  I  counted  the 
oscillations  in  which  a  given  part  of  the  motion  was  lost.  The  first  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  tables  exhibits  the  number  of  oscillations  in  which  ^  part  of  the  whole 
motion  was  lost;  the  second  the  number  of  oscillations  in  which  there  was  lost 
34  part  of  the  same. 


First  descent 

1 

2 

4 

8 

16 

32 

64 

Last  ascent 

Vs 

% 

33^ 

7 

14 

28 

56 

No.  of  oscillations 

226 

228 

193 

140 

9034 

53 

30 

First  descent 

1 

2 

4 

8 

16 

32 

64 

Last  ascent 

13^ 

3 

6 

12 

24 

48 

No.  of  oscillations 

510 

518 

420 

318 

204 

121 

70 

Selecting  in  the  first  table  the  3d,  5th,  and  7th  observations,  and  expressing 
the  greatest  velocities  in  these  observations  particularly  by  the  numbers  1,  4, 
16,  respectively,  and  generally  by  the  quantity  V  as  above,  there  will  come  out 
in  the  3d  observation  t^  =  A-1-B+C,  in  the  5th  observation  9^=4A+8B 
+  16C,  in  the  7th  observation  16A+64B+256C.  These  equations  reduced 
give  A  =  0.001414,  B  =  0.000297,  C  =  0.000879.  And  thence  the  resistance  of  the 
globe  moving  with  the  velocity  V  will  be  to  its  weight  26^  ounces  in  the  same 
ratio  as  0.0009V+0.000208V®/2+0.000659V^  to  121  inches,  the  length  of  the 
pendulum.  And  if  we  regard  that  part  only  of  the  resistance  which  is  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  it  will  be  to  the  weight  of  the  globe  as  0.000659V-  to  121 
inches.  But  this  part  of  the  resistance  in  the  first  experiment  was  to  the  weight 
of  the  wooden  globe  of  57^2  ounces  as  0. 00221 7 to  121;  hence  the  resistance 
of  the  wooden  globe  is  to  the  resistance  of  the  leaden  one  (their  velocities  being 
equal)  as  57^2  into  0.002217  to  2634  into  0.000659,  that  is,  as  734  to  1.  The 
diameters  of  the  two  globes  were  6J4  and  2  inches,  and  the  squares  of  these  are 
to  each  other  as  4734  and  4,  or  ll^Me  and  1,  nearly.  Therefore  the  resistances 
of  these  equally  swift  globes  were  in  less  than  a  squared  ratio  of  the  diameters. 
But  we  have  not  yet  considered  the  resistance  of  the  thread,  which  was  cer¬ 
tainly  very  considerable,  and  ought  to  be  subtracted  from  the  resistance  of  the 
pendulums  here  found.  I  could  not  determine  this  accurately,  but  I  found  it 
greater  than  ^  part  of  the  whole  resistance  of  the  lesser  pendulum;  hence  I 
gathered  that  the  resistances  of  the  globes,  when  the  resistance  of  the  thread  is 
subtracted,  are  nearly  in  the  squared  ratio  of  their  diameters.  For  the  ratio  of 
734  “34  fo  1  “34)  or  1034  to  1  is  not  very  different  from  the  squared  ratio  of 
the  diameters  iF^e  to  1. 

Since  the  resistance  of  the  thread  is  of  less  moment  in  greater  globes,  I  tried 
the  experiment  also  with  a  globe  whose  diameter  was  18^  inches.  The  length 
of  the  pendulum  between  the  point  of  suspension  and  the  centre  of  oscillation 
was  12234  inches,  and  between  the  point  of  suspension  and  the  knot  in  the 
thread  10934  inches.  The  arc  described  by  the  knot  at  the  first  descent  of  the 
pendulum  was  32  inches.  The  arc  described  by  the  same  knot  in  the  last  ascent 
after  five  oscillations  was  28  inches.  The  sum  of  the  arcs,  or  the  whole  arc  de¬ 
scribed  in  one  mean  oscillation,  was  60  inches;  the  difference  of  the  arcs,  4 
inches.  The  Mo  part  of  this,  or  the  difference  between  the  descent  and  ascent  in 
one  mean  oscillation,  is  34  of  an  inch.  Then  as  the  radius  10934  is  to  the  radius 
12234;  so  is  the  whole  arc  of  60  inches  described  by  the  knot  in  one  mean  oscil- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  215 

lation  to  the  whole  arc  of  673^  inches  described  by  the  centre  of  the  globe  in  one 
mean  oscillation;  and  so  is  the  difference  %  to  a  new  difference  0.4475.  If  the 
length  of  the  arc  described  were  to  remain,  and  the  length  of  the  pendulum 
should  be  augmented  in  the  ratio  of  126  to  1223^,  the  time  of  the  oscillation 
would  be  augmented,  and  the  velocity  of  the  pendulum  would  be  diminished  as 
the  square  root  of  that  ratio;  so  that  the  difference  0.4475  of  the  arcs  described 
in  the  descent  and  subsequent  ascent  would  remain.  Then  if  the  arc  described 
be  augmented  in  the  ratio  of  124^i  to  673^8?  that  difference  0.4475  would  be 
augmented  as  the  square  of  that  ratio,  and  so  would  become  1.5295.  These 
things  would  be  so  upon  the  supposition  that  the  resistance  of  the  pendulum 
were  as  the  square  of  the  velocity.  Therefore  if  the  pendulum  describe  the 
whole  arc  of  1243^1  inches,  and  its  length  between  the  point  of  suspension  and 
the  centre  of  oscillation  be  126  inches,  the  difference  of  the  arcs  described  in  the 
descent  and  subsequent  ascent  would  be  1.5295  inches.  And  this  difference 
multiplied  by  the  weight  of  the  pendulous  globe,  which  was  208  ounces,  pro¬ 
duces  318.136.  Again,  in  the  pendulum  above  mentioned,  made  of  a  wooden 
globe,  when  its  centre  of  oscillation,  being  126  inches  from  the  point  of  suspen¬ 
sion,  described  the  whole  arc  of  124^i  inches,  the  difference  of  the  arcs  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  descent  and  ascent  was  ^^^21  into  9% .  This  multiplied  by  the  weight 
of  the  globe,  which  was  57^2  ounces,  produces  49.396.  But  I  multiply  these 
differences  by  the  weights  of  the  globes,  in  order  to  find  their  resistances.  For 
the  differences  arise  from  the  resistances,  and  are  as  the  resistances  directly 
and  the  weights  inversely.  Therefore  the  resistances  are  as  the  numbers  318.136 
and  49.396.  But  that  part  of  the  resistance  of  the  lesser  globe,  which  is  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  was  to  the  whole  resistance  as  0.56752  to  0.61675,  that 
is,  as  45.453  to  49.396;  whereas  that  part  of  the  resistance  of  the  greater  globe 
is  almost  equal  to  its  whole  resistance,  and  so  those  parts  are  nearly  as  318.136 
and  45.453,  that  is,  as  7  and  1.  But  the  diameters  of  the  globes  are  18%  and 
6%;  and  their  squares  351%6  and  47^%4  are  as  7.438  and  1,  that  is,  nearly  as 
the  resistances  of  the  globes  7  and  1.  The  difference  of  these  ratios  is  barely 
greater  than  may  arise  from  the  resistance  of  the  thread.  Therefore  those  parts 
of  the  resistances  which  are,  when  the  globes  are  equal,  as  the  squares  of 
the  velocities,  are  also,  when  the  velocities  are  equal,  as  the  squares  of  the 
diameters  of  the  globes. 

But  the  greatest  of  the  globes  I  used  in  these  experiments  was  not  perfectly 
spherical,  and  therefore  in  this  calculation  I  have,  for  brevity’s  sake,  neglected 
some  little  niceties;  being  not  very  solicitous  for  an  accurate  calculus  in  an 
experiment  that  was  not  very  accurate.  So  that  I  could  wish  that  these  ex¬ 
periments  were  tried  again  with  other  globes,  of  a  larger  size,  more  in  number, 
and  more  accurately  formed;  since  the  demonstration  of  a  vacuum  depends 
thereon.  If  the  globes  be  taken  in  a  geometrical  proportion,  whose  diameters, 
let  us  suppose,  are  4,  8,  16,  32  inches;  one  may  infer  from  the  progression  ob¬ 
served  in  the  experiments  what  would  happen  if  the  globes  were  still  larger. 

In  order  to  compare  the  resistances  of  different  fluids  "with  each  other,  I  made 
the  follovdng  trials.  I  procured  a  wooden  vessel  4  feet  long,  1  foot  broad,  and 
1  foot  high.  This  vessel,  being  uncovered,  I  filled  with  spring  water,  and,  having 
immersed  pendulums  therein,  I  made  them  oscillate  in  the  water.  And  I  found 
that  a  leaden  globe  weighing  ounces,  and  in  diameter  3%  inches,  moved 

therein  as  it  is  set  down  in  the  following  table;  the  length  of  the  pendulum  from 


216  Mathematical  Principles 

the  point  of  suspension  to  a  certain  point  marked  in  the  thread  being  126 
inches,  and  to  the  centre  of  oscillation  134^  inches. 


The  arc  described  in  the 
first  descent,  by  a  'point 
marked  in  the  thread 
was  inches 

64 

32 

16  . 

8  . 

4  . 

2  . 

1  . 

H  . 

3€ 

The  arc  described  in  the 
last  ascent  was  inches 

48  . 

.  24  . 

,  12  . 

6  . 

3  . 

13^  . 

M  . 

Ks  . 

Ke 

The  difference  of  the 
arcs,  proportional  to  the 
motion  lost,  was  inches 

16  . 

.  8  . 

.  4  . 

2  . 

1  . 

3^  . 

3i 

. 

Ke 

The  number  of  the  oscil¬ 
lations  in  water 

29/„„ 
/60  • 

BA. 

3 

.  7 

.  113€  . 

12%  . 

13H 

The  number  of  the  oscil- 

853^  . 

,  287  , 

,  535 

lations  in  air 


In  the  experiments  of  the  4th  column  there  were  equal  motions  lost  in  535 
oscillations  made  in  the  air,  and  1^5  in  water.  The  oscillations  in  the  air  were 
indeed  a  little  smfter  than  those  in  the  water.  But  if  the  oscillations  in  the 
water  were  accelerated  in  such  a  ratio  that  the  motions  of  the  pendulums  might 
be  equally  swift  in  both  mediums,  there  would  be  still  the  same  number  of  iVs 
oscillations  in  the  water,  and  by  these  the  same  quantity  of  motion  would  be 
lost  as  before;  because  the  resistance  is  increased,  and  the  square  of  the  time 
diminished  in  the  same  squared  ratio.  The  pendulums,  therefore,  being  of  equal 
velocities,  there  were  equal  motions  lost  in  535  oscillations  in  the  air,  and  \]4> 
in  the  water;  and  therefore  the  resistance  of  the  pendulum  in  the  water  is  to  its 
resistance  in  the  air  as  535  to  l]/^.  This  is  the  proportion  of  the  whole  resist¬ 
ances  in  the  case  of  the  4th  column. 

Now  let  AV+CV^  represent  the  difference  of  the  arcs  described  in  the  de¬ 
scent  and  subsequent  ascent  by  the  globe  moving  in  air  with  the  greatest  vel¬ 
ocity  V ;  and  since  the  greatest  velocity  is  in  the  case  of  the  4th  column  to  the 
greatest  velocity  in  the  case  of  the  1st  column  as  1  is  to  8;  and  that  difference 
of  the  arcs  in  the  case  of  the  4th  column  to  the  difference  in  the  case  of  the  1st 
column  as  5^5-  to  or  as  853^  to  4280;  put  in  these  cases  1  and  8  for  the  vel¬ 
ocities,  and  853^  and  4280  for  the  differences  of  the  arcs,  and  A-f-C  wll  be 
=  853^,  and  8A-1-64C  =  4280  or  A-1-8C  =  535;  and  then,  by  reducing  these 
equations,  there  ^vi\\  come  out  7C  =  4493^  and  C  =  64tt  and  A  =  21f;  and 
therefore  the  resistance,  which  is  as  3^iAV-f  will  become  as  13^iV 

+48%6VI  Therefore  in  the  case  of  the  4th  column,  where  the  velocity  was  1, 
the  whole  resistance  is  to  its  part  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  velocity  as 
13%i+48%6  or  61^5^7  to  48%6;  and  therefore  the  resistance  of  the  pendulum 
in  water  is  to  that  part  of  the  resistance  in  air,  which  is  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  and  which  in  swift  motions  is  the  only  part  that  deserves 
consideration,  as  61^3^7  to  483^6  and  535  to  13/5  conjointly,  that  is,  as  571  to 
1.  If  the  w'hole  thread  of  the  pendulum  oscillating  in  the  w'ater  had  been  im¬ 
mersed,  its  resistance  w^ould  have  been  still  greater;  so  that  the  resistance  of 
the  pendulum  oscillating  in  the  w^ater,  that  is,  that  part  w'hich  is  proportional  to 
the  square  of  the  velocity,  and  w’hich  only  needs  to  be  considered  in  swift 
bodies,  is  to  the  resistance  of  the  same  whole  pendulum,  oscillating  in  air  wdth 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  217 

the  same  velocity,  as  about  850  to  1,  that  is,  as  the  density  of  water  is  to  the 
density  of  air.  nearly. 

In  this  calculation  we  ought  also  to  have  taken  in  that  part  of  the  resistance 
of  the  pendulum  in  the  water  which  was  as  the  square  of  the  velocity;  but  I 
found  (which  vill  perhaps  seem  strange)  that  the  resistance  in  the  water  was 
augmented  in  more  than  a  squared  ratio  of  the  velocity.  In  searching  after  the 
cause.  I  thought  upon  this,  that  the  vessel  was  too  narrow  for  the  magnitude  of 
the  pendulous  globe,  and  by  its  narrowness  obstructed  the  motion  of  the  water 
as  it  yielded  to  the  oscillating  globe.  For  when  I  immersed  a  pendulous  globe, 
whose  diameter  was  one  inch  only  ,  the  resistance  was  augmented  nearly  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity.  I  tried  this  by  making  a  pendulum  of  two  globes,  of 
which  the  lesser  and  lower  oscillated  in  the  water,  and  the  greater  and  higher 
was  fastened  to  the  thread  just  above  the  water,  and,  by  oscillating  in  the  air, 
assisted  the  motion  of  the  pendulum,  and  continued  it  longer.  The  experiments 
made  by  this  contrivance  resulted  as  shown  in  the  follovdng  table. 


Arc  described  in  first  descent 

16 

.  8 

.  4 

2 

.  1 

•  K  . 

Arc  described  in  last  ascent 

12 

.  6 

.  3  . 

11^ 

.  M  . 

.  H  . 

Ke 

Difference  of  arcs,  proportional  to 
motion  lost 

4  . 

.  2  . 

1  . 

•  M  . 

3^  . 

He 

Number  of  oscillations 

3H  . 

.  6H 

.  i2yi2 . 

211/5  .  34 

.  53  . 

621/5 

In  comparing  the  resistances  of  the  mediums  with  each  other,  I  also  caused 
iron  pendulums  to  oscillate  in  quicksilver.  The  length  of  the  iron  wire  was 
about  3  feet,  and  the  diameter  of  the  pendulous  globe  about  of  an  inch.  To 
the  wire,  just  above  the  quicksilver,  there  was  fixed  another  leaden  globe  of  a 
bigness  sufficient  to  continue  the  motion  of  the  pendulum  for  some  time.  Then 
a  vessel,  that  would  hold  about  3  pounds  of  quicksilver,  was  filled  by  turns  vith 
quicksilver  and  common  water,  so  that,  by  making  the  pendulum  oscillate 
successively  in  these  two  different  fluids,  I  might  find  the  proportion  of  their 
resistances;  and  the  resistance  of  the  quicksilver  proved  to  be  to  the  resistance 
of  water  as  about  13  or  14  to  1;  that  is,  as  the  density  of  quicksilver  to  the 
density  of  water.  When  I  made  use  of  a  pendulous  globe  something  bigger,  as 
of  one  whose  diameter  was  about  3/2  or  %  of  an  inch,  the  resistance  of  the 
quicksilver  proved  to  be  to  the  resistance  of  the  water  as  about  12  or  10  to  1. 
But  the  former  experiment  is  more  to  be  relied  on,  because  in  the  latter  the  vessel 
was  too  narrow  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  immersed  globe ;  for  the 
vessel  ought  to  have  been  enlarged  together  vith  the  globe.  I  intended  to  repeat 
these  experiments  with  larger  vessels,  and  in  melted  metals,  and  other  liquors 
both  cold  and  hot;  but  I  had  not  leisure  to  try  all;  and  besides,  from  what  is 
already  described,  it  appears  sufficiently  that  the  resistance  of  bodies  moving 
sviftly  is  nearly  proportional  to  the  densities  of  the  fluids  in  which  they  move. 
I  do  not  say  accurately;  for  more  tenacious  fluids,  of  equal  density,  will  un¬ 
doubtedly  resist  more  than  those  that  are  more  liquid;  as  cold  oil  more  than 
warm,  warm  oil  more  than  rain  water,  and  water  more  than  spirit  of  vine.  But 
in  liquors,  which  are  sensibly  fluid  enough,  as  in  air,  in  salt  and  fresh  water,  in 
spirit  of  vine,  of  turpentine,  and  salts,  in  oil  cleared  of  its  feces  by  distillation 
and  warmed,  in  oil  of  vitriol,  and  in  mercury,  and  melted  metals,  and  any  other 
such  like,  that  are  fluid  enough  to  retain  for  some  time  the  motion  impressed 
upon  them  by  the  agitation  of  the  vessel,  and  which  being  poured  out  are  easily 


218  Mathematical  Principles 

resolved  into  drops,  I  doubt  not  that  the  rule  already  laid  down  may  be  accu¬ 
rate  enough,  especially  if  the  experiments  be  made  with  larger  pendulous  bodies 
and  more  swiftly  moved. 

Lastly,  since  it  is  the  opinion  of  some  that  there  is  a  certain  ethereal  medium 
extremely  rare  and  subtile,  which  freely  pervades  the  pores  of  all  bodies;  and 
from  such  a  medium,  so  pervading  the  pores  of  bodies,  some  resistance  must 
needs  arise;  in  order  to  try  whether  the  resistance,  which  we  experience  in 
bodies  in  motion,  be  made  upon  their  outward  surfaces  only,  or  whether  their 
internal  parts  meet  with  any  considerable  resistance  upon  their  surfaces,  I 
thought  of  the  following  experiment.  I  suspended  a  round  deal  box  by  a  thread 
11  feet  long,  on  a  steel  hook,  by  means  of  a  ring  of  the  same  metal,  so  as  to 
make  a  pendulum  of  the  aforesaid  length.  The  hook  had  a  sharp  hollow  edge  on 
its  upper  part,  so  that  the  upper  arc  of  the  ring  pressing  on  the  edge  might 
move  the  more  freely;  and  the  thread  was  fastened  to  the  lower  arc  of  the  ring. 
The  pendulum  being  thus  prepared,  I  drew  it  aside  from  the  perpendicular  to 
the  distance  of  about  6  feet,  and  that  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  edge  of 
the  hook,  lest  the  ring,  while  the  pendulum  oscillated,  should  slide  to  and  fro 
on  the  edge  of  the  hook;  for  the  point  of  suspension,  in  which  the  ring  touches 
the  hook,  ought  to  remain  immovable.  I  therefore  accurately  noted  the  place 
to  which  the  pendulum  was  brought,  and  letting  it  go,  I  marked  three  other 
places,  to  which  it  returned  at  the  end  of  the  1st,  2d,  and  3d  oscillation.  This 
I  often  repeated,  that  I  might  find  those  places  as  accurately  as  possible.  Then 
I  filled  the  box  inth  lead  and  other  heavy  metals  that  were  near  at  hand.  But 
first,  I  weighed  the  box  when  empty,  and  that  part  of  the  thread  that  went 
round  it,  and  half  the  remaining  part,  extended  between  the  hook  and  the  sus¬ 
pended  box;  for  the  thread  so  extended  always  acts  upon  the  pendulum,  when 
drawn  aside  from  the  perpendicular,  wdth  half  its  weight.  To  this  weight  I 
added  the  weight  of  the  air  contained  in  the  box.  And  this  whole  weight  was 
about  ^78  of  the  weight  of  the  box  when  filled  with  the  metals.  Then  because 
the  box  when  full  of  the  metals,  by  extending  the  thread  with  its  weight,  in¬ 
creased  the  length  of  the  pendulum,  I  shortened  the  thread  so  as  to  make  the 
length  of  the  pendulum,  when  oscillating,  the  same  as  before.  Then  drawing 
aside  the  pendulum  to  the  place  first  marked,  and  letting  it  go,  I  reckoned 
about  77  oscillations  before  the  box  returned  to  the  second  mark,  and  as  many 
afterwards  before  it  came  to  the  third  mark,  and  as  many  after  that  before  it 
came  to  the  fourth  mark.  From  this  I  conclude  that  the  whole  resistance  of  the 
box,  when  full,  had  not  a  greater  proportion  to  the  resistance  of  the  box,  when 
empty,  than  78  to  77.  For  if  their  resistances  were  equal,  the  box,  when  full,  by 
reason  of  its  inertia,  which  was  78  times  greater  than  the  inertia  of  the  same 
when  empty,  ought  to  have  continued  its  oscillating  motion  so  much  the  longer, 
and  therefore  to  have  returned  to  those  marks  at  the  end  of  78  oscillations.  But 
it  returned  to  them  at  the  end  of  77  oscillations. 

Let,  therefore,  A  represent  the  resistance  of  the  box  upon  its  external  surface, 
and  B  the  resistance  of  the  empty  box  on  its  internal  surface,  and  if  the  resist¬ 
ances  to  the  internal  parts  of  bodies  equally  swift  be  as  the  matter,  or  the 
number  of  particles  that  are  resisted,  then  78B  will  be  the  resistance  made  to 
the  internal  parts  of  the  box,  when  full;  and  therefore  the  whole  resistance 
A+B  of  the  empty  box  vill  be  to  the  whole  resistance  A-f-78B  of  the  full  box 
as  77  to  78,  and,  by  subtraction,  A+B  to  77B  as  77  to  1;  and  thence  A+B  to 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  219 

B  as  11  'll  to  1,  and,  by  subtraction,  again,  A  to  B  as  5928  to  1.  Therefore  the 
resistance  of  the  empty  box  in  its  internal  parts  will  be  above  5000  times  less 
than  the  resistance  on  its  external  surface.  This  reasoning  depends  upon  the 
supposition  that  the  greater  resistance  of  the  full  box  arises  not  from  any  other 
latent  cause,  but  only  from  the  action  of  some  subtile  fluid  upon  the  included 
metal. 

This  experiment  is  related  by  memory,  the  paper  being  lost  in  which  I  had 
described  it;  so  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  omit  some  fractional  parts,  which 
are  slipped  out  of  my  memory;  and  I  have  no  leisure  to  try  it  again.  The  first 
time  I  made  it,  the  hook  being  weak,  the  full  box  was  retarded  sooner.  The 
cause  I  found  to  be,  that  the  hook  was  not  strong  enough  to  bear  the  weight  of 
the  box;  so  that,  as  it  oscillated  to  and  fro,  the  hook  was  bent  sometimes  this 
and  sometimes  that  way.  I  therefore  procured  a  hook  of  sufficient  strength,  so 
that  the  point  of  suspension  might  remain  unmoved,  and  then  all  things  hap¬ 
pened  as  is  above  described. 


SECTION  VII 

The  motion  of  fluids,  and  the  resistance  made  to  projected  bodies 

Proposition  32.  Theorem  26 

Suppose  two  similar  systems  of  bodies  consisting  of  an  equal  number  of  particles, 
and  let  the  correspondent  particles  he  similar  and  proportional,  each  in  one  system 
to  each  in  the  other,  and  have  a  like  situation  arnong  themselves,  and  the  same  given 
ratio  of  density  to  each  other;  and  let  them  begin  to  move  among  themselves  in 
proportional  times,  and  with  like  motions  {that  is,  those  in  one  system  among  one 
another,  and  those  in  the  other  among  one  another).  And  if  the  particles  that  are  in 
the  same  system  do  not  touch  one  another,  except  in  the  moments  of  reflection;  nor 
attract,  nor  repel  each  other,  except  with  accelerative  forces  that  are  inversely  as  the 
diameters  of  the  correspondent  particles,  and  directly  as  the  squares  of  the  velocities: 
1  say,  that  the  particles  of  those  systems  will  continue  to  move  among  themselves 
with  like  motions  and  in  proportional  times. 

Like  bodies  in  like  situations  are  said  to  be  moved  among  themselves  with 
like  motions  and  in  proportional  times,  when  their  situations  at  the  end  of 
those  times  are  always  found  alike  in  respect  of  each  other;  as  suppose  we  com¬ 
pare  the  particles  in  one  system  with  the  correspondent  particles  in  the  other. 
Hence  the  times  will  be  proportional,  in  which  similar  and  proportional  parts 
of  similar  figures  will  be  described  by  correspondent  particles.  Therefore  if  we 
suppose  two  systems  of  this  kind,  the  correspondent  particles,  by  reason  of  the 
similitude  of  the  motions  at  their  beginning,  will  continue  to  be  moved  with 
like  motions,  so  long  as  they  move  without  meeting  one  another;  for  if  they  are 
acted  on  by  no  forces,  they  vill  go  on  uniformly  in  right  lines,  by  the  first  Law. 
But  if  they  agitate  one  another  vith  some  certain  forces,  and  those  forces  are 
inversely  as  the  diameters  of  the  correspondent  particles  and  directly  as  the 
squares  of  the  velocities,  then,  because  the  particles  are  in  like  situations,  and 
their  forces  are  proportional,  the  whole  forces  vdth  which  correspondent  par¬ 
ticles  are  agitated,  and  which  are  compounded  of  each  of  the  agitating  forces 
(by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws),  vdll  have  like  directions,  and  have  the  same  effect  as 


220  Mathematical  Principles 

if  they  respected  centres  places  alike  among  the  particles;  and  those  whole 
forces  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  several  forces  which  compose  them,  that  is, 
inversely  as  the  diameters  of  the  correspondent  particles  and  directly  as  the 
squares  of  the  velocities:  and  therefore  will  cause  correspondent  particles  to 
continue  to  describe  like  figures.  These  things  will  be  so  (by  Cor.  i  and  viii. 
Prop.  4,  Book  i),  if  those  centres  are  at  rest;  but  if  they  are  moved,  yet,  by 
reason  of  the  similitude  of  the  translations,  their  situations  among  the  particles 
of  the  system  will  remain  similar,  so  that  the  changes  introduced  into  the 
figures  described  by  the  particles  will  still  be  similar.  So  that  the  motions  of 
correspondent  and  similar  particles  Mill  continue  similar  till  their  first  meeting 
with  each  other;  and  thence  will  arise  similar  collisions,  and  similar  reflections; 
which  will  again  beget  similar  motions  of  the  particles  among  themselves  (by 
what  was  just  now  shown),  till  they  mutually  fall  upon  one  another  again,  and 
so  on  ad  infinitum.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  any  two  bodies,  which  are  similar  and  in  like  situations  to 
the  correspondent  particles  of  the  systems,  begin  to  move  amongst  them  in  like 
manner  and  in  proportional  times,  and  their  magnitudes  and  densities  be  to 
each  other  as  the  magnitudes  and  densities  of  the  corresponding  particles,  these 
bodies  will  continue  to  be  moved  in  like  manner  and  in  proportional  times;  for 
the  case  of  the  greater  parts  of  both  systems  and  of  the  particles  is  the  very 
same. 

Cor.  II.  And  if  all  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  parts  of  both  systems  be 
at  rest  among  themselves;  and  two  of  them,  which  are  greater  than  the  rest, 
and  mutually  correspondent  in  both  systems,  begin  to  move  in  lines  alike 
posited,  Math  any  similar  motion  whatsoever,  they  wall  excite  similar  motions 
in  the  rest  of  the  parts  of  the  systems,  and  A\all  continue  to  move  among  those 
parts  in  like  manner  and  in  proportional  times;  and  mil  therefore  describe 
spaces  proportional  to  their  diameters. 

Proposition  33.  Theorem  27 

The  same  things  being  supposed,  I  say,  that  the  greater  parts  of  the  systems  are 
resisted  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  squared  ratio  of  their  velocities,  and  the 
squared  ratio  of  their  diameters,  and  the  simple  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  parts  of 
the  systems. 

For  the  resistance  arises  partly  from  the  centripetal  or  centrifugal  forces  "svith 
which  the  particles  of  the  system  act  on  each  other,  partly  from  the  collisions 
and  reflections  of  the  particles  and  the  greater  parts.  The  resistances  of  the  first 
kind  are  to  each  other  as  the  whole  motive  forces  from  which  they  arise,  that  is, 
as  the  whole  accelerative  forces  and  the  quantities  of  matter  in  corresponding 
parts;  that  is  (by  the  supposition),  directly  as  the  squares  of  the  velocities  and 
inversely  as  the  distances  of  the  corresponding  particles,  and  directly  as  the 
quantities  of  matter  in  the  correspondent  parts:  and  therefore  since  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  the  particles  in  one  system  are  to  the  correspondent  distances  of  the 
particles  in  the  other,  as  the  diameter  of  one  particle  or  part  in  the  former 
system  to  the  diameter  of  the  correspondent  particle  or  part  in  the  other,  and 
since  the  quantities  of  matter  are  as  the  densities  of  the  parts  and  the  cubes  of 
the  diameters,  the  resistances  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the  velocities 
and  the  squares  of  the  diameters  and  the  densities  of  the  parts  of  the  systems. 
Q.E.D.  The  resistances  of  the  latter  sort  are  as  the  number  of  correspondent 


221 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 

reflections  and  the  forces  of  those  reflections  conjointly;  but  the  number  of  the 
reflections  are  to  each  other  directly  as  the  velocities  of  the  corresponding  parts 
and  inversely  as  the  spaces  between  their  reflections.  And  the  forces  of  the 
reflections  are  as  the  velocities  and  the  magnitudes  and  the  densities  of  the 
corresponding  parts  conjointly;  that  is,  as  the  velocities  and  the  cubes  of  the 
diameters  and  the  densities  of  the  parts.  And,  joining  all  these  ratios,  the  resist¬ 
ances  of  the  corresponding  parts  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the  vel¬ 
ocities  and  the  squares  of  the  diameters  and  the  densities  of  the  parts  conjointly. 

q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  if  those  systems  are  two  elastic  fluids,  like  our  air,  and 
their  parts  are  at  rest  among  themselves;  and  two  similar  bodies  proportional 
in  magnitude  and  density  to  the  parts  of  the  fluids,  and  similarly  situated 
among  those  parts,  be  in  any  manner  projected  in  the  direction  of  lines  sim¬ 
ilarly  posited;  and  the  accelerative  forces  vith  which  the  particles  of  the  fluids 
act  upon  each  other  are  inversely  as  the  diameters  of  the  bodies  projected  and 
directly  as  the  squares  of  their  velocities;  those  bodies  will  excite  similar  mo¬ 
tions  in  the  fluids  in  proportional  times,  and  vnW  describe  similar  spaces  and 
proportional  to  their  diameters. 

Cor.  II.  Therefore  in  the  same  fluid  a  projected  body  that  moves  swiftly 
meets  with  a  resistance  that  is  as  the  square  of  its  velocity,  nearly.  For  if  the 
forces  with  which  distant  particles  act  upon  one  another  should  be  augmented 
as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  the  projected  body  would  be  resisted  in  the  same 
squared  ratio  accurately;  and  therefore  in  a  medium,  whose  parts  when  at  a 
distance  do  not  act  with  any  force  on  one  another,  the  resistance  is  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity,  accurately.  Let  there  be,  therefore,  three  mediums  A, 
B,  C,  consisting  of  similar  and  equal  parts  regularly  disposed  at  equal  distances. 
Let  the  parts  of  the  mediums  A  and  B  recede  from  each  other  with  forces  that 
are  among  themselves  as  T  and  V ;  and  let  the  parts  of  the  medium  C  be  en¬ 
tirely  destitute  of  any  such  forces.  And  if  four  equal  bodies  D,  E,  F,  G  move  in 
these  mediums,  the  two  first  D  and  E  in  the  tw^o  first  A  and  B,  and  the  other 
two  F  and  G  in  the  third  C ;  and  if  the  velocity  of  the  body  D  be  to  the  velocity 
of  the  body  E,  and  the  velocity  of  the  body  F  to  the  velocity  of  the  body  G,  as 
the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  force  T  to  the  force  V ;  then  the  resistance  of 
the  body  D  to  the  resistance  of  the  body  E,  and  the  resistance  of  the  body  F  to 
the  resistance  of  the  body  G,  will  be  as  the  square  of  the  velocities;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  resistance  of  the  body  D  will  be  to  the  resistance  of  the  body  F  as  the 
resistance  of  the  body  E  to  the  resistance  of  the  body  G.  Let  the  bodies  D  and 
F  be  equally  swift,  as  also  the  bodies  E  and  G;  and,  augmenting  the  velocities 
of  the  bodies  D  and  F  in  any  ratio,  and  diminishing  the  forces  of  the  particles 
of  the  medium  B  as  the  square  of  the  same  ratio,  the  medium  B  will  approach 
to  the  form  and  condition  of  the  medium  C  at  pleasure;  and  therefore  the 
resistances  of  the  equal  and  equally  swift  bodies  E  and  G  in  these  mediums  will 
continually  approach  to  equality,  so  that  their  difference  will  at  last  become 
less  than  any  given.  Therefore  since  the  resistances  of  the  bodies  D  and  F  are 
to  each  other  as  the  resistances  of  the  bodies  E  and  G,  those  will  also  in  like 
manner  approach  to  the  ratio  of  equality.  Therefore  the  bodies  D  and  F,  when 
they  move  with  very  great  swiftness,  meet  with  resistances  very  nearly  equal; 
and  therefore  since  the  resistance  of  the  body  F  is  in  a  squared  ratio  of  the 
velocity,  the  resistance  of  the  body  D  will  be  nearly  in  the  same  ratio. 


222  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  III.  Hence  the  resistance  of  a  body  moving  very  sviftly  in  an  elastic 
fluid  is  almost  the  same  as  if  the  parts  of  the  fluid  were  destitute  of  their 
centrifugal  forces,  and  did  not  fly  from  each  other;  provided  only  that  the 
elasticity  of  the  fluid  arise  from  the  centrifugal  forces  of  the  particles,  and  the 
velocity  be  so  great  as  not  to  allow  the  particles  time  enough  to  act. 

Cor.  IV.  Since  the  resistances  of  similar  and  equally  swift  bodies,  in  a  me¬ 
dium  whose  distant  parts  do  not  fly  from  each  other,  are  as  the  squares  of  the 
diameters,  therefore  the  resistances  made  to  bodies  moving  with  very  great  and 
equal  velocities  in  an  elastic  fluid  will  be  as  the  squares  of  the  diameters,  nearly. 

Cor.  V.  And  since  similar,  equal,  and  equally  swift  bodies,  moving  through 
mediums  of  the  same  density,  whose  particles  do  not  fly  from  each  other,  will 
strike  against  an  equal  quantity  of  matter  in  equal  times,  whether  the  particles 
of  which  the  medium  consists  be  more  and  smaller,  or  fewer  and  greater,  and 
therefore  impress  on  that  matter  an  equal  quantity  of  motion,  and  in  return 
(by  the  third  Law  of  Motion)  suffer  an  equal  reaction  from  the  same,  that  is, 
are  equally  resisted;  it  is  manifest,  also,  that  in  elastic  fluids  of  the  same  den¬ 
sity,  when  the  bodies  move  vdth  extreme  swiftness,  their  resistances  are  nearly 
equal,  whether  the  fluids  consist  of  gross  parts,  or  of  parts  ever  so  subtile.  For 
the  resistance  of  projectiles  moving  udth  exceedingly  great  celerities  is  not 
much  diminished  by  the  subtilty  of  the  medium. 

Cor.  VI.  All  these  things  are  so  in  fluids  whose  elastic  force  takes  its  rise  from 
the  centrifugal  forces  of  the  particles.  But  if  that  force  arise  from  some  other 
cause,  as  from  the  expansion  of  the  particles  after  the  manner  of  wool,  or  the 
boughs  of  trees,  or  any  other  cause,  by  which  the  particles  are  hindered  from 
moving  freely  among  themselves,  the  resistance,  by  reason  of  the  lesser  fluidity 
of  the  medium,  will  be  greater  than  in  the  Corollaries  above. 

Proposition  34.  Theorem  28 

If  in  a  rare  medium,  consisting  of  equal  particles  freely  disposed  at  equal  distances 
from  each  other,  a  globe  and  a  cylinder  described  on  equal  diameters  move  with 
equal  velocities  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  the  resistance  of  the  globe 
will  be  but  half  as  great  as  that  of  the  cylinder. 

For  since  the  action  of  the  medium  upon  the  body  is  the  same  (by  Cor.  v  of 
the  Laws)  whether  the  body  move  in  a  quiescent  medium,  or  whether  the 
particles  of  the  medium  impinge  udth  the  same  velocity  upon  the  quiescent 
body,  let  us  consider  the  body  as  if  it  were  quiescent,  and  see  mth  what  force 
it  would  be  impelled  by  the  moving  medium. 

Let,  therefore,  ABKI  represent  a  spherical 
body  described  from  the  centre  C  -with  the 
semidiameter  CA,  and  let  the  particles  of  the 
medium  impinge  with  a  given  velocity  upon 
that  spherical  body  in  the  directions  of  right 
lines  parallel  to  AC;  and  let  FB  be  one  of 
those  right  lines.  In  FB  take  LB  equal  to  the 
semidiameter  CB,  and  draw  BD  touching  the 
sphere  in  B.  Upon  KC  and  BD  let  fall  the 
perpendiculars  BE,  LD;  and  the  force  with  which  a  particle  of  the  medium,  im¬ 
pinging  on  the  globe  obliquely  in  the  direction  FB,  would  strike  the  globe  in  B, 
Mill  be  to  the  force  with  which  the  same  particle,  meeting  the  cylinder  ONGQ 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


223 


described  about  the  globe  Mth  the  axis  ACI,  would  strike  it  perpendicularly 
in  6,  as  LD  is  to  LB,  or  BE  to  BC.  Again;  the  efficacy  of  this  force  to  move  the 
globe,  according  to  the  direction  of  its  incidence  FB  or  AC,  is  to  the  efficacy 
of  the  same  to  move  the  globe,  according  to  the  direction  of  its  determination, 
that  is,  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  BC  in  which  it  impels  the  globe  di¬ 
rectly,  as  BE  to  BC.  And,  joining  these  ratios,  the  efficacy  of  a  particle,  falling 
upon  the  globe  obliquely  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  FB,  to  move  the  globe 
in  the  direction  of  its  incidence,  is  to  the  efficacy  of  the  same  particle  falling  in 
the  same  line  perpendicularly  on  the  cylinder,  to  move  it  in  the  same  direction, 
as  BE^  to  BC^.  Therefore  if  in  6E,  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  circular  base 


of  the  cylinder  NAO,  and  equal  to  the  radius  AC,  we  take  6H  equal  to 


BE2 

CB’ 


then  6H  Avill  be  to  6E  as  the  effect  of  the  particle  upon  the  globe  to  the  effect 
of  the  particle  upon  the  cylinder.  And  therefore  the  solid  which  is  formed  by 
all  the  right  lines  6H  will  be  to  the  solid  formed  by  all  the  right  lines  6E  as  the 
effect  of  all  the  particles  upon  the  globe  to  the  effect  of  all  the  particles  upon 
the  cylinder.  But  the  former  of  these  solids  is  a  paraboloid  wffiose  vertex  is  C, 
its  axis  CA,  and  latus  rectum  CA,  and  the  latter  solid  is  a  cylinder  circumscrib¬ 
ing  the  paraboloid;  and  it  is  knowm  that  a  paraboloid  is  half  its  circumscribed 
cylinder.  Therefore  the  whole  force  of  the  medium  upon  the  globe  is  half  the 
entire  force  of  the  same  upon  the  cylinder.  And  therefore  if  the  particles  of 
the  medium  are  at  rest,  and  the  cylinder  and  globe  move  with  equal  velocities, 
the  resistance  of  the  globe  will  be  half  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder.  q.e.d. 


Scholium 

By  the  same  method  other  figures  may  be  compared  together  as  to  their 
resistance ;  and  those  may  be  found  -which  are  most  apt  to  continue  their  mo- 
Q  tions  in  resisting  mediums.  As  if  upon  the  circular 

base  CEBH  from  the  centre  0,  with  the  radius  OC, 
and  the  altitude  OD,  one  would  construct  a  frustum 
CBGF  of  a  cone,  which  should  meet  with  less  resist¬ 
ance  than  any  other  frustum  constructed  with  the 
same  base  and  altitude,  and  going  forwards  tow^ards 
D  in  the  direction  of  its  axis :  bisect  the  altitude  OD 
in  Q,  and  produce  OQ  to  S,  so  that  QS  may  be  equal 
to  QC,  and  S  will  be  the  vertex  of  the  cone  wffiose  frus¬ 
tum  is  sought. 

Incidentally,  since  the  angle  CSB  is 
always  acute,  it  follows  from  the  above 
that,  if  the  solid  ADBE  be  generated  by 
the  convolution  of  an  elliptical  or  oval 
figure  ADBE  about  its  axis  AB,  and  the 
generating  figure  be  touched  by  three 
right  lines  FG,  GH,  HI,  in  the  points  F, 

B,  and  I,  so  that  GH  shall  be  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  axis  in  the  point  of  contact 
B,  and  FG,  HI  may  be  inclined  to  GH 
in  the  angles  FGB,  BHI  of  135  degrees:  the  solid  arising  from  the  convolution 
of  the  figure  ADFGHIE  about  the  same  axis  AB  w'ill  be  less  resisted  than  the 


224 


Mathematical  Principles 

former  solid,  provided  that  both  move  forwards  in  the  direction  of  their  axis 
AB,  and  that  the  extremity  B  of  each  go  foremost.  This  Proposition  I  conceive 
may  be  of  use  in  the  building  of  ships. 

If  the  figure  DNFG  be  such  a  curve,  that  if,  from  any  point  thereof,  as  N, 
the  perpendicular  NM  be  let  fall  on  the  axis  AB,  and  from  the  given  point  G 
there  be  drawn  the  right  line  GR  parallel  to  a  right  line  touching  the  figure  in 
N,  and  cutting  the  axis  produced  in  R,  MN  becomes  to  GR  as  GR*  to  4BR  •  GB*, 
the  solid  described  by  the  revolution  of  this  figure  about  its  axis  AB,  moving  in 
the  before-mentioned  rare  medium  from  A  towards  B,  will  be  less  resisted  than 
any  other  circular  solid  whatsoever,  described  of  the  same  length  and  breadth. 


Proposition  35.  Problem  7 

If  a  rare  medium  consist  of  very  small  quiescent  'particles  of  equal  magnitudes,  and 
freely  disposed  at  equal  distances  from  one  another:  to  find  the  resistance  of  a  globe 
moving  uniformly  forwards  in  this  mediurn. 

Case  1.  Let  a  cylinder  described  ^vith  the  same  diameter  and  altitude  be 
conceived  to  go  forwards  with  the  same  velocity  in  the  direction  of  its  axis 
through  the  same  medium;  and  let  us  suppose  that  the  particles  of  the  medium, 
on  which  the  globe  or  cylinder  falls,  fly  back  with  as  great  a  force  of  reflection 
as  possible.  Then  since  the  resistance  of  the  globe  (by  the  last  Proposition)  is 
but  half  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder,  and  since  the  globe  is  to  the  cylinder  as 
2  to  3,  and  since  the  cylinder  by  falling  perpendicularly  on  the  particles,  and 
reflecting  them  with  the  utmost  force,  communicates  to  them  a  velocity  double 
to  its  own:  it  follows  that  the  cylinder  in  moving  forwards  uniformly  half  the 
length  of  its  axis,  will  communicate  a  motion  to  the  particles  which  is  to  the 
whole  motion  of  the  cylinder  as  the  density  of  the  medium  to  the  density  of  the 
cylinder;  and  that  the  globe,  in  the  time  it  describes  one  length  of  its  diameter 
in  moving  uniformly  forwards,  will  communicate  the  same  motion  to  the  par¬ 
ticles;  and,  in  the  time  that  it  describes  two-thirds  of  its  diameter,  wall  com¬ 
municate  a  motion  to  the  particles  which  is  to  the  whole  motion  of  the  globe  as 
the  density  of  the  medium  to  the  density  of  the  globe.  And  therefore  the  globe 
meets  with  a  resistance,  which  is  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  motion  may  be 
either  taken  away  or  generated  in  the  time  in  which  it  describes  two-thirds  of 
its  diameter  moving  uniformly  forwards,  as  the  density  of  the  medium  is  to  the 
density  of  the  globe. 

Case  2.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  particles  of  the  medium  incident  on  the 
globe  or  cylinder  are  not  reflected;  and  then  the  cylinder  falling  perpendicularly 
on  the  particles  will  communicate  its  own  simple  velocity  to  them,  and  there¬ 
fore  meets  a  resistance  but  half  so  great  as  in  the  former  case,  and  the  globe 
also  meets  with  a  resistance  but  half  so  great. 

Case  3.  Let  us  suppose  the  particles  of  the  medium  to  fly  back  from  the 
globe  with  a  force  which  is  neither  the  greatest,  nor  yet  none  at  all,  but  with  a 
certain  mean  force;  then  the  resistance  of  the  globe  will  be  in  the  same  mean 
ratio  between  the  resistance  in  the  first  case  and  the  resistance  in  the  second. 

Q.E.I. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  the  globe  and  the  particles  are  infinitely  hard,  and  destitute 
of  all  elastic  force,  and  therefore  of  all  force  of  reflection,  the  resistance  of  the 
globe  will  be  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  motion  may  be  destroyed  or 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


225 


generated,  in  the  time  that  the  globe  describes  four  third  parts  of  its  diameter, 
as  the  density  of  the  medium  is  to  the  density  of  the  globe. 

Cor.  II.  The  resistance  of  the  globe,  other  things  being  equal,  varies  as  the 
square  of  the  velocity. 

Cor.  III.  The  resistance  of  the  globe,  other  things  being  equal,  varies  as  the 
square  of  the  diameter. 

CoR.  IV.  The  resistance  of  the  globe,  other  things  being  equal,  varies  as  the 
density  of  the  medium. 

CoR.  V.  The  resistance  of  the  globe  varies  jointly  as  the  square  of  the  veloc¬ 
ity,  as  the  square  of  the  diameter,  and  as  the  density  of  the  medium. 

CoR.  VI.  The  motion  of  the  globe  and  its  resistance  may  be  thus  represented. 
Let  AB  be  the  time  in  which  the  globe  may,  by  its  resistance  uniformly  con¬ 
tinued,  lose  its  whole  motion.  Erect  AD,  BC  perpendicular  to  AB.  Let  BC  be 
that  whole  motion,  and  through  the  point  C,  the  asymptotes  being  AD,  AB, 

describe  the  hyperbola  CF.  Produce  AB  to  any 
point  E.  Erect  the  perpendicular  EF  meeting  the 
hyperbola  in  F.  Complete  the  parallelogram  CBEG, 
and  draw  AF  meeting  BC  in  H.  Then  if  the  globe  in 
any  time  BE,  with  its  first  motion  BC  uniformly 
continued,  describes  in  a  nonresisting  medium  the 
space  CBEG  represented  by  the  area  of  the  paral¬ 
lelogram,  the  same  in  a  resisting  medium  will  describe  the  space  CBEF,  rep¬ 
resented  by  the  area  of  the  hyperbola;  and  its  motion  at  the  end  of  that  time 
will  be  represented  by  EF,  the  ordinate  of  the  hyperbola,  there  being  lost  of 
its  motion  the  part  FG.  And  its  resistance  at  the  end  of  the  same  time  wll  be 
represented  by  the  length  BH,  there  being  lost  of  its  resistance  the  part  CH. 
All  these  things  appear  by  Cor.  i  and  iii.  Prop.  5,  Book  ii. 

Cor.  VII.  Hence  if  the  globe  in  the  time  T  by  the  resistance  R  uniformly 
continued  to  lose  its  whole  motion  M,  the  same  globe  in  the  time  t  in  a  resisting 
medium,  wherein  the  resistance  R  decreases  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  will 


lose  out  of  its  motion  M  the  part 


tU 

T-ff’ 


the  part 


TM 

T-{-t 


remaining;  and  wll 


describe  a  space  which  is  to  the  space  described  in  the  same  time  t,  with  the 


uniform  motion  M,  as  the  logarithm  of  the  number 


T-\-t 


multiplied  by  the 


number  2.302585092994  is  to  the  number  because  the  hyperbolic  area  BCFE 
is  to  the  rectangle  BCGE  in  that  proportion. 


Scholium 

I  have  exhibited  in  this  Proposition  the  resistance  and  retardation  of  spheri¬ 
cal  projectiles  in  mediums  that  are  not  continued,  and  shown  that  this  resist¬ 
ance  is  to  the  force  by  which  the  whole  motion  of  the  globe  may  be  destroyed  or 
produced  in  the  time  in  which  the  globe  can  describe  tw'o-thirds  of  its  diameter, 
\vith  a  velocity  uniformly  continued,  as  the  density  of  the  medium  is  to  the 
density  of  the  globe,  provided  the  globe  and  the  particles  of  the  medium  be 
perfectly  elastic,  and  are  endued  wdth  the  utmost  force  of  reflection;  and  that 
this  force,  wLere  the  globe  and  particles  of  the  medium  are  infinitely  hard  and 
void  of  any  reflecting  force,  is  diminished  one-half.  But  in  continued  mediums. 


226  Mathematical  Principles 

as  water,  hot  oil,  and  quicksilver,  the  globe  as  it  passes  through  them  does  not 
immediately  strike  against  all  the  particles  of  the  fluid  that  generate  the  resist¬ 
ance  made  to  it,  but  presses  only  the  particles  that  lie  next  to  it,  which  press 
the  particles  beyond,  which  press  other  particles,  and  so  on;  and  in  these 
mediums  the  resistance  is  diminished  one  other  half.  A  globe  in  these  extremely 
fluid  mediums  meets  vith  a  resistance  that  is  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole 
motion  may  be  destroyed  or  generated  in  the  time  wherein  it  can  describe,  with 
that  motion  uniformly  continued,  eight  third  parts  of  its  diameter,  as  the  den¬ 
sity  of  the  medium  is  to  the  density  of  the  globe.  This  I  shall  endeavor  to  show 
in  what  follows. 

Proposition  36.  Problem  8 

To  find  the  motion  of  water  running  out  of  a  cylindrical  vessel  through  a  hole  made 
at  the  bottom. 

Let  ACDB  be  a  cylindrical  vessel,  AB  the  mouth  of  it,  CD  the  bottom 
parallel  to  the  horizon,  EF  a  circular  hole  in  the  middle  of  the  bottom,  G  the 
centre  of  the  hole,  and  GH  the  axis  of  the  cylinder  perpendicular  to  the  horizon. 
And  suppose  a  cylinder  of  ice  APQB  to  be  of  the  same  breadth  with  the  cavity 
of  the  vessel,  and  to  have  the  same  axis,  and  to  de¬ 
scend  continually  with  an  uniform  motion,  and  that 
its  parts,  as  soon  as  they  touch  the  surface  AB,  dis¬ 
solve  into  water,  and  flow  down  by  their  weight  into 
the  vessel,  and  in  their  fall  compose  the  cataract  or 
column  of  water  ABNFEM,  passing  through  the  hole 
EF,  and  filling  up  the  same  exactly.  Let  the  uniform 
velocity  of  the  descending  ice  and  of  the  contiguous 
water  in  the  circle  AB  be  that  which  the  water  would 
acquire  by  falling  through  the  space  IH ;  and  let  IH 
and  HG  lie  in  the  same  right  line;  and  through  the 
point  I  let  there  be  drawn  the  right  line  KL  parallel 
to  the  horizon,  and  meeting  the  ice  on  both  the  sides 
thereof  in  K  and  L.  Then  the  velocity  of  the  water  running  out  at  the  hole  EF 
will  be  the  same  that  it  would  acquire  by  falling  from  I  through  the  space  IG. 
Therefore,  by  Galileo’s  Theorems,  IG  will  be  to  IH  as  the  square  of  the  velocity 
of  the  water  that  runs  out  at  the  hole  to  the  velocity  of  the  water  in  the  circle 
AB,  that  is,  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  circle  AB  to  the  circle  EF ;  those 
circles  being  inversely  as  the  velocities  of  the  water  which  in  the  same  time  and 
in  equal  quantities  passes  through  each  of  them,  and  completely  fills  them  both. 
We  are  now  considering  the  velocity  with  which  the  water  tends  to  the  plane  of 
the  horizon.  But  the  motion  parallel  to  the  same,  by  which  the  parts  of  the 
falling  water  approach  to  each  other,  is  not  here  taken  notice  of;  since  it  is 
neither  produced  by  gravity,  nor  at  all  changes  the  motion  perpendicular  to 
the  horizon  which  the  gravity  produces.  We  suppose,  indeed,  that  the  parts  of 
the  water  cohere  a  little,  that  by  their  cohesion  they  may  in  falling  approach 
to  each  other  vdth  motions  parallel  to  the  horizon  in  order  to  form  one  single 
cataract,  and  to  prevent  their  being  divided  into  several;  but  the  motion  par¬ 
allel  to  the  horizon  arising  from  this  cohesion  does  not  come  under  our  present 
consideration. 

Case  1.  Conceive  now  the  whole  cavity  in  the  vessel,  which  surrounds  the 
falhng  water  ABNFEM,  to  be  full  of  ice,  so  that  the  water  may  pass  through 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  227 

the  ice  as  through  a  funnel.  Then  if  the  water  pass  very  near  to  the  ice  only, 
without  touching  it;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  if  by  reason  of  the  perfect 
smoothness  of  the  surface  of  the  ice,  the  water,  though  touching  it,  glides  over 
it  ^\^th  the  utmost  freedom,  and  vdthout  the  least  resistance;  the  water  vdll  run 
through  the  hole  EF  Avith  the  same  velocity  as  before,  and  the  Avhole  weight  of 
the  column  of  water  ABNFEM  will  be  taken  up  as  before  in  forcing  out  the 
water,  and  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  mil  sustain  the  weight  of  the  ice  surround¬ 
ing  that  column. 

Let  now  the  ice  in  the  vessel  dissolve  into  water;  but  the  efflux  of  the  water 
mil  remain,  as  to  its  velocity,  the  same  as  before.  It  mil  not  be  less,  because 
the  ice  now  dissolved  will  endeavor  to  descend ;  it  will  not  be  greater,  because 
the  ice,  now  become  water,  cannot  descend  without  hindering  the  descent  of 
other  water  equal  to  its  own  descent.  The  same  force  ought  always  to  generate 
the  same  velocity  in  the  effluent  water. 

But  the  hole  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  by  reason  of  the  oblique  motions  of 
the  particles  of  the  effluent  water,  must  be  a  little  greater  than  before.  For  now 
the  particles  of  the  Avater  do  not  all  of  them  pass  through  the  hole  perpen¬ 
dicularly,  but,  floAving  doAvn  on  all  parts  from  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  and 
converging  toAvards  the  hole,  pass  through  it  Avith  oblique  motions;  and  in 
tending  doAvnAvards  they  meet  in  a  stream  Avhose  diameter  is  a  little  smaller 
beloAV  the  hole  than  at  the  hole  itself ;  its  diameter  being  to  the  diameter  of  the 
hole  as  5  to  6,  or  as  5}/2  f-o  ^^2,  very  nearly,  if  I  measured  those  diameters 
rightly.  I  procured  a  thin  flat  plate,  having  a  hole  pierced  in  the  middle,  the 
diameter  of  the  circular  hole  being  five  eighth  parts  of  an  inch.  And  that  the 
stream  of  running  Avater  might  not  be  accelerated  in  falling,  and  by  that  accel¬ 
eration  become  narroAver,  I  fixed  this  plate  not  to  the  bottom,  but  to  the  side  of 
the  vessel,  so  as  to  make  the  Avater  go  out  in  the  direction  of  a  line  parallel  to 
the  horizon.  Then,  AA’^hen  the  vessel  Avas  full  of  Avater,  I  opened  the  hole  to  let  it 
run  out;  and  the  diameter  of  the  stream,  measured  AAuth  great  accuracy  at  the 
distance  of  about  half  an  inch  from  the  hole,  Avas  of  an  inch.  Therefore  the 
diameter  of  this  circular  hole  Avas  to  the  diameter  of  the  stream  very  nearly  as 
25  to  21.  So  that  the  Avater  in  passing  through  the  hole  converges  on  all  sides, 
and,  after  it  has  run  out  of  the  vessel,  becomes  smaller  by  converging  in  that 
manner,  and  by  becoming  smaller  is  accelerated  till  it  comes  to  the  distance  of 
half  an  inch  from  the  hole,  and  at  that  distance  floAVs  in  a  smaller  stream  and 
Avith  greater  celerity  than  in  the  hole  itself,  and  this  in  the  ratio  of  25  •  25  to 
21-21,  or  17  to  12,  very  nearly;  that  is,  in  about  the  ratio  of  x/2  to  1.  Noav  it  is 
certain  from  experiments,  that  the  quantity  of  Avater  running  out  in  a  given 
time  through  a  circular  hole  made  in  the  bottom  of  a  vessel  is  equal  to  the 
quantity,  Avhich,  floAving  freely  Avith  the  aforesaid  velocity,  Avould  run  out  in 
the  same  time  through  another  circular  hole,  Avhose  diameter  is  to  the  diameter 
of  the  former  as  21  to  25.  And  therefore  this  running  Avater  in  passing  through 
the  hole  itself  has  a  velocity  doAvuiAvards  nearly  equal  to  that  Avhich  a  heavy 
body  Avould  acquire  in  falling  through  hah  the  height  of  the  stagnant  Avater  in 
the  vessel.  But  then,  after  it  has  run  out,  it  is  still  accelerated  by  converging, 
till  it  arrives  at  a  distance  from  the  hole  that  is  nearly  equal  to  its  diameter, 
and  acquires  a  velocity  greater  than  the  other  in  about  the  ratio  of  \/2  to  1; 
this  velocity  a  heavy  body  Avould  nearly  acquire  by  falling  freely  through  the 
AA'hole  height  of  the  stagnant  Avater  in  the  vessel. 


228  Mathematical  Principles 

Therefore  in  what  follows  let  the  diameter  of  the  stream  be  represented  by 
that  lesser  hole  which  we  shall  call  EF.  And  imagine  another  plane  VW  above 
the  hole  EF,  and  parallel  to  the  plane  thereof,  to  be  placed  at  a  distance  equal 
to  the  diameter  of  the  same  hole,  and  to  be  pierced  through  with  a  greater  hole 
ST,  of  such  a  magnitude  that  a  stream  which  will 
exactly  fill  the  lower  hole  EF  may  pass  through  it; 
the  diameter  of  this  hole  ^vill  therefore  be  to  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  lower  hole  nearly  as  25  to  21.  By  this 
means  the  water  Avill  run  perpendicularly  out  at  the 
lower  hole;  and  the  quantity  of  the  water  running 
out  will  be,  according  to  the  magnitude  of  this  last 
hole,  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  which  the  solution 
of  the  Problem  requires.  The  space  included  between 
the  two  planes  and  the  falling  stream  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  But  to  make  the  solution  more  simple  and 
mathematical,  it  is  better  to  take  the  lower  plane  alone  for  the  bottom  of  the 
vessel,  and  to  suppose  that  the  water  which  flowed  through  the  ice  as  through 
a  funnel,  and  ran  out  of  the  vessel  through  the  hole  EF  made  in  the  lower 
plane,  preserves  its  motion  continually,  and  that  the  ice  continues  at  rest. 
Therefore  in  what  follows  let  ST  be  the  diameter  of  a  circular  hole  described 
from  the  centre  Z,  and  let  the  stream  run  out  of  the  vessel  through  that  hole, 
when  the  water  in  the  vessel  is  all  fluid.  And  let  EF  be  the  diameter  of  the  hole, 
which  the  stream,  in  falling  through,  exactly  fills  up,  whether  the  water  runs 
out  of  the  vessel  by  that  upper  hole  ST,  or  flows  through  the  middle  of  the  ice  in 
the  vessel,  as  through  a  funnel.  And  let  the  diameter  of  the  upper  hole  ST  be  to 
the  diameter  of  the  lower  EF  as  about  25  to  21,  and  let  the  perpendicular  dis¬ 
tance  between  the  planes  of  the  holes  be  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  lesser 
hole  EF.  Then  the  velocity  of  the  water  downwards,  in  running  out  of  the 
vessel  through  the  hole  ST,  vnW  be  in  that  hole  the  same  that  a  body  may  ac¬ 
quire  by  falling  freely  from  half  the  height  IZ;  and  the  velocity  of  both  the 
falling  streams  will  be  in  the  hole  EF,  the  same  which  a  body  would  acquire  by 
falling  freely  from  the  whole  height  IG. 

Case  2.  If  the  hole  EF  be  not  in  the  middle  of  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  but 
in  some  other  part  thereof,  the  water  will  still  run  out  with  the  same  velocity 
as  before,  if  the  magnitude  of  the  hole  be  the  same.  For  though  a  heavy  body 
takes  a  longer  time  in  descending  to  the  same  depth,  by  an  oblique  line,  than 
by  a  perpendicular  line,  yet  in  both  cases  it  acquires  in  its  descent  the  same 
velocity;  as  Galileo  hath  demonstrated. 

Case  3.  The  velocity  of  the  water  is  the  same  when  it  runs  out  through  a  hole 
in  the  side  of  the  vessel.  For  if  the  hole  be  small,  so  that  the  interval  between 
the  surfaces  AB  and  KL  may  vanish  as  to  sense,  and  the  stream  of  water 
horizontally  issuing  out  may  form  a  parabolic  figure ;  from  the  latus  rectum  of 
this  parabola  one  may  see,  that  the  velocity  of  the  effluent  water  is  that  which 
a  body  may  acquire  by  falling  the  height  IG  or  HG  of  the  stagnant  water  in  the 
vessel.  For,  by  making  an  experiment,  I  found  that  if  the  height  of  the  stagnant 
water  above  the  hole  were  20  inches,  and  the  height  of  the  hole  above  a  plane 
parallel  to  the  horizon  were  also  20  inches,  a  stream  of  water  springing  out  from 
thence  would  fall  upon  the  plane,  at  the  distance  of  very  nearly  37  inches,  from 
a  perpendicular  let  fall  upon  that  plane  from  the  hole.  For  Avithout  resistance 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  229 

the  stream  would  have  fallen  upon  the  plane  at  the  distance  of  40  inches,  the 
latus  rectum  of  the  parabolic  stream  being  80  inches. 

Case  4.  If  the  effluent  water  tend  upwards,  it  will  still  issue  forth  with  the 
same  velocity.  For  the  small  stream  of  water  springing  upwards,  ascends  with 
a  perpendicular  motion  to  GH  or  GI,  the  height  of  the  stagnant  water  in  the 
vessel;  except  so  far  as  its  ascent  is  hindered  a  little  by  the  resistance  of  the  air; 
and  therefore  it  springs  out  with  the  same  velocity  that  it  would  acquire  in 
falling  from  that  height.  Every  particle  of  the  stagnant  water  is  equally  pressed 
on  all  sides  (by  Prop.  19,  Book  ii),  and,  yielding  to  the  pressure,  tends  always 
with  an  equal  force,  whether  it  descends  through  the  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the 
vessel,  or  gushes  out  in  an  horizontal  direction  through  a  hole  in  the  side,  or 
passes  into  a  canal,  and  springs  up  from  thence  through  a  little  hole  made  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  canal.  And  it  may  not  only  be  inferred  from  reasoning, 
but  is  manifest  also  from  the  well-known  experiments  just  mentioned,  that  the 
velocity  \vith  which  the  water  runs  out  is  the  very  same  that  is  assigned  in  this 
Proposition. 

Case  5.  The  velocity  of  the  effluent  water  is  the  same,  whether  the  figure  of 
the  hole  be  circular,  or  square,  or  triangular,  or  of  any  other  figure  whatever 
equal  to  the  circular;  for  the  velocity  of  the  effluent  water  does  not  depend 
upon  the  figure  of  the  hole,  but  arises  from  such  depth  of  the  hole  as  it  may 
have  below  the  plane  KL. 

Case  6.  If  the  lower  part  of  the  vessel  ABDC  be  immersed  into  stagnant 
water,  and  the  height  of  the  stagnant  water  above  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  be 

GR,  the  velocity  with  which  the  water  that  is  in  the 
vessel  Avill  run  out  at  the  hole  EF  into  the  stagnant 
water  will  be  the  same  which  the  water  would  ac¬ 
quire  by  falling  from  the  height  IR;  for  the  weight  of 
all  the  water  in  the  vessel  that  is  below  the  surface  of 
the  stagnant  water  will  be  sustained  in  equilibrium 
by  the  weight  of  the  stagnant  water,  and  therefore 
does  not  at  all  accelerate  the  motion  of  the  descend¬ 
ing  water  in  the  vessel.  This  case  will  also  become 
evident  from  experiments,  measuring  the  times  in 
which  the  water  will  run  out. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  CA,  the  depth  of  the  water,  be  produced  to  K,  so  that  AK 
may  be  to  CK  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  area  of  a  hole  made  in  any  part 
of  the  bottom  to  the  area  of  the  circle  AB,  the  velocity  of  the  effluent  water  will 
be  equal  to  the  velocity  which  the  water  would  acquire  by  falling  freely  from 
the  height  KC. 

Cor.  II.  And  the  force  vith  which  the  whole  motion  of  the  effluent  water  may 
be  generated  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  cylindric  column  of  water,  whose  base 
is  the  hole  EF,  and  its  altitude  2GI  or  2CK.  For  the  effluent  water,  in  the  time 
it  becomes  equal  to  this  column,  may  acquire,  by  falling  by  its  own  weight 
from  the  height  GI,  a  velocity  equal  to  that  with  which  it  runs  out. 

Cor.  III.  The  weight  of  all  the  water  in  the  vessel  ABDC  is  to  that  part  of 
the  weight  which  is  employed  in  forcing  out  the  water  as  the  sum  of  the  circles 
AB  and  EF  is  to  twice  the  circle  EF.  For  let  10  be  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  IH  and  IG,  and  the  water  running  out  at  the  hole  EF  will,  in  the  time 
that  a  drop  falling  from  I  would  describe  the  altitude  IG,  become  equal  to  a 


230  Mathematical  Principles 

cylinder  whose  base  is  the  circle  EF  and  its  altitude  2IG,  that  is,  to  a  cylinder 
whose  base  is  the  circle  AB,  and  whose  altitude  is  210.  For  the  circle  EF  is  to 
the  circle  AB  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  altitude  IH  to  the  altitude 
IG;  that  is,  in  the  simple  ratio  of  the  mean  proportional  10  to  the  altitude  IG. 
Moreover,  in  the  time  that  a  drop  falling  from  I  can  describe  the  altitude  IH, 
the  water  that  runs  out  will  have  become  equal  to  a  cylinder  whose  base  is  the 
circle  AB,  and  its  altitude  2IH;  and  in  the  time  that  a  drop  falling  from  I 
through  H  to  G  describes  HG,  the  difference  of  the  altitudes,  the  effluent  water, 
that  is,  the  water  contained  within  the  solid  ABNFEM,  will  be  equal  to  the 
difference  of  the  cylinders,  that  is,  to  a  cylinder  whose  base  is  AB,  and  its 
altitude  2HO.  And  therefore  all  the  water  contained  in  the  vessel  ABDC  is  to 
the  whole  falling  water  contained  in  the  said  solid  ABNFEM  as  HG  is  to  2HO, 
that  is,  as  HO+OG  to  2HO,  or  IH+IO  to  2IH.  But  the  weight  of  all  the  water 
in  the  solid  ABNFEM  is  employed  in  forcing  out  the  water;  and  therefore  the 
weight  of  all  the  water  in  the  vessel  is  to  that  part  of  the  weight  that  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  forcing  out  the  water  as  IH-f-IO  is  to  2IH,  and  therefore  as  the  sum 
of  the  circles  EF  and  AB  is  to  twdce  the  circle  EF. 

Cor.  IV.  And  hence  the  weight  of  all  the  water  in  the  vessel  ABDC  is  to  the 
other  part  of  the  weight  which  is  sustained  by  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  as  the 
sum  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF  is  to  the  difference  of  the  same  circles. 

Cor.  V.  And  that  part  of  the  weight  which  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  sustains 
is  to  the  other  part  of  the  weight  employed  in  forcing  out  the  water  as  the 
difference  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF  is  to  tmce  the  lesser  circle  EF,  or  as  the 
area  of  the  bottom  to  Uvice  the  hole. 

Cor.  VI.  That  part  of  the  weight  which  presses  upon  the  bottom  is  to  the 
whole  weight  of  the  water  perpendicularly  incumbent  thereon  as  the  circle  AB 
is  to  the  sum  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF,  or  as  the  circle  AB  is  to  the  excess  of 
tvdce  the  circle  AB  above  the  area  of  the  bottom.  For  that  part  of  the  weight 
which  presses  upon  the  bottom  is  to  the  weight  of  the  whole  water  in  the  vessel 
as  the  difference  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF  is  to  the  sum  of  the  same  circles  (by 
Cor.  iv) ;  and  the  weight  of  the  whole  water  in  the  vessel  is  to  the  weight  of  the 
whole  water  perpendicularly  incumbent  on  the  bottom  as  the  circle  AB  is  to 
the  difference  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF.  Therefore,  multiplying  together  corres¬ 
ponding  terms  of  the  two  proportions,  that  part  of  the  weight  which  presses 
upon  the  bottom  is  to  the  weight  of  the  Avhole  water  perpendicularly  incumbent 
thereon  as  the  circle  AB  to  the  sum  of  the  circles  AB  and  EF,  or  the  excess  of 
twice  the  circle  AB  above  the  bottom. 

Cor.  VII.  If  in  the  middle  of  the  hole  EF  there  be  placed  the  little  circle  PQ 
described  about  the  centre  G,  and  parallel  to  the 
horizon,  the  weight  of  water  which  that  little  circle  ^ 
sustains  is  greater  than  the  weight  of  a  third  part  A 
of  a  cylinder  of  water  whose  base  is  that  little  circle 
and  its  height  GH.  For  let  ABNFEM  be  the  cat¬ 
aract  or  column  of  falling  water  whose  axis  is  GH, 
as  above,  and  let  all  the  Avater,  whose  fluidity  is 
not  requisite  for  the  ready  and  quick  descent  of  the 
water,  be  supposed  to  be  congealed,  as  well  round 
about  the  cataract,  as  above  the  little  circle.  And 
let  PHQ  be  the  column  of  water  congealed  above  ( 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  231 

the  little  circle,  whose  vertex  is  H,  and  its  altitude  GH,  And  suppose  this  cat¬ 
aract  to  fall  with  its  whole  weight  downwards,  and  not  in  the  least  to  lie  against 
or  to  press  PHQ,  but  to  glide  freely  by  it  without  any  friction,  unless,  perhaps, 
just  at  the  very  vertex  of  the  ice,  where  the  cataract  at  the  beginning  of  its 
fall  may  tend  to  a  concave  figure.  And  as  the  congealed  water  AMEC,  BNFD, 
lying  round  the  cataract,  is  convex  in  its  internal  surfaces  AME,  BNF  towards 
the  falling  cataract,  so  this  column  PHQ  will  be  convex  towards  the  cataract 
also,  and  'vvill  therefore  be  greater  than  a  cone  whose  base  is  that  little  circle 
PQ  and  its  altitude  GH;  that  is,  greater  than  a  third  part  of  a  cylinder  des¬ 
cribed  mth  the  same  base  and  altitude.  Now  that  little  circle  sustains  the 
weight  of  this  column,  that  is,  a  weight  greater  than  the  weight  of  the  cone, 
or  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder. 

Cor.  VIII.  The  weight  of  water  which  the  circle  PQ,  when  very  small,  sus¬ 
tains,  seems  to  be  less  than  the  weight  of  two-thirds  of  a  cylinder  of  water 
whose  base  is  that  little  circle,  and  its  altitude  HG.  For,  things  standing  as 
above  supposed,  imagine  the  half  of  a  spheroid  described  whose  base  is  that 
little  circle,  and  its  semiaxis  or  altitude  HG.  This  figure  ^vill  be  equal  to  two- 
thirds  of  that  cylinder,  and  will  comprehend  within  it  the  column  of  congealed 
water  PHQ,  the  weight  of  which  is  sustained  by  that  little  circle.  For  though 
the  motion  of  the  water  tends  directly  downwards,  the  external  surfaces  of  that 
column  must  yet  meet  the  base  PQ  in  an  angle  somewhat  acute,  because  the 
water  in  its  fall  is  continually  accelerated,  and  by  reason  of  that  acceleration 
becomes  narrower.  Therefore,  since  that  angle  is  less  than  a  right  one,  this 
column  in  the  lower  parts  thereof  will  lie  within  the  hemispheroid.  In  the  upper 
parts  also  it  mil  be  acute  or  pointed;  because  to  make  it  otherwise,  the  hor¬ 
izontal  motion  of  the  water  must  be  at  the  vertex  infinitely  more  swift  than  its 
motion  towards  the  horizon.  And  the  less  this  circle  PQ  is,  the  more  acute  will 
the  vertex  of  this  column  be;  and  the  circle  being  diminished  in  infinitum,  the 
angle  PHQ  will  be  diminished  in  infinitum,  and  therefore  the  column  mil  lie 
within  the  hemispheroid.  Therefore  that  column  is  less  than  that  hemispheroid, 
or  than  two  third  parts  of  the  cylinder  whose  base  is  that  little  circle,  and  its 
altitude  GH.  Now  the  little  circle  sustains  a  force  of  water  equal  to  the  weight 
of  this  column,  the  weight  of  the  ambient  water  being  employed  in  causing  its 
efflux  out  at  the  hole. 

Cor.  IX.  The  weight  of  water  which  the  little  circle  PQ  sustains,  when  it  is 
very  small,  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  cylinder  of  water  whose  base 
is  that  little  circle,  and  its  altitude  3^GH;  for  this  weight  is  an  arithmetical 
mean  between  the  weights  of  the  cone  and  the  hemispheroid  above  mentioned. 
But  if  that  little  circle  be  not  very  small,  but  on  the  contrary  increased  till  it  be 
equal  to  the  hole  EF,  it  will  sustain  the  weight  of  all  the  water  lying  perpen¬ 
dicularly  above  it,  that  is,  the  weight  of  a  cylinder  of  water  whose  base  is  that 
little  circle,  and  its  altitude  GH. 

Cor.  X.  And  (as  far  as  I  can  judge)  the  weight  which  this  little  circle  sustains 
is  always  to  the  weight  of  a  cylinder  of  water  whose  base  is  that  little  circle, 
and  its  altitude  3^GH,  as  EF^  is  to  EF^— 3/^PQ2,  or  as  the  circle  EF  is  to  the 
excess  of  this  circle  above  half  the  little  circle  PQ,  very  nearly. 


232 


Mathematical  Principles 


Lemma  4 

If  a  cylinder  moves  uniformly  forwards  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  the  resistance 
made  thereto  is  not  at  all  changed  by  augmenting  or  diminishing  that  length;  and  is 
therefore  the  same  with  the  resistance  of  a  circle,  described  with  the  same  diameter, 
and  moving  forwards  with  the  same  velocity  in  the  direction  of  a  right  line  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  its  plane. 

For  the  sides  are  not  at  all  opposed  to  the  motion;  and  a  cylinder  becomes  a 
circle  when  its  length  is  diminished  in  infinitum.. 

Proposition  37.  Theorem  29 

If  a  cylinder  moves  uniformly  forwards  in  a  compressed,  infinite,  and  nonelastic 
fluid,  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  the  resistance  arising  from  the  magnitude  of  its 
transverse  section  is  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  vnotion  may  be  destroyed  or 
generated,  in  the  time  that  it  moves  four  times  its  length,  as  the  density  of  the  me¬ 
dium  is  to  the  density  of  the  cylinder,  nearly. 

For  let  the  vessel  ABDC  touch  the  surface  of  stagnant  water  wth  its  bottom 
CD,  and  let  the  water  run  out  of  this  vessel  into  the  stagnant  water  through 
the  cylindric  canal  EFTS  perpendicular  to  the  hori¬ 
zon  ;  and  let  the  little  circle  PQ  be  placed  parallel  to 
the  horizon  anywhere  in  the  middle  of  the  canal; 
and  produce  CA  to  K,  so  that  AK  may  be  to  CK  as 
the  square  of  the  ratio,  which  the  excess  of  the  orifice 


1 . . . 

. : 

H 

G 

the  circle  AB.  Then  it  is  manifest  (by  Case  5,  Case  6, 
and  Cor.  i,  Prop.  36)  that  the  velocity  of  the  water 
passing  through  the  annular  space  between  the  little 
circle  and  the  sides  of  the  vessel  will  be  the  very 
same  as  that  which  the  water  would  acquire  by  fall¬ 
ing,  and  in  its  fall  describing  the  altitude  KC  or  IG. 

And  (by  Cor.  x,  Prop.  36)  if  the  breadth  of  the  vessel  be  infinite,  so  that  the 
short  line  HI  may  vanish,  and  the  altitudes  IG,  HG  become  equal;  the  force  of 
the  water  that  flows  down  and  presses  upon  the  circle  will  be  to  the  weight  of  a 
cylinder  whose  base  is  that  little  circle,  and  the  altitude  ^IG,  as  EF^  is  to 
EF^  — 3^PQ2,  very  nearly.  For  the  force  of  the  water  flowing  downwards  uni¬ 
formly  through  the  whole  canal  will  be  the  same  upon  the  little  circle  PQ  in 
whatsoever  part  of  the  canal  it  be  placed. 

Let  now  the  orifices  of  the  canal  EF,  ST  be  closed,  and  let  the  little  circle 
ascend  in  the  fluid  compressed  on  every  side,  and  by  its  ascent  let  it  oblige  the 
water  that  lies  above  it  to  descend  through  the  annular  space  between  the  little 
circle  and  the  sides  of  the  canal.  Then  wll  the  velocity  of  the  ascending  little 
circle  be  to  the  velocity  of  the  descending  water  as  the  difference  of  the  circles 
EF  and  PQ  is  to  the  circle  PQ;  and  the  velocity  of  the  ascending  little  circle  will 
be  to  the  sum  of  the  velocities,  that  is,  to  the  relative  velocity  of  the  descending 
water  with  which  it  passes  by  the  little  circle  in  its  ascent,  as  the  difference  of 
the  circles  EF  and  PQ  is  to  the  circle  EF,  or  as  EF^  — PQ^  to  EF^.  Let  that 
relative  velocity  be  equal  to  the  velocity  with  which  it  was  shown  above  that 
the  water  would  pass  through  the  annular  space,  if  the  circle  were  to  remain 
unmoved,  that  is,  to  the  velocity  which  the  water  would  acquire  by  falling,  and 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  233 

in  its  fall  describing  the  altitude  IG;  and  the  force  of  the  water  upon  the  as¬ 
cending  circle  will  be  the  same  as  before  (by  Cor.  v  of  the  Laws  of  Motion); 
that  is,  the  resistance  of  the  ascending  litrle  circle  will  be  to  the  weight  of  a 
cylinder  of  water  whose  base  is  that  little  circle,  and  its  altitude  HIG,  as  EF’ 
is  to  EF^  — 3/^PQ^,  nearly.  But  the  velocity  of  the  little  circle  will  be  to  the 
velocity  which  the  water  acquires  by  falling,  and  in  its  fall  describing  the 
altitude  IG,  as  EF^  — PQ^  is  to  EF^. 

Let  the  breadth  of  the  canal  be  increased  in  infinitum;  and  the  ratios  between 
EF^  — PQ2  and  EF^,  and  between  EF^  and  EF^  — ^/^PQ^,  vdll  become  at  last 
ratios  of  equality.  And  therefore  the  velocity  of  the  little  circle  will  now  be  the 
same  as  that  which  the  water  would  acquire  in  falling,  and  in  its  fall  describing 
the  altitude  IG;  and  the  resistance  will  become  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  cylinder 
whose  base  is  that  little  circle,  and  its  altitude  half  the  altitude  IG,  from  which 
the  cylinder  must  fall  to  acquire  the  velocity  of  the  ascending  circle;  and  with 
this  velocity  the  cylinder  in  the  time  of  its  fall  will  describe  four  times  its 
length.  But  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  moving  forwards  with  this  velocity'’  in 
the  direction  of  its  length  is  the  same  with  the  resistance  of  the  little  circle  (by 
Lem.  4),  and  is  therefore  nearly  equal  to  the  force  by  which  its  motion  may  be 
generated  while  it  describes  four  times  its  length. 

If  the  length  of  the  cylinder  be  augmented  or  diminished,  its  motion,  and 
the  time  in  which  it  describes  four  times  its  length,  mil  be  augmented  or 
diminished  in  the  same  ratio,  and  therefore  the  force  by  which  the  motion,  so 
increased  or  diminished,  may  be  destroyed  or  generated,  will  continue  the  same; 
because  the  time  is  increased  or  diminished  in  the  same  proportion;  and  there¬ 
fore  that  force  remains  still  equal  to  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder,  because  (by 
Lem.  4)  that  resistance  mil  also  remain  the  same. 

If  the  density  of  the  cylinder  be  augmented  or  diminished,  its  motion,  and 
the  force  by  which  its  motion  may  be  generated  or  destroyed  in  the  same  time, 
will  be  augmented  or  diminished  in  the  same  ratio.  Therefore  the  resistance  of 
any  cylinder  whatsoever  will  be  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  motion  may  be 
generated  or  destroyed,  in  the  time  during  which  it  moves  four  times  its  length, 
as  the  density  of  the  medium  is  to  the  density  of  the  cylinder,  nearly,  q.e.d. 

A  fluid  must  be  compressed  to  become  continued ;  it  must  be  continued  and 
nonelastic,  that  all  the  pressure  arising  from  its  compression  may  be  propa¬ 
gated  in  an  instant;  and  so,  acting  equally  upon  all  parts  of  the  body  moved, 
may  produce  no  change  of  the  resistance.  The  pressure  arising  from  the  motion 
of  the  body  is  spent  in  generating  a  motion  in  the  parts  of  the  fluid,  and  this 
creates  the  resistance.  But  the  pressure  arising  from  the  compression  of  the 
fluid,  be  it  ever  so  forcible,  if  it  be  propagated  in  an  instant,  generates  no 
motion  in  the  parts  of  a  continued  fluid,  produces  no  change  at  all  of  motion 
therein;  and  therefore  neither  augments  nor  lessens  the  resistance.  This  is  cer¬ 
tain,  that  the  action  of  the  fluid  arising  from  the  compression  cannot  be 
stronger  on  the  hinder  parts  of  the  body  moved  than  on  its  fore  parts,  and 
therefore  cannot  lessen  the  resistance  described  in  this  Proposition.  And  if  its 
propagation  be  infinitely  swifter  than  the  motion  of  the  body  pressed,  it  vill 
not  be  stronger  on  the  fore  parts  than  on  the  hinder  parts.  But  that  action  will 
be  infinitely  swifter,  and  propagated  in  an  instant,  if  the  fluid  be  continued  and 
nonelastic. 

Cor.  I.  The  resistances,  made  to  cylinders  going  uniformly  forw'ards  in  the 


234  Mathematical  Principles 

direction  of  their  lengths  through  continued  infinite  mediums,  are  in  a  ratio 
compounded  of  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  and  the  square  of  the 
ratio  of  the  diameters,  and  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  mediums. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  breadth  of  the  canal  be  not  infinitely  increased,  but  the  cylin¬ 
der  go  forwards  in  the  direction  of  its  length  through  an  included  quiescent 
medium,  its  axis  all  the  while  coinciding  vith  the  axis  of  the  canal,  its  resistance 

will  be  to  the  force  by  w’hich  its  whole  motion,  in  the 
time  in  w'hich  it  describes  four  times  its  length,  may 
be  generated  or  destroyed,  in  a  ratio  compounded  of 
the  ratio  of  EF^  to  EF^  — and  the  square  of 
the  ratio  of  EF^  to  EF^  — PQ^,  and  the  ratio  of  the 
density  of  the  medium  to  the  density  of  the  cylinder. 

Cor.  III.  The  same  thing  supposed,  and  that  a 
length  L  is  to  four  times  the  length  of  the  cylinder 
in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  EF^  — j/^PQ^  to 
EF^,  and  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  EF^  — PQ^  to  EF^: 
the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  will  be  to  the  force  by 
wEich  its  whole  motion,  in  the  time  during  wEich  it 
describes  the  length  L,  may  be  destroyed  or  generated,  as  the  density  of  the 
medium  is  to  the  density  of  the  cylinder. 

Scholium 

In  this  Proposition  w^e  have  investigated  that  resistance  alone  wEich  arises 
from  the  magnitude  of  the  transverse  section  of  the  cylinder,  neglecting  that 
part  of  the  same  wEich  may  arise  from  the  obliquity  of  the  motions.  For  as,  in 
Case  1  of  Prop.  36,  the  obliquity  of  the  motions  wdth  wEich  the  parts  of  the 
water  in  the  vessel  converged  on  every  side  to  the  hole  EF  hindered  the  efflux 
of  the  w^ater  through  the  hole,  so,  in  this  Proposition,  the  obliquity  of  the 
motions,  with  wEich  the  parts  of  the  water,  pressed  by  the  antecedent  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  cylinder,  yield  to  the  pressure,  and  diverge  on  all  sides,  retards 
their  passage  through  the  places  that  lie  round  that  antecedent  extremity, 
tow^ards  the  hinder  parts  of  the  cylinder,  and  causes  the  fluid  to  be  moved  to  a 
greater  distance;  which  increases  the  resistance,  and  that  in  the  same  ratio 
almost  in  wEich  it  diminished  the  efflux  of  the  w'ater  out  of  the  vessel,  that  is, 
in  the  squared  ratio  of  25  to  21,  nearly.  And  as,  in  Case  1  of  that  Proposition, 
w'e  made  the  parts  of  the  water  pass  through  the  hole  EF  perpendicularly  and 
in  the  greatest  plenty,  by  supposing  all  the  water  in  the  vessel  lying  round  the 
cataract  to  be  frozen,  and  that  part  of  the  w^ater  wEose  motion  was  oblique  and 
useless  to  remain  without  motion,  so  in  this  Proposition,  that  the  obliquity  of 
the  motions  may  be  taken  aw'ay,  and  the  parts  of  the  w^ater  may  give  the  freest 
passage  to  the  cylinder,  by  yielding  to  it  with  the  most  direct  and  quick  motion 
possible,  so  that  only  so  much  resistance  may  remain  as  arises  from  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  transverse  section,  and  as  is  incapable  of  diminution,  unless  by 
diminishing  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder;  w^e  must  conceive  those  parts  of  the 
fluid  wEose  motions  are  oblique  and  useless,  and  produce  resistance,  to  be  at 
rest  among  themselves  at  both  extremities  of  the  cylinder,  and  there  to  cohere, 
and  be  joined  to  the  cylinder.  Let  ABCD  be  a  rectangle,  and  let  AE  and  BE 
be  tw'o  parabolic  arcs,  described  w  ith  the  axis  AB,  and  w  ith  a  latus  rectum  that 
is  to  the  space  HG,  wEich  must  be  described  by  the  cylinder  in  falling,  in  order 


H 

G 

D 


Ht- 


iG 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  235 

to  acquire  the  velocity  vith  which  it  moves,  as  HG  to  3^AB.  Let  CF  and  DF 
be  two  other  parabolic  arcs  described  vith  the  axis  CD,  and  a  latus  rectum 
four  times  the  former;  and  by  the  revolution  of  the  figure  about  the  axis  EF  let 
there  be  generated  a  solid,  whose  middle  part  ABDC  is  the  cylinder  we  are  here 

speaking  of,  and  whose  extreme  parts  ABE 
and  CDF  contain  the  parts  of  the  fluid  at  rest 
among  themselves,  and  concreted  into  two 
Fc;'  '  y-  'E-  hard  bodies,  adhering  to  the  cylinder  at  each 

end  like  a  head  and  tail.  Then  if  this  solid 
EACFDB  move  in  the  direction  of  the  length 
of  its  axis  FE  towards  the  parts  beyond  E,  the  resistance  will  be  nearly  the 
same  as  that  which  we  have  here  determined  in  this  Proposition;  that  is,  it  ^vill 
have  the  same  ratio  to  the  force  with  which  the  whole  motion  of  the  cylinder 
may  be  destroyed  or  generated,  in  the  time  that  it  is  describing  the  length  4AC 
with  that  motion  uniformly  continued,  as  the  density  of  the  fluid  has  to  the 
density  of  the  cylinder,  nearly.  And  (by  Cor.  vii.  Prop.  36)  the  resistance  must 
be  to  this  force  in  the  ratio  of  2  to  3,  at  the  least. 


I 

B 

Lemma  5 

If  a  cylinder,  a  sphere,  and  a  spheroid,  of  equal  breadths  he  placed  successively  in 
the  middle  of  a  cylindric  canal,  so  that  their  axes  may  coincide  with  the  axis  of  the 
canal,  these  bodies  will  equally  hinder  the  passage  of  the  water  through  the  canal. 

For  the  spaces  lying  between  the  sides  of  the  canal,  and  the  cylinder,  sphere, 
and  spheroid,  through  which  the  water  passes,  are  equal;  and  the  water  will 
pass  equally  through  equal  spaces. 

This  is  true,  upon  the  supposition  that  all  the  water  above  the  cylinder, 
sphere,  or  spheroid,  whose  fluidity  is  not  necessary  to  make  the  passage  of  the 
water  the  quickest  possible,  is  congealed,  as  was  explained  above  in  Cor.  vii, 
Prop.  36. 


Lemma  6 

The  same  supposition  remaining,  the  fore-mentioned  bodies  are  equally  acted  on  by 
the  water  flowing  through  the  canal. 

This  appears  by  Lem.  5  and  the  third  Law.  For  the  water  and  the  bodies  act 
upon  each  other  mutually  and  equally. 

Lemma  7 

If  the  water  he  at  rest  in  the  canal,  and  these  bodies  move  with  equal  velocity  and 
in  opposite  directions  through  the  canal,  their  resistances  will  be  equal  among 
themselves. 

This  appears  from  the  last  Lemma,  for  the  relative  motions  remain  the  same 
among  themselves. 


Scholium 

The  case  is  the  same  for  all  convex  and  round  bodies,  w^hose  axes  coincide 
with  the  axis  of  the  canal.  Some  difference  may  arise  from  a  greater  or  less 
friction;  but  in  these  Lemmas  w'e  suppose  the  bodies  to  be  perfectly  smooth, 
and  the  medium  to  be  void  of  all  tenacity  and  friction;  and  that  those  parts  of 
the  fluid  which  by  their  oblique  and  superfluous  motions  may  disturb,  hinder, 


236  Mathematical  Principles 

and  retard  the  flux  of  the  water  through  the  canal,  are  at  rest  among  themselves; 
being  fixed  like  water  by  frost,  and  adhering  to  the  force  and  hinder  parts  of 
the  bodies  in  the  manner  explained  in  the  Scholium  of  the  last  Proposition;  for 
in  what  follows  we  consider  the  very  least  resistance  that  round  bodies  de¬ 
scribed  with  the  greatest  given  transverse  sections  can  possibly  meet  with. 

Bodies  swimming  upon  fluids,  when  they  move  straight  forwards,  cause  the 
fluid  to  ascend  at  their  fore  parts  and  subside  at  their  hinder  parts,  especially 
if  they  are  of  an  obtuse  figure;  and  hence  they  meet  with  a  little  more  resistance 
than  if  they  were  acute  at  the  head  and  tail.  And  bodies  moving  in  elastic 
fluids,  if  they  are  obtuse  behind  and  before,  condense  the  fluid  a  little  more  at 
their  fore  parts,  and  relax  the  same  at  their  hinder  parts;  and  therefore  meet 
also  with  a  little  more  resistance  than  if  they  were  acute  at  the  head  and  tail. 
But  in  these  Lemmas  and  Propositions  we  are  not  treating  of  elastic  but  non¬ 
elastic  fluids;  not  of  bodies  floating  on  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  but  deeply 
immersed  therein.  And  when  the  resistance  of  bodies  in  nonelastic  fluids  is  once 
known,  we  may  then  augment  this  resistance  a  little  in  elastic  fluids,  as  our  air; 
and  in  the  surfaces  of  stagnating  fluids,  as  lakes  and  seas. 

Proposition  38.  Theorem  30 

If  a  globe  move  uniformly  forwards  in  a  compressed,  infinite,  and  nonelastic  fluid, 
its  resistance  is  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  motion  may  be  destroyed  or  generated, 
in  the  time  that  it  describes  eight  third  parts  of  its  diameter,  as  the  density  of  the 
fluid  is  to  the  density  of  the  globe,  very  nearly. 

For  the  globe  is  to  its  circumscribed  cylinder  as  2  to  3;  and  therefore  the 
force  which  can  destroy  all  the  motion  of  the  cylinder,  while  the  same  cylinder 
is  describing  the  length  of  four  of  its  diameters,  will  destroy  all  the  motion  of 
the  globe,  while  the  globe  is  describing  two-thirds  of  this  length,  that  is,  eight 
third  parts  of  its  own  diameter.  Now  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  is  to  this 
force  very  nearly  as  the  density  of  the  fluid  is  to  the  density  of  the  cylinder  or 
globe  (by  Prop.  37),  and  the  resistance  of  the  globe  is  equal  to  the  resistance  of 
the  cylinder  (by  Lems.  5,  6,  7).  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  The  resistances  of  globes  in  infinite  compressed  mediums  are  in  a 
ratio  compounded  of  the  squared  ratio  of  the  velocity,  and  the  squared  ratio  of 
the  diameter,  and  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  mediums. 

Cor.  ii.  The  greatest  velocity,  with  which  a  globe  can  descend  by  its  com¬ 
parative  weight  through  a  resisting  fluid,  is  the  same  as  that  which  it  may 
acquire  by  falling  with  the  same  weight,  and  mthout  any  resistance,  and  in  its 
fall  describing  a  space  that  is  to  four  third  parts  of  its  diameter  as  the  density 
of  the  globe  is  to  the  density  of  the  fluid.  For  the  globe  in  the  time  of  its  fall, 
moving  with  the  velocity  acquired  in  falling,  will  describe  a  space  that  will  be 
to  eight  third  parts  of  its  diameter  as  the  density  of  the  globe  is  to  the  density 
of  the  fluid;  and  the  force  of  its  weight  which  generates  this  motion  'will  be  to 
the  force  that  can  generate  the  same  motion,  in  the  time  that  the  globe  de¬ 
scribes  eight  third  parts  of  its  diameter,  with  the  same  velocity  as  the  density 
of  the  fluid  is  to  the  density  of  the  globe;  and  therefore  (by  this  Proposition) 
the  force  of  weight  will  be  equal  to  the  force  of  resistance,  and  therefore  cannot 
accelerate  the  globe. 

Cor.  hi.  If  there  be  given  both  the  density  of  the  globe  and  its  velocity  at 
the  beginning  of  the  motion,  and  the  density  of  the  compressed  quiescent  fluid 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies  237 

in  which  the  globe  moves,  there  is  given  at  any  time  both  the  velocity  of  the 
globe  and  its  resistance,  and  the  space  described  by  it  (by  Cor,  vii,  Prop.  35). 

Cor.  IV.  A  globe  moving  in  a  compressed  quiescent  fluid  of  the  same  density 
with  itself  will  lose  half  its  motion  before  it  can  describe  the  length  of  two  of  its 
diameters  (by  the  same  Cor.  vii). 

Proposition  39.  Theorem  31 

If  a  globe  move  uniformly  forwards  through  a  fluid  inclosed  and  compressed  in  a 
cylindric  canal,  its  resistance  is  to  the  force  by  which  its  whole  motion  may  be 
generated  or  destroyed,  in  the  time  in  which  it  describes  eight  third  parts  of  its 
diameter,  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  orifice  of  the  canal  to  the  excess 
of  that  orifice  above  half  the  greatest  circle  of  the  globe;  and  the  squared  ratio  of  the 
orifice  of  the  canal  to  the  excess  of  that  orifice  above  the  greatest  circle  of  the  globe; 
and  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  fluid  to  the  density  of  the  globe,  nearly. 

This  appears  by  Cor.  ii,  Prop.  37,  and  the  demonstration  proceeds  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  the  foregoing  Proposition. 

Scholium 

In  the  last  two  Propositions  we  suppose  (as  was  done  before  in  Lem.  5)  that 
all  the  water  which  precedes  the  globe,  and  whose  fluidity  increases  the  resist¬ 
ance  of  the  same,  is  congealed.  Now  if  that  water  becomes  fluid,  it  will  some¬ 
what  increase  the  resistance.  But  in  these  Propositions  that  increase  is  so  small, 
that  it  may  be  neglected,  because  the  convex  surface  of  the  globe  produces  the 
very  same  effect  almost  as  the  congelation  of  the  water. 

Proposition  40.  Problem  9 

To  find  by  experiment  the  resistance  of  a  globe  moving  through  a  perfectly  fluid 
compressed  medium. 

Let  A  be  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  a  vacuum,  B  its  weight  in  the  resisting 
medium,  D  the  diameter  of  the  globe,  F  a  space  which  is  to  as  the  density 
of  the  globe  is  to  the  density  of  the  medium,  that  is,  as  A  is  to  A  — B,  G  the  time 
in  which  the  globe  falling  -with  the  weight  B  without  resistance  describes  the 
space  F,  and  H  the  velocity  which  the  body  acquires  by  that  fall.  Then  H  will 
be  the  greatest  velocity  Avith  which  the  globe  can  possibly  descend  with  the 
weight  B  in  the  resisting  medium,  by  Cor.  ii,  Prop.  38;  and  the  resistance 
which  the  globe  meets  mth,  Avhen  descending  -with  that  velocity,  Avill  be  equal 
to  its  weight  B ;  and  the  resistance  it  meets  vdth  in  any  other  velocity  will  be  to 
the  weight  B  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  that  velocity  to  the  greatest  velocity 
H,  by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  3^ 

This  is  the  resistance  that  arises  from  the  inactivity  of  the  matter  of  the 
fluid.  That  resistance  which  arises  from  the  elasticity,  tenacity,  and  friction  of 
its  parts,  may  be  thus  investigated. 

Let  the  globe  be  let  fall  so  that  it  may  descend  in  the  fluid  by  the  weight  B ; 
and  let  P  be  the  time  of  falling,  and  let  that  time  be  expressed  in  seconds,  if  the 
time  G  be  given  in  seconds.  Find  the  absolute  number  N  agreeing  to  the  log- 

2P  N-t-1 

arithm  0.4342944819  and  let  L  be  the  logarithm  of  the  number  ■■  ;  and 


238 


Mathematical  Principles 


N-L 


the  velocity  acquired  in  falling  will  be  -H,  and  the  height  described  \vill  be 

9PT? 

— ^ - 1.386294361 1F+4.605170186LF.  If  the  fluid  be  of  a  sufficient  depth,  we 

(jr 

2PF 

may  neglect  the  term  4.605170186LF;  and  - 1.3862943611F  vill  be  the 

(jr 


altitude  described,  nearly.  These  things  appear  by  Prop.  9,  Book  ii,  and  its 
Corollaries,  and  are  true  upon  this  supposition,  that  the  globe  meets  mth  no 
other  resistance  but  that  which  arises  from  the  inactivity  of  matter.  Now  if  it 
really  meet  with  any  resistance  of  another  kind,  the  descent  will  be  slower,  and 
from  the  amount  of  that  retardation  ^\dll  be  known  the  amount  of  this  new 
resistance. 

That  the  velocity  and  descent  of  a  body  falling  in  a  fluid  might  more  easily 
be  known,  I  have  composed  the  follo\ving  table,  the  first  column  of  which 


The  Times 

P 

Velocities  of 
the  body  falling  in 
the  fluid 

The  spaces 
described  in  falling 
in  the  fluid 

The  spaces 
described  with  the 
greatest  motion 

The  spaces 
described  by  falling 
in  a  vacuum 

O.OOIG 

99999% 

0.000001 F 

0.002F 

O.OOOOOIF 

O.OIG 

999967 

O.OOOIF 

0.02F 

O.OOOIF 

O.IG 

9966799 

0.0099834F 

0.2F 

O.OIF 

0.2G 

19737532 

0.0397361F 

0.4F 

0.04F 

0.3G 

29131261 

0.088681 5F 

0.6F 

0.09F 

0.4G 

37994896 

0.1559070F 

0.8F 

0.16F 

0.5G 

46211716 

0.2402290F 

l.OF 

0.25F 

0.6G 

53704957 

0.3402706F 

1.2F 

0.36F 

0.7G 

60436778 

0.4545405F 

1.4F 

0.49F 

0.8G 

66403677 

0.5815071F 

1.6F 

0.64F 

0.9G 

71629787 

0.7196609F 

1.8F 

0.81F 

IG 

76159416 

0.8675617F 

2F 

IF 

2G 

96402758 

2.6500055F 

4F 

4F 

3G 

99505475 

4.6186570F 

6F 

9F 

4G 

99932930 

6.6143765F 

8F 

16F 

5G 

99990920 

8.6137964F 

lOF 

25F 

6G 

99998771 

10.6137179F 

12F 

36F 

7G 

99999834 

12.6137073F 

14F 

49F 

8G 

99999980 

14.6137059F 

16F 

64F 

9G 

99999997 

16.6137057F 

18F 

81F 

lOG 

999999993/5 

18.6137056F 

20F 

lOOF 

denotes  the  times  of  descent;  the  second  shows  the  velocities  acquired  in 
falling,  the  greatest  velocity  being  100,000,000;  the  third  exhibits  the  spaces 
described  by  falling  in  those  times,  2F  being  the  space  which  the  body  describes 
in  the  time  G  with  the  greatest  velocity;  and  the  fourth  gives  the  spaces  de¬ 
scribed  with  the  greatest  velocity  in  the  same  times.  The  numbers  in  the  fourth 
2P 

column  are  and  by  subtracting  the  number  1.3862944  — 4. 6051702L,  are 

found  the  numbers  in  the  third  column ;  and  these  numbers  must  be  multiplied 
by  the  space  F  to  obtain  the  spaces  described  in  falling.  A  fifth  column  is  added 
to  all  these,  containing  the  spaces  described  in  the  same  times  by  a  body  falling 
in  a  vacuum  ^\^th  the  force  of  B  its  comparative  weight. 


239 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 
Scholium 

In  order  to  investigate  the  resistances  of  fluids  from  experiments,  I  procured 
a  square  wooden  vessel,  whose  length  and  breadth  on  the  inside  was  9  inches 
English  measure,  and  its  depth  93^  feet;  this  I  filled  with  rain  water;  and  having 
provided  globes  made  up  of  wax,  and  lead  included  therein,  I  noted  the  times 
of  the  descents  of  these  globes,  the  height  through  which  they  descended  being 
112  inches.  A  solid  cubic  foot  of  English  measure  contains  76  pounds  troy 
weight  of  rain  water;  and  a  solid  inch  contains  ounces  troy  weight,  or  2533^ 
grains;  and  a  globe  of  water  of  one  inch  in  diameter  contains  132.645  grains  in 
air,  or  132.8  grains  in  a  vacuum;  and  any  other  globe  will  be  as  the  excess  of 
its  weight  in  a  vacuum  above  its  weight  in  water. 

Exper.  1.  A  globe  whose  weight  was  15634  grains  in  air,  and  77  grains  in 
water,  described  the  whole  height  of  112  inches  in  4  seconds.  And,  upon  re¬ 
peating  the  experiment,  the  globe  spent  again  the  very  same  time  of  4  seconds 
in  falling. 

The  weight  of  this  globe  in  a  vacuum  is  156^348  grains;  and  the  excess  of  this 
weight  above  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  water  is  79^3^8  grains.  Hence  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  globe  appears  to  be  0.84224  parts  of  an  inch.  Then  it  will  be,  as  that 
excess  to  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  a  vacuum,  so  is  the  density  of  the  water  to 
the  density  of  the  globe;  and  so  is  34  parts  of  the  diameter  of  the  globe  (viz., 
2.24597  inches)  to  the  space  2F,  which  will  be  therefore  4.4256  inches.  Now  a 
globe  falling  in  a  vacuum  mth  its  whole  weight  of  156^348  grains  in  one  second 
of  time  will  describe  19334  inches;  and  falling  in  water  in  the  same  time  with 
the  weight  of  77  grains  without  resistance,  will  describe  95.219  inches;  and  in 
the  time  G,  which  is  to  one  second  of  time  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the 
space  F,  or  of  2.2128  inches  to  95.219  inches,  will  describe  2.2128  inches,  and 
will  acquire  the  greatest  velocity  H  with  which  it  is  capable  of  descending  in 
water.  Therefore  the  time  G  is  0.15244  seconds.  And  in  this  time  G,  with  that 
greatest  velocity  H,  the  globe  wtU  describe  the  space  2F,  which  is  4.4256  inches; 
and  therefore  in  4  seconds  will  describe  a  space  of  116.1245  inches.  Subtract 
the  space  1.3862944 -F,  or  3.0676  inches,  and  there  will  remain  a  space  of 
113.0569  inches,  which  the  globe  falling  through  water  in  a  very  wide  vessel 
will  describe  in  4  seconds.  But  this  space,  by  reason  of  the  narrowness  of  the 
wooden  vessel  before  mentioned,  ought  to  be  diminished  in  a  ratio  compounded 
of  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  orifice  of  the  vessel  to  the  excess  of  this 
orifice  above  half  a  great  circle  of  the  globe,  and  of  the  simple  ratio  of  the  same 
orifice  to  its  excess  above  a  great  circle  of  the  globe,  that  is,  in  a  ratio  of  1  to 
0.9914.  This  done,  we  have  a  space  of  112.08  inches,  which  a  globe  falling 
through  the  water  in  this  wooden  vessel  in  4  seconds  of  time  ought  nearly  to 
describe  by  this  theory;  but  it  described  112  inches  by  the  experiment. 

Exper.  2.  Three  equal  globes,  whose  weights  were  severally  7634  grains  in 
air,  and  5346  grains  in  water,  were  let  fall  successively;  and  every  one  fell 
through  the  water  in  15  seconds  of  time,  describing  in  its  fall  a  height  of  112 
inches. 

By  computation,  the  weight  of  each  globe  in  a  vacuum  is  76342  grains;  the 
excess  of  this  weight  above  the  weight  in  water  is  7H348  grains;  the  diameter  of 
the  globe  0.81296  of  an  inch;  34  parts  of  this  diameter  2.16789  inches;  the 
space  2F  is  2.3217 inches;  the  space  which  a  globe  of  5346  grains  in  weight  would 
describe  in  one  second  without  resistance,  12.808  inches,  and  the  time  G 


240  Mathematical  Principles 

0.301056  seconds.  Therefore  the  globe,  MTth  the  greatest  velocity  it  is  capable  of 
receiving  from  a  weight  of  5^6  grains  in  its  descent  through  water,  ^^^ll  describe 
in  the  time  0.301056  seconds  the  space  2.3217  inches;  and  in  15  seconds  the 
space  115.678  inches.  Subtract  the  space  1.3862944F,  or  1.609  inches,  and 
there  remains  the  space  114.069  inches;  which  therefore  the  falling  globe  ought 
to  describe  in  the  same  time,  if  the  vessel  were  very  ^vide.  But  because  our 
vessel  was  narrow,  the  space  ought  to  be  diminished  by  about  0.895  of  an  inch. 
And  so  the  space  vdll  remain  113.174  inches,  which  a  globe  falling  in  this  vessel 
ought  nearly  to  describe  in  15  seconds.  But  by  the  experiment  it  described  112 
inches.  The  difference  is  not  sensible. 

Exper.  3.  Three  equal  globes,  whose  weights  were  severally  121  grains  in 
air,  and  1  grain  in  water,  were  successively  let  fall;  and  they  fell  through  the 
water  in  the  times  46  seconds,  47  seconds,  and  50  seconds,  describing  a  height 
of  112  inches. 

By  the  theory,  these  globes  ought  to  have  fallen  in  about  40  seconds.  Now 
whether  their  falling  more  slowly  were  occasioned  from  the  consideration  that 
in  slow  motions  the  resistance  arising  from  the  force  of  inactivity  does  really 
bear  a  less  proportion  to  the  resistance  arising  from  other  causes;  or  whether 
it  is  to  be  attributed  to  little  bubbles  that  might  chance  to  stick  to  the  globes, 
or  to  the  rarefaction  of  the  wax  by  the  warmth  of  the  weather,  or  of  the  hand 
that  let  them  fall ;  or,  lastly,  whether  it  proceeded  from  some  insensible  errors 
in  weighing  the  globes  in  the  water,  I  am  not  certain.  Therefore  the  weight  of 
the  globe  in  water  should  be  of  several  grains,  that  the  experiment  may  be 
certain,  and  to  be  depended  on. 

Exper.  4.  I  began  the  foregoing  Experiments  to  investigate  the  resistances 
of  fluids,  before  I  was  acquainted  -with  the  theory  laid  down  in  the  Proposi¬ 
tions  immediately  preceding.  Afterwards,  in  order  to  examine  the  theory  after 
it  was  discovered,  I  procured  a  wooden  vessel,  whose  breadth  on  the  inside  was 
8%  inches,  and  its  depth  153^  feet.  Then  I  made  four  globes  of  wax,  mth  lead 
included,  each  of  which  weighed  139M  grains  in  air,  and  grains  in  water. 
These  I  let  fall,  measuring  the  times  of  their  falling  in  the  water  with  a  pen¬ 
dulum  oscillating  to  half-seconds.  The  globes  were  cold,  and  had  remained  so 
some  time,  both  when  they  were  weighed  and  when  they  were  let  fall ;  because 
warmth  rarefies  the  wax,  and  by  rarefying  it  diminishes  the  weight  of  the  globe 
in  the  water;  and  wax,  when  rarefied,  is  not  instantly  reduced  by  cold  to  its 
former  density.  Before  they  were  let  fall,  they  were  totally  immersed  under 
water,  lest,  by  the  weight  of  any  part  of  them  that  might  chance  to  be  above 
the  water,  their  descent  should  be  accelerated  in  its  beginning.  Then,  when 
after  their  immersion  they  were  perfectly  at  rest,  they  were  let  go  Avith  the 
greatest  care,  that  they  might  not  receive  any  impulse  from  the  hand  that  let 
them  down.  And  they  fell  successively  in  the  times  of  473^,  483^,  50,  and  51 
oscillations,  describing  a  height  of  15  feet  and  2  inches.  But  the  weather  was 
now  a  little  colder  than  when  the  globes  were  weighed,  and  therefore  I  re¬ 
peated  the  experiment  another  day;  and  then  the  globes  fell  in  the  times  of 
49,  493/2j  50,  and  53;  and  at  a  third  trial  in  the  times  of  493^2;  50,  51,  and  53 
oscillations.  And  by  making  the  experiment  several  times  over,  I  found  that 
the  globes  fell  mostly  in  the  times  of  493/^  and  50  oscillations.  When  they  fell 
slower,  I  suspect  them  to  have  been  retarded  by  striking  against  the  sides  of 
the  vessel. 


Book  II:  The  Motiox  of  Bodies  241 

Now,  computing  from  the  theory,  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  a  vacuum  is 
139’^  grains;  the  excess  of  this  weight  above  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  water 
132^^0  grains;  the  diameter  of  the  globe  0.99868  of  an  inch;  5^  parts  of  the 
diameter  2.66315  inches;  the  space  2F  2.8066  inches;  the  space  which  a  globe 
weighing  1)/%  grains  falling  without  resistance  describes  in  a  second  of  time 
9.88164  inches;  and  the  time  G  0.376843  seconds.  Therefore  the  globe  \nth 
the  greatest  velocity  vith  which  it  is  capable  of  descending  through  the  water 
by  the  force  of  a  weight  of  73/^  grains,  vill  in  the  time  0.376843  seconds  de¬ 
scribe  a  space  of  2.8066  inches,  and  in  one  second  of  time  a  space  of  7.44766 
inches,  and  in  the  time  25  seconds,  or  in  50  oscillations,  the  space  186.1915 
inches.  Subtract  the  space  1.386294F,  or  1.9454  inches,  and  there  will  remain 
the  space  184.2461  inches  which  the  globe  will  describe  in  that  time  in  a  very 
wide  vessel.  Because  our  vessel  was  narrow,  let  this  space  be  diminished  in  a 
ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  orifice  of  the  vessel  to 
the  excess  of  this  orifice  above  half  a  great  circle  of  the  globe,  and  of  the  simple 
ratio  of  the  same  orifice  to  its  excess  above  a  great  circle  of  the  globe;  and  we 
shall  have  the  space  of  181.86  inches,  which  the  globe  ought  by  the  theory  to 
describe  in  this  vessel  in  the  time  of  50  oscillations,  nearly.  But  it  described 
the  space  of  182  inches,  by  experiment,  in  493^  or  50  oscillations. 

Exper.  5.  Four  globes  weighing  154^  grains  in  air,  and  213^  grains  in 
water,  being  let  fall  several  times,  fell  in  the  times  of  283^,  29,  29^^,  and  30, 
and  sometimes  of  31,  32,  and  33  oscillations,  describing  a  height  of  15  feet  and 
2  inches. 

They  ought  by  the  theory  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  29  oscillations,  nearly. 

Exper.  6.  Five  globes,  weighing  212^  grains  in  air,  and  793^  in  water,  being 
several  times  let  fall,  fell  in  the  times  of  15,  15^,  16,  17,  and  18  oscillations, 
describing  a  height  of  15  feet  and  2  inches. 

By  the  theory  they  ought  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  15  oscillations, 
nearly. 

Exper.  7.  Four  globes,  weighing  293^  grains  in  air,  and  35 grains  in 
water,  being  let  fall  several  times,  fell  in  the  times  of  293^,  30,  303/^,  31,  32, 
and  33  oscillations,  describing  a  height  of  15  feet  and  13^  inches. 

By  the  theory  they  ought  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  28  oscillations,  nearly. 

In  searching  for  the  cause  that  occasioned  these  globes  of  the  same  weight 
and  magnitude  to  fall,  some  swifter  and  some  slower,  I  hit  upon  this :  that  the 
globes,  when  they  were  first  let  go  and  began  to  fall,  oscillated  about  their 
centres;  that  side  which  chanced  to  be  the  hea^der  descending  first,  and  pro¬ 
ducing  an  oscillating  motion.  Now  by  oscillating  thus,  the  globe  communicates 
a  greater  motion  to  the  water  than  if  it  descended  without  any  oscillations; 
and  by  this  communication  loses  part  of  its  own  motion  with  which  it  should 
descend;  and  therefore  as  this  oscillation  is  greater  or  less,  it  vill  be  more  or 
less  retarded.  Besides,  the  globe  always  recedes  from  that  side  of  itself  which 
is  descending  in  the  oscillation,  and  by  so  receding  comes  nearer  to  the  sides 
of  the  vessel,  so  as  even  to  strike  against  them  sometimes.  And  the  heavier  the 
globes  are,  the  stronger  this  oscillation  is;  and  the  greater  they  are,  the  more  is 
the  water  agitated  by  it.  Therefore  to  diminish  this  oscillation  of  the  globes,  I 
made  new  ones  of  lead  and  wax,  sticking  the  lead  in  one  side  of  the  globe  very 
near  its  surface;  and  I  let  fall  the  globe  in  such  a  manner,  that,  as  near  as  possi¬ 
ble,  the  heavier  side  might  be  lowest  at  the  beginning  of  the  descent.  By  this 


242  Mathematical  Principles 

means  the  oscillations  became  much  less  than  before,  and  the  times  in  which 
the  globes  fell  were  not  so  unequal :  as  in  the  following  Experiments. 

Exper.  8.  Four  globes  weighing  139  grains  in  air,  and  6)^  in  water,  were  let 
fall  several  times,  and  fell  mostly  in  the  time  of  51  oscillations,  never  in  more 
than  52,  or  in  fewer  than  50,  describing  a  height  of  182  inches. 

By  the  theory  they  ought  to  fall  in  about  the  time  of  52  oscillations. 

Exper.  9.  Four  globes  weighing  27334  grains  in  air,  and  140^  in  water, 
being  several  times  let  fall,  fell  in  never  fewer  than  12,  and  never  more  than 
13  oscillations,  describing  a  height  of  182  inches. 

These  globes  by  the  theory  ought  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  1134  oscilla¬ 
tions,  nearly. 

Exper.  10.  Four  globes,  weighing  384  grains  in  air,  and  11934  in  water, 
being  let  fall  several  times,  fell  in  the  times  of  18,  1834^  nnd  19  oscilla¬ 
tions,  describing  a  height  of  181)4  inches.  And  when  they  fell  in  the  time  of  19 
oscillations,  I  sometimes  heard  them  hit  against  the  sides  of  the  vessel  before 
they  reached  the  bottom. 

By  the  theory  they  ought  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  15^4  oscillations, 
nearly. 

Exper.  11.  Three  equal  globes,  weighing  48  grains  in  air,  and  3^%2  in  water, 
being  several  times  let  fall,  fell  in  the  times  of  4334;  44,  4434>  45,  and  46  oscilla¬ 
tions,  and  mostly  in  44  and  45,  describing  a  height  of  182)4  inches,  nearly. 

By  the  theory  they  ought  to  have  fallen  in  the  time  of  4654  oscillations, 
nearly. 

Exper.  12.  Three  equal  globes,  weighing  141  grains  in  air,  and  4^  in  water, 
being  let  fall  several  times,  fell  in  the  times  of  61,  62,  63,  64,  and  65  oscillations, 
describing  a  space  of  182  inches. 

And  by  the  theory  they  ought  to  have  fallen  in  64)4  oscillations,  nearly. 

From  these  Experiments  it  is  manifest,  that  when  the  globes  fell  sloAvly,  as 
in  the  second,  fourth,  fifth,  eighth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  Experiments,  the 
times  of  falling  are  rightly  exhibited  by  the  theory;  but  when  the  globes  fell 
more  swiftly,  as  in  the  sixth,  ninth,  and  tenth  Experiments,  the  resistance  was 
somewhat  greater  than  the  square  of  the  velocity.  For  the  globes  in  falling 
oscillate  a  little;  and  this  oscillation,  in  those  globes  that  are  light  and  fall 
slowly,  soon  ceases  by  the  weakness  of  the  motion;  but  in  greater  and  heavier 
globes,  the  motion  being  strong,  it  continues  longer,  and  is  not  to  be  checked 
by  the  ambient  water  till  after  several  oscillations.  Besides,  the  more  swiftly 
the  globes  move,  the  less  are  they  pressed  by  the  fluid  at  their  hinder  parts; 
and  if  the  velocity  be  continually  increased,  they  will  at  last  leave  an  empty 
space  behind  them,  unless  the  compression  of  the  fluid  be  increased  at  the  same 
time.  For  the  compression  of  the  fluid  ought  to  be  increased  (by  Props.  32  and 
33)  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  in  order  to  maintain  the  resistance  in  the 
same  squared  ratio.  But  because  this  is  not  done,  the  globes  that  move  swiftly 
are  not  so  much  pressed  at  their  hinder  parts  as  the  others;  and  by  the  defect  of 
this  pressure  it  comes  to  pass  that  their  resistance  is  a  little  greater  than  the 
square  of  their  velocity. 

So  that  the  theory  agrees  Avith  the  experiments  on  bodies  falling  in  Avater. 
It  remains  that  we  examine  the  observations  of  bodies  falling  in  air. 

Exper.  13.  From  the  top  of  St.  Paul’s  Church  in  London,  in  June,  1710, 
there  were  let  fall  together  two  glass  globes,  one  full  of  quicksilver,  the  other 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  243 

of  air;  and  in  their  fall  they  described  a  height  of  220  English  feet.  A  wooden 
table  was  suspended  upon  iron  hinges  on  one  side,  and  the  other  side  of  the 
table  was  supported  by  a  wooden  pin.  The  two  globes  lying  upon  this  table 
were  let  fall  together  by  pulling  out  the  pin  by  means  of  an  iron  wire  reaching 
thence  down  to  the  ground;  so  that,  the  pin  being  removed,  the  table,  which 
had  then  no  support  but  the  iron  hinges,  fell  downwards,  and  turning  round 
upon  the  hinges,  gave  leave  to  the  globes  to  drop  off  from  it.  At  the  same  in¬ 
stant,  vdth  the  same  pull  of  the  iron  wire  that  took  out  the  pin,  a  pendulum 
oscillating  to  seconds  was  let  go,  and  began  to  oscillate.  The  diameters  and 
weights  of  the  globes,  and  their  times  of  falling,  are  exhibited  in  the  accom¬ 
panying  table. 


The  globes  filled  with  mercury 

The  globes  full  of  air 

Weights 

Diameters 

Times  in 
falling 

Weights 

Diameters 

Times  in 
falling 

grains 

inches 

seconds 

grains 

inches 

seconds 

908 

0.8 

4 

510 

5.1 

983 

0.8 

4- 

642 

5.2 

8 

866 

0.8 

4 

599 

5.1 

8 

747 

0.75 

4+ 

515 

5.0 

m 

808 

0.75 

4 

483 

5.0 

8^ 

784 

0.75 

4+ 

641 

5.2 

8 

But  the  times  observed  must  be  corrected;  for  the  globes  of  mercury  (by 
Galileo’s  theory),  in  4  seconds  of  time,  wll  describe  257  English  feet,  and  220 
feet  in  only  3  seconds  42  thirds.  So  that  the  wooden  table,  when  the  pin  was 
taken  out,  did  not  turn  upon  its  hinges  so  quickly  as  it  ought  to  have  done; 
and  the  slowness  of  that  revolution  hindered  the  descent  of  the  globes  at  the 
beginning.  For  the  globes  lay  about  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  indeed  were 
rather  nearer  to  the  axis  upon  which  it  turned  than  to  the  pin.  And  hence  the 
times  of  falling  were  prolonged  about  18  thirds;  and  therefore  ought  to  be 
corrected  by  subtracting  that  excess,  especially  in  the  larger  globes,  which,  by 
reason  of  the  largeness  of  their  diameters,  lay  longer  upon  the  revolving  table 
than  the  others.  This  being  done,  the  times  in  which  the  six  larger  globes  fell 
\vill  come  forth  8  seconds  12  thirds,  7  seconds  42  thirds,  7  seconds  42  thirds, 
7  seconds  57  thirds,  8  seconds  12  thirds,  and  7  seconds  42  thirds. 

Therefore  the  fifth  in  order  among  the  globes  that  were  full  of  air  being  5 
inches  in  diameter,  and  483  grains  in  weight,  fell  in  8  seconds  12  thirds,  de¬ 
scribing  a  space  of  220  feet.  The  weight  of  a  bulk  of  water  equal  to  this  globe 
is  16,600  grains;  and  the  weight  of  an  equal  bulk  of  air  is  grains,  or  lO^^o 
grains;  and  therefore  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  a  vacuum  is  502^o  grains;  and 
this  weight  is  to  the  weight  of  a  bulk  of  air  equal  to  the  globe  as  502^o  is  to 
lO^^o;  and  so  is  2F  to  %  of  the  diameter  of  the  globe,  that  is,  to  133^  inches. 
Hence  2F  becomes  28  feet  11  inches.  A  globe,  falling  in  a  vacuum  with  its 
Avhole  weight  of  502^o  grains,  ^vill  in  one  second  of  time  describe  1933^  inches 
as  above;  and  wth  the  weight  483  grains  will  describe  185.905  inches;  and  with 
that  weight  483  grains  in  a  vacuum  will  describe  the  space  F,  or  14  feet  53^ 
inches,  in  the  time  of  57  thirds  and  58  fourths,  and  acquire  the  greatest  veloc¬ 
ity  it  is  capable  of  descending  with  in  the  air.  With  this  velocity  the  globe  in 


244  Mathematical  Principles 

8  seconds  12  thirds  of  time  mtU  describe  245  feet  and  53^  inches.  Subtract 
1.3863 -F,  or  20  feet  and  Y2  an  inch,  and  there  remain  225  feet  5  inches.  This 
space,  therefore,  the  falling  globe  ought  by  the  theory  to  describe  in  8  seconds 
12  thirds.  But  by  the  experiment  it  described  a  space  of  220  feet.  The  differ¬ 
ence  is  inappreciable. 

By  like  calculations  applied  to  the  other  globes  full  of  air,  I  composed  the 
following  table. 


The  weights  of 
the  globes 

^  The 
diayneters 

The  times 
of  falling  from 
a  height  of 

220  feet 

The  spaces  which 
they  would  describe 
by  the  theory 

The 

excesses 

grains 

inches 

seconds 

thirds 

feet 

inches 

feet 

inches 

510 

5.1 

8 

12 

226 

11 

6 

11 

642 

5.2 

7 

42 

230 

9 

10 

9 

599 

5.1 

7 

42 

227 

10 

7 

0 

515 

5 

7 

57 

224 

5 

4 

5 

483 

5 

8 

12 

225 

5 

5 

5 

641 

5.2 

7 

42 

230 

7 

10 

7 

Exper.  14.  In  the  year  1719,  in  the  month  of  July,  Dr.  Desaguliers  made 
some  experiments  of  this  kind  again,  by  forming  hogs’  bladders  into  spherical 
orbs;  which  was  done  by  means  of  a  concave  wooden  sphere,  which  the  blad¬ 
ders,  being  wetted  w'ell  first,  were  put  into.  After  that,  being  blown  full  of  air, 
they  were  obliged  to  fill  up  the  spherical  cavity  that  contained  them ;  and  then, 
when  dry,  were  taken  out.  These  were  let  fall  from  the  lantern  on  the  top  of  the 
cupola  of  the  same  church,  namely,  from  a  height  of  272  feet;  and  at  the  same 
moment  of  time  there  was  let  fall  a  leaden  globe,  whose  weight  was  about  2 
pounds  troy  weight.  And  in  the  meantime  some  persons  standing  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  church  where  the  globes  were  let  fall  observed  the  whole  times  of 
falling;  and  others  standing  on  the  ground  observed  the  differences  of  the 
times  between  the  fall  of  the  leaden  weight  and  the  fall  of  the  bladder.  The 
times  were  measured  by  pendulums  oscillating  to  half-seconds.  And  one  of 
those  that  stood  upon  the  ground  had  a  machine  vibrating  four  times  in  one 
second;  and  another  had  another  machine  accurately  made  Avith  a  pendulum 
vibrating  four  times  in  a  second  also.  One  of  those  also  AA'ho  stood  at  the  top  of 
the  church  had  a  like  machine;  and  these  instruments  were  so  contrived,  that 
their  motions  could  be  stopped  or  reneAA'ed  at  pleasure.  Noav  the  leaden  globe 
fell  in  about  43^  seconds  of  time;  and  from  the  addition  of  this  time  to  the 
difference  of  time  above  spoken  of,  Avas  obtained  the  AA^hole  time  in  Avhich  the 
bladder  AA^as  falling.  The  times  Avhich  the  five  bladders  spent  in  falling,  after 
the  leaden  globe  had  reached  the  ground,  Avere,  the  first  time,  14^  seconds, 
12^4  seconds,  14^  seconds,  17^  seconds,  and  16  seconds ;  and  the  second  time, 
143/^  seconds,  143^  seconds,  14  seconds,  19  seconds,  and  16^  seconds.  Add  to 
these  43^  seconds,  the  time  in  Avhich  the  leaden  globe  was  falling,  and  the 
Avhole  times  in  AA^hich  the  five  bladders  fell  AA^ere,  the  first  time,  19  seconds,  17 
seconds,  18 seconds,  22  seconds,  and  213^  seconds;  and  the  second  time, 
18^  seconds,  183/^  seconds,  1834  seconds,  2334  seconds,  and  21  seconds.  The 
times  observed  at  the  top  of  the  church  Avere,  the  first  time,  19^  seconds,  1734 
seconds,  18^  seconds,  2234  seconds,  and  21^  seconds;  and  the  second  time. 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  245 

19  seconds,  18^  seconds,  18^  seconds,  24  seconds,  and  2134  seconds.  But  the 
bladders  did  not  always  fall  directly  down,  but  sometimes  fluttered  a  little  in  the 
air,  and  waved  to  and  fro,  as  they  were  descending.  And  by  these  motions  the 
times  of  their  falling  were  prolonged,  and  increased  by  half  a  second  some¬ 
times,  and  sometimes  by  a  whole  second.  The  second  and  fourth  bladders  fell 
most  directly  the  first  time,  and  the  first  and  third  the  second  time.  The  fifth 
bladder  was  wrinkled,  and  by  its  wrinkles  was  a  little  retarded.  I  found  their 
diameters  by  their  circumferences  measured  with  a  very  fine  thread  w^ound 
about  them  twice.  In  the  following  table  I  have  compared  the  experiments 
with  the  theory;  making  the  density  of  air  to  be  to  the  density  of  rain  water  as 
1  to  860,  and  computing  the  spaces  which  by  the  theory  the  globes  ought  to 
describe  in  falling. 


The  weights  of 
the  bladders 

_  The 
diameters 

The  times 
of  falling  from 
a  height  of 

272  feet 

The  spaces 
which  by  the  theory 
ought  to  have  been  de¬ 
scribed  in  those  times 

The  difference 
between  the  theory 
and  the 
experiments 

grains 

inches 

seconds 

feet 

inches 

feel 

inches 

128 

5.28 

19 

271 

11 

-  0 

1 

156 

5.19 

17 

272 

0^ 

4-  0 

0)4 

13734 

5.3 

18 

272 

7 

+  0 

7 

97^ 

5.26 

22 

277 

4 

+  5 

4 

99H 

5 

2114 

282 

0 

+  10 

0 

Our  theory,  therefore,  exhibits  rightly,  mthin  a  very  little,  all  the  resistance 
that  globes  moving  either  in  air  or  in  water  meet  -with;  w'hich  appears  to  be 
proportional  to  the  densities  of  the  fluids  in  globes  of  equal  velocities  and 
magnitudes. 

In  the  Scholium  subjoined  to  the  sixth  Section,  we  show^ed,  by  experiments 
of  pendulums,  that  the  resistances  of  equal  and  equally  swift  globes  moving 
in  air,  water,  and  quicksilver,  are  as  the  densities  of  the  fluids.  We  here  prove 
the  same  more  accurately  by  experiments  of  bodies  falling  in  air  and  water. 
For  pendulums  at  each  oscillation  excite  a  motion  in  the  fluid  always  contrary 
to  the  motion  of  the  pendulum  in  its  return;  and  the  resistance  arising  from 
this  motion,  as  also  the  resistance  of  the  thread  by  Avhich  the  pendulum  is 
suspended,  makes  the  whole  resistance  of  a  pendulum  greater  than  the  resist¬ 
ance  deduced  from  the  experiments  of  falling  bodies.  For  by  the  experiments 
of  pendulums  described  in  that  Scholium,  a  globe  of  the  same  density  as  water 
in  describing  the  length  of  its  semidiameter  in  air  w^ould  lose  the  part  of 
its  motion.  But  by  the  theory  delivered  in  this  seventh  Section,  and  confirmed 
by  experiments  of  falling  bodies,  the  same  globe  in  describing  the  same  length 
would  lose  only  a  part  of  its  motion  equal  to  tfTb’j  supposing  the  density  of 
w'ater  to  be  to  the  density  of  air  as  860  to  1.  Therefore  the  resistances  were 
found  greater  by  the  experiments  of  pendulums  (for  the  reasons  just  men¬ 
tioned)  than  by  the  experiments  of  falling  globes;  and  that  in  the  ratio  of  about 
4  to  3.  But  yet  since  the  resistances  of  pendulums  oscillating  in  air,  water,  and 
quicksilver,  are  alike  increased  by  like  causes,  the  proportion  of  the  resistances 
in  these  mediums  will  be  rightly  enough  exhibited  by  the  experiments  of  pen¬ 
dulums,  as  well  as  by  the  experiments  of  falling  bodies.  And  from  all  this  it 
may  be  concluded,  that  the  resistances  of  bodies,  moving  in  any  fluids  whatso- 


246 


Mathematical  Principles 


ever,  though  of  the  most  extreme  fluidity,  are,  other  things  being  equal,  as  the 
densities  of  the  fluids. 

These  things  being  thus  established,  we  may  now  determine  what  part  of 
its  motion  any  globe  projected  in  any  fluid  whatsoever  would  nearly  lose  in  a 
given  time.  Let  D  be  the  diameter  of  the  globe,  and  V  its  velocity  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  its  motion,  and  T  the  time  in  which  a  globe  with  the  velocity  V  can 
describe  in  a  vacuum  a  space  that  is  to  the  space  as  the  density  of  the 
globe  to  the  density  of  the  fluid;  and  the  globe  projected  in  that  fluid  will,  in 


any  other  time  t  lose  the  part 


T+r 


the  part 


TV 

T+^ 


remaining;  and  will  describe 


a  space,  w'hich  will  be  to  that  described  in  the  same  time  in  a  vacuum  with  the 


uniform  velocity  V,  as  the  logarithm  of  the  number 


T  +  i 
T 


multiplied  by  the 


number  2.302585093  is  to  the  number  ^  by  Cor.  vii,  Prop.  35.  In  slow  motions 

the  resistance  may  be  a  little  less,  because  the  figure  of  a  globe  is  more  adapted 
to  motion  than  the  figure  of  a  cylinder  described  with  the  same  diameter.  In 
swift  motions  the  resistance  may  be  a  little  greater,  because  the  elasticity  and 
compression  of  the  fluid  do  not  increase  as  the  square  of  the  velocity.  But 
these  little  niceties  I  take  no  notice  of. 

And  though  air,  water,  quicksilver,  and  the  like  fluids,  by  the  division  of 
their  parts  in  infinitum,  should  be  subtilized,  and  become  mediums  infinitely 
fluid,  nevertheless,  the  resistance  they  would  make  to  projected  globes  would 
be  the  same.  For  the  resistance  considered  in  the  preceding  Propositions  arises 
from  the  inactivity  of  the  matter;  and  the  inactivity  of  matter  is  essential  to 
bodies,  and  always  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  matter.  By  the  division  of 
the  parts  of  the  fluid  the  resistance  arising  from  the  tenacity  and  friction  of  the 
parts  may  be  indeed  diminished;  but  the  quantity  of  matter  will  not  be  at  all 
diminished  by  this  division;  and  if  the  quantity  of  matter  be  the  same,  its 
force  of  inactivity  will  be  the  same;  and  therefore  the  resistance  here  spoken  of 
will  be  the  same,  as  being  always  proportional  to  that  force.  To  diminish  this 
resistance,  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  spaces  through  which  the  bodies  move 
must  be  diminished;  and  therefore  the  celestial  spaces,  through  which  the 
globes  of  the  planets  and  comets  are  continually  passing  towards  all  parts, 
with  the  utmost  freedom,  and  without  the  least  sensible  diminution  of  their 
motion,  must  be  utterly  void  of  any  corporeal  fluid,  excepting,  perhaps,  some 
extremely  rare  vapors  and  the  rays  of  light. 

Projectiles  excite  a  motion  in  fluids  as  they  pass  through  them,  and  this 
motion  arises  from  the  excess  of  the  pressure  of  the  fluid  at  the  fore  parts  of 
the  projectile  above  the  pressure  of  the  same  at  the  hinder  parts;  and  cannot 
be  less  in  mediums  infinitely  fluid  than  it  is  in  air,  water,  and  quicksilver,  in 
proportion  to  the  density  of  matter  in  each.  Now  this  excess  of  pressure  does, 
in  proportion  to  its  quantity,  not  only  excite  a  motion  in  the  fluid,  but  also 
acts  upon  the  projectile  so  as  to  retard  its  motion;  and  therefore  the  resistance 
in  every  fluid  is  as  the  motion  excited  by  the  projectile  in  the  fluid;  and  cannot 
be  less  in  the  most  subtile  ether  in  proportion  to  the  density  of  that  ether,  than 
it  is  in  air,  water,  and  quicksilver,  in  proportion  to  the  densities  of  those  fluids. 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


247 


SECTION  VIII 

The  motion  propagated  through  fluids 
Proposition  41.  Theorem  32 

A  pressure  is  not  propagated  through  a  fluid  in  rectilinear  directions  except  where 
the  particles  of  the  fluid  lie  in  a  right  line. 

If  the  particles  a,  b,  c,  d,  e  lie  in  a  right  line,  the  pressure  may  be  indeed 
directly  propagated  from  a  to  e;  but  then  the  particle  e  will  urge  the  obliquely 
posited  particles  /  and  g  obliquely,  and  those  particles  /  and  g  will  not  sustain 

this  pressure,  unless  they  be  supported  by  the  par¬ 
ticles  h  and  k  lying  beyond  them ;  but  the  particles 
that  support  them  are  also  pressed  by  them;  and 
those  particles  cannot  sustain  that  pressure,  with¬ 
out  being  supported  by,  and  pressing  upon,  those 
particles  that  lie  still  farther,  as  I  and  m,  and  so  on 
in  infinitum.  Therefore  the  pressure,  as  soon  as  it  is 
propagated  to  particles  that  lie  out  of  right  lines, 
begins  to  deflect  towards  one  hand  and  the  other, 
and  will  be  propagated  obliquely  in  infinitum;  and  after  it  has  begun  to  be  pro¬ 
pagated  obliquely,  if  it  reaches  more  distant  particles  lying  out  of  the  right 
line,  it  will  deflect  again  on  each  hand;  and  this  it  wll  do  as  often  as  it  lights 
on  particles  that  do  not  lie  exactly  in  a  right  line.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  If  any  part  of  a  pressure,  propagated  through  a  fluid  from  a  given 
point,  be  intercepted  by  any  obstacle,  the  remaining  part,  which  is  not  inter¬ 
cepted,  Avill  deflect  into  the  spaces  behind  the  obstacle.  This  may  be  demon¬ 
strated  also  after  the  following  manner.  Let  a  pressure  be  propagated  from  the 
point  A  towards  any  part,  and,  if  it  be  possible,  in  rectilinear  directions;  and 
the  obstacle  NBCK  being  perforated  in  BC,  let  all  the  pressure  be  intercepted 


248  Mathematical  Principles 

but  the  coniform  part  APQ  passing  through  the  circular  hole  BC.  Let  the  cone 
APQ  be  divided  into  frustums  by  the  transverse  planes,  de,  fg,  hi.  Then  while 
the  cone  ABC,  propagating  the  pressure,  urges  the  conic  frustum  degf  beyond 
it  on  the  surface  de,  and  this  frustum  urges  the  next  frustum /grt'A  on  the  surface 
fg,  and  that  frustum  urges  a  third  frustum,  and  so  in  infinitum;  it  is  manifest 
(by  the  third  Law)  that  the  first  frustum  dejg  is,  by  the  reaction  of  the  second 
frustum  fghi,  as  much  urged  and  pressed  on  the  surface  Jg,  as  it  urges  and 
presses  that  second  frustum.  Therefore  the  frustum  degj  is  compressed  on  both 
sides,  that  is,  between  the  cone  Kde  and  the  frustum  fhig;  and  therefore  (by 
Case  6,  Prop.  19)  cannot  preserve  its  figure,  unless  it  be  compressed  with  the 
same  force  on  all  sides.  Therefore  with  the  same  force  with  which  it  is  pressed 
on  the  surfaces  de,  jg,  it  vdll  endeavor  to  break  forth  at  the  sides  dj,  eg;  and 
there  (being  not  in  the  least  tenacious  or  hard,  but  perfectly  fluid)  it  wall  run 
out,  expanding  itself,  unless  there  be  an  ambient  fluid  opposing  that  endeavor. 
Therefore,  by  the  effort  it  makes  to  run  out,  it  will  press  the  ambient  fluid, 
at  its  sides  df,  eg,  with  the  same  force  that  it  does  the  frustum  jghi;  and 
therefore,  the  pressure  will  be  propagated  as  much  from  the  sides  dj,  eg,  into 
the  spaces  NO,  KL  this  way  and  that  way,  as  it  is  propagated  from  the 
surface  jg  towards  PQ.  q.e.d. 


Proposition  42.  Theorem  33 

All  motion  propagated  through  a  fiuid  diverges  jrom  a  rectilinear  progress  into 

the  unmoved  spaces. 

Case  1.  Let  a  motion  be  propagated  from  the  point  A  through  the  hole  BC, 
and,  if  it  be  possible,  let  it  proceed  in  the  conic  space  BCQP  according  to  right 
lines  diverging  from  the  point  A.  And  let  us  first  suppose  this  motion  to  be 


. "/////; 


that  of  w'aves  in  the  surface  of  standing  water;  and  let  de,  jg,  hi,  kl,  &c.,  be  the 
tops  of  the  several  waves,  divided  from  each  other  by  as  many  intermediate 
valleys  or  hollows.  Then,  because  the  water  in  the  ridges  of  the  waves  is  higher 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  249 

than  in  the  unmoved  parts  of  the  fluid  KL,  NO,  it  will  run  down  from  off  the 
tops  of  those  ridges,  e,  g,  i,  I,  &c.,  d,  f,  h,  k,  &c.,  this  way  and  that  way  towards 
KL  and  NO;  and  because  the  water  is  more  depressed  in  the  hollows  of  the 
waves  than  in  the  unmoved  parts  of  the  fluid  KL,  NO,  it  will  run  down  into 
those  hollows  out  of  those  unmoved  parts.  By  the  first  deflux  the  ridges  of  the 
waves  will  dilate  themselves  this  way  and  that  way,  and  be  propagated  to¬ 
wards  KL  and  NO.  And  because  the  motion  of  the  waves  from  A  towards  PQ 
is  carried  on  by  a  continual  deflux  from  the  ridges  of  the  waves  into  the  hollows 
next  to  them,  and  therefore  cannot  be  swifter  than  in  proportion  to  the  celerity 
of  the  descent;  and  the  descent  of  the  water  on  each  side  towards  KL  and  NO 
must  be  performed  with  the  same  velocity:  it  follows  that  the  dilatation  of  the 
waves  on  each  side  towards  KL  and  NO  will  be  propagated  with  the  same 
velocity  as  the  waves  themselves  go  forwards  directly  from  A  to  PQ.  And 
therefore  the  whole  space  this  way  and  that  way  towards  KL  and  NO  Avill  be 
filled  by  the  dilated  waves  rfgr,  shis,  tklt,  vmnv,  &c.  q.e.d.  That  these  things 
are  so,  anyone  may  find  by  making  the  experiment  in  still  water. 

Case  2.  Let  us  suppose  that  de,  fg,  hi,  kl,  mn  represent  pulses  successively 
propagated  from  the  point  A  through  an  elastic  medium.  Conceive  the  pulses 
to  be  propagated  by  successive  condensations  and  rarefactions  of  the  medium, 
so  that  the  densest  part  of  every  pulse  may  occupy  a  spherical  surface  de¬ 
scribed  about  the  centre  A,  and  that  equal  intervals  intervene  between  the 
successive  pulses.  Let  the  lines  de,  fg,  hi,  kl,  &c.,  represent  the  densest  parts  of 
the  pulses,  propagated  through  the  hole  BC;  and  because  the  medium  is  denser 
there  than  in  the  spaces  on  either  side  towards  KL  and  NO,  it  ^vill  dilate  itself 
as  well  towards  those  spaces  KL,  NO,  on  each  hand,  as  towards  the  rare  inter¬ 
vals  between  the  pulses;  and  hence  the  medium,  becoming  always  more  rare 
next  the  intervals,  and  more  dense  next  the  pulses,  Mil  partake  of  their  motion. 
And  because  the  progressive  motion  of  the  pulses  arises  from  the  continual 
relaxation  of  the  denser  parts  towards  the  antecedent  rare  intervals;  and  since 
the  pulses  will  relax  themselves  on  each  hand  towards  the  quiescent  parts  of 
the  medium  KL,  NO  Mth  very  near  the  same  celerity;  therefore  the  pulses 
will  dilate  themselves  on  all  sides  into  the  unmoved  parts  KL,  NO  with  almost 
the  same  celerity  Mth  which  they  are  propagated  directly  from  the  centre  A; 
and  therefore  will  fill  up  the  whole  space  KLON.  q.e.d.  And  we  find  the  same 
by  experience  also  in  sounds  which  are  heard  through  a  mountain  interposed; 
and,  if  they  come  into  a  chamber  through  the  Mndow,  dilate  themselves  into 
all  the  parts  of  the  room,  and  are  heard  in  every  corner;  and  not  as  reflected 
from  the  opposite  walls,  but  directly  propagated  from  the  window,  as  far  as 
our  sense  can  judge. 

Case  3.  Let  us  suppose,  lastly,  that  a  motion  of  any  kind  is  propagated  from 
A  through  the  hole  BC.  Then  since  the  cause  of  this  propagation  is  that  the 
parts  of  the  medium  that  are  near  the  centre  A  disturb  and  agitate  those  which 
lie  farther  from  it;  and  since  the  parts  which  are  urged  are  fluid,  and  therefore 
recede  every  way  towards  those  spaces  Avhere  they  are  less  pressed:  they  Mil 
by  consequence  recede  towards  all  the  parts  of  the  quiescent  medium,  as  well 
to  the  parts  on  each  hand,  as  KL  and  NO,  as  to  those  right  before,  as  PQ;  and 
by  this  means  all  the  motion,  as  soon  as  it  has  passed  through  the  hole  BC, 
Mil  begin  to  dilate  itself,  and  from  thence,  as  from  its  principle  and  centre. 
Mil  be  propagated  directly  every  way.  q.e.d. 


250 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  43.  Theorem  34 

Every  tremulous  body  in  an  elastic  medium  propagates  the  motion  of  the  pulses  on 
every  side  straight  forwards;  but  in  a  nonelastic  medium  excites  a  circular  motion. 

Case  1.  The  parts  of  the  tremulous  body,  alternately  going  and  returning, 
do  in  going  urge  and  drive  before  them  those  parts  of  the  medium  that  lie 
nearest,  and  by  that  impulse  compress  and  condense  them;  and  in  returning 
suffer  those  compressed  parts  to  recede  again,  and  expand  themselves.  There¬ 
fore  the  parts  of  the  medium  that  lie  nearest  to  the  tremulous  body  move  to 
and  fro  by  turns,  in  like  manner  as  the  parts  of  the  tremulous  body  itself  do; 
and  for  the  same  cause  that  the  parts  of  this  body  agitate  these  parts  of  the 
medium,  these  parts,  being  agitated  by  like  tremors,  will  in  their  turn  agitate 
others  next  to  themselves;  and  these  others,  agitated  in  like  manner,  will  agi¬ 
tate  those  that  lie  beyond  them,  and  so  on  in  infinitum.  And  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  the  first  parts  of  the  medium  were  condensed  in  going,  and  relaxed  in 
returning,  so  wll  the  other  parts  be  condensed  every  time  they  go,  and  expand 
themselves  every  time  they  return.  And  therefore  they  wll  not  be  all  going  and 
all  returning  at  the  same  instant  (for  in  that  case  they  would  always  maintain 
determined  distances  from  each  other,  and  there  could  be  no  alternate  conden¬ 
sation  and  rarefaction);  but  since,  in  the  places  where  they  are  condensed, 
they  approach  to,  and,  in  the  places  where  they  are  rarefied,  recede  from  each 
other,  therefore  some  of  them  will  be  going  while  others  are  returning;  and  so 
on  in  infinitum.  The  parts  so  going,  and  in  their  going  condensed,  are  pulses, 
by  reason  of  the  progressive  motion  mth  which  they  strike  obstacles  in  their 
way;  and  therefore  the  successive  pulses  produced  by  a  tremulous  body  -will 
be  propagated  in  rectilinear  directions;  and  that  at  nearly  equal  distances  from 
each  other,  because  of  the  equal  intervals  of  time  in  which  the  body,  by  its 
several  tremors,  produces  the  several  pulses.  And  though  the  parts  of  the 
tremulous  body  go  and  return  in  some  certain  and  determinate  direction,  yet 
the  pulses  propagated  from  thence  through  the  medium  vdll  dilate  themselves 
towards  the  sides,  by  the  foregoing  Proposition;  and  will  be  propagated  on  all 
sides  from  that  tremulous  body,  as  from  a  common  centre,  in  surfaces  nearly 
spherical  and  concentric,  as  in  waves  excited  by  shaking  a  finger  in  water, 
which  proceed  not  only  forwards  and  backwards  agreeably  to  the  motion  of 
the  finger,  but  spread  themselves  in  the  manner  of  concentric  circles  all  round 
the  finger,  and  are  propagated  on  every  side.  For  the  gravity  of  the  water 
supplies  the  place  of  elastic  force. 

Case  2.  If  the  medium  be  not  elastic,  then,  because  its  parts  cannot  be 
condensed  by  the  pressure  arising  from  the  vibrating  parts  of  the  tremulous 
body,  the  motion  vdll  be  propagated  in  an  instant  towards  the  parts  where  the 
medium  yields  most  easily,  that  is,  to  the  parts  which  the  tremulous  body 
would  othermse  leave  vacuous  behind  it.  The  case  is  the  same  mth  that  of  a 
body  projected  in  any  medium  whatever.  A  medium  yielding  to  projectiles 
does  not  recede  in  infinitum,  but  ^v^th  a  circular  motion  comes  round  to  the 
spaces  which  the  body  leaves  behind  it.  Therefore  as  often  as  a  tremulous  body 
tends  to  any  part,  the  medium  yielding  to  it  comes  round  in  a  circle  to  the 
parts  which  the  body  leaves;  and  as  often  as  the  body  returns  to  the  first 
place,  the  medium  will  be  driven  from  the  place  it  came  round  to,  and  return 
to  its  original  place.  And  though  the  tremulous  body  be  not  firm  and  hard,  but 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  251 

every  way  flexible,  yet  if  it  continue  of  a  given  magnitude,  since  it  cannot 
impel  the  medium  by  its  tremors  anywhere  without  yielding  to  it  somewhere 
else,  the  medium  receding  from  the  parts  of  the  body  where  it  is  pressed  will 
always  come  round  in  a  circle  to  the  parts  that  yield  to  it.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  the  agitation  of  the  parts  of  flame 
conduces  to  the  propagation  of  a  pressure  in  rectilinear  directions  through  an 
ambient  medium.  Such  a  pressure  must  be  derived  not  from  the  agitation  only 
of  the  parts  of  flame,  but  from  the  dilatation  of  the  whole. 

Proposition  44.  Theorem  35 

If  water  ascend  and  descend  alternately  in  the  erected  legs  KL,  MN  of  a  canal  or 
pipe;  and  a  pendulum,  be  constructed  whose  length  between  the  point  of  suspension 
and  the  centre  of  oscillation  is  equal  to  half  the  length  of  the  water  in  the  canal:  I 
say,  that  the  water  will  ascend  and  descend  in  the  same  times  in  which  the  pendu¬ 
lum  oscillates. 

I  measure  the  length  of  the  water  along  the  axes  of  the  canal  and  its  legs, 
and  make  it  equal  to  the  sum  of  those  axes;  and  take  no  notice  of  the  resistance 
of  the  water  arising  from  its  attrition  by  the  sides  of  the  canal.  Let,  therefore, 
AB,  CD  represent  the  mean  height  of  the  water  in  both  legs;  and  when  the 
water  in  the  leg  KL  ascends  to  the  height  EF,  the  water  will  descend  in  the 


leg  MN  to  the  height  GH.  Let  P  be  a  pendulous  body,  VP  the  thread,  V  the 
point  of  suspension,  RPQS  the  cycloid  which  the  pendulum  describes,  P  its 
lowest  point,  PQ  an  arc  equal  to  the  height  AE.  The  force  with  which  the 
motion  of  the  water  is  accelerated  and  retarded  alternately  is  the  excess  of  the 
weight  of  the  water  in  one  leg  above  the  weight  in  the  other;  and,  therefore, 
when  the  water  in  the  leg  KL  ascends  to  EF,  and  in  the  other  leg  descends  to 
GH,  that  force  is  double  the  weight  of  the  water  EABF,  and  therefore  is  to  the 
weight  of  the  whole  water  as  AE  or  PQ  to  VP  or  PR.  The  force  also  with  which 
the  body  P  is  accelerated  or  retarded  in  any  place,  as  Q,  of  a  cycloid,  is  (by 
Cor.,  Prop.  51,  Book  i)  to  its  whole  weight  as  its  distance  PQ  from  the  lowest 
place  P  to  the  length  PR  of  the  cycloid.  Therefore  the  motive  forces  of  the 
water  and  pendulum,  describing  the  equal  spaces  AE,  PQ,  are  as  the  weights 
to  be  moved;  and  therefore  if  the  water  and  pendulum  are  quiescent  at  first, 
those  forces  will  move  them  in  equal  times,  and  will  cause  them  to  go  and 
return  together  with  a  reciprocal  motion.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  reciprocations  of  the  water  in  ascending  and  descend- 


252  Mathematical  Principles 

ing  are  all  performed  in  equal  times,  whether  the  motion  be  more  or  less  intense 
or  remiss. 

Cor.  II.  If  the  length  of  the  whole  water  in  the  canal  be  of  6^/9  feet  of  French 
measure,  the  water  will  descend  in  one  second  of  time,  and  will  ascend  in  an¬ 
other  second,  and  so  on  by  turns  in  infinitum;  for  a  pendulum  of  Z]/i%  such  feet 
in  length  will  oscillate  in  one  second  of  time. 

Cor.  III.  But  if  the  length  of  the  water  be  increased  or  diminished,  the  time 
of  the  reciprocation  will  be  increased  or  diminished  as  the  square  root  of  the 
length. 


Proposition  45.  Theorem  36 

The  velocity  of  waves  varies  as  the  square  root  of  the  breadths. 

This  follows  from  the  construction  of  the  following  Proposition. 

Proposition  46.  Problem  10 
To  find  the  velocity  of  waves. 

Let  a  pendulum  be  constructed,  whose  length  between  the  point  of  suspen¬ 
sion  and  the  centre  of  oscillation  is  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the  waves,  and  in 
the  time  that  the  pendulum  vdll  perform  one  single  oscillation  the  waves  will 
advance  forwards  nearly  a  space  equal  to  their  breadth. 

That  which  I  call  the  breadth  of  waves  is  the  transverse  measure  lying  be¬ 
tween  the  deepest  part  of  the  hollows,  or  the  tops  of  the  ridges.  Let  ABCDEF 
represent  the  surface  of  stagnant  water  ascending  and  descending  in  successive 


ACE 


waves;  and  let  A,  C,  E,  &c.,  be  the  tops  of  the  waves;  and  let  B,  D,  F,  &c.,  be 
the  intermediate  hollows.  Because  the  motion  of  the  waves  is  carried  on  by  the 
successive  ascent  and  descent  of  the  water,  so  that  the  parts  thereof,  as  A,  C, 
E,  &c.,  which  are  highest  at  one  time,  become  lowest  immediately  after;  and 
because  the  motive  force,  by  which  the  highest  parts  descend  and  the  lowest 
ascend,  is  the  weight  of  the  elevated  water,  that  alternate  ascent  and  descent 
wll  be  analogous  to  the  reciprocal  motion  of  the  water  in  the  canal,  and  will 
observe  the  same  laws  as  to  the  times  of  ascent  and  descent;  and  therefore 
(by  Prop.  44)  if  the  distances  between  the  highest  places  of  the  waves  A,  C,  E 
and  the  lowest  B,  D,  F  be  equal  to  twice  the  length  of  any  pendulum,  the 
highest  parts  A,  C,  E  "will  become  the  lowest  in  the  time  of  one  oscillation,  and 
in  the  time  of  another  oscillation  will  ascend  again.  Therefore  mth  the  passage 
of  each  wave,  the  time  of  two  oscillations  wll  occur;  that  is,  the  wave  will 
describe  its  breadth  in  the  time  that  pendulum  will  oscillate  twice;  but  a  pen¬ 
dulum  of  four  times  that  length,  and  therefore  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the 
waves,  will  just  oscillate  once  in  that  time.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore,  weaves  whose  breadth  is  equal  to  SVis  French  feet,  will 
advance  through  a  space  equal  to  their  breadth  in  one  second  of  time;  and 
therefore  in  one  minute  will  go  over  a  space  of  183)/^  feet;  and  in  an  hour,  a 
space  of  11,000  feet,  nearly. 

Cor.  II.  And  the  velocity  of  greater  or  less  waves  will  be  augmented  or 
diminished  as  the  square  root  of  their  breadth. 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


253 


These  things  are  true  upon  the  supposition  that  the  parts  of  water  ascend  or 
descend  in  a  straight  line;  but,  in  truth,  that  ascent  and  descent  is  rather  per¬ 
formed  in  a  circle;  and  therefore  I  give  the  time  defined  by  this  Proposition  as 
only  approximate. 

Proposition  47.  Theorem  37 

If  pulses  are  propagated  through  a  fluid,  the  several  particles  of  the  fluid,  going  and 
returning  with  the  shortest  reciprocal  motion,  are  always  accelerated  or  retarded 
according  to  the  law  of  the  oscillating  pendulum. 

Let  AB,  BC,  CD,  &c.,  represent  equal  distances  of  successive  pulses;  ABC 
the  line  of  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  successive  pulses  propagated  from 
A  to  B ;  E,  F,  G  three  physical  points  of  the  quiescent  medium  situate  in  the 
right  line  AC  at  equal  distances  from  each  other;  Ee,  F/,  Gg  equal  spaces  of 
extreme  shortness,  through  which  those  points  go  and  return  with  a  reciprocal 
motion  in  each  vibration;  e,  0,  7  any  intermediate  places  of  the 
same  points;  EF,  FG  physical  short  lines,  or  linear  parts  of  the 
medium  lying  between  those  points,  and  successively  transferred 
into  the  places  t<h,  07,  and  ef,  fg.  Let  there  be  drawn  the  right 
line  PS  equal  to  the  right  line  Ee.  Bisect  the  same  in  0,  and  from 
the  centre  0,  wth  the  radius  OP,  describe  the  circle  SIPL  Let 
the  whole  time  of  one  vibration,  vith  its  proportional  parts,  be 
represented  by  the  whole  circumference  of  this  circle  and  its 
parts,  in  such  sort,  that,  when  any  time  PH  or  PHS/i  is  com¬ 
pleted,  if  there  be  let  fall  to  PS  the  perpendicular  HL  or  hi,  and 
there  be  taken  Ee  equal  to  PL  or  P^,  the  physical  point  E  may 
be  found  in  e.  A  point,  as  E,  moving  according  to  this  law  vdth 
a  reciprocal  motion,  in  its  going  from  E  through  e  to  e,  and  re¬ 
turning  again  through  e  to  E,  mil  perform  its  several  vibrations 
vith  the  same  degrees  of  acceleration  and  retardation  mth 
those  of  an  oscillating  pendulum.  We  are  now  to  prove  that  the 
several  physical  points  of  the  medium  will  be  agitated  mth  such 
a  kind  of  motion.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  a 
medium  hath  such  a  motion  excited  in  it  from 
any  cause  whatsoever,  and  consider  what  will 
follow  from  thence. 

In  the  circumference  PHS/i  let  there  be  taken 
the  equal  arcs,  HI,  IK,  or  hi,  ik,  having  the  same 
ratio  to  the  whole  circumference  as  the  equal 
right  lines  EF,  FG  have  to  BC,  the  whole  in¬ 
terval  of  the  pulses.  Let  fall  the  perpendiculars 
IM,  KN,  or  im,  kn;  then  because  the  points  E,  F,  G  are  succes¬ 
sively  agitated  with  like  motions,  and  perform  their  entire  vi¬ 
brations  composed  of  their  going  and  return,  while  the  pulse 
is  transferred  from  B  to  C;  if  PH  or  PHS/i  be  the  time  elapsed 
since  the  beginning  of  the  motion  of  the  point  E,  then  vill  PI 
or  PHSf  be  the  time  elapsed  since  the  beginning  of  the  motion 
of  the  point  F,  and  PK  or  PHSit  the  time  elapsed  since  the 
beginning  of  the  motion  of  the  point  G;  and  therefore  Ee,  F0,  ||||||Ia 
G7  mil  be  respectively  equal  to  PL,  PM,  PN,  while  the  points  il'| 


a 

4> 

Gf 

e" 

it.l 

B 


::r 

6 

+F 


254 


Mathematical  Principles 


are  going,  and  to  FI,  Fm,  Pn,  when  the  points  are  returning.  Therefore  ey  or 
EG+Gt  — Ee  will,  when  the  points  are  going,  be  equal  to  EG  — LN,  and  in 
their  return  equal  to  EG+^n.  But  ey  is  the  breadth  or  expansion  of  the  part 
EG  of  the  medium  in  the  place  ty,  and  therefore  the  expansion  of  that  part  in 
its  going  is  to  its  mean  expansion  as  EG  — LN  to  EG;  and  in  its  return,  as 
EG+^n  or  EG+LN  is  to  EG.  Therefore  since  LN  is  to  KH  as  IM  to  the  radius 
OP,  and  KH  to  EG  as  the  circumference  PHS/iP  to  BC;  that  is,  if  we  put  V 
for  the  radius  of  a  circle  whose  circumference  is  equal  to  BC,  the  interval  of 
the  pulses,  as  OP  is  to  V;  and,  multiplying  together  corresponding  terms  of  the 
proportions,  we  obtain  LN  to  EG  as  IM  to  V ;  the  expansion  of  the  part  EG, 
or  of  the  physical  point  F  in  the  place  ey,  is  to  the  mean  expansion  of  the 
same  part  in  its  first  place  EG,  as  V  — IM  is  to  V  in  going,  and  as  V+fm  is 
to  V  in  its  return.  Hence  the  elastic  force  of  the  point  F  in  the  place  ey  is  to  its 

mean  elastic  force  in  the  place  EG  as  ^  is  to  in  its  going,  and  as 


.-  is  to  ^  in  its  return.  And  by  the  same  reasoning  the  elastic  forces  of 
V+tm  V 

the  physical  points  E  and  G  in  going  are  as  y  and  is  to  and 

the  difference  of  the  forces  is  to  the  mean  elastic  force  of  the  medium  as 

VV  — V-HL  — V-KN+HL-KN  y,  that  is,  as  yy  is  to  y,  or  as 


HL  —  KN  is  to  V ;  if  we  suppose  (by  reason  of  the  very  short  extent  of  the  vi¬ 
brations)  HL  and  KN  to  be  indefinitely  less  than  the  quantity  V.  Therefore 
since  the  quantity  V  is  given,  the  difference  of  the  forces  is  as  HL-KN;  that 
is  (because  HL-KN  is  proportional  to  HK,  and  OM  to  01  or  OP;  and  be¬ 
cause  HK  and  OP  are  given),  as  OM;  that  is,  if  F/  be  bisected  in  Q,  as  F4>. 
And  for  the  same  reason  the  difference  of  the  elastic  forces  of  the  physical 
points  e  and  y,  in  the  return  of  the  physical  short  line  ey,  is  as  But  that 
difference  (that  is,  the  excess  of  the  elastic  force  of  the  point  e  above  the  elastic 
force  of  the  point  y)  is  the  very  force  by  which  the  intervening  physical  short 
line  ey  of  the  medium  is  accelerated  in  going,  and  retarded  in  returning;  and 
therefore  the  accelerative  force  of  the  physical  short  line  ey  is  as  its  distance 
from  Q,  the  middle  place  of  the  vibration.  Therefore  (by  Prop.  38,  Book  i)  the 
time  is  rightly  represented  by  the  arc  PI ;  and  the  linear  part  of  the  medium  ey 
is  moved  according  to  the  law  above  mentioned,  that  is,  according  to  the  law 
of  a  pendulum  oscillating;  and  the  case  is  the  same  of  all  the  linear  parts  of 
which  the  whole  medium  is  compounded.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  number  of  the  pulses  propagated  is  the  same 
wth  the  number  of  the  vibrations  of  the  tremulous  body,  and  is  not  multiplied 
in  their  progress.  For  the  physical  short  line  ey  as  soon  as  it  returns  to  its  first 
place  is  at  rest;  neither  will  it  move  again,  unless  it  receives  a  new  motion 
either  from  the  impulse  of  the  tremulous  body,  or  of  the  pulses  propagated 
from  that  body.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  pulses  cease  to  be  propagated  from 
the  tremulous  body,  it  mil  return  to  a  state  of  rest,  and  move  no  more. 


Book  II :  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


255 


Proposition  48.  Theorem  38 

The  velocities  of  pulses  propagated  in  an  elastic  fluid  are  in  a  ratio  compounded  of 
the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  elastic  force  directly,  and  the  square  root  of  the 
ratio  of  the  density  inversely;  supposing  the  elastic  force  of  the  fluid  to  he  propor¬ 
tional  to  its  condensation. 

Case  1.  If  the  mediums  be  homogeneous,  and  the  distances  of  the  pulses  in 
those  mediums  be  equal  amongst  themselves,  but  the  motion  in  one  medium  is 
more  intense  than  in  the  other,  the  contractions  and  dilatations  of  the  corre¬ 
sponding  parts  will  be  as  those  motions;  not  that  this  proportion  is  perfectly 
accurate.  However,  if  the  contractions  and  dilatations  are  not  exceedingly  in¬ 
tense,  the  error  will  not  be  sensible;  and  therefore  this  proportion  may  be 
considered  as  physically  exact.  Now  the  motive  elastic  forces  are  as  the  con¬ 
tractions  and  dilatations;  and  the  velocities  generated  in  the  same  time  in  equal 
parts  are  as  the  forces.  Therefore  equal  and  corresponding  parts  of  correspond¬ 
ing  pulses  will  go  and  return  together,  through  spaces  proportional  to  their 
contractions  and  dilatations,  with  velocities  that  are  as  those  spaces;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  pulses,  which  in  the  time  of  one  going  and  returning  advance  forwards 
a  space  equal  to  their  breadth,  and  are  always  succeeding  into  the  places  of  the 
pulses  that  immediately  go  before  them,  \vill,  by  reason  of  the  equality  of  the 
distances,  go  forwards  in  both  mediums  with  equal  velocity. 

Case  2.  If  the  distances  of  the  pulses  or  their  lengths  are  greater  in  one 
medium  than  in  another,  let  us  suppose  that  the  correspondent  parts  describe 
spaces,  in  going  and  returning,  each  time  proportional  to  the  breadths  of  the 
pulses;  then  will  their  contractions  and  dilatations  be  equal;  and  therefore  if 
the  mediums  are  homogeneous,  the  motive  elastic  forces,  which  agitate  them 
with  a  reciprocal  motion,  will  be  equal  also.  Now  the  matter  to  be  moved  by 
these  forces  is  as  the  breadth  of  the  pulses;  and  the  space  through  which  they 
move  every  time  they  go  and  return  is  in  the  same  ratio.  And,  moreover,  the 
time  of  one  going  and  returning  is  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of 
the  matter  and  the  square  root  of  the  space;  and  therefore  is  as  the  space.  But 
the  pulses  advance  a  space  equal  to  their  breadths  in  the  times  of  going  once 
and  returning  once ;  that  is,  they  go  over  spaces  proportional  to  the  times,  and 
therefore  are  equally  swift. 

Case  3.  And  therefore  in  mediums  of  equal  density  and  elastic  force,  all  the 
pulses  are  equally  swift.  Now  if  the  density  or  the  elastic  force  of  the  medium 
were  augmented,  then,  because  the  motive  force  is  increased  in  the  ratio  of  the 
elastic  force,  and  the  matter  to  be  moved  is  increased  in  the  ratio  of  the  density, 
the  time  which  is  necessary  for  producing  the  same  motion  as  before  will  be 
increased  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  density,  and  will  be  diminished 
as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  elastic  force.  And  therefore  the  velocity  of 
the  pulses  will  be  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of  the  inverse  ratio 
of  the  density  of  the  medium,  and  the  square  root  of  the  direct  ratio  of  the 
elastic  force.  q.e.d. 

This  Proposition  will  be  made  clearer  from  the  construction  of  the  following 
Problem. 


256 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  49.  Problem  11 


D. 

01 


■.y 

€ 


G  - 
E-- 

,1,1 

B 


The  density  and  elastic  force  of  a  medium  being  given,  to  find  the  velocity  of  the 
pidses. 

Suppose  the  medium  to  be  pressed  by  an  incumbent  weight  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  our  air;  and  let  A  be  the  height  of  an  homogeneous  medium,  whose 
weight  is  equal  to  the  incumbent  weight,  and  whose  density  is  the  same  mth 
the  density  of  the  compressed  medium  in  which  the  pulses  are  propagated. 
Suppose  a  pendulum  to  be  constructed  whose  length  between 
the  point  of  suspension  and  the  centre  of  oscillation  is  A:  and 
in  the  time  in  which  that  pendulum  ^vill  perform  one  entire  os¬ 
cillation  composed  of  its  going  and  returning,  the  pulse  mil  be 
propagated  right  onwards  through  a  space  equal  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  a  circle  described  mth  the  radius  A. 

For,  letting  those  things  stand  which  were  constructed  in 
Prop.  47,  if  any  physical  line,  as  EF,  describing  the  space  PS  in 
each  vibration,  be  acted  on  in  the  extremities  P  and  S  of  every 
going  and  return  that  it  makes  by  an  elastic  force  that  is  equal 
to  its  weight,  it  will  perform  its  several  vibrations  in  the  time  in 
which  the  same  might  oscillate  in  a  cycloid  whose  whole  peri¬ 
meter  is  equal  to  the  length  PS;  and  that  because  equal  forces  mil 
impel  equal  corpuscles  through  equal  spaces  in  the  same  or  equal 
times.  Therefore  since  the  times  of  the  oscillations  are  as  the 
square  root  of  the  lengths  of  the  pendulums,  and  the  length  of  the 
pendulum  is  equal  to  half  the  arc  of  the  whole  cycloid,  the  time 
of  one  vibration  w'ould  be  to  the  time  of  the  os¬ 
cillation  of  a  pendulum  w'hose  length  is  A  as  the 
square  root  of  the  length  3^PS  or  PO  to  the 
length  A.  But  the  elastic  force  with  w’hich  the 
physical  short  line  EG  is  urged,  Avhen  it  is  found 
in  its  extreme  places  P,  S,  w’as  (in  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  Prop.  47)  to  its  whole  elastic  force  as 
HL  — KN  is  to  V,  that  is  (since  the  point  K  now 
falls  upon  P),  as  HK  to  V;  and  all  that  force, 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  incumbent  w'eight  by  w^hich  the 
short  line  EG  is  compressed,  is  to  the  weight  of  the  short  line  as 
the  altitude  of  the  incumbent  weight  is  to  EG  the  length  of  the 
short  line;  and  therefore,  taking  the  product  of  corresponding 
terms,  the  force  with  w'hich  the  short  line  EG  is  urged  in  the 
places  P  and  S  is  to  the  weight  of  that  short  line  as  HK  •  A  is  to 
V-EG;  or  as  PO-A  is  to  VV;  because  HK  was  to  EG  as  PO  to 
V.  Therefore,  since  the  times  in  which  equal  bodies  are  impelled 
through  equal  spaces  are  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  forces, 
the  time  of  one  vibration,  produced  by  the  action  of  that  elastic 
force,  will  be  to  the  time  of  a  vibration,  produced  by  the  impulse  of  the  w'eight, 
as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  W  to  PO  •  A,  and  therefore  to  the  time  of  the 
oscillation  of  a  pendulum  whose  length  is  A  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  W 
to  PO-A,  and  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  PO  to  A  conjointly;  that  is,  in 
the  entire  ratio  of  V  to  A.  But  in  the  time  of  one  vibration  composed  of  the  going 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  257 

and  returning  of  the  pendulum,  the  pulse  -will  be  propagated  right  onwards 
through  a  space  equal  to  its  breadth  BC.  Therefore  the  time  in  which  a  pulse 
runs  over  the  space  BC  is  to  the  time  of  one  oscillation  composed  of  the  going 
and  returning  of  the  pendulum  as  V  is  to  A,  that  is,  as  BC  is  to  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is  A.  But  the  time  in  w'hich  the  pulse  will  run  over 
the  space  BC  is  to  the  time  in  which  it  mil  run  over  a  length  equal  to  that  cir¬ 
cumference  in  the  same  ratio;  and  therefore  in  the  time  of  such  an  oscillation 
the  pulse  mil  run  over  a  length  equal  to  that  circumference.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  The  velocity  of  the  pulses  is  equal  to  that  which  heavy  bodies  acquire 
by  falling  mth  an  equally  accelerated  motion,  and  in  their  fall  describing  half 
the  altitude  A.  For  the  pulse  wall,  in  the  time  of  this  fall,  supposing  it  to  move 
mth  the  velocity  acquired  by  that  fall,  run  over  a  space  that  mil  be  equal  to 
the  whole  altitude  A;  and  therefore  in  the  time  of  one  oscillation  composed  of 
one  going  and  return,  wall  go  over  a  space  equal  to  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
described  with  the  radius  A;  for  the  time  of  the  fall  is  to  the  time  of  oscillation 
as  the  radius  of  a  circle  to  its  circumference. 

Cor.  II.  Therefore  since  that  altitude  A  is  directly  as  the  elastic  force  of  the 
fluid,  and  inversely  as  the  density  of  the  same,  the  velocity  of  the  pulses  will  be 
in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  inversely, 
and  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  elastic  force  directly. 

Proposition  50.  Problem  12 
To  find  the  distances  of  the  pulses. 

Let  the  number  of  the  vibrations  of  the  body,  by  whose  tremor  the  pulses 
are  produced,  be  found  to  any  given  time.  By  that  number  divide  the  space 
which  a  pulse  can  go  over  in  the  same  time,  and  the  part  found  mil  be  the 
breadth  of  one  pulse.  q.e.i. 


Scholium 

The  last  Propositions  respect  the  motions  of  light  and  sounds;  for  since  light 
is  propagated  in  right  lines,  it  is  certain  that  it  cannot  consist  in  action  alone 
(by  Props.  41  and  42).  As  to  sounds,  since  they  arise  from  tremulous  bodies, 
they  can  be  nothing  else  but  pulses  of  the  air  propagated  through  it  (by  Prop. 
43);  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  tremors  which  sounds,  if  they  be  loud  and 
deep,  excite  in  the  bodies  near  them,  as  we  experience  in  the  sound  of  drums; 
for  quick  and  short  tremors  are  less  easily  excited.  But  it  is  well  knowm  that  any 
sounds,  falling  upon  strings  in  unison  mth  the  sonorous  bodies,  excite  tremors 
in  those  strings.  This  is  also  confirmed  from  the  velocity  of  sounds;  for  since  the 
specific  gravities  of  rain  w'ater  and  quicksilver  are  to  one  another  as  about  1  to 
1Z%,  and  when  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  is  at  the  height  of  30  inches  of 
our  measure,  the  specific  gravities  of  the  air  and  of  rain  water  are  to  one 
another  as  about  1  to  870,  therefore  the  specific  gravities  of  air  and  quicksilver 
are  to  each  other  as  1  to  11,890.  Therefore  when  the  height  of  the  quicksilver  is 
at  30  inches,  a  height  of  uniform  air,  w'hose  weight  would  be  sufficient  to  com¬ 
press  our  air  to  the  density  we  find  it  to  be  of,  must  be  equal  to  356,700  inches, 
or  29,725  feet  of  our  measure;  and  this  is  that  very  height  of  the  medium,  w'hich 
I  have  called  A  in  the  construction  of  the  foregoing  Proposition.  A  circle  -svhose 
radius  is  29,725  feet  is  186,768  feet  in  circumference.  And  since  a  pendulum  39)/5 
inches  in  length  completes  one  oscillation,  composed  of  its  going  and  return,  in 


258  Mathematical  Principles 

two  seconds  of  time,  as  is  commonly  known,  it  follows  that  a  pendulum  29,725 
feet,  or  356,700  inches  in  length  will  perform  a  like  oscillation  in  190%  seconds. 
Therefore  in  that  time  a  sound  will  go  right  onwards  186,768  feet,  and  therefore 
in  one  second,  979  feet. 

But  in  this  computation  we  have  made  no  allowance  for  the  crassitude  of  the 
solid  particles  of  the  air,  by  which  the  sound  is  propagated  instantaneously. 
Because  the  weight  of  air  is  to  the  weight  of  water  as  1  to  870,  and  because  salts 
are  almost  twice  as  dense  as  water;  if  the  particles  of  air  are  supposed  to  be  of 
about  the  same  density  as  those  of  water  or  salt,  and  the  rarity  of  the  air  arises 
from  the  intervals  of  the  particles,  the  diameter  of  one  particle  of  air  wall  be  to 
the  interval  between  the  centres  of  the  particles  as  1  to  about  9  or  10,  and  to 
the  interval  between  the  particles  themselves  as  1  to  8  or  9.  Therefore  to  979 
feet,  which,  according  to  the  above  calculation,  a  sound  will  advance  forwards 
in  one  second  of  time,  we  may  add  or  about  109  feet,  to  compensate  for  the 
crassitude  of  the  particles  of  the  air:  and  then  a  sound  will  go  forwards  about 
1088  feet  in  one  second  of  time. 

Moreover,  the  vapors  floating  in  the  air  being  of  another  spring,  and  a  differ¬ 
ent  tone,  will  hardly,  if  at  all,  partake  of  the  motion  of  the  true  air  in  which 
the  sounds  are  propagated.  Now  if  these  vapors  remain  unmoved,  that  motion 
will  be  propagated  the  swifter  through  the  true  air  alone,  and  that  as  the  square 
root  of  the  defect  of  the  matter.  So  if  the  atmosphere  consist  of  ten  parts  of 
true  air  and  one  part  of  vapors,  the  motion  of  sounds  mil  be  swifter  as  the 
square  root  of  the  ratio  of  11  to  10,  or  very  nearly  in  the  entire  ratio  of  21  to  20 
than  if  it  were  propagated  through  eleven  parts  of  true  air:  and  therefore  the 
motion  of  sounds  above  discovered  must  be  increased  in  that  ratio.  By  this 
means  the  sound  will  pass  through  1142  feet  in  one  second  of  time. 

These  things  will  be  found  true  in  spring  and  autumn,  w'hen  the  air  is  rarefied 
by  the  gentle  w’armth  of  those  seasons,  and  by  that  means  its  elastic  force 
becomes  somewhat  more  intense.  But  in  wdnter,  w'hen  the  air  is  condensed  by 
the  cold,  and  its  elastic  force  is  somewhat  remitted,  the  motion  of  sounds  will 
be  slower  as  the  square  root  of  the  density;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  swifter  in 
the  summer. 

Now’  by  experiments  it  actually  appears  that  sounds  do  really  advance  in  one 
second  of  time  about  1142  feet  of  English  measure,  or  1070  feet  of  French 
measure. 

The  velocity  of  sounds  being  known,  the  intervals  of  the  pulses  are  known 
also.  For  M.  Sauveur,  by  some  experiments  that  he  made,  found  that  an  open 
pipe  about  five  Paris  feet  in  length  gives  a  sound  of  the  same  tone  mth  a  viol 
string  that  vibrates  a  hundred  times  in  one  second.  Therefore  there  are  near  100 
pulses  in  a  space  of  1070  Paris  feet,  which  a  sound  runs  over  in  a  second  of  time; 
and  therefore  one  pulse  fills  up  a  space  of  about  lOj/io  Paris  feet,  that  is,  about 
twice  the  length  of  the  pipe.  From  this  it  is  probable  that  the  breadths  of  the 
pulses,  in  all  sounds  made  in  open  pipes,  are  equal  to  twice  the  length  of  the  pipes. 

Moreover,  from  the  Corollary  of  Prop.  47  appears  the  reason  why  the  sounds 
immediately  cease  with  the  motion  of  the  sonorous  body,  and  why  they  are 
heard  no  longer  wEen  we  are  at  a  great  distance  from  the  sonorous  bodies  than 
w’hen  we  are  very  near  them.  And  besides,  from  the  foregoing  principles,  it 
plainly  appears  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  sounds  are  so  mightily  increased  in 
speaking-trumpets;  for  all  reciprocal  motion  tends  to  be  increased  by  the  gen- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  259 

erating  cause  at  each  return.  And  in  tubes  hindering  the  dilatation  of  the 
sounds,  the  motion  decays  more  slowly,  and  recurs  more  forcibly;  and  therefore 
is  the  more  increased  by  the  new  motion  impressed  at  each  return.  And  these 
are  the  principal  phenomena  of  sounds. 


SECTION  IX 


The  circular  motion  of  fluids 


HYPOTHESIS 

The  resistance  arising  from  the  want  of  lubricity  in  the  parts  of  a  fluid,  is,  other 
things  being  equal,  proportional  to  the  velocity  with  which  the  parts  of  the  fluid  are 
separated  from  one  another. 

Proposition  51.  Theorem  39 

If  a  solid  cylinder  infinitely  long,  in  an  uniform  and  infinite  fluid,  revolves  with  an 
uniform  motion  about  an  axis  given  in  position,  and  the  fluid  be  forced  round  by 
only  this  impulse  of  the  cylinder,  and  every  part  of  the  fluid  continues  uniformly 
in  its  motion:  I  say,  that  the  periodic  times  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  are  as  their 
distances  from  the  axis  of  the  cylinder. 

Let  AFL  be  a  cylinder  turning  uniformly  about  the  axis  S,  and  let  the  con¬ 
centric  circles  BGM,  CHN,  DIO,  EKP,  &c.,  divide  the  fluid  into  innumerable 
concentric  cylindric  solid  orbs  of  the  same  thickness.  Then,  because  the  fluid  is 
homogeneous,  the  impressions  which  the  contiguous  orbs  make  upon  each 

other  will  be  (by  the  Hypothesis)  as 
their  translations  from  each  other,  and 
as  the  contiguous  surfaces  upon  w^hich 
the  impressions  are  made.  If  the  impres¬ 
sion  made  upon  any  orb  be  greater  or 
less  on  its  concave  than  on  its  convex 
side,  the  stronger  impression  will  pre¬ 
vail,  and  will  either  accelerate  or  retard 
the  motion  of  the  orb,  according  as  it 
agrees  with,  or  is  contrary  to,  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  same.  Therefore,  that  every 
orb  may  continue  uniformly  in  its  mo¬ 
tion,  the  impressions  made  on  both 
sides  must  be  equal  and  their  directions 
contrary.  Therefore  since  the  impres¬ 
sions  are  as  the  contiguous  surfaces, 
and  as  their  translations  from  one 
another,  the  translations  will  be  inversely  as  the  surfaces,  that  is,  inversely  as 
the  distances  of  the  surfaces  from  the  axis.  But  the  differences  of  the  angular 
motions  about  the  axis  are  as  those  translations  applied  to  the  distances,  or 
directly  as  the  translations  and  inversely  as  the  distances;  that  is,  joining  these 
ratios  together,  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances.  Therefore  if  there  be 
erected  the  lines  Aa,  B6,  Cc,  Dd,  Ee,  &c.,  perpendicular  to  the  several  parts 
of  the  infinite  right  line  S./\.BCDEQ,  and  inversely  proportional  to  the  squares 


260 


Mathematical  Principles 


of  SA,  SB,  SC,  SD,  SE,  &c.,  and  through  the  extremities  of  those  perpendicu¬ 
lars  there  be  supposed  to  pass  an  hyperbolic  curve,  the  sums  of  the  differences, 
that  is,  the  whole  angular  motions,  will  be  as  the  correspondent  sums  of  the 
lines  Ao,  Bh,  Cc,  Dd,  Ee,  that  is  (if  to  constitute  a  medium  uniformly  fluid 
the  number  of  the  orbs  be  increased  and  their  breadth  diminished  in  infini¬ 
tum),  as  the  hyperbolic  areas  AaQ,  B6Q,  CcQ,  DdQ,  EeQ,  &c.,  analogous  to 
the  sums;  and  the  times,  inversely  proportional  to  the  angular  motions,  will  be 
also  inversely  proportional  to  those  areas.  Therefore  the  periodic  time  of  any 
particle,  as  D,  is  inversely  as  the  area  DdQ,  that  is  (as  appears  from  the  known 
methods  of  quadratures  of  curves),  directly  as  the  distance  SD.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  angular  motions  of  the  particles  of  the  fluid  are  inversely  as 
their  distances  from  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  absolute  velocities  are  equal. 

Cor.  II.  If  a  fluid  be  contained  in  a  cylindric  vessel  of  an  infinite  length,  and 
contain  another  cylinder  within,  and  both  the  cylinders  revolve  about  one 
common  axis,  and  the  times  of  their  revolutions  be  as  their  semidiameters,  and 
every  part  of  the  fluid  continues  in  its  motion,  the  periodic  times  of  the  several 
parts  will  be  as  the  distances  from  the  axis  of  the  cylinders. 

Cor.  III.  If  there  be  added  or  taken  away  any  common  quantity  of  angular 
motion  from  the  cylinder  and  fluid  moving  in  this  manner,  yet  because  this  new 
motion  wll  not  alter  the  mutual  attrition  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid,  the  motion 
of  the  parts  among  themselves  will  not  be  changed ;  for  the  translations  of  the 
parts  from  one  another  depend  upon  the  attrition.  Any  part  will  continue  in 
that  motion,  which,  by  the  attrition  made  on  both  sides  with  contrary  direc¬ 
tions,  is  no  more  accelerated  than  it  is  retarded. 

Cor.  VI.  Therefore  if  there  be  taken  away  from  this  whole  system  of  the 
cylinders  and  the  fluid  all  the  angular  motion  of  the  outward  cylinder,  we  shall 
have  the  motion  of  the  fluid  in  a  quiescent  cylinder. 

Cor.  V.  Therefore  if  the  fluid  and  outward  cylinder  are  at  rest,  and  the  in¬ 
ward  cylinder  revolve  uniformly,  there  will  be  communicated  a  circular  motion 
to  the  fluid,  which  will  be  propagated  by  degrees  through  the  whole  fluid;  and 
will  go  on  continually  increasing,  till  such  time  as  the  several  parts  of  the  fluid 
acquire  the  motion  determined  in  Cor.  iv. 

Cor.  VI.  And  because  the  fluid  endeavors  to  propagate  its  motion  still  far¬ 
ther,  its  impulse  mil  carry  the  outmost  cylinder  also  about  with  it,  unless  the 
cylinder  be  forcibly  held  back;  and  accelerate  its  motion  till  the  periodic  times 
of  both  cylinders  become  equal  mth  each  other.  But  if  the  outward  cylinder  be 
forcibly  held  fast,  it  mil  make  an  effort  to  retard  the  motion  of  the  fluid;  and 
unless  the  inward  cylinder  preserve  that  motion  by  means  of  some  external 
force  impressed  thereon,  it  mil  make  it  cease  by  degrees. 

All  these  things  will  be  found  true  by  making  the  experiment  in  deep  stand¬ 
ing  water.  ^ 

Proposition  52.  Theorem  40 


If  a  solid  sphere,  in  an  uniform  and  infinite  fluid,  revolves  about  an  axis  given  in 
position  with  an  uniform  motion,  and  the  fluid  be  forced  round  by  only  this  impulse 
of  the  sphere;  and  every  part  of  the  fluid  continues  uniformly  in  its  motion:  I  say, 
that  the  periodic  times  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  are  as  the  squares  of  their  distances 
from  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 

Case  1.  Let  AFL  be  a  sphere  turning  uniformly  about  the  axis  S,  and  let  the 
concentric  circles  BGM,  CHN,  DIO,  EKP,  &c.,  divide  the  fluid  into  innumer- 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies 


261 


va 

V 

K/V;: . . 

.‘I ..•••  . •... 

a 

•  *  ;  ;  1 

■ 

v. 

*  '•  ;i 

*  *  •  •  1  V 

\  . * 

\  Vn"- . -*• 

’••O 

p*-..  . 

A.^BiCiD-E  Q 
•  •  •  • 

*  /  /  .* 

•*  •*  / 

•  .*  * 

•  '  •  * 

able  concentric  orbs  of  the  same  thickness.  Suppose  those  orbs  to  be  solid;  and, 
because  the  fluid  is  homogeneous,  the  impressions  which  the  contiguous  orbs 
make  one  upon  another  mil  be  (by  the  supposition)  as  their  translations  from 
one  another,  and  the  contiguous  surfaces  upon  which  the  impressions  are  made. 
If  the  impression  upon  any  orb  be  greater  or  less  upon  its  concave  than  upon 
its  convex  side,  the  more  forcible  impression  will  prevail,  and  will  either  ac¬ 
celerate  or  retard  the  velocity  of  the 
orb,  according  as  it  is  directed  with  a 
conspiring  or  contrary  motion  to  that 
of  the  orb.  Therefore  that  every  orb 
may  continue  uniformly  in  its  motion, 
it  is  necessary  that  the  impressions 
made  upon  both  sides  of  the  orb  should 
be  equal,  and  have  contrary  directions. 
Therefore  since  the  impressions  are  as 
the  contiguous  surfaces,  and  as  their 
translations  from  one  another,  the  trans¬ 
lations  will  be  inversely  as  the  surfaces, 
that  is,  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the 
distances  of  the  surfaces  from  the  cen¬ 
tre.  But  the  differences  of  the  angular 
motions  about  the  axis  are  as  those 
translations  applied  to  the  distances,  or 
directly  as  the  translations  and  inversely  as  the  distances;  that  is,  by  com¬ 
pounding  those  ratios,  inversely  as  the  cubes  of  the  distances.  Therefore,  if 
upon  the  several  parts  of  the  inflnite  right  line  SABCDEQ  there  be  erected 
the  perpendiculars  Aa,  B6,  Cc,  Dd,  Ee,  &c.,  inversely  proportional  to  the  cubes 
of  SA,  SB,  SC,  SD,  SE,  &c.,  the  sums  of  the  differences,  that  is,  the  whole  an¬ 
gular  motions,  will  be  as  the  corresponding  sums  of  the  lines  Aa,  B6,  Cc,  Dd, 
Ee,  &c.,  that  is  (if  to  constitute  an  uniformly  fluid  medium  the  number  of  the 
orbs  be  increased  and  their  thickness  diminished  in  infinitum),  as  the  hyper¬ 
bolic  areas  AaQ,  B6Q,  CcQ,  DdQ,  EeQ,  &c.,  analogous  to  the  sums;  and  the 
periodic  times  being  inversely  proportional  to  the  angular  motions,  will  be  also 
inversely  proportional  to  those  areas.  Therefore  the  periodic  time  of  any  orb 
DIO  is  inversely  as  the  area  DdQ,  that  is  (by  the  known  methods  of  quadra¬ 
tures),  directly  as  the  square  of  the  distance  SD.  Which  was  first  to  be  demon¬ 
strated. 

Case  2.  From  the  centre  of  the  sphere  let  there  be  drawn  a  great  number  of 
indefinite  right  lines,  making  given  angles  with  the  axis,  exceeding  one  another 
by  equal  differences;  and,  by  these  lines  revolving  about  the  axis,  conceive  the 
orbs  to  be  cut  into  innumerable  annuli;  then  will  every  annulus  have  four 
annuli  contiguous  to  it,  that  is,  one  on  its  inside,  one  on  its  outside,  and  two  on 
each  hand.  Now  each  of  these  annuli  cannot  be  impelled  equally  and  with 
contrary  directions  by  the  attrition  of  the  interior  and  exterior  annuli,  unless 
the  motion  be  communicated  according  to  the  law  which  we  demonstrated  in 
Case  1.  This  appears  from  that  demonstration.  And  therefore  any  series  of 
annuli,  taken  in  any  right  line  extending  itself  in  infinitum  from  the  globe,  ^vill 
move  according  to  the  law  of  Case  1,  except  we  should  imagine  it  hindered  by 
the  attrition  of  the  annuli  on  each  side  of  it.  But  now  in  a  motion,  according  to 


262  Mathematical  Principles 

this  law,  no  such  is,  and  therefore  cannot  be,  any  obstacle  to  the  motions  con¬ 
tinuing  according  to  that  law.  If  annuli  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre 
revolve  either  more  swiftly  or  more  slowly  near  the  poles  than  near  the  ecliptic 
they  will  be  accelerated  if  slow,  and  retarded  if  svdft,  by  their  mutual  attrition; 
and  so  the  periodic  times  will  continually  approach  to  equality,  according  to 
the  law  of  Case  1.  Therefore  this  attrition  will  not  at  all  hinder  the  motion  from 
going  on  according  to  the  law  of  Case  1,  and  therefore  that  law  vill  take  place; 
that  is,  the  periodic  times  of  the  several  annuli  will  be  as  the  squares  of  their 
distances  from  the  centre  of  the  globe.  \\Tiich  w^as  to  be  demonstrated  in  the 
second  place. 

Case  3.  Let  now  every  annulus  be  divided  by  transverse  sections  into  in¬ 
numerable  particles  constituting  a  substance  absolutely  and  uniformly  fluid; 
and  because  these  sections  do  not  at  all  respect  the  law'  of  circular  motion,  but 
only  serve  to  produce  a  fluid  substance,  the  law'  of  circular  motion  will  continue 
the  same  as  before.  All  the  very  small  annuli  will  either  not  at  all  change  their 
asperity  and  force  of  mutual  attrition  upon  account  of  these  sections,  or  else 
they  will  change  the  same  equally.  Therefore  the  proportion  of  the  causes 
remaining  the  same,  the  proportion  of  the  effects  will  remain  the  same  also; 
that  is,  the  proportion  of  the  motions  and  the  periodic  times,  q.e.d.  But  now'  as 
the  circular  motion,  and  the  centrifugal  force  thence  arising,  is  greater  at  the 
ecliptic  than  at  the  poles,  there  must  be  some  cause  operating  to  retain  the 
several  particles  in  their  circles;  otherwise  the  matter  that  is  at  the  ecliptic  will 
ahvays  recede  from  the  centre,  and  come  round  about  to  the  poles  by  the  out¬ 
side  of  the  vortex,  and  from  thence  return  by  the  axis  to  the  ecliptic  with  a 
continual  circulation. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  angular  motions  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  about  the  axis  of 
the  globe  are  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of  the 
globe,  and  the  absolute  velocities  are  inversely  as  the  same  squares  applied  to 
the  distances  from  the  axis. 

Cor.  II.  If  a  globe  revolve  with  an  uniform  motion  about  an  axis  of  a  given 
position  in  a  similar  and  infinite  quiescent  fluid  with  an  uniform  motion,  it  vnW 
communicate  a  whirling  motion  to  the  fluid  like  that  of  a  vortex,  and  that 
motion  will  by  degrees  be  propagated  onw'ards  in  infinitum;  and  this  motion 
Avill  be  increased  continually  in  every  part  of  the  fluid,  till  the  periodical  times 
of  the  several  parts  become  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of 
the  globe. 

Cor.  III.  Because  the  inw'ard  parts  of  the  vortex  are  by  reason  of  their  greater 
velocity  continually  pressing  upon  and  driving  forwards  the  external  parts,  and 
by  that  action  are  continually  communicating  motion  to  them,  and  at  the 
same  time  those  exterior  parts  communicate  the  same  quantity  of  motion  to 
those  that  lie  still  beyond  them,  and  by  this  action  preserve  the  quantity  of 
their  motion  continually  unchanged,  it  is  plain  that  the  motion  is  continually 
transferred  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  vortex,  till  it  is  quite 
sw'allowed  up  and  lost  in  the  boundless  extent  of  that  circumference.  The  mat¬ 
ter  betw'een  any  tw'o  spherical  surfaces  concentric  to  the  vortex  w"!!!  never  be 
accelerated;  because  that  matter  w'ill  be  ahvays  transferring  the  motion  it 
receives  from  the  matter  nearer  the  centre  to  that  matter  w'hich  lies  nearer  the 
circumference. 

Cor.  IV.  Therefore,  in  order  to  continue  a  vortex  in  the  same  state  of  motion, 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  263 

some  active  principle  is  required  from  which  the  globe  may  receive  continually 
the  same  quantity  of  motion  which  it  is  always  communicating  to  the  matter 
of  the  vortex.  Without  such  a  principle  it  will  undoubtedly  come  to  pass  that 
the  globe  and  the  inward  parts  of  the  vortex,  being  always  propagating  their 
motion  to  the  outward  parts,  and  not  receiving  any  new  motion,  will  gradually 
move  slower  and  slower,  and  at  last  be  carried  round  no  longer. 

Cor.  V.  If  another  globe  should  be  swimming  in  the  same  vortex  at  a  certain 
distance  from  its  centre,  and  in  the  meantime  by  some  force  revolve  constantly 
about  an  axis  of  a  given  inclination,  the  motion  of  this  globe  will  drive  the  fluid 
round  after  the  manner  of  a  vortex;  and  at  first  this  new  and  small  vortex  will 
revolve  mth  its  globe  about  the  centre  of  the  other;  and  in  the  meantime  its 
motion  vdll  creep  on  farther  and  farther,  and  by  degrees  be  propagated  in 
infinitum,  after  the  manner  of  the  first  vortex.  And  for  the  same  reason  that  the 
globe  of  the  new  vortex  was  carried  about  before  by  the  motion  of  the  other 
vortex,  the  globe  of  this  other  will  be  carried  about  by  the  motion  of  this  new 
vortex,  so  that  the  two  globes  vill  revolve  about  some  intermediate  point,  and 
by  reason  of  that  circular  motion  mutually  fly  from  each  other,  unless  some 
force  restrains  them.  Afterwards,  if  the  constantly  impressed  forces,  by  which 
the  globes  continue  in  their  motions,  should  cease,  and  everything  be  left  to 
act  according  to  the  laws  of  mechanics,  the  motion  of  the  globes  will  languish 
by  degrees  (for  the  reason  assigned  in  Cor.  iii  and  iv),  and  the  vortices  at  last 
Avill  quite  stand  still. 

Cor.  VI.  If  several  globes  in  given  places  should  constantly  revolve  with 
determined  velocities  about  axes  given  in  position,  there  would  arise  from  them 
as  many  vortices  going  on  in  infinitum.  For  upon  the  same  account  that  any 
one  globe  propagates  its  motion  in  infinitum,  each  globe  apart  -svill  propagate 
its  motion  in  infinitum  also;  so  that  every  part  of  the  infinite  fluid  \vill  be 
agitated  vdth  a  motion  resulting  from  the  actions  of  all  the  globes.  Therefore 
the  vortices  vdll  not  be  confined  by  any  certain  limits,  but  by  degrees  run  into 
each  other;  and  by  the  actions  of  the  vortices  on  each  other,  the  globes  mil  be 
continually  moved  from  their  places,  as  was  shown  in  the  last  Corollary; 
neither  can  they  possibly  keep  any  certain  position  among  themselves,  unless 
some  force  restrains  them.  But  if  those  forces,  which  are  constantly  impressed 
upon  the  globes  to  continue  these  motions,  should  cease,  the  matter  (for  the  rea¬ 
son  assigned  in  Cor.  iii  and  iv)  mil  gradually  stop,  and  cease  to  move  in  vortices. 

Cor.  VII.  If  a  similar  fluid  be  inclosed  in  a  spherical  vessel,  and,  by  the  uni¬ 
form  rotation  of  a  globe  in  its  centre,  be  driven  round  in  a  vortex;  and  the  globe 
and  vessel  revolve  the  same  way  about  the  same  axis,  and  their  periodic  times 
be  as  the  squares  of  the  semidiameters :  the  parts  of  the  fluid  mil  not  go  on  in 
their  motions  mthout  acceleration  or  retardation,  till  their  periodical  times  are 
as  the  squares  of  their  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  vortex.  No  constitution 
of  a  vortex  can  be  permanent  but  this. 

Cor.  VIII.  If  the  vessel,  the  inclosed  fluid,  and  the  globe,  retain  this  motion, 
and  revolve  besides  mth  a  common  angular  motion  about  any  given  axis, 
because  the  mutual  attrition  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  is  not  changed  by  this 
motion,  the  motions  of  the  parts  among  themselves  mil  not  be  changed;  for  the 
translations  of  the  parts  among  themselves  depend  upon  this  attrition.  Any 
part  mil  continue  in  that  motion  in  which  its  attrition  on  one  side  retards  it 
just  as  much  as  its  attrition  on  the  other  side  accelerates  it. 


264  Mathematical  Principles 

Cor.  IX.  Therefore  if  the  vessel  be  quiescent,  and  the  motion  of  the  globe  be 
given,  the  motion  of  the  fluid  will  be  given.  For  conceive  a  plane  to  pass  through 
the  axis  of  the  globe,  and  to  revolve  vith  a  contrary  motion;  and  suppose  the 
sum  of  the  time  of  this  revolution  and  of  the  revolution  of  the  globe  to 
be  to  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  the  globe  as  the  square  of  the  semidiam¬ 
eter  of  the  vessel  to  the  square  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  globe;  and  the 
periodic  times  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid  in  respect  of  this  plane  ■will  be  as  the 
squares  of  their  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  globe. 

Cor.  X.  Therefore  if  the  vessel  move  about  the  same  axis  ^vith  the  globe,  or 
vith  a  given  velocity  about  a  different  one,  the  motion  of  the  fluid  vdll  be  given. 
For  if  from  the  whole  system  we  take  away  the  angular  motion  of  the  vessel, 
all  the  motions  will  remain  the  same  among  themselves  as  before,  by  Cor.  viii, 
and  those  motions  will  be  given  by  Cor.  ix. 

Cor.  XI.  If  the  vessel  and  the  fluid  are  quiescent,  and  the  globe  revolves  with 
an  uniform  motion,  that  motion  vill  be  propagated  by  degrees  through  the 
whole  fluid  to  the  vessel,  and  the  vessel  vill  be  carried  round  by  it,  unless 
forcibly  held  back;  and  the  fluid  and  the  vessel  ^vill  be  continually  accelerated 
till  their  periodic  times  become  equal  to  the  periodic  times  of  the  globe.  If  the 
vessel  be  either  restrained  by  some  force,  or  revolve  Avith  any  constant  and 
uniform  motion,  the  medium  ^vill  come  little  by  little  to  the  state  of  motion 
defined  in  Cor.  viii,  ix,  x,  nor  vdll  it  ever  continue  in  any  other  state.  But  if 
then  the  forces,  by  which  the  globe  and  vessel  revolve  Avith  certain  motions, 
should  cease,  and  the  whole  system  be  left  to  act  according  to  the  mechanical 
laws,  the  vessel  and  globe,  by  means  of  the  intervening  fluid,  -wdll  act  upon  each 
other,  and  Avill  continue  to  propagate  their  motions  through  the  fluid  to  each 
other,  till  their  periodic  times  become  equal  among  themselves,  and  the  whole 
system  revolves  together  like  one  solid  body. 

Scholium 

In  all  these  reasonings  I  suppose  the  fluid  to  consist  of  matter  of  uniform 
density  and  fluidity;  I  mean,  that  the  fluid  is  such,  that  a  globe  placed  any¬ 
where  therein  may  propagate  with  the  same  motion  of  its  own,  at  distances 
from  itself  continually  equal,  similar  and  equal  motions  in  the  fluid  in  the  same 
interval  of  time.  The  matter  by  its  circular  motion  endeavors  to  recede  from 
the  axis  of  the  vortex,  and  therefore  presses  all  the  matter  that  lies  beyond. 
This  pressure  makes  the  attrition  greater,  and  the  separation  of  the  parts  more 
difficult;  and  by  consequence  diminishes  the  fluidity  of  the  matter.  Again;  if 
the  parts  of  the  fluid  are  in  any  one  place  denser  or  larger  than  in  the  others, 
the  fluidity  will  be  less  in  that  place,  because  there  are  few'er  surfaces  where  the 
parts  can  be  separated  from  each  other.  In  these  cases  I  suppose  the  defect  of 
the  fluidity  to  be  supplied  by  the  smoothness  or  softness  of  the  parts,  or  some 
other  condition;  otherwise  the  matter  w’here  it  is  less  fluid  will  cohere  more, 
and  be  more  sluggish,  and  therefore  will  receive  the  motion  more  slowly,  and 
propagate  it  farther  than  agrees  with  the  ratio  above  assigned.  If  the  vessel  be 
not  spherical,  the  particles  will  move  in  lines  not  circular,  but  answering  to  the 
figure  of  the  vessel ;  and  the  periodic  times  will  be  nearly  as  the  squares  of  the 
mean  distances  from  the  centre.  In  the  parts  between  the  centre  and  the  cir¬ 
cumference  the  motions  will  be  slower  where  the  spaces  are  wide,  and  swifter 
W'here  narrow';  nevertheless,  the  particles  will  not  tend  to  the  circumference  at 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  265 

all  the  more  because  of  their  greater  swiftness;  for  they  then  describe  arcs  of 
less  curvity,  and  the  tendency  to  recede  from  the  centre  is  as  much  diminished 
by  the  lessening  of  this  curvature  as  it  is  augmented  by  the  increase  of  the 
velocity.  As  they  go  out  of  narrow  into  wide  spaces,  they  recede  a  little  farther 
from  the  centre,  but  in  doing  so  are  retarded;  and  when  they  come  out  of  Avide 
into  narrow  spaces,  they  are  again  accelerated ;  and  so  each  particle  is  retarded 
and  accelerated  by  turns  forever.  These  things  will  come  to  pass  in  a  rigid  ves¬ 
sel;  for  the  state  of  vortices  in  an  infinite  fluid  is  known  by  Cor.  vi  of  this  Prop¬ 
osition. 

I  have  endeavored  in  this  Proposition  to  investigate  the  properties  of  vor¬ 
tices,  that  I  might  find  whether  the  celestial  phenomena  can  be  explained  by 
them;  for  the  phenomenon  is  this,  that  the  periodic  times  of  the  planets  revolv¬ 
ing  about  Jupiter  are  as  the  5^th  power  of  their  distances  from  Jupiter’s  centre; 
and  the  same  rule  obtains  also  among  the  planets  that  revolve  about  the  sun. 
And  these  rules  obtain  also  vdth  the  greatest  accuracy,  as  far  as  has  been  yet 
discovered  by  astronomical  observation.  Therefore  if  those  planets  are  carried 
round  in  vortices  revolving  about  Jupiter  and  the  sun,  the  vortices  must  re¬ 
volve  according  to  that  laAV.  But  here  we  found  the  periodic  times  of  the  parts 
of  the  vortex  to  be  as  the  square  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of  motion;  and 
this  ratio  cannot  be  diminished  and  reduced  to  the  5^th  poAver,  unless  either 
the  matter  of  the  vortex  be  more  fluid  the  farther  it  is  from  the  centre,  or  the 
resistance  arising  from  the  AA'ant  of  lubricity  in  the  parts  of  the  fluid  should,  as 
the  velocity  Avith  Avhich  the  parts  of  the  fluid  are  separated  goes  on  increasing, 
be  augmented  Avith  it  in  a  greater  ratio  than  that  in  Avhich  the  velocity  in¬ 
creases.  But  neither  of  these  suppositions  seems  reasonable.  The  more  gross 
and  less  fluid  parts  Avill  tend  to  the  circumference,  unless  they  are  heavy  to- 
AA’ards  the  centre.  And  though,  for  the  sake  of  demonstration,  I  proposed,  at 
the  beginning  of  this  Section,  an  Hypothesis  that  the  resistance  is  proportional 
to  the  velocity,  nevertheless,  it  is  in  truth  probable  that  the  resistance  is  in  a 
less  ratio  than  that  of  the  velocity;  AA^hich  granted,  the  periodic  times  of  the 
parts  of  the  vortex  aatII  be  in  a  greater  ratio  than  the  square  of  the  distances 
from  its  centre.  If,  as  some  think,  the  vortices  move  more  SAAuftly  near  the 
centre,  then  sloAA^er  to  a  certain  limit,  then  again  sAvifter  near  the  circumference, 
certainly  neither  the  %th  poAver,  nor  any  other  certain  and  determinate  poAA’er, 
can  obtain  in  them.  Let  philosophers  then  see  hoAV  that  phenomenon  of  the 
5^th  poAver  can  be  accounted  for  by  vortices. 

Proposition  53.  Theorem  41 

Bodies  carried  about  in  a  vortex,  and  returning  in  the  same  orbit,  are  of  the  same 
density  with  the  vortex,  and  are  moved  according  to  the  same  law  with  the  parts  of 
the  vortex,  as  to  velocity  and  direction  of  motion. 

For  if  any  small  part  of  the  vortex,  Avhose  particles  or  physical  points  con¬ 
tinue  a  given  situation  among  themselves,  be  supposed  to  be  congealed,  this 
particle  Avill  move  according  to  the  same  laAv  as  before,  since  no  change  is  made 
either  in  its  density,  inertia,  or  figure.  And  again;  if  a  congealed  or  solid  part  of 
the  vortex  be  of  the  same  density  AA'ith  the  rest  of  the  vortex,  and  be  resolved 
into  a  fluid,  this  AA-ill  move  according  to  the  same  laAv  as  before,  except  so  far  as 
its  particles,  noAv  become  fluid,  may  be  moved  among  themselves.  Neglect, 
therefore,  the  motion  of  the  particles  among  themselves  as  not  at  all  concerning 


266  Mathematical  Principles 

the  progressive  motion  of  the  whole,  and  the  motion  of  the  whole  will  be  the 
same  as  before.  But  this  motion  will  be  the  same  with  the  motion  of  other  parts 
of  the  vortex  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre;  because  the  solid,  now  resolved 
into  a  fluid,  is  become  exactly  like  the  other  parts  of  the  vortex.  Therefore  a 
solid,  if  it  be  of  the  same  density  Avith  the  matter  of  the  vortex,  will  move  Avith 
the  same  motion  as  the  parts  thereof,  being  relatively  at  rest  in  the  matter  that 
surrounds  it.  If  it  be  more  dense,  it  will  endeavor  more  than  before  to  recede 
from  the  centre;  and  therefore  overcoming  that  force  of  the  vortex,  by  which, 
being,  as  it  were,  kept  in  equilibrium,  it  was  retained  in  its  orbit,  it  will  recede 
from  the  centre,  and  in  its  revolution  describe  a  spiral,  returning  no  longer  into 
the  same  orbit.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  if  it  be  more  rare,  it  Avill  approach 
to  the  centre.  Therefore  it  can  never  continually  go  round  in  the  same  orbit, 
unless  it  be  of  the  same  density  Avith  the  fluid.  But  Ave  have  shoAvn  in  that  case 
that  it  Avould  revolve  according  to  the  same  laAV  Avith  those  parts  of  the  fluid 
that  are  at  the  same  or  equal  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  vortex. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  a  solid  revolving  in  a  vortex,  and  continually  going  round 
in  the  same  orbit,  is  relatively  quiescent  in  the  fluid  that  carries  it. 

Cor.  II.  And  if  the  vortex  be  of  an  uniform  density,  the  same  body  may 
revolve  at  any  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  vortex. 


Scholium 

Hence  it  is  manifest  that  the  planets  are  not  carried  round  in  corporeal 
vortices;  for,  according  to  the  Copernican  hypothesis,  the  planets  going  round 
the  sun  revolve  in  ellipses,  having  the  sun  in  their  common  focus;  and  by  radii 
draAvn  to  the  sun  describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times.  But  the  parts  of  a 
vortex  can  never  revolve  Avith  such  a  motion.  For,  let  AD,  BE,  CF  represent 
three  orbits  described  about  the  sun  S,  of  Avhich  let  the  outmost  circle  CF  be 
concentric  to  the  sun;  let  the  aphelions  of  the  tAvo  innermost  be  A,  B;  and  their 
perihelions  D,  E.  Hence  a  body  revolving  in  the  orb  CF,  describing,  by  a  radius 
draAvn  to  the  sun,  areas  proportional  to  the  times,  Avill  move  Avith  an  uniform 
motion.  And,  according  to  the  laAvs  of  astronomy,  the  body  revolving  in  the 
orbit  BE  Avill  move  sloAver  in  its  aphelian 
B,  and  SAvifter  in  its  perihelion  E;  Avhereas, 
according  to  the  laAVS  of  mechanics,  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  vortex  ought  to  move  more  sAAdftly 
in  the  narroAV  space  betAveen  A  and  C  than  in 
the  Avide  space  betAveen  D  and  F ;  that  is, 
more  SAviftly  in  the  aphelion  than  in  the  peri¬ 
helion.  Noav  these  tAvo  conclusions  contradict 
each  other.  So  at  the  beginning  of  the  sign 
of  Virgo,  Avhere  the  aphelion  of  Mars  is  at 
present,  the  distance  betAveen  the  orbits  of 
Mars  and  Venus  is  to  the  distance  betAveen 
the  same  orbits,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sign 
of  Pisces,  as  about  3  to  2;  and  therefore  the  matter  of  the  vortex  betAveen  those 
orbits  ought  to  be  SAvifter  at  the  beginning  of  Pisces  than  at  the  beginning  of 
Virgo  in  the  ratio  of  3  to  2;  for  the  narroAver  the  space  is  through  Avhich  the 
same  quantity  of  matter  passes  in  the  same  time  of  one  revolution,  the  greater 
AAill  be  the  velocity  Avith  AA^hich  it  passes  through  it.  Therefore  if  the  earth 


Book  II:  The  Motion  of  Bodies  267 

being  relatively  at  rest  in  this  celestial  matter  should  be  carried  round  by  it, 
and  revolve  together  vith  it  about  the  sun,  the  velocity  of  the  earth  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Pisces  would  be  to  its  velocity  at  the  beginning  of  Virgo  in  the  ratio 
of  3  to  2.  Therefore  the  sun’s  apparent  diurnal  motion  at  the  beginning  of  Vir¬ 
go  ought  to  be  above  70  minutes,  and  at  the  beginning  of  Pisces  less  than  48 
minutes;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  that  apparent  motion  of  the  sun  is  really 
greater  at  the  beginning  of  Pisces  than  at  the  beginning  of  Virgo,  as  experience 
testifies;  and  therefore  the  earth  is  swifter  at  the  beginning  of  Virgo  than  at 
the  beginning  of  Pisces;  so  that  the  hypothesis  of  vortices  is  utterly  irrecon¬ 
cilable  with  astronomical  phenomena,  and  rather  serves  to  perplex  than  explain 
the  heavenly  motions.  How  these  motions  are  performed  in  free  spaces  without 
vortices,  may  be  understood  by  the  first  book;  and  I  shall  now  more  fully  treat 
of  it  in  the  follovdng  book. 


’jaiwU  ’oHJtld  j^iif^olMrr  nHd  ]Jxu|l^wil  itti(^.^  4^  oV&w^b*® 

(liiiW  p  i  i^frV  i^loimsisocf  ^r  ur  j«ii  ]4Kroi)»<{i^o«l^>}^^ 

'K3ifV  1ctW^i^i‘«;j|ed  i!)<l*cita.nai{^nkiiiurtbH»i^.fH}q«  Tto 

Skt^tih  isd  jj»tei'^^^gafii«M6SKl'»5rt>>  )4  b«a^ 

«t  iiirsi  atf  ^ol> 

i«  tsisckg 

u j('uV.  lo' gicfrtiiiigpd  <ii itit^ 

V*lIo?>!l^7^>  ^  «pi>fdrio^  di»«ybBaiilo<i  t 

j'loiaqfl  .^usiui^otnrxinsypsdsid^ 

uniwii!#  if*  ^  '?J»4?vi»4i^><^;n  tJt^  j>  .iilw^^lgrthifOifcl  ^>4^^ 

fM!P^  itvnw  ‘-s;»v,.-wrtii  th£».4h»<i. 

jutnu-  <vr  fi-orr,  *i*«'  a/*'*rt^sx.  '  '■  ' 

•  i»  tJT  %  ^x4‘Um,  wn4  ^7rttjiau»»<i;v  '*^^^.I5^  f»*iiJ»4 

ii,  I '  v  <iti)il,  it*  «j(i»i<v%  •mii*;  '  -'flu  6uid  cm^  it^ 

.^.  .viMv.  <>■  •,44a^i  if;  Uhi  -ym’-ei  «£K  iif  ^  ib*}  ».*ef>0- may 

.  ■.  .  -  '  ,  .  . -.  i  -  :m'-«'J? 

■  „  ‘v  S  .  , 

•  |*-iv<-  i'  a  rnanifei<t  4  tiii*  |»}.«ni 'x  !rJ9-  mti  ^jorlwi  n’W'/l  t£l  <K>fp<'4:ai 

'vr.y'^  ■>.!>  ■:  *  acpof  'iif ;.jCoperat«'‘;..'t  *}W,,pbA^»4»  goini!: f<>UiUd| 

rHt-)Ni3i  in  hftviftg;  tJift  ainiblKkr  'iMnmmi  fdcutii  tml  Hy  riyrfU 

i)f  ji»*n  d^5>*rilv  ptdp<irtio(ni|.i  to  the  s*inic4.  Hut  thepeu#  n(  & 
.%th*v  •;.*  Aevpr  irvolvife  -^th  HWilj  n  inorjiin.  i^'or,  bt  AT>,  BE,  CrP'tepi*e^‘it 

rfiui  i®.  <rf  wj&k  ^^’!*  eii'olii!  CF'.be 

J  mmmof^ybt K,  B;  And  thetp 

'  TV.’E,  \hr\iM  x*  bi.l'v  rnv>A*H  <  m  the;.ot1>-CF#  rkwriiina^,  hy  a  'r^ii»i 

.<  V  ^ ^  wink  »»ref«i.  '  •  H»  «'ln»  tijnc*,  ^>’ti^  movr  «ith  nn  wofonrf 

Wf!  ,4. 4M!u»'i*', Un;<  1^*  4j’*  V.»i  t'lji  •wbA<»\403y<,iht' iK-^y  W'tniting’iu 


"ft 


*'i  miivo  tdMpitfr,Mt'^ 

<K'-  >A  ttA  .pf  5^;  ^i»vi-  Mii;?, 

fr •■''<-  il;i»ii;:Ai* 

<|Mi||;ht.  Ur  w  -'.I  r^tt,*^ 

i»n'A .m>tft  f "  4’i'.\n'i.a 

t>  ,'£»',  f.lKit,'  h, 

^45)(i-r'‘^''ii‘i;*ij  b  tl^'i  fiCti-'  y 

<3''*!V'li<i^miivi^  ••;  (hv  aiga 


1  ^ 


..if 


:rp'  ■  ., 


;a  .. 

\ftiU  : 

<Vt*,'' 

.  >«!, 

fJiS  *  '!  I 

AUt 

IfiA  rtIUifP--'  ■ 

fi.j*s3^m'*>---  •\'- 

Vicf o4is  iv 

«iime^  -i* 

\mU  (^s^fVnW' 


n  j  HeBtm  ‘>f  M  *  ig  j#  •  i. 
ipflen. 

>>'.  4#'  dfat»Av^  b#lv  '’‘'U 
&♦•''  t;«^tnifii^«*f  tlu*  i*if|T> 


k..^. 


■>\, 


.''.ii.«:.''V) 


.  "■-  av  in  tJKe'^«MM4nw  of  tm  nsn^i^ttoitj  ilio  gru’uteP 

'I*®?|3|''  iti:p#V:'8j i|_  th^M^lth 

'i'.r-"‘  ■  '  ,  ■■  '.  ■  '■  - 

i^V, .  ■,'  ■ 

.  :\''  '  ■  “  -  ^ 


:  'F  ' 


4'V.; 


1 


-#1 


•1 

J 


i-k 


.  jt  ' 


'  ^\i'fjh‘  U  ji' ;'  i 


BOOK  THREE 

SYSTEM  OF  THE  WORLD 

(IN  MATHEMATICAL  TREATMENT) 


In  the  preceding  books  I  have  laid  down  the  principles  of  philosophy;  principles 
not  philosophical  but  mathematical :  such,  namely,  as  we  may  build  our  reason¬ 
ings  upon  in  philosophical  inquiries.  These  principles  are  the  laws  and  con¬ 
ditions  of  certain  motions,  and  powers  or  forces,  which  chiefly  have  respect  to 
philosophy;  but,  lest  they  should  have  appeared  of  themselves  dry  and  barren, 
I  have  illustrated  them  here  and  there  vith  some  philosophical  scholiums,  giv¬ 
ing  an  account  of  such  things  as  are  of  more  general  nature,  and  which  philos¬ 
ophy  seems  chiefly  to  be  founded  on;  such  as  the  density  and  the  resistance  of 
bodies,  spaces  void  of  all  bodies,  and  the  motion  of  light  and  sounds.  It  remains 
that,  from  the  same  principles,  I  now  demonstrate  the  frame  of  the  System  of 
the  World.  Upon  this  subject  I  had,  indeed,  composed  the  third  book  in  a 
popular  method,  that  it  might  be  read  by  many;  but  afterwards,  considering 
that  such  as  had  not  sufficiently  entered  into  the  principles  could  not  easily 
discern  the  strength  of  the  consequences,  nor  lay  aside  the  prejudices  to  which 
they  had  been  many  years  accustomed,  therefore,  to  prevent  the  disputes 
which  might  be  raised  upon  such  accounts,  I  chose  to  reduce  the  substance  of 
this  book  into  the  form  of  Propositions  (in  the  mathematical  way),  which 
should  be  read  by  those  only  who  had  first  made  themselves  masters  of  the 
principles  established  in  the  preceding  books :  not  that  I  would  advise  anyone 
to  the  previous  study  of  every  Proposition  of  those  books;  for  they  abound 
vdth  such  as  might  cost  too  much  time,  even  to  readers  of  good  mathematical 
learning.  It  is  enough  if  one  carefully  reads  the  Definitions,  the  Laws  of  Mo¬ 
tion,  and  the  first  three  sections  of  the  first  book.  He  may  then  pass  on  to  this 
book,  and  consult  such  of  the  remaining  Propositions  of  the  first  two  books,  as 
the  references  in  this,  and  his  occasions,  shall  require. 


269 


RULES  OF  REASONING  IN  PHILOSOPHY 


RULE  I 

We  are  to  admit  no  more  causes  of  natural  things  than  such  as  are  both  true  and 
sufficient  to  explain  their  appearances. 

To  this  purpose  the  philosophers  say  that  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  and 
more  is  in  vain  when  less  ^^'ill  serve;  for  Nature  is  pleased  with  simplicity,  and 
affects  not  the  pomp  of  superfluous  causes. 

RULE  II 

Therefore  to  the  same  natural  effects  we  must,  as  far  as  possible,  assign  the  same 
causes. 

As  to  respiration  in  a  man  and  in  a  beast ;  the  descent  of  stones  in  Europe 
and  in  America;  the  light  of  our  culinary  fire  and  of  the  sun;  the  reflection  of 
light  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  planets. 

RULE  III 

The  qualities  of  bodies,  which  admit  neither  intensification  nor  remission  of  de¬ 
grees,  and  which  are  found  to  belong  to  all  bodies  within  the  reach  of  our  experi¬ 
ments,  are  to  be  esteemed  the  universal  qualities  of  all  bodies  whatsoever. 

For  since  the  qualities  of  bodies  are  only  known  to  us  by  experiments,  we  are 
to  hold  for  universal  all  such  as  universally  agree  with  experiments;  and  such 
as  are  not  liable  to  diminution  can  never  be  quite  taken  away.  We  are  certainly 
not  to  relinquish  the  evidence  of  experiments  for  the  sake  of  dreams  and  vain 
fictions  of  our  own  devising;  nor  are  we  to  recede  from  the  analogy  of  Nature, 
which  is  wont  to  be  simple,  and  always  consonant  to  itself.  We  no  other  way 
know  the  extension  of  bodies  than  by  our  senses,  nor  do  these  reach  it  in  all 
bodies;  but  because  we  perceive  extension  in  all  that  are  sensible,  therefore  we 
ascribe  it  universally  to  all  others  also.  That  abundance  of  bodies  are  hard,  we 
learn  by  experience;  and  because  the  hardness  of  the  whole  arises  from  the 
hardness  of  the  parts,  we  therefore  justly  infer  the  hardness  of  the  undivided 
particles  not  only  of  the  bodies  we  feel  but  of  all  others.  That  all  bodies  are 
impenetrable,  we  gather  not  from  reason,  but  from  sensation.  The  bodies  which 
we  handle  we  find  impenetrable,  and  thence  conclude  impenetrability  to  be  an 
universal  property  of  all  bodies  whatsoever.  That  all  bodies  are  movable,  and 
endowed  with  certain  powers  (which  we  call  the  inertia)  of  persevering  in  their 
motion,  or  in  their  rest,  we  only  infer  from  the  like  properties  observed  in  the 
bodies  which  we  have  seen.  The  extension,  hardness,  impenetrability,  mobility, 
and  inertia  of  the  whole,  result  from  the  extension,  hardness,  impenetrability, 
mobility,  and  inertia  of  the  parts ;  and  hence  we  conclude  the  least  particles  of 
all  bodies  to  be  also  all  extended,  and  hard  and  impenetrable,  and  movable, 
and  endowed  wdth  their  proper  inertia.  And  this  is  the  foundation  of  all  philos¬ 
ophy.  Moreover,  that  the  divided  but  contiguous  particles  of  bodies  may  be 

270 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  271 

separated  from  one  another,  is  matter  of  observation;  and,  in  the  particles  that 
remain  undivided,  our  minds  are  able  to  distinguish  yet  lesser  parts,  as  is 
mathematically  demonstrated.  But  whether  the  parts  so  distinguished,  and 
not  yet  divided,  may,  by  the  powers  of  Nature,  be  actually  divided  and  sepa¬ 
rated  from  one  another,  we  cannot  certainly  determine.  Yet,  had  we  the  proof 
of  but  one  experiment  that  any  undivided  particle,  in  breaking  a  hard  and 
solid  body,  suffered  a  division,  we  might  by  virtue  of  this  rule  conclude  that  the 
undivided  as  well  as  the  divided  particles  may  be  divided  and  actually  sepa¬ 
rated  to  infinity. 

Lastly,  if  it  universally  appears,  by  experiments  and  astronomical  observa¬ 
tions,  that  all  bodies  about  the  earth  gravitate  towards  the  earth,  and  that  in 
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter  which  they  severally  contain;  that  the 
moon  likemse,  according  to  the  quantity  of  its  matter,  gravitates  towards  the 
earth;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  our  sea  gravitates  toAvards  the  moon;  and  all 
the  planets  one  towards  another;  and  the  comets  in  like  manner  towards  the 
sun;  we  must,  in  consequence  of  this  rule,  universally  allow  that  all  bodies 
whatsoever  are  endoAved  Avith  a  principle  of  mutual  graAdtation.  For  the  argu¬ 
ment  from  the  appearances  concludes  Avith  more  force  for  the  universal  grav¬ 
itation  of  all  bodies  than  for  their  impenetrability;  of  Avhich,  among  those  in 
the  celestial  regions,  Ave  have  no  experiments,  nor  any  manner  of  observation. 
Not  that  I  affirm  gravity  to  be  essential  to  bodies:  by  their  vis  insita  I  mean 
nothing  but  their  inertia.  This  is  immutable.  Their  gravity  is  diminished  as 
they  recede  from  the  earth. 


RULE  IV 

In  experimental  philosophy  we  are  to  look  upon  propositions  inferred  by  general 
induction  from  phenomena  as  accurately  or  very  nearly  true,  notwithstanding  any 
contrary  hypotheses  that  may  be  imagined,  till  such  time  as  other  phenomena  occur, 
by  which  they  may  either  be  made  more  accurate,  or  liable  to  exceptions. 

This  rule  we  must  folloAV,  that  the  argument  of  induction  may  not  be  evaded 
by  hypotheses. 


PHENOMENA^ 


PHENOMENON  I 

That  the  circumjovial  planets,  by  radii  drawn  to  Jupiter’s  centre,  describe  areas 
proportional  to  the  times  of  description;  and  that  their  periodic  times,  the  fixed 
stars  being  at  rest,  are  as  the  ^/2th  power  of  their  distances  from  its  centre. 

This  we  know  from  astronomical  observations.  For  the  orbits  of  these 
planets  differ  but  insensibly  from  circles  concentric  to  Jupiter;  and  their 
motions  in  those  circles  are  found  to  be  uniform.  And  all  astronomers  agree 
that  their  periodic  times  are  as  the  power  of  the  semidiameters  of  their 
orbits;  and  so  it  manifestly  appears  from  the  follomng  table. 

The  periodic  times  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter. 

1^.  IS*'.  27’".  34®.,  Z^.  13^.  13'".  42®.,  7^.  3^’.  42"".  36®.,  IQ^.  16^  32'".  9®. 

The  distances  of  the  satellites  from  Jupiter’s  centre. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

From  the  observations  of: 

Borelli 

5% 

SH 

14 

24% 

ToAvnly  by  the  micrometer 

5.52 

8.78 

13.47 

24.72 

Semi¬ 

Cassini  by  the  telescope 

5 

8 

13 

23 

diameter  of 

Cassini  by  the  eclipse  of  the  satel¬ 
lites 

5M 

9 

1423/60 

253/10 

Jupiter 

From  the  periodic  times 

5.667 

9.017 

14.384 

25.299 

Mr.  Pound  hath  determined,  by  the  help  of  excellent  micrometers,  the  diam¬ 
eters  of  Jupiter  and  the  elongation  of  its  satellites  after  the  follomng  manner. 
The  greatest  heliocentric  elongation  of  the  fourth  satellite  from  Jupiter’s 
centre  was  taken  ^vith  a  micrometer  in  a  15-foot  telescope,  and  at  the  mean 
distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  earth  Avas  found  about  8'  16".  The  elongation  of 
the  third  satellite  was  taken  with  a  micrometer  in  a  telescope  of  123  feet,  and 
at  the  same  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  earth  was  found  4'  42".  The  greatest 
elongations  of  the  other  satellites,  at  the  same  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the 
earth,  are  found  from  the  periodic  times  to  be  2'  56"  47'",  and  1'  51"  6"'. 

The  diameter  of  Jupiter  taken  Avith  the  micrometer  in  a  123-foot  telescope 
several  times,  and  reduced  to  Jupiter’s  mean  distance  from  the  earth,  proved 
ahvays  less  than  40",  never  less  than  38",  generally  39".  This  diameter  in 
shorter  telescopes  is  40",  or  41";  for  Jupiter’s  light  is  a  little  dilated  by  the 
unequal  refrangibility  of  the  rays,  and  this  dilatation  bears  a  less  ratio  to  the 
diameter  of  Jupiter  in  the  longer  and  more  perfect  telescopes  than  in  those 
Avhich  are  shorter  and  less  perfect.  The  times  in  Avhich  tAvo  satellites,  the  first 

^[In  the  following  parts  of  Book  III,  scattered  w'ords  and  phrases  in  italics  (except  in  Latin 
expressions  and  in  names  of  writings)  are,  in  Motte’s  translation,  interpolations  of  words  and 
phrases  not  in  the  Latin  text  of  the  Principles;  and  a  few  are  departures  from  a  literal  trans¬ 
lation  of  the  Latin]. 


272 


Book  III :  The  System  of  the  World  273 

and  the  third,  passed  over  Jupiter’s  body,  were  observed,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  ingress  to  the  beginning  of  the  egress,  and  from  the  complete  ingress  to  the 
complete  egress,  with,  the  long  telescope.  And  from  the  transit  of  the  first 
satellite,  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  at  its  mean  distance  from  the  earth  came 
forth  373^^",  and  from  the  transit  of  the  third  37^".  There  was  observed  also 
the  time  in  which  the  shadow  of  the  first  satellite  passed  over  Jupiter’s  body, 
and  thence  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  at  its  mean  distance  from  the  earth  came 
out  about  37".  Let  us  suppose  its  diameter  to  be  37  very  nearly,  and  then 
the  greatest  elongations  of  the  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  satellite  will  be 
respectively  equal  to  5.965,  9.494,  15.141,  and  26.63  semidiameters  of  Jupiter. 

PHEXOMEXON  II 

That  the  circumsaturnal  'planets,  by  radii  drawn  to  Saturn’s  centre,  describe  areas 
proportional  to  the  twies  of  description;  and  that  their  periodic  times,  the  fixed 
stars  being  at  rest,  are  as  the  l/fih  power  of  their  distances  from  its  centre. 

For,  as  Cassini  from  his  own  observations  hath  determined,  their  distances 
from  Saturn’s  centre  and  their  periodic  times  are  as  follows: 

The  periodic  times  of  the  satellites  of  Saturn. 

1^.  21L  18“.  27^,  24  174  41“  22\,  44  124  25“.  12^,  154  224  41“.  144, 

794  74  48“  004 

The  distances  of  the  satellites  from  Saturn’s  centre,  in  semidiameters 

of  its  ring. 

From  observations  l^/^o  2)^  33^  8  24 

From  the  periodic  times  1.93  2.47  3.45  8  23.35 

The  greatest  elongation  of  the  fourth  satellite  from  Saturn’s  centre  is  com¬ 
monly  determined  from  the  observations  to  be  eight  of  those  semidiameters, 
very  nearly.  But  the  greatest  elongation  of  this  satellite  from  Saturn’s  centre, 
when  taken  with  an  excellent  micrometer  in  Mr.  Huygens’  telescope  of  123 
feet,  appeared  to  be  eight  semidiameters  and  Mo  of  a  semidiameter.  And  from 
this  observation  and  the  periodic  times  the  distances  of  the  satellites  from 
Saturn’s  centre  in  semidiameters  of  the  ring  are  2.1,  2.69,  3.75,  8.7,  and  25.35. 
The  diameter  of  Saturn  observed  in  the  same  telescope  was  found  to  be  to  the 
diameter  of  the  ring  as  3  to  7;  and  the  diameter  of  the  ring.  May  28-29,  1719, 
was  found  to  be  43";  and  hence  the  diameter  of  the  ring  when  Saturn  is  at  its 
mean  distance  from  the  earth  is  42",  and  the  diameter  of  Saturn  18".  These 
things  appear  so  in  very  long  and  excellent  telescopes,  because  in  such  tele¬ 
scopes  the  apparent  magnitudes  of  the  heavenly  bodies  bear  a  greater  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  dilatation  of  light  in  the  extremities  of  those  bodies  than  in  shorter 
telescopes.  If,  then,  we  reject  all  the  spurious  light,  the  diameter  of  Saturn  wiW 
not  amount  to  more  than  16". 

PHEXOMEXOX  III 

That  the  five  primary  planets.  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn, 
with  their  several  orbits,  encompass  the  sun. 

That  Mercury  and  Venus  revolve  about  the  sun,  is  e\ddent  from  their  moon¬ 
like  appearances.  When  they  shine  out  with  a  full  face,  they  are,  in  respect  of 
us,  beyond  or  above  the  sun;  when  they  appear  half  full,  they  are  about  the 


274  Mathematical  Principles 

same  height  on  one  side  or  other  of  the  sun;  when  horned,  they  are  below  or 
between  us  and  the  sun;  and  they  are  sometimes,  when  directly  under,  seen  like 
spots  traversing  the  sun’s  disk.  That  Mars  surrounds  the  sun,  is  as  plain  from 
its  full  face  when  near  its  conjunction  wdth  the  sun,  and  from  the  gibbous 
figure  which  it  shows  in  its  quadratures.  And  the  same  thing  is  demonstrable 
of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  from  their  appearing  full  in  all  situations;  for  the  shad¬ 
ows  of  their  satellites  that  appear  sometimes  upon  their  disks  make  it  plain 
that  the  light  they  shine  with  is  not  their  own,  but  borrowed  from  the  sun. 

PHENOMENON  IV 

That  the  fixed  stars  being  at  rest,  the  periodic  times  of  the  five  primary  planets,  and 
{whether  of  the  sun  about  the  earth,  or)  of  the  earth  about  the  sun,  are  as  the  ^/Uh 
power  of  their  mean  distances  from  the  sun. 

This  proportion,  first  observed  by  Kepler,  is  now  received  by  all  astron¬ 
omers;  for  the  periodic  times  are  the  same,  and  the  dimensions  of  the  orbits 
are  the  same,  whether  the  sun  revolves  about  the  earth,  or  the  earth  about  the 
sun.  And  as  to  the  measures  of  the  periodic  times,  all  astronomers  are  agreed 
about  them.  But  for  the  dimensions  of  the  orbits,  Kepler  and  Boulliau,  above 
all  others,  have  determined  them  from  observations  with  the  greatest  accuracy; 
and  the  mean  distances  corresponding  to  the  periodic  times  differ  but  insen¬ 
sibly  from  those  which  they  have  assigned,  and  for  the  most  part  fall  in  be¬ 
tween  them;  as  we  may  see  from  the  following  table. 

The  periodic  times,  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  of  the  planets  and  earth 
revolving  about  the  sun,  in  days  and  decmial  parts  of  a  day. 

h  21-  d"  6  9  y 

10759.275  4332.514  686.9785  365.2565  224.6176  87.9692 


The  mean  distances  of  the  planets  and  of  the  earth  from  the  sun. 


b 

% 

d’ 

According  to  Kepler 

951,000 

519,650 

152,350 

“  “  Boulliau 

954,198 

522,520 

152,350 

“  “  the  periodic  times 

954,006 

520,096 

152,369 

6 

9 

According  to  Kepler 

100,000 

72,400 

38,806 

“  Boulliau 

100,000 

72,398 

38,585 

“  “  the  periodic  times 

100,000 

72,333 

38,710 

As  to  Mercury  and  Venus,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  their  distances  from 
the  sun;  for  they  are  determined  by  the  elongations  of  those  planets  from  the 
sun;  and  for  the  distances  of  the  superior  planets,  all  dispute  is  cut  off  by 
the  eclipses  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.  For  by  those  eclipses  the  position  of  the 
shadow  which  Jupiter  projects  is  determined;  from  this  we  have  the  helio¬ 
centric  longitude  of  Jupiter.  And  from  its  heliocentric  and  geocentric  longitudes 
compared  together,  we  determine  its  distance. 

PHENOMENON  V 

Then  the  primary  planets,  by  radii  drawn  to  the  earth,  describe  areas  in  no  wise 
proportional  to  the  times;  bid  the  areas  which  they  describe  by  radii  drawn  to  the  sun 
are  proportional  to  the  times  of  description. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  275 

For  to  the  earth  they  appear  sometimes  direct,  sometimes  stationary,  nay, 
and  sometimes  retrograde.  But  from  the  sun  they  are  always  seen  direct,  and 
to  proceed  with  a  motion  nearly  uniform,  that  is  to  say,  a  little  smfter  in  the 
perihelion  and  a  little  slower  in  the  aphelion  distances,  so  as  to  maintain  an 
equality  in  the  description  of  the  areas.  This  is  a  noted  proposition  among 
astronomers,  and  particularly  demonstrable  in  Jupiter,  from  the  eclipses  of  his 
satellites;  by  the  help  of  these  eclipses,  as  we  have  said,  the  heliocentric  longi¬ 
tudes  of  that  planet,  and  its  distances  from  the  sun,  are  determined. 

PHENOMENON  VI 

That  the  moon,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  earth’s  centre,  describes  an  area  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  time  of  description. 

This  we  gather  from  the  apparent  motion  of  the  moon,  compared  with  its 
apparent  diameter.  It  is  true  that  the  motion  of  the  moon  is  a  little  disturbed 
by  the  action  of  the  sun :  but  in  laying  down  these  Phenomena,  I  neglect  those 
small  and  inconsiderable  errors. 


PROPOSITIONS 


Proposition  1.  Theorem  1 

That  the  forces  by  which  the  circumjovial  planets  are  continually  drawn  off  from 
rectilinear  motions,  and  retained  in  their  proper  orbits,  tend  to  Jupiter's  centre; 
and  are  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  of  the  places  of  those  planets  from 
that  centre. 

The  former  part  of  this  Proposition  appears  from  Phen.  i,  and  Prop.  2  or  3, 
Book  i;  the  latter  from  Phen.  i,  and  Cor.  vi,  Prop.  4,  of  the  same  book. 

The  same  thing  we  are  to  understand  of  the  planets  which  encompass  Saturn, 
by  Phen.  ii. 

Proposition  2.  Theorem  2 

That  the  forces  by  which  the  primary  planets  are  continually  drawn  off  from 
rectilinear  motions,  and  retained  in  their  proper  ^orbits,  tend  to  the  sun;  and  are 
inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  of  the  places  of  those  planets  from  the  sun’s 
centre. 

The  former  part  of  the  Proposition  is  manifest  from  Phen.  v,  and  Prop.  2, 
Book  i;  the  latter  from  Phen.  iv,  and  Cor.  vi,  Prop.  4,  of  the  same  book.  But 
this  part  of  the  Proposition  is,  with  great  accuracy,  demonstrable  from  the 
quiescence  of  the  aphelion  points;  for  a  very  small  aberration  from  the  propor¬ 
tion  according  to  the  inverse  square  of  the  distances  would  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  45, 
Book  i)  produce  a  motion  of  the  apsides  sensible  enough  in  every  single  revo¬ 
lution,  and  in  many  of  them  enormously  great. 

Proposition  3.  Theorem  3 

That  the  force  by  which  the  moon  is  retained  in  its  orbit  tends  to  the  earth;  and  is 
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  its  place  from  the  earth’s  centre. 

The  former  part  of  the  Proposition  is  evident  from  Phen.  vi,  and  Prop.  2  or 
3,  Book  i;  the  latter  from  the  very  slow  motion  of  the  moon’s  apogee;  which  in 
every  single  revolution  amounting  but  to  3®  3'  forwards,  may  be  neglected.  For 
(by  Cor.  i.  Prop.  45,  Book  i)  it  appears  that,  if  the  distance  of  the  moon  from 
the  earth’s  centre  is  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  earth  as  D  to  1,  the  force,  from 
which  such  a  motion  Avill  result,  is  inversely  as  i.e.,  inversely  as  the  power 

of  D,  whose  exponent  is  2^43;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  proportion  of  the  distance 
somewhat  greater  than  the  inverse  square,  but  which  comes  59^  times  nearer 
to  the  proportion  according  to  the  square  than  to  the  cube.  But  since  this 
increase  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  sun  (as  we  shall  afterwards  show),  it  is  here 
to  be  neglected.  The  action  of  the  sun,  attracting  the  moon  from  the  earth,  is 
nearly  as  the  moon’s  distance  from  the  earth;  and  therefore  (by  what  we  have 
shown  in  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  45,  Book  i)  is  to  the  centripetal  force  of  the  moon  as  2  to 
357.45,  or  nearly  so;  that  is,  as  1  to  178^^0-  And  if  we  neglect  so  inconsiderable 
a  force  of  the  sun,  the  remaining  force,  by  which  the  moon  is  retained  in  its  orb, 

276 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  277 

Mill  be  inversely  as  This  vill  yet  more  fully  appear  from  comparing  this 
force  vith  the  force  of  gra\dty,  as  is  done  in  the  next  Proposition. 

Cor.  If  we  augment  the  mean  centripetal  force  by  which  the  moon  is  re¬ 
tained  in  its  orb,  first  in  the  proportion  of  177^%o  to  178‘3^0j  and  then  in  the 
proportion  of  the  square  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  earth  to  the  mean  distance 
of  the  centres  of  the  moon  and  earth,  we  shall  have  the  centripetal  force  of  the 
moon  at  the  surface  of  the  earth;  supposing  this  force,  in  descending  to  the 
earth’s  surface,  continually  to  increase  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  height. 

Proposition  4.  Theorem  4 

That  the  moon  gravitates  towards  the  earth,  and  by  the  force  of  gravity  is  continually 
drawn  off  from  a  rectilinear  motion,  and  retained  in  its  orbit. 

The  mean  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  in  the  syzygies  in  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  earth,  is,  according  to  Ptolemy  and  most  astronomers,  59; 
according  to  Vendelin  and  Huygens,  60;  to  Copernicus,  Q0}i;  to  Street,  60%; 
and  to  Tycho,  56%.  But  Tycho,  and  all  that  follow  his  tables  of  refraction, 
making  the  refractions  of  the  sun  and  moon  (altogether  against  the  nature  of 
light)  to  exceed  the  refractions  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  that  by  four  or  five 
minutes  near  the  horizon,  did  thereby  increase  the  moon’s  horizontal  parallax  by 
a  like  number  of  minutes,  that  is,  by  a  twelfth  or  fifteenth  part  of  the  whole 
parallax.  Correct  this  error,  and  the  distance  vill  become  about  60%  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  earth,  near  to  what  others  have  assigned.  Let  us  assume  the 
mean  distance  of  60  diameters  in  the  syzygies;  and  suppose  one  revolution  of 
the  moon,  in  respect  of  the  fixed  stars,  to  be  completed  in  27*^ -7^ -43“.,  as 
astronomers  have  determined;  and  the  circumference  of  the  earth  to  amount 
to  123,249,600  Paris  feet,  as  the  French  have  found  by  mensuration.  And  now 
if  we  imagine  the  moon,  deprived  of  all  motion,  to  be  let  go,  so  as  to  descend 
towards  the  earth  vdth  the  impulse  of  all  that  force  by  which  (by  Cor.  Prop.  3) 
it  is  retained  in  its  orb,  it  vdll  in  the  space  of  one  minute  of  time,  describe  in  its 
fall  15%2  Paris  feet.  This  we  gather  by  a  calculus,  founded  either  upon  Prop. 
36,  Book  I,  or  (which  comes  to  the  same  thing)  upon  Cor.  ix.  Prop.  4,  of  the 
same  book.  For  the  versed  sine  of  that  arc,  which  the  moon,  in  the  space  of  one 
minute  of  time,  would  by  its  mean  motion  describe  at  the  distance  of  60  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  earth,  is  nearly  15%2  Paris  feet,  or  more  accurately  15  feet, 
1  inch,  and  1  hne  %.  WTierefore,  since  that  force,  in  approaching  to  the  earth, 
increases  in  the  proportion  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance,  and,  upon  that 
account,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  is  60  •  60  times  greater  than  at  the  moon,  a 
body  in  our  regions,  falling  vdth  that  force,  ought  in  the  space  of  one  minute  of 
time,  to  describe  60-60-15%2  Paris  feet;  and,  in  the  space  of  one  second  of 
time,  to  describe  15%2  of  those  feet;  or  more  accurately  15  feet,  1  inch,  and  1 
hne  %.  And  vdth  this  very  force  we  actually  find  that  bodies  here  upon  earth 
do  really  descend ;  for  a  pendulum  oscillating  seconds  in  the  latitude  of  Paris 
vdll  be  3  Paris  feet,  and  8  lines  %  in  length,  as  Mr.  Huygens  has  observed.  And 
the  space  which  a  heavy  body  describes  by  falling  in  one  second  of  time  is  to 
half  the  length  of  this  pendulum  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  circumference 
of  a  circle  to  its  diameter  (as  Mr.  Huygens  has  also  shown),  and  is  therefore  15 
Paris  feet,  1  inch,  1  hne  %.  And  therefore  the  force  by  which  the  moon  is  re¬ 
tained  in  its  orbit  becomes,  at  the  very  surface  of  the  earth,  equal  to  the  force 
of  gravity  which  we  observe  in  heavy  bodies  there.  And  therefore  (by  Rules  1 


278  Mathematical  Principles 

and  2)  the  force  by  which  the  moon  is  retained  in  its  orbit  is  that  very  same 
force  which  we  commonly  call  gravity;  for,  were  gravity  another  force  different 
from  that,  then  bodies  descending  to  the  earth  MTth  the  joint  impulse  of  both 
forces  would  fall  Avith  a  double  velocity,  and  in  the  space  of  one  second  of  time 
would  describe  30^/6  Paris  feet;  altogether  against  experience. 

This  calculus  is  founded  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  earth’s  standing  still;  for 
if  both  earth  and  moon  move  about  the  sun,  and  at  the  same  time  about  their 
common  centre  of  gravity,  the  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  moon  and  earth 
from  one  another  will  be  60^  semidiameters  of  the  earth;  as  may  be  found  by 
a  computation  from  Prop.  60,  Book  i. 

Scholium 

The  demonstration  of  this  Proposition  may  be  more  diffusely  explained  after 
the  following  manner.  Suppose  several  moons  to  revolve  about  the  earth,  as  in 
the  system  of  Jupiter  or  Saturn;  the  periodic  times  of  these  moons  (by  the 
argument  of  induction)  would  observe  the  same  law  which  Kepler  found  to 
obtain  among  the  planets;  and  therefore  their  centripetal  forces  would  be  in¬ 
versely  as  the  squares  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  by  Prop.  1, 
of  this  book.  Now  if  the  low'est  of  these  were  very  small,  and  were  so  near  the 
earth  as  almost  to  touch  the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains,  the  centripetal 
force  thereof,  retaining  it  in  its  orbit,  would  be  nearly  equal  to  the  weights  of 
any  terrestrial  bodies  that  should  be  found  upon  the  tops  of  those  mountains, 
as  may  be  known  by  the  foregoing  computation.  Therefore  if  the  same  little 
moon  should  be  deserted  by  its  centrifugal  force  that  carries  it  through  its 
orbit,  and  be  disabled  from  going  onward  therein,  it  would  descend  to  the 
earth;  and  that  "with  the  same  velocity,  "with  which  heavy  bodies  actually  fall 
upon  the  tops  of  those  very  mountains,  because  of  the  equality  of  the  forces 
that  oblige  them  both  to  descend.  And  if  the  force  by  which  that  lowest  moon 
would  descend  were  different  from  gravity,  and  if  that  moon  were  to  gravitate 
towards  the  earth,  as  we  find  terrestrial  bodies  do  upon  the  tops  of  mountains, 
it  would  then  descend  with  twice  the  velocity,  as  being  impelled  by  both  these 
forces  conspiring  together.  Therefore  since  both  these  forces,  that  is,  the  grav¬ 
ity  of  heavy  bodies,  and  the  centripetal  forces  of  the  moons,  are  directed  to  the 
centre  of  the  earth,  and  are  similar  and  equal  betAveen  themselves,  they  will 
(by  Rules  1  and  2)  have  one  and  the  same  cause.  And  therefore  the  force  Avhich 
retains  the  moon  in  its  orbit  is  that  very  force  Avhich  we  commonly  call  graAuty; 
because  otherAvise  this  little  moon  at  the  top  of  a  mountain  must  either  be 
without  gravity,  or  fall  tA\ice  as  SAviftly  as  heavy  bodies  are  Avont  to  do. 

Proposition  5.  Theorem  5 

That  the  circum jovial  planets  gravitate  towards  Jupiter;  the  circumsaturnal  to¬ 
wards  Saturn;  the  circumsolar  towards  the  sun;  and  hy  the  forces  of  their  gravity 
are  drawn  off  froin  rectilinear  motions,  and  retained  in  curvilinear  orbits. 

For  the  revolutions  of  the  circum  jovial  planets  about  Jupiter,  of  the  circum¬ 
saturnal  about  Saturn,  and  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  and  the  other  circumsolar 
planets,  about  the  sun,  are  appearances  of  the  same  sort  Avith  the  revolution  of 
the  moon  about  the  earth;  and  therefore,  by  Rule  2,  must  be  OAving  to  the  same 
sort  of  causes;  especially  since  it  has  been  demonstrated,  that  the  forces  upon 
which  those  revolutions  depend  tend  to  the  centres  of  Jupiter,  of  Saturn,  and 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  279 

of  the  sun;  and  that  those  forces,  in  receding  from  Jupiter,  from  Saturn,  and 
from  the  sun,  decrease  in  the  same  proportion,  and  according  to  the  same  law, 
as  the  force  of  gravity  does  in  receding  from  the  earth. 

Cor.  I.  There  is,  therefore,  a  power  of  gravity  tending  to  all  the  planets;  for, 
doubtless,  Venus,  Mercury,  and  the  rest,  are  bodies  of  the  same  sort  with 
Jupiter  and  Saturn.  And  since  all  attraction  (by  Law  iii)  is  mutual,  Jupiter  will 
therefore  gravitate  towards  all  his  own  satellites,  Saturn  towards  his,  the  earth 
towards  the  moon,  and  the  sun  tow^ards  all  the  primary  planets. 

Cor.  II.  The  force  of  gravity  which  tends  to  any  one  planet  is  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance  of  places  from  that  planet’s  centre. 

Cor.  III.  All  the  planets  do  gravitate  towards  one  another,  by  Cor.  i  and  ii. 
And  hence  it  is  that  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  when  near  their  conjunction,  by  their 
mutual  attractions  sensibly  disturb  each  other’s  motions.  So  the  sun  disturbs 
the  motions  of  the  moon;  and  both  sun  and  moon  disturb  our  sea,  as  we  shall 
hereafter  explain. 

Scholium 

The  force  which  retains  the  celestial  bodies  in  their  orbits  has  been  hitherto 
called  centripetal  force;  but  it  being  now  made  plain  that  it  can  be  no  other 
than  a  gravitating  force,  we  shall  hereafter  call  it  gravity.  For  the  cause  of  that 
centripetal  force  which  retains  the  moon  in  its  orbit  mil  extend  itself  to  all  the 
planets,  by  Rules  1,  2,  and  4. 

Proposition  6.  Theorem  6 

That  all  bodies  gravitate  towards  every  planet;  and  that  the  weights  of  bodies  towards 
any  one  planet,  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  planet,  are  proportional  to 
the  quantities  of  matter  which  they  severally  contain. 

It  has  been,  now  for  a  long  time,  observed  by  others,  that  all  sorts  of  heavy 
bodies  (allowance  being  made  for  the  inequality  of  retardation  which  they  suf¬ 
fer  from  a  small  power  of  resistance  in  the  air)  descend  to  the  earth  from  equal 
heights  in  equal  times ;  and  that  equality  of  times  we  may  distinguish  to  a  great 
accuracy,  by  the  help  of  pendulums.  I  tried  experiments  with  gold,  silver,  lead, 
glass,  sand,  common  salt,  wood,  water,  and  wheat.  I  provided  two  wooden 
boxes,  round  and  equal:  I  filled  the  one  with  wood,  and  suspended  an  equal 
weight  of  gold  (as  exactly  as  I  could)  in  the  centre  of  oscillation  of  the  other. 
The  boxes,  hanging  by  equal  threads  of  1 1  feet,  made  a  couple  of  pendulums 
perfectly  equal  in  weight  and  figure,  and  equally  receiving  the  resistance  of  the 
air.  And,  placing  the  one  by  the  other,  I  observed  them  to  play  together  for¬ 
wards  and  backwards,  for  a  long  time,  mth  equal  vibrations.  And  therefore  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  the  gold  (by  Cor.  i  and  vi.  Prop.  24,  Book  ii)  was  to  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  the  wood  as  the  action  of  the  motive  force  (or  vis  matrix) 
upon  all  the  gold  to  the  action  of  the  same  upon  all  the  wood;  that  is,  as  the 
weight  of  the  one  to  the  weight  of  the  other :  and  the  like  happened  in  the  other 
bodies.  By  these  experiments,  in  bodies  of  the  same  weight,  I  could  manifestly 
have  discovered  a  difference  of  matter  less  than  the  thousandth  part  of  the 
whole,  had  any  such  been.  But,  without  all  doubt,  the  nature  of  gravity  to¬ 
wards  the  planets  is  the  same  as  towards  the  earth.  For,  should  we  imagine  our 
terrestrial  bodies  taken  to  the  orbit  of  the  moon,  and  there,  together  ^vith  the 
moon,  deprived  of  all  motion,  to  be  let  go,  so  as  to  fall  together  towards  the 
earth,  it  is  certain,  from  what  we  have  demonstrated  before,  that,  in  equal 


280  Mathematical  Principles 

times,  they  would  describe  equal  spaces  wth  the  moon,  and  of  consequence  are 
to  the  moon,  in  quantity  of  matter,  as  their  weights  to  its  weight.  Moreover, 
since  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  perform  their  revolutions  in  times  which  observe 
the  ^th  power  of  the  proportion  of  their  distances  from  Jupiter’s  centre,  their 
accelerative  gravities  towards  Jupiter  will  be  inversely  as  the  squares  of  their 
distances  from  Jupiter’s  centre;  that  is,  equal,  at  equal  distances.  And,  there¬ 
fore,  these  satellites,  if  supposed  to  fall  towards  Jupiter  from  equal  heights, 
would  describe  equal  spaces  in  equal  times,  in  like  manner  as  heavy  bodies  do 
on  our  earth.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  if  the  circumsolar  planets  were 
supposed  to  be  let  fall  at  equal  distances  from  the  sun,  they  would,  in  their 
descent  towards  the  sun,  describe  equal  spaces  in  equal  times.  But  forces  which 
equally  accelerate  unequal  bodies  must  be  as  those  bodies :  that  is  to  say,  the 
weights  of  the  planets  towards  the  sun  must  be  as  their  quantities  of  matter. 
Further,  that  the  weights  of  Jupiter  and  of  his  satellites  towards  the  sun  are 
proportional  to  the  several  quantities  of  their  matter,  appears  from  the  exceed¬ 
ingly  regular  motions  of  the  satellites  (by  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  65,  Book  i).  For  if 
some  of  those  bodies  were  more  strongly  attracted  to  the  sun  in  proportion  to 
their  quantity  of  matter  than  others,  the  motions  of  the  satellites  would  be 
disturbed  by  that  inequality  of  attraction  (by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  65,  Book  i).  If,  at 
equal  distances  from  the  sun,  any  satellite,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  its 
matter,  did  gravitate  towards  the  sun  ^vith  a  force  greater  than  Jupiter  in 
proportion  to  his,  according  to  any  given  proportion,  suppose  of  d  to  e;  then  the 
distance  between  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  of  the  satellite’s  orbit  would  be 
always  greater  than  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  of  Jupiter, 
nearly  as  the  square  root  of  that  proportion :  as  by  some  computations  I  have 
found.  And  if  the  satellite  did  gravitate  towards  the  sun  with  a  force,  less  in  the 
proportion  of  e  to  d,  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  the  satellite’s  orbit  from  the 
sun  would  be  less  than  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun  as  the 
square  root  of  the  same  proportion.  Therefore  if,  at  equal  distances  from  the 
sun,  the  accelerative  gravity  of  any  satellite  towards  the  sun  were  greater  or 
less  than  the  accelerative  gravity  of  Jupiter  towards  the  sun  but  by  one 
part  of  the  whole  gravity,  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  the  satellite’s  orbit  from 
the  sun  would  be  greater  of  less  than  the  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun  by 
one  ^  0^0  o'  part  of  the  whole  distance ;  that  is,  by  a  fifth  part  of  the  distance  of  the 
utmost  satellite  from  the  centre  of  Jupiter;  an  eccentricity  of  the  orbit  which 
would  be  very  sensible.  But  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  are  concentric  to  Jupiter, 
and  therefore  the  accelerative  gravities  of  Jupiter,  and  of  all  its  satellites  to¬ 
wards  the  sun,  are  equal  among  themselves.  And  by  the  same  argument,  the 
weights  of  Saturn  and  of  his  satellites  towards  the  sun,  at  equal  distances  from 
the  sun,  are  as  their  several  quantities  of  matter;  and  the  weights  of  the  moon 
and  of  the  earth  towards  the  sun  are  either  none,  or  accurately  proportional  to 
the  masses  of  matter  which  they  contain.  But  some  weight  they  have,  by  Cor. 
I  and  III,  Prop.  5. 

But  further;  the  weights  of  all  the  parts  of  every  planet  towards  any  other 
planet  are  one  to  another  as  the  matter  in  the  several  parts;  for  if  some  parts 
did  gravitate  more,  others  less,  than  for  the  quantity  of  their  matter,  then  the 
whole  planet,  according  to  the  sort  of  parts  Avith  which  it  most  abounds,  would 
gravitate  more  or  less  than  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  whole. 
Nor  is  it  of  any  moment  whether  these  parts  are  external  or  internal;  for  if,  for 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  281 

example,  we  should  imagine  the  terrestrial  bodies  with  us  to  be  raised  to  the 
orbit  of  the  moon,  to  be  there  compared  with  its  body;  if  the  weights  of  such 
bodies  were  to  the  weights  of  the  external  parts  of  the  moon  as  the  quantities 
of  matter  in  the  one  and  in  the  other  respectively,  but  to  the  weights  of  the 
internal  parts  in  a  greater  or  less  proportion,  then  likeAvise  the  weights  of  those 
bodies  would  be  to  the  weight  of  the  whole  moon  in  a  greater  or  less  proportion; 
against  what  we  have  shown  above. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  weights  of  bodies  do  not  depend  upon  their  forms  and  textures ; 
for  if  the  weights  could  be  altered  with  the  forms,  they  would  be  greater  or  less, 
according  to  the  variety  of  forms,  in  equal  matter;  altogether  against  experience. 

Cor.  II.  Universally,  all  bodies  about  the  earth  gravitate  towards  the  earth; 
and  the  weights  of  all,  at  equal  distances  from  the  earth’s  centre,  are  as  the 
quantities  of  matter  which  they  severally  contain.  This  is  the  quality  of  all 
bodies  within  the  reach  of  our  experiments;  and  therefore  (by  Rule  3)  to  be 
affirmed  of  all  bodies  whatsoever.  If  the  ether,  or  any  other  body,  were  either 
altogether  void  of  gravity,  or  were  to  gravitate  less  in  proportion  to  its  quan¬ 
tity  of  matter,  then,  because  (according  to  Aristotle,  Descartes,  and  others) 
there  is  no  difference  between  that  and  other  bodies  but  in  mere  form  of  matter, 
by  a  successive  change  from  form  to  form,  it  might  be  changed  at  last  into  a 
body  of  the  same  condition  with  those  which  gravitate  most  in  proportion  to 
their  quantity  of  matter;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  heaviest  bodies,  acquiring 
the  first  form  of  that  body,  might  by  degrees  quite  lose  their  gravity.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  weights  would  depend  upon  the  forms  of  bodies,  and  Avith  those  forms, 
might  be  changed :  contrary  to  what  was  proved  in  the  preceding  Corollary. 

Cor.  III.  All  spaces  are  not  equally  full;  for  if  all  spaces  were  equally  full, 
then  the  specific  gravity  of  the  fluid  which  fills  the  region  of  the  air,  on  account 
of  the  extreme  density  of  the  matter,  would  fall  nothing  short  of  the  specific 
gravity  of  quicksilver,  or  gold,  or  any  other  the  most  dense  body;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  neither  gold,  nor  any  other  body,  could  descend  in  air;  for  bodies  do  not 
descend  in  fluids,  unless  they  are  specifically  heavier  than  the  fluids.  And  if  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  a  given  space  can,  by  any  rarefaction,  be  diminished, 
wffiat  should  hinder  a  diminution  to  infinity? 

Cor.  IV.  If  all  the  solid  particles  of  all  bodies  are  of  the  same  density,  and 
cannot  be  rarefied  without  pores,  then  a  void,  space,  or  vacuum  must  be 
granted.  By  bodies  of  the  same  density,  I  mean  those  whose  inertias  are  in  the 
proportion  of  their  bulks. 

Cor.  V.  The  power  of  gravity  is  of  a  different  nature  from  the  power  of 

magnetism;  for  the  magnetic  attraction  is  not  as  the  matter  attracted.  Some 

bodies  are  attracted  more  by  the  magnet;  others  less;  most  bodies  not  at  all. 

The  power  of  magnetism  in  one  and  the  same  body  may  be  increased  and 

diminished;  and  is  sometimes  far  stronger,  for  the  quantity  of  matter,  than  the 

power  of  gravity;  and  in  receding  from  the  magnet  decreases  not  as  the  square 

but  almost  as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  as  nearly  as  I  could  judge  from  some 

rude  observations.  _  „  ^ 

Proposition  7.  Theorem  7 

That  there  is  a  power  of  gravity  pertaining  to  all  bodies,  proportional  to  the  several 
quantities  of  matter  which  they  contain. 

That  all  the  planets  gravitate  one  towards  another,  w^e  have  proved  before; 
as  well  as  that  the  force  of  gravity  tow'ards  every  one  of  them,  considered 


282  Mathematical  Principles 

apart,  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  places  from  the  centre  of  the 
planet.  And  thence  (by  Prop.  69,  Book  i,  and  its  Corollaries)  it  follows  that  the 
gravity  tending  towards  all  the  planets  is  proportional  to  the  matter  which 
they  contain. 

Moreover,  since  all  the  parts  of  any  planet  A  gravitate  towards  any  other 
planet  B;  and  the  gra\dty  of  every  part  is  to  the  gravity  of  the  whole  as  the 
matter  of  the  part  to  the  matter  of  the  whole;  and  (by  Law  iii)  to  every  action 
corresponds  an  equal  reaction;  therefore  the  planet  B  Mil,  on  the  other  hand, 
gravitate  towards  all  the  parts  of  the  planet  A;  and  its  gravity  towards  any  one 
part  will  be  to  the  gravity  towards  the  whole  as  the  matter  of  the  part  to  the 
matter  of  the  whole.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  force  of  gravity  towards  any  whole  planet  arises  from, 
and  is  compounded  of,  the  forces  of  gravity  towards  all  its  parts.  Magnetic  and 
electric  attractions  afford  us  examples  of  this;  for  all  attraction  towards  the 
whole  arises  from  the  attractions  towards  the  several  parts.  The  thing  may  be 
easily  understood  in  gravity,  if  we  consider  a  greater  planet,  as  formed  of  a 
number  of  lesser  planets,  meeting  together  in  one  globe;  for  hence  it  would 
appear  that  the  force  of  the  whole  must  arise  from  the  forces  of  the  component 
parts.  If  it  is  objected  that,  according  to  this  law,  all  bodies  with  us  must  grav¬ 
itate  one  towards  another,  whereas  no  such  gravitation  anywhere  appears,  I 
answer,  that  since  the  gravitation  towards  these  bodies  is  to  the  gravita¬ 
tion  towards  the  whole  earth  as  these  bodies  are  to  the  whole  earth,  the  grav¬ 
itation  towards  them  must  be  far  less  than  to  fall  under  the  observation  of  our 
senses. 

Cor.  II.  The  force  of  gravity  towards  the  several  equal  particles  of  any  body 
is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  places  from  the  particles;  as  appears 
from  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  74,  Book  i. 

Proposition  8.  Theorem  8 

In  two  spheres  gravitating  each  towards  the  other,  if  the  matter  in  places  on  all  sides 
round  about  and  equidistant  from  the  centres  is  similar,  the  weight  of  cither  sphere 
towards  the  other  will  he  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  between  their  centres. 

After  I  had  found  that  the  force  of  gravity  towards  a  whole  planet  did  arise 
from  and  was  compounded  of  the  forces  of  gravity  towards  all  its  parts,  and 
towards  every  one  part  was  in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  squares  of  the 
distances  from  the  part,  I  was  yet  in  doubt  whether  that  proportion  inversely 
as  the  square  of  the  distance  did  accurately  hold,  or  but  nearly  so,  in  the  total 
force  compounded  of  so  many  partial  ones;  for  it  might  be  that  the  proportion 
which  accurately  enough  took  place  in  greater  distances  should  be  Mde  of  the 
truth  near  the  surface  of  the  planet,  where  the  distances  of  the  particles  are 
unequal,  and  their  situation  dissimilar.  But  by  the  help  of  Props.  75  and  76, 
Book  I,  and  their  Corollaries,  I  was  at  last  satisfied  of  the  truth  of  the  Proposi¬ 
tion,  as  it  now  lies  before  us. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  we  may  find  and  compare  together  the  weights  of  bodies 
towards  different  planets;  for  the  weights  of  bodies  revolving  in  circles  about 
planets  are  (by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  4,  Book  i)  directly  as  the  diameters  of  the  circles 
and  inversely  as  the  squares  of  their  periodic  times;  and  their  weights  at  the 
surfaces  of  the  planets,  or  at  any  other  distances  from  their  centres,  are  (by 
this  Proposition)  greater  or  less  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distances.  Thus 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  283 

from  the  periodic  times  of  Venus,  revolving  about  the  sun,  in  224'^- 16^'*.;  of 
the  utmost  circumjovial  satellite  revolving  about  Jupiter,  in  16^.,  163^5^.;  of  the 
Huygenian  satellite  about  Saturn,  in  15‘^.  22%*'.;  and  of  the  moon  about  the 
earth,  in  27**.  7*'.  43"'. ;  compared  with  the  mean  distance  of  Venus  from  the  sun, 
and  vdth  the  greatest  heliocentric  elongations  of  the  outmost  circumjovial 
satellite  from  Jupiter’s  centre,  8'  16";  of  the  Huygenian  satellite  from  the 
centre  of  Saturn,  3'  4";  and  of  the  moon  from  the  earth,  10'  33";  by  computa¬ 
tion  I  found  that  the  weight  of  equal  bodies,  at  equal  distances  from  the  centres 
of  the  sun,  of  Jupiter,  of  Saturn,  and  of  the  earth,  towards  the  sun,  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  and  the  earth,  were  one  to  another,  as  1,  twwt,  swtt,  and  i-g-gVs-a'  respec¬ 
tively.  Then  because  as  the  distances  are  increased  or  diminished,  the  weights  are 
diminished  or  increased  in  a  squared  ratio,  the  weights  of  equal  bodies  towards 
the  sun,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  the  earth,  at  the  distances  10,000,  997,  791,  and 
109  from  their  centres,  that  is,  at  their  very  surfaces,  ^\ill  be  as  10,000,  943,  529, 
and  435  respectively.  How  much  the  weights  of  bodies  are  at  the  surface  of  the 
moon,  Avill  be  shown  hereafter. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  likeAvise  we  discover  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  several 
planets;  for  their  quantities  of  matter  are  as  the  forces  of  gravity  at  equal 
distances  from  their  centres;  that  is,  in  the  sun,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  the  earth, 
as  1,  rrrr,  and  TeaVsT  respectively.  If  the  parallax  of  the  sun  be  taken 
greater  or  less  than  10"  30'",  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  earth  must  be  aug¬ 
mented  or  diminished  as  the  cube  of  that  proportion. 

Cor.  III.  Hence  also  we  find  the  densities  of  the  planets;  for  (by  Prop.  72, 
Book  i)  the  weights  of  equal  and  similar  bodies  towards  similar  spheres  are,  at 
the  surfaces  of  those  spheres,  as  the  diameters  of  the  spheres;  and  therefore  the 
densities  of  dissimilar  spheres  are  as  those  weights  applied  to  the  diameters  of 
the  spheres.  But  the  true  diameters  of  the  sun,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  the  earth, 
were  one  to  another  as  10,000,  997,  791,  and  109;  and  the  weights  towards  the 
same  as  10,000,  943,  529,  and  435  respectively;  and  therefore  their  densities  are 
as  100,  94%,  67,  and  400.  The  density  of  the  earth,  which  comes  out  by  this 
computation,  does  not  depend  upon  the  parallax  of  the  sun,  but  is  determined 
by  the  parallax  of  the  moon,  and  therefore  is  here  truly  defined.  The  sun,  there¬ 
fore,  is  a  little  denser  than  Jupiter,  and  Jupiter  than  Saturn,  and  the  earth  four 
times  denser  than  the  sun;  for  the  sun,  by  its  great  heat,  is  kept  in  a  sort  of 
rarefied  state.  The  moon  is  denser  than  the  earth,  as  shall  appear  afterwards. 

Cor.  IV.  The  smaller  the  planets  are,  they  are,  other  things  being  equal,  of  so 
much  the  greater  density;  for  so  the  powers  of  gravity  on  their  several  surfaces 
come  nearer  to  equality.  They  are  likeAvise,  other  things  being  equal,  of  the 
greater  density,  as  they  are  nearer  to  the  sun.  So  Jupiter  is  more  dense  than 
Saturn,  and  the  earth  than  Jupiter;  for  the  planets  were  to  be  placed  at  differ¬ 
ent  distances  from  the  sun,  that,  according  to  their  degrees  of  density,  they 
might  enjoy  a  greater  or  less  proportion  of  the  sun’s  heat.  Our  water,  if  it  were 
removed  as  far  as  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  would  be  turned  into  ice,  and  in  that  of 
Mercury  would  quickly  fly  away  in  vapor;  for  the  light  of  the  sun,  to  which  its 
heat  is  proportional,  is  seven  times  denser  in  the  orb  of  Mercury  than  vdth  us: 
and  by  the  thermometer  I  have  found  that  a  sevenfold  heat  of  our  summer  sun 
will  make  water  boil.  Nor  are  we  to  doubt  that  the  matter  of  Mercury  is 
adapted  to  its  heat,  and  is  therefore  more  dense  than  the  matter  of  our  earth; 
since,  in  a  denser  matter,  the  operations  of  Nature  require  a  stronger  heat. 


284 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  9.  Theorem  9 

That  the  force  of  gravity,  considered  downwards  from  the  surface  of  the  -planets, 
decreases  nearly  in  the  proportion  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  planets. 

If  the  matter  of  the  planet  were  of  an  uniform  density,  this  Proposition  would 
be  accurately  true  (by  Prop.  73,  Book  i).  The  error,  therefore,  can  be  no  greater 
than  what  may  arise  from  the  inequality  of  the  density. 

Proposition  10.  Theorem  10 

That  the  motions  of  the  planets  in  the  heavens  may  subsist  an  exceedingly  long  time. 

In  the  Scholium  of  Prop.  40,  Book  ii,  I  have  shown  that  a  globe  of  water 
frozen  into  ice,  and  moving  freely  in  our  air,  in  the  time  that  it  ^Yould  describe 
the  length  of  its  semidiameter,  would  lose  by  the  resistance  of  the  air  TsVe  part 
of  its  motion;  and  the  same  proportion  holds  nearly  in  all  globes,  however 
great,  and  moved  vdth  whatever  velocity.  But  that  our  globe  of  earth  is  of 
greater  density  than  it  would  be  if  the  whole  consisted  of  water  only,  I  thus 
make  out.  If  the  whole  consisted  of  water  only,  whatever  was  of  less  density 
than  water,  because  of  its  less  specific  gravity,  would  emerge  and  float  above. 
And  upon  this  account,  if  a  globe  of  terrestrial  matter,  covered  on  all  sides  with 
water,  w^as  less  dense  than  water,  it  would  emerge  somewhere;  and,  the  subsid¬ 
ing  water  falling  back,  would  be  gathered  to  the  opposite  side.  And  such  is  the 
condition  of  our  earth,  wiiich  in  a  great  measure  is  covered  with  seas.  The  earth, 
if  it  was  not  for  its  greater  density,  w^ould  emerge  from  the  seas,  and,  according 
to  its  degree  of  levity,  w^ould  be  raised  more  or  less  above  their  surface,  the 
water  of  the  seas  flowing  backw'ards  to  the  opposite  side.  By  the  same  argu¬ 
ment,  the  spots  of  the  sun,  which  float  upon  the  lucid  matter  thereof,  are  lighter 
than  that  matter;  and,  however  the  planets  have  been  formed  w^hile  they  were 
yet  in  fluid  masses,  all  the  heavier  matter  subsided  to  the  centre.  Since,  there¬ 
fore,  the  common  matter  of  our  earth  on  the  surface  thereof  is  about  twice  as 
heavy  as  water,  and  a  little  low^er,  in  mines,  is  found  about  three,  or  four,  or 
even  five  times  heavier,  it  is  probable  that  the  quantity  of  the  whole  matter  of 
the  earth  may  be  five  or  six  times  greater  than  if  it  consisted  all  of  water; 
especially  since  I  have  before  shown  that  the  earth  is  about  four  times  more 
dense  than  Jupiter.  If,  therefore,  Jupiter  is  a  little  more  dense  than  water,  in 
the  space  of  thirty  days,  in  w’hich  that  planet  describes  the  length  of  459  of  its 
semidiameters,  it  w'ould,  in  a  medium  of  the  same  density  \vith  our  air,  lose 
almost  a  tenth  part  of  its  motion.  But  since  the  resistance  of  mediums  decreases 
in  proportion  to  their  weight  or  density,  so  that  water,  which  is  135^  times 
lighter  than  quicksilver,  resists  less  in  that  proportion;  and  air,  which  is  860 
times  lighter  than  w^ater,  resists  less  in  the  same  proportion;  therefore  in  the 
heavens,  where  the  w'eight  of  the  medium  in  which  the  planets  move  is  im¬ 
mensely  diminished,  the  resistance  wdll  almost  vanish. 

It  is  shown  in  the  Scholium  of  Prop.  22,  Book  ii,  that  at  the  height  of  200 
miles  above  the  earth  the  air  is  more  rare  than  it  is  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  in 
the  ratio  of  30  to  0.0000000000003998,  or  as  75,000,000,000,000  to  1,  nearly.  And 
hence  the  planet  Jupiter,  revolving  in  a  medium  of  the  same  density  with  that 
superior  air,  would  not  lose  by  the  resistance  of  the  medium  the  1 ,000,000th  part 
of  its  motion  in  1,000,000  years.  In  the  spaces  near  the  earth  the  resistance  is 
produced  only  by  the  air,  exhalations,  and  vapors.  When  these  are  carefully 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  285 

exhausted  by  the  air  pump  from  under  the  receiver,  heavy  bodies  fall  vithin 
the  receiver  wth  perfect  freedom,  and  wthout  the  least  sensible  resistance: 
gold  itself,  and  the  lightest  down,  let  fall  together,  vill  descend  vith  equal 
velocity;  and  though  they  fall  through  a  space  of  four,  six,  and  eight  feet,  they 
will  come  to  the  bottom  at  the  same  time ;  as  appears  from  experiments.  And 
therefore,  the  celestial  regions  being  perfectly  void  of  air  and  exhalations,  the 
planets  and  comets  meeting  no  sensible  resistance  in  those  spaces  will  continue 
their  motions  through  them  for  an  immense  tract  of  time. 

HYPOTHESIS  I 

That  the  centre  of  the  system  of  the  world  is  immovable. 

This  is  acknowiedged  by  all,  while  some  contend  that  the  earth,  others  that 
the  sun,  is  fixed  in  that  centre.  Let  us  see  w'hat  may  from  hence  follow. 

Proposition  11.  Theorem  11 

That  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth,  the  sun,  and  all  the  'planets,  is 
immovable. 

For  (by  Cor.  iv  of  the  Laws)  that  centre  either  is  at  rest,  or  moves  uniformly 
forwards  in  a  right  line;  but  if  that  centre  moved,  the  centre  of  the  world  w^ould 
move  also,  against  the  Hypothesis. 

Proposition  12.  Theorem  12 

That  the  sun  is  agitated  by  a  continual  motion,  but  never  recedes  far  from  the 
common  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  planets. 

For  since  (by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  8)  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  sun  is  to  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  Jupiter  as  1067  to  1;  and  the  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the 
sun  is  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  sun  in  a  proportion  but  a  small  matter  greater, 
the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  Jupiter  and  the  sun  wdll  fall  upon  a  point  a 
little  without  the  surface  of  the  sun.  By  the  same  argument,  since  the  quantity 
of  matter  in  the  sun  is  to  the  quantity  of  matter  in  Saturn  as  3021  to  1,  and  the 
distance  of  Saturn  from  the  sun  is  to  the  semidiameter  of  the  sun  in  a  propor¬ 
tion  but  a  small  matter  less,  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  Saturn  and  the 
sun  Avill  fall  upon  a  point  a  little  within  the  surface  of  the  sun.  And,  pursuing 
the  principles  of  this  computation,  we  should  find  that  though  the  earth  and  all 
the  planets  were  placed  on  one  side  of  the  sun,  the  distance  of  the  common 
centre  of  gravity  of  all  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  wnuld  scarcely  amount  to  one 
diameter  of  the  sun.  In  other  cases,  the  distances  of  those  centres  are  ahvays 
less;  and  therefore,  since  that  centre  of  gravity  is  continually  at  rest,  the  sun, 
according  to  the  various  positions  of  the  planets,  must  continually  be  moved 
every  w’ay,  but  will  never  recede  far  from  that  centre. 

Cor.  Hence  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth,  the  sun,  and  all  the 
planets,  is  to  be  esteemed  the  centre  of  the  w'orld;  for  since  the  earth,  the  sun, 
and  all  the  planets  gravitate  one  tow'ards  another,  and  are,  therefore,  according 
to  their  powers  of  gravity,  in  continual  agitation,  as  the  Laws  of  Motion  re¬ 
quire,  it  is  plain  that  their  movable  centres  cannot  be  taken  for  the  immovable 
centre  of  the  w’orld.  If  that  body  were  to  be  placed  in  the  centre,  tow-ards  w’hich 
other  bodies  gravitate  most  (according  to  common  opinion),  that  privilege 
ought  to  be  allowed  to  the  sun;  but  since  the  sun  itself  is  moved,  a  fixed  point 
is  to  be  chosen  from  which  the  centre  of  the  sun  recedes  least,  and  from  which 


286  Mathematical  Peinciples 

it  would  recede  yet  less  if  the  body  of  the  sun  were  denser  and  greater,  and 
therefore  less  apt  to  be  moved. 

Proposition  13.  Theorem  13 

The  'planets  move  in  ellipses  which  have  their  common  focus  in  the  centre  of  the  sun; 
and,  by  radii  drawn  to  that  centre,  they  describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times  of 
description. 

We  have  discoursed  above  on  these  motions  from  the  Phenomena.  Xow  that 
we  know  the  principles  on  which  they  depend,  from  those  principles  we  deduce 
the  motions  of  the  heavens  a  priori.  Because  the  weights  of  the  planets  towards 
the  sun  are  inversely  as  the  squares  of  their  distances  from  the  sun’s  centre,  if 
the  sun  were  at  rest,  and  the  other  planets  did  not  act  one  upon  another,  their 
orbits  would  be  ellipses,  having  the  sun  in  their  common  focus;  and  they  would 
describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times  of  description,  by  Props.  1  and  11,  and 
Cor.  I,  Prop.  13,  Book  i.  But  the  actions  of  the  planets  one  upon  another  are  so 
very  small,  that  they  may  be  neglected;  and  by  Prop.  66,  Book  i,  they  disturb 
the  motions  of  the  planets  around  the  sun  in  motion,  less  than  if  those  motions 
were  performed  about  the  sun  at  rest. 

It  is  true,  that  the  action  of  Jupiter  upon  Saturn  is  not  to  be  neglected;  for 
the  force  of  gra\’ity  towards  Jupiter  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  towards  the  sun 
(at  equal  distances,  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  8)  as  1  to  1067 ;  and  therefore  in  the  conjunc¬ 
tion  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  because  the  distance  of  Saturn  from  Jupiter  is  to 
the  distance  of  Saturn  from  the  sun  almost  as  4  to  9,  the  gravity  of  Saturn 
towards  Jupiter  vdll  be  to  the  gravity  of  Saturn  towards  the  sun  as  81  to 
16- 1067;  or,  as  1  to  about  211.  And  hence  arises  a  perturbation  of  the  orbit  of 
Saturn  in  every  conjunction  of  this  planet  with  Jupiter,  so  sensible,  that  as¬ 
tronomers  are  puzzled  vith  it.  As  the  planet  is  differently  situated  in  these 
conjunctions,  its  eccentricity  is  sometimes  augmented,  sometimes  diminished; 
its  aphelion  is  sometimes  carried  forwards,  sometimes  backwards,  and  its  mean 
motion  is  by  turns  accelerated  and  retarded;  yet  the  whole  error  in  its  motion 
about  the  sun,  though  arising  from  so  great  a  force,  may  be  almost  avoided 
(except  in  the  mean  motion)  by  placing  the  lower  focus  of  its  orbit  in  the  com¬ 
mon  centre  of  gravity  of  Jupiter  and  the  sun  (according  to  Prop.  67,  Book  i), 
and  therefore  that  error,  when  it  is  greatest,  scarcely  exceeds  two  minutes;  and 
the  greatest  error  in  the  mean  motion  scarcely  exceeds  two  minutes  yearly.  But 
in  the  conjunction  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  the  accelerative  forces  of  gravity  of 
the  sun  towards  Saturn,  of  Jupiter  towards  Saturn,  and  of  Jupiter  towards  the 

1 fi • 81 • 3021 

sun,  are  almost  as  16,  81,  and - p— - ,  or  156,609;  and  therefore  the  differ- 

25 

ence  of  the  forces  of  gravity  of  the  sun  towards  Saturn,  and  of  Jupiter  towards 
Saturn,  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  of  Jupiter  towards  the  sun  as  65  to  156,609,  or 
as  1  to  2409.  But  the  greatest  power  of  Saturn  to  disturb  the  motion  of  Jupiter 
is  proportional  to  this  difference;  and  therefore  the  perturbation  of  the  orbit  of 
Jupiter  is  much  less  than  that  of  Saturn’s.  The  perturbations  of  the  other  orbits 
are  yet  far  less,  except  that  the  orbit  of  the  earth  is  sensibly  disturbed  by  the 
moon.  The  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth  and  moon  moves  in  an  ellipse 
about  the  sun  in  the  focus  thereof,  and,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  sun,  describes 
areas  proportional  to  the  times  of  description.  But  the  earth  in  the  meantime 
by  a  menstrual  motion  is  revolved  about  this  common  centre. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


287 


Proposition  14.  Theorem  14 

The  aphelions  and  nodes  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  are  fixed. 

The  aphelions  are  immovable  by  Prop.  11,  Book  i;  and  so  are  the  planes  of 
the  orbits,  by  Prop.  1  of  the  same  book.  And  if  the  planes  are  fixed,  the  nodes 
must  be  so  too.  It  is  true  that  some  inequalities  may  arise  from  the  mutual 
actions  of  the  planets  and  comets  in  their  revolutions,  but  these  will  be  so 
small,  that  they  may  be  here  passed  by. 

Cor.  I.  The  fixed  stars  are  immovable,  seeing  they  keep  the  same  position  to 
the  aphelions  and  nodes  of  the  planets. 

Cor.  II.  And  since  these  stars  are  liable  to  no  sensible  parallax  from  the 
annual  motion  of  the  earth,  they  can  have  no  force,  because  of  their  immense 
distance,  to  produce  any  sensible  effect  in  our  system.  Not  to  mention  that  the 
fixed  stars,  everywhere  promiscuously  dispersed  in  the  heavens,  by  their  con¬ 
trary  attractions  destroy  their  mutual  actions,  by  Prop.  70,  Book  i. 

Scholium 

Since  the  planets  near  the  sun  (viz..  Mercury,  Venus,  the  earth,  and  Mars) 
are  so  small  that  they  can  act  with  but  little  force  upon  one  another,  therefore 
their  aphelions  and  nodes  must  be  fixed,  except  so  far  as  they  are  disturbed  by 
the  actions  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  and  other  higher  bodies.  And  hence  we  may 
find,  by  the  theory  of  gravity,  that  their  aphelions  move  forwards  a  little,  in 
respect  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  that  as  the  ^th  power  of  their  several  distances 
from  the  sun.  So  that  if  the  aphelion  of  Mars,  in  the  space  of  a  hundred  years, 
is  carried  forwards  33'  20",  in  respect  of  the  fixed  stars,  the  aphelions  of  the 
earth,  of  Venus,  and  of  Mercury,  Mil  in  a  hundred  years  be  carried  forwards 
17'  40",  10'  53",  and  4'  16",  respectively.  But  these  motions  are  so  inconsider¬ 
able,  that  we  have  neglected  them  in  this  Proposition. 

Proposition  15.  Problem  1 

To  find  the  principal  diameters  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets. 

They  are  to  be  taken  as  the  %th  power  of  the  periodic  times,  by  Prop.  15, 
Book  I,  and  then  to  be  severally  augmented  in  the  proportion  of  the  sum  of  the 
masses  of  matter  in  the  sun  and  each  planet  to  the  first  of  two  mean  propor¬ 
tionals  between  that  sum  and  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the  sun,  by  Prop.  60, 
Book  I. 


Proposition  16.  Problem  2 

To  find  the  eccentricities  and  aphelions  of  the  planets. 

This  Problem  is  resolved  by  Prop.  18,  Book  i. 

Proposition  17.  Theorem  15 

That  the  diurnal  motions  of  the  planets  are  uniform,  and  that  the  libration  of  the 
moon  arises  from  its  diurnal  motion. 

The  Proposition  is  proved  from  the  first  Law  of  Motion,  and  Cor.  xxii. 
Prop.  66,  Book  i.  Jupiter,  Mth  respect  to  the  fixed  stars,  revolves  in  9^.  5Q^.; 
Vlars  in  24^.  39™. ;  Venus  in  about  23**. ;  the  earth  in  23^.  56"^. ;  the  sun  in  253^^^., 
and  the  moon  in  27^^.  7^.  43™.  These  things  appear  by  the  Phenomena.  The 
spots  in  the  sun’s  body  return  to  the  same  situation  on  the  sun’s  disk,  with 


288  Mathematical  Principles 

respect  to  the  earth,  in  27)^  days;  and  therefore  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars 
the  sun  revolves  in  about  25)^  days.  But  because  the  lunar  day,  arising  from 
its  uniform  revolution  about  its  axis,  is  menstrual,  that  is,  equal  to  the  time  of  its 
periodic  revolution  in  its  orbit,  hence  the  same  face  of  the  moon  Avill  be  always 
nearly  turned  to  the  upper  focus  of  its  orbit;  but,  as  the  situation  of  that  focus 
requires,  wiW  deviate  a  little  to  one  side  and  to  the  other  from  the  earth  in  the 
lower  focus;  and  this  is  the  libration  in  longitude;  for  the  libration  in  latitude 
arises  from  the  moon’s  latitude,  and  the  inclination  of  its  axis  to  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic.  This  theory  of  the  libration  of  the  moon,  Mr.  N.  Mercator,  in  his 
Astronomy,  published  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1676,  explained  more  fully 
out  of  the  letters  I  sent  him.  The  utmost  satellite  of  Saturn  seems  to  revolve 
about  its  axis  mth  a  motion  like  this  of  the  moon,  respecting  Saturn  continually 
with  the  same  face;  for  in  its  revolution  round  Saturn,  as  often  as  it  comes  to 
the  eastern  part  of  its  orbit,  it  is  scarcely  visible,  and  generally  quite  disap¬ 
pears;  this  is  probably  occasioned  by  some  spots  in  that  part  of  its  body,  which 
is  then  turned  towards  the  earth,  as  M.  Cassini  has  observed.  So  also  the  ut¬ 
most  satellite  of  Jupiter  seems  to  revolve  about  its  axis  vdth  a  like  motion, 
because  in  that  part  of  its  body  which  is  turned  from  Jupiter  it  has  a  spot, 
which  always  appears  as  if  it  were  in  Jupiter’s  own  body,  whenever  the  satellite 
passes  between  Jupiter  and  our  eye. 

Proposition  18.  Theorem  16 

That  the  axes  of  the  planets  are  less  than  the  diameters  drawn  perpendicular  to  the 
axes. 

The  equal  gravitation  of  the  parts  on  all  sides  would  give  a  spherical  figure 
to  the  planets,  if  it  was  not  for  their  diurnal  revolution  in  a  circle.  By  that 
circular  motion  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  parts  receding  from  the  axis  endeavor 
to  ascend  about  the  equator;  and  therefore  if  the  matter  is  in  a  fluid  state,  by 
its  ascent  towards  the  equator  it  mil  enlarge  the  diameters  there,  and  by  its 
descent  towards  the  poles  it  mil  shorten  the  axis.  So  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  (by 
the  concurring  observations  of  astronomers)  is  found  shorter  between  pole  and 
pole  than  from  east  to  west.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  if  our  earth  was  not 
higher  about  the  equator  than  at  the  poles,  the  seas  would  subside  about  the 
poles,  and,  rising  towards  the  equator,  would  lay  all  things  there  under  water. 

Proposition  19.  Problem  3 

To  find  the  proportion  of  the  axis  of  a  planet  to  the  diameters  perpendicular  thereto. 

Our  countryman,  Mr.  Norwood,  measuring  a  distance  of  905,751  feet  of 
London  measure  between  London  and  York,  in  1635,  and  observing  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  latitudes  to  be  2°  28',  determined  the  measure  of  one  degree  to  be 
367,196  feet  of  London  measure,  that  is,  57,300  Paris  toises.  M.  Picard,  measur¬ 
ing  an  arc  of  one  degree,  and  22'  55"  of  the  meridian  between  Amiens  and 
Malvoisine,  found  an  arc  of  one  degree  to  be  57,060  Paris  toises.  M.  Cassini,  the 
father,  measured  the  distance  upon  the  meridian  from  the  town  of  Collioure  in 
Roussillon  to  the  Observatory  of  Paris;  and  his  son  added  the  distance  from 
the  Observatory  to  the  Citadel  of  Dunkirk.  The  whole  distance  was  4861563^ 
toises  and  the  difference  of  the  latitudes  of  Collioure  and  Dunkirk  was  8  de¬ 
grees,  and  31'  11%".  Hence  an  arc  of  one  degree  appears  to  be  57,061  Paris 
toises.  And  from  these  measures  we  conclude  that  the  circumference  of  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  289 

earth  is  123,249,600,  and  its  semidiameter  19,615,800  Paris  feet,  upon  the  sup¬ 
position  that  the  earth  is  of  a  spherical  figure. 

In  the  latitude  of  Paris  a  heavy  body  falling  in  a  second  of  time  describes  15 
Paris  feet,  1  inch,  1^  lines,  as  above,  that  is,  2173|  lines.  The  weight  of  the 
body  is  diminished  by  the  weight  of  the  ambient  air.  Let  us  suppose  the  weight 
lost  thereby  to  be  part  of  the  whole  weight ;  then  that  heavy  body  fall¬ 

ing  in  a  vacuum  will  describe  a  height  of  2174  lines  in  one  second  of  time. 

A  body  in  every  sidereal  day  of  23^.  56"^.  4®.  uniformly  revolving  in  a  circle 
at  the  distance  of  19,615,800  feet  from  the  centre,  in  one  second  of  time  describes 
an  arc  of  1433.46  feet;  the  versed  sine  of  wLich  is  0.05236561  feet,  or  7.54064 
lines.  And  therefore  the  force  with  wLich  bodies  descend  in  the  latitude  of  Paris 
is  to  the  centrifugal  force  of  bodies  in  the  equator  arising  from  the  diurnal 
motion  of  the  earth  as  2174  to  7.54064. 

The  centrifugal  force  of  bodies  in  the  equator  is  to  the  centrifugal  force  with 
which  bodies  recede  directly  from  the  earth  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  48°  50'  10", 
as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  radius  to  the  cosine  of  the  latitude,  that  is,  as 
7.54064  to  3.267.  Add  this  force  to  the  force  with  wLich  bodies  descend  by  their 
weight  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  and  a  body,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  falling  by 
its  whole  undiminished  force  of  gravity,  in  the  time  of  one  second,  will  describe 
2177.267  lines,  or  15  Paris  feet,  1  inch,  and  5.267  lines.  And  the  total  force  of 
gravity  in  that  latitude  will  be  to  the  centrifugal  force  of  bodies  in  the  equator 
of  the  earth  as  2177.267  to  7.54064,  or  as  289  to  1. 

Therefore  if  APBQ  represent  the  figure  of  the  earth,  now'  no  longer  spherical, 
but  generated  by  the  rotation  of  an  ellipse  about  its  lesser  axis  PQ ;  and  ACQqca 
a  canal  full  of  w^ater,  reaching  from  the  pole  Qg  to  the  centre  Cc,  and  thence 
rising  to  the  equator  Aa;  the  weight  of  the  w'ater  in  the  leg  of  the  canal  ACca 

w411  be  to  the  weight  of  w'ater  in  the  other  leg  QCcg  as 
289  to  288,  because  the  centrifugal  force  arising  from  the 
circular  motion  sustains  and  takes  off  one  of  the  289 
parts  of  the  weight  (in  the  one  leg),  and  the  weight  of 
288  in  the  other  sustains  the  rest.  But  by  computation 
(from  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  91,  Book  i)  I  find,  that,  if  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  earth  was  all  uniform,  and  without  any  motion, 
and  its  axis  PQ  w'ere  to  the  diameter  AB  as  100  to  101, 
the  force  of  gravity  in  the  place  Q  towards  the  earth 
w'ould  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  same  place  Q 
towards  a  sphere  described  about  the  centre  C  with  the  radius  PC,  or  QC,  as 
126  to  125.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  place  A 
towards  the  spheroid  generated  by  the  rotation  of  the  ellipse  APBQ  about  the 
axis  AB  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  same  place  A,  towards  the  sphere  de¬ 
scribed  about  the  centre  C  with  the  radius  AC,  as  125  to  126.  But  the  force  of 
gravity  in  the  place  A  towards  the  earth  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the 
forces  of  gravity  towards  the  spheroid  and  this  sphere;  because  the  sphere,  by 
having  its  diameter  PQ  diminished  in  the  proportion  of  101  to  100,  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  figure  of  the  earth;  and  this  figure,  by  having  a  third  diameter 
perpendicular  to  the  two  diameters  AB  and  PQ  diminished  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion,  is  converted  into  the  said  spheroid;  and  the  force  of  gravity  in  A,  in 
either  case,  is  diminished  nearly  in  the  same  proportion.  Therefore  the  force  of 
gravity  in  A  tow'ards  the  sphere  described  about  the  centre  C  mth  the  radius 


Aa 


B 


290  Mathematical  Principles 

AC,  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  in  A  towards  the  earth  as  126  is  to  1253^.  And 
the  force  of  gravity  in  the  place  Q  towards  the  sphere  described  about  the 
centre  C  with  the  radius  QC,  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  place  A  towards 
the  sphere  described  about  the  centre  C  with  the  radius  AC,  in  the  proportion 
of  the  diameters  (by  Prop.  72,  Book  i),  that  is,  as  100  to  101.  If,  therefore,  Ave 
compound  those  three  proportions  126  to  125,  126  to  1253^,  and  100  to  101, 
into  one,  the  force  of  gravity  in  the  place  Q  toAvards  the  earth  Avill  be  to  the 
force  of  gravity  in  the  place  A  toAvards  the  earth  as  126  •  126  •  100  to  125  •  1253/2  • 
101;  or  as  501  to  500. 

Noav  since  (by  Cor.  iii.  Prop.  91,  Book  i)  the  force  of  gravity  in  either  leg 
of  the  canal  ACca,  or  QCcg,  is  as  the  distance  of  the  places  from  the  centre  of 
the  earth,  if  those  legs  are  conceived  to  be  divided  by  transverse,  parallel,  and 
equidistant  surfaces,  into  parts  proportional  to  the  Avholes,  the  Aveights  of  any 
number  of  parts  in  the  one  leg  ACca  Avill  be  to  the  Aveights  of  the  same  number 
of  parts  in  the  other  leg  as  their  magnitudes  and  the  accelerative  forces  of  their 
gravity  conjointly,  that  is,  as  101  to  100,  and  500  to  501,  or  as  505  to  501.  And 
therefore  if  the  centrifugal  force  of  every  part  in  the  leg  ACca,  arising  from  the 
diurnal  motion,  AA^as  to  the  AA^eight  of  the  same  part  as  4  to  505,  so  that  from  the 
Aveight  of  every  part,  conceived  to  be  di\dded  into  505  parts,  the  centrifugal 
force  might  take  off  four  of  those  parts,  the  Aveights  Avould  remain  equal  in  each 
leg,  and  therefore  the  fluid  Avould  rest  in  an  equilibrium.  But  the  centrifugal 
force  of  every  part  is  to  the  Aveight  of  the  same  part  as  1  to  289 ;  that  is,  the 
centrifugal  force,  Avhich  should  be  parts  of  the  Aveight,  is  only^sr  part  there¬ 
of .  And,  therefore,  I  say,  by  the  rule  of  proportion,  that  if  the  centrifugal  force  5^ 
make  the  height  of  the  Avater  in  the  leg  ACca  to  exceed  the  height  of  the  Avater 
in  the  leg  QCcg-  by  tw  part  of  its  AA^hole  height  the  centrifugal  force  Avill  make 
the  excess  of  the  height  in  the  leg  ACca  only  gw  part  of  the  height  of  the  Avater  in 
the  other  leg  QCcq;  and  therefore  the  diameter  of  the  earth  at  the  equator  is  to 
its  diameter  from  pole  to  pole  as  230  to  229.  And  since  the  mean  semidiameter 
of  the  earth,  according  to  Picard’s  mensuration,  is  19,615,800  Paris  feet,  or 
3923.16  miles  (reckoning  5000  feet  to  a  mile),  the  earth  Avill  be  higher  at  the 
equator  than  at  the  poles  by  85,472  feet,  or  17/^o  miles.  And  its  height  at  the 
equator  Avill  be  about  19,658,600  feet,  and  at  the  poles  19,573,000  feet. 

If,  the  density  and  periodic  time  of  the  diurnal  revolution  remaining  the 
same,  the  planet  Avas  greater  or  less  than  the  earth,  the  proportion  of  the  cen¬ 
trifugal  force  to  that  of  gravity,  and  therefore  also  of  the  diameter  betAveen  the 
poles  to  the  diameter  at  the  equator,  Avould  likeAvise  remain  the  same.  But  if 
the  diurnal  motion  Avas  accelerated  or  retarded  in  any  proportion,  the  centrifu¬ 
gal  force  would  be  augmented  or  diminished  nearly  in  the  same  proportion 
squared;  and  therefore  the  difference  of  the  diameters  Avill  be  increased  or 
diminished  in  the  same  squared  ratio,  very  nearly.  And  if  the  density  of  the 
planet  Avas  augmented  or  diminished  in  any  proportion,  the  force  of  gravity 
tending  toAvards  it  would  also  be  augmented  or  diminished  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  :  and  the  difference  of  the  diameters  on  the  contrary  Avould  be  dimin¬ 
ished  in  proportion  as  the  force  of  gravity  is  augmented,  and  augmented  in 
proportion  as  the  force  of  gravity  is  diminished.  Therefore,  since  the  earth,  in 
respect  of  the  fixed  stars,  revolves  in  23^.  56"*.,  but  Jupiter  in  9**.  56"*.,  and  the 
squares  of  their  periodic  times  are  as  29  to  5,  and  their  densities  as  400  to  943/2> 
the  difference  of  the  diameters  of  Jupiter  Avill  be  to  its  lesser  diameter  as 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  291 

•  97h  •TJ'F  to  1,  or  as  1  to  93^,  nearly.  Therefore  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  from 
east  to  west  is  to  its  diameter  from  pole  to  pole  nearly  as  103^  to  9}/s-  Therefore, 
since  its  greatest  diameter  is  37",  its  lesser  diameter  lying  between  the  poles 
will  be  33"  25'".  Add  thereto  about  3"  for  the  irregular  refraction  of  light,  and 
the  apparent  diameters  of  this  planet  will  become  40"  and  36"  25"';  which  are 
to  each  other  as  11%  to  10%,  very  nearly.  These  things  are  so  upon  the  sup¬ 
position  that  the  body  of  Jupiter  is  uniformly  dense.  But  now  if  its  body  be 
denser  tow^ards  the  plane  of  the  equator  than  towards  the  poles,  its  diameters 
may  be  to  each  other  as  12  to  11,  or  13  to  12,  or  perhaps  as  14  to  13. 

And  Cassini  observed,  in  the  year  1691,  that  the  diameter  of  Jupiter  reaching 
from  east  to  west  is  greater  by  about  a  fifteenth  part  than  the  other  diameter. 
Mr.  Pound  with  his  123-foot  telescope,  and  an  excellent  micrometer,  measured 
the  diameters  of  Jupiter  in  the  year  1719,  and  found  them  as  follow's: 


The  times 

Greatest  diameter 

Lesser  diameter 

The  diameters  to  each  other 

days 

hours 

Parts 

Paris 

January 

28 

6 

13.40 

12.28 

As  12  to  11 

March 

6 

7 

13.12 

12.20 

13^  to  12^ 

March 

9 

7 

13.12 

12.08 

l2^  tollVs 

April 

9 

9 

12.32 

11.48 

Uy2  to  133^ 

So  that  the  theory  agrees  with  the  phenomena;  for  the  planets  are  more 
heated  by  the  sun’s  rays  tow'ards  their  equators,  and  therefore  are  a  little  more 
condensed  by  that  heat  than  tow'ards  their  poles. 

Moreover,  that  there  is  a  diminution  of  gravity  occasioned  by  the  diurnal 
rotation  of  the  earth,  and  therefore  the  earth  rises  higher  there  than  it  does  at 
the  poles  (supposing  that  its  matter  is  uniformly  dense),  will  appear  by  the 
experiments  of  pendulums  related  under  the  following  Proposition. 


Proposition  20.  Problem  4 


Aa 


To  find  and  compare  together  the  weights  of  bodies  in  the  different  regions  of 
our  earth. 

Because  the  w'eights  of  the  unequal  legs  of  the  canal  of  water  ACQgca  are 
equal;  and  the  weights  of  the  parts  proportional  to  the  w'hole  legs,  and  alike 
situated  in  them,  are  one  to  another  as  the  w'eights  of  the  w^holes,  and  therefore 
equal  between  themselves;  the  weights  of  equal  parts,  and  alike  situated  in  the 

legs,  will  be  inversely  as  the  legs,  that  is,  inversely  as  230 
to  229.  And  the  case  is  the  same  in  all  homogeneous 
equal  bodies  alike  situated  in  the  legs  of  the  canal. 
Their  weights  are  inversely  as  the  legs,  that  is,  inversely 
as  the  distances  of  the  bodies  from  the  centre  of  the 
earth.  Therefore  if  the  bodies  are  situated  in  the  upper¬ 
most  parts  of  the  canals,  or  on  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
their  w'eights  will  be  one  to  another  inversely  as  their  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  centre.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  the 
w’^eights  in  all  other  places  round  the  w-hole  surface  of  the  earth  are  inversely 
as  the  distances  of  the  places  from  the  centre;  and,  therefore,  on  the  hypothesis 
of  the  earth’s  being  a  spheroid,  are  given  in  proportion. 

From  this  arises  the  theorem  that  the  increase  of  w'eight  in  passing  from  the 
equator  to  the  poles  is  nearly  as  the  versed  sine  of  double  the  latitude;  or. 


292  Mathematical  Principles 

which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  latitude;  and  the 
arcs  of  the  degrees  of  latitude  in  the  meridian  increase  nearly  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion.  And,  therefore,  since  the  latitude  of  Paris  is  48°  50',  that  of  places 
under  the  equator  00°00',  and  that  of  places  under  the  poles  90°;  and  the 
versed  sines  of  double  those  arcs  are  1,133,400,000  and  20,000,  the  radius  being 
10,000;  and  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  pole  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  at  the 
equator  as  230  to  229;  and  the  excess  of  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  pole  to  the 
force  of  gravity  at  the  equator  is  as  1  to  229;  the  excess  of  the  force  of  gravity 
in  the  latitude  of  Paris  will  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  equator  as  1  •  iM'ov 
to  229,  or  as  5667  to  2,290,000.  And  therefore  the  whole  forces  of  gravity  in  those 
places  will  be  one  to  the  other  as  2,295,667  to  2,290,000.  Therefore,  since  the 
lengths  of  pendulums  vibrating  in  equal  times  are  as  the  forces  of  gravity,  and 
in  the  latitude  of  Paris  the  length  of  a  pendulum  vibrating  seconds  is  3  Paris 
feet  and  8^  lines,  or  rather,  because  of  the  weight  of  the  air,  8^  lines,  the 
length  of  a  pendulum  vibrating  in  the  same  time  under  the  equator  will  be 
shorter  by  1.087  lines.  And  by  a  like  calculus  the  follo^\^ng  table  is  made. 


Latitude 

of 

the  place 

Length 
of  the 
pendulum 

Measure  of 
one  degree  in 
the  meridian 

Latitude 

of 

the  place 

Length 
of  the 
pendulum 

Measure  of 
one  degree  in 
the  meridian 

degrees 

feet 

lines 

toises 

degrees 

feet 

lines 

toises 

0 

3 

.  7.468 

56637 

6 

3 

.  8.461 

57022 

5 

3 

.  7.482 

56642 

7 

3 

.  8.494 

57035 

10 

3 

.  7.526 

56659 

8 

3 

.  8.528 

57048 

15 

3 

.  7,596 

56687 

9 

3 

.  8.561 

57061 

20 

3 

.  7.692 

56724 

50 

3 

.  8,594 

57074 

25 

3 

.  7.812 

56769 

55 

3 

.  8.756 

57137 

30 

3 

.  7.948 

56823 

60 

3 

.  8.907 

57196 

35 

3 

.  8.099 

56882 

65 

3 

.  9.044 

57250 

40 

3 

.  8.261 

56945 

70 

3 

.  9.162 

57295 

1 

3 

.  8.294 

56958 

75 

3 

.  9.258 

57332 

2 

3 

.  8.327 

56971 

80 

3 

.  9.329 

57360 

3 

3 

.  8.361 

56984 

85 

3 

.  9.372 

57377 

4 

3 

.  8.394 

56997 

90 

3 

.  9.387 

57382 

45 

3 

.  8.428 

57010 

By  this  table,  therefore,  it  appears  that  the  inequality  of  degrees  is  so  small 
that  the  figure  of  the  earth,  in  geographical  matters,  may  be  considered  as 
spherical;  especially  if  the  earth  be  a  little  denser  towards  the  plane  of  the 
equator  than  towards  the  poles. 

Now  several  astronomers,  sent  into  remote  countries  to  make  astronomical 
observations,  have  found  that  pendulum  clocks  do  accordingly  move  slower 
near  the  equator  than  in  our  climates.  And,  first  of  all,  in  the  year  1672,  M. 
Richer  took  notice  of  it  in  the  island  of  Cayenne;  for  when,  in  the  month  of 
August,  he  was  observing  the  transits  of  the  fixed  stars  over  the  meridian,  he 
found  his  clock  to  go  slower  than  it  ought  in  respect  of  the  mean  motion  of  the 
sun  at  the  rate  of  2"^.  28®.  a  day.  Therefore,  fitting  up  a  simple  pendulum  to 
vibrate  in  seconds,  which  were  measured  by  an  excellent  clock,  he  observed  the 
length  of  that  simple  pendulum;  and  this  he  did  over  and  over  every  week  for 
ten  months  together.  And  upon  his  return  to  France,  comparing  the  length  of 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  293 

that  pendulum  ^^'ith  the  length  of  the  pendulum  at  Paris  (which  was  3  Paris 
feet  and  8^  lines),  he  found  it  shorter  by  134  lines. 

Afterwards,  our  friend  Dr.  Halley,  about  the  year  1677,  arriving  at  the 
island  of  St.  Helena,  found  his  pendulum  clock  to  go  slower  there  than  at  Lon¬ 
don  without  marking  the  difference.  But  he  shortened  the  rod  of  his  clock  by 
more  than  34  of  an  inch,  or  134  lines;  and,  to  effect  this,  because  the  length  of 
the  screw  at  the  lower  end  of  the  rod  was  not  sufficient,  he  interposed  a  wooden 
ring  between  the  nut  and  the  ball. 

Then,  in  the  year  1682,  M.  Varin  and  M.  des  Hayes  found  the  length  of  a 
simple  pendulum  vibrating  in  seconds  at  the  Royal  Observatory  of  Paris  to  be 
3  feet  and  8^  lines.  And  by  the  same  method  in  the  island  of  Goree,  they  found 
the  length  of  an  isochronal  pendulum  to  be  3  feet  and  6^4  lines,  differing  from 
the  former  by  two  hnes.  And  in  the  same  year,  going  to  the  islands  of  Guad- 
aloupe  and  Martinico,  they  found  that  the  length  of  an  isochronal  pendulum 
in  those  islands  was  3  feet  and  634  hnes. 

After  this,  M.  Couplet,  the  son,  in  the  month  of  July,  1697,  at  the  Royal 
Observatory  of  Paris,  so  fitted  his  pendulum  clock  to  the  mean  motion  of  the 
sun,  that  for  a  considerable  time  together  the  clock  agreed  mth  the  motion  of 
the  sun.  In  November  folloving,  upon  his  arrival  at  Lisbon,  he  found  his  clock 
to  go  slower  than  before  at  the  rate  of  2°^.  13®.  in  24  hours.  And  the  following 
March,  coming  to  Paraiba,  he  found  his  clock  to  go  slower  than  at  Paris,  and 
at  the  rate  4“.  12®.  in  24  hours;  and  he  affirms  that  the  pendulum  vibrating  in 
seconds  was  shorter  at  Lisbon  by  234  lines,  and  at  Paraiba  by  3^4  lines,  than 
at  Paris.  He  would  have  done  better  to  have  reckoned  those  differences  134  nnd 
2^:  for  these  differences  correspond  to  the  differences  of  the  times  2“.  13®. 
and  4“.  12®.  But  this  gentleman’s  observations  are  so  gross,  that  we  cannot 
confide  in  them. 

In  the  following  years,  1699  and  1700,  M.  des  Hayes,  making  another  voyage 
to  America,  determined  that  in  the  islands  of  Cayenne  and  Granada  the  length 
of  the  pendulum  vibrating  in  seconds  was  a  small  matter  less  than  3  feet  and 
634  lines;  that  in  the  island  of  St.  Christopher  it  was  3  feet  and  634  lines;  and 
in  the  island  of  St.  Domingo  3  feet  and  7  lines. 

And,  in  the  year  1704,  Feuille,  at  Puerto  Bello  in  America,  found  that  the 
length  of  the  pendulum  vibrating  in  seconds  was  3  Paris  feet  and  only  5iV 
lines,  that  is,  almost  3  lines  shorter  than  at  Paris;  but  the  observation  was 
faulty.  For  afterwards,  going  to  the  island  of  Martinico,  he  found  the  length  of 
the  isochronal  pendulum  there  3  Paris  feet  and  5^/42  lines. 

Now  the  latitude  of  Paraiba  is  6®  38'  south;  that  of  Puerto  Bello,  9®  33'  north; 
and  the  latitudes  of  the  islands  Cayenne,  Goree,  Guadaloupe,  Martinico, 
Granada,  St.  Christopher,  and  St.  Domingo,  are  respectively  4®  55',  14®  40", 
15®  00',  14®  44',  12®  06',  17®  19',  and  19®  48',  north.  And  the  excesses  of  the 
length  of  the  pendulum  at  Paris  above  the  lengths  of  the  isochronal  pendulums 
observed  in  those  latitudes  are  a  little  greater  than  by  the  table  of  the  lengths 
of  the  pendulum  before  computed.  And  therefore  the  earth  is  a  little  higher 
under  the  equator  than  by  the  preceding  calculus,  and  a  little  denser  at  the 
centre  than  in  mines  near  the  surface,  unless,  perhaps,  the  heats  of  the  torrid 
zone  have  a  little  extended  the  length  of  the  pendulums. 

For  M.  Picard  has  observed  that  a  rod  of  iron,  which  in  frosty  weather  in  the 
winter  season  was  one  foot  long,  when  heated  by  fire,  was  lengthened  into  one 


294  Mathematical  Principles 

foot  and  ]/i  line.  Afterwards  M.  de  la  Hire  found  that  a  rod  of  iron,  which  in  the 
like  winter  season  was  6  feet  long,  when  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  summer  sun, 
was  extended  into  6  feet  and  %  line.  In  the  former  case  the  heat  was  greater 
than  in  the  latter;  but  in  the  latter  it  was  greater  than  the  heat  of  the  external 
parts  of  a  human  body;  for  metals  exposed  to  the  summer  sun  acquire  a  very 
considerable  degree  of  heat.  But  the  rod  of  a  pendulum  clock  is  never  exposed 
to  the  heat  of  the  summer  sun,  nor  ever  acquires  a  heat  equal  to  that  of  the 
external  parts  of  a  human  body;  and,  therefore,  though  the  3-foot  rod  of  a 
pendulum  clock  will  indeed  be  a  little  longer  in  the  summer  than  in  the  winter 
season,  yet  the  difference  will  scarcely  amount  to  34  hne.  Therefore  the  total 
difference  of  the  lengths  of  isochronal  pendulums  in  different  climates  cannot 
be  ascribed  to  the  difference  of  heat;  nor  indeed  to  the  mistakes  of  the  French 
astronomers.  For  although  there  is  not  a  perfect  agreement  between  their 
observations,  yet  the  errors  are  so  small  that  they  may  be  neglected;  and  in  this 
they  all  agree,  that  isochronal  pendulums  are  shorter  under  the  equator  than 
at  the  Royal  Observatory  of  Paris,  by  a  difference  not  less  than  134  lines,  nor 
greater  than  2%  lines.  By  the  observations  of  M.  Richer,  in  the  island  of 
Cayenne,  the  difference  was  134  lines.  That  difference  being  corrected  by  those 
of  M.  des  Hayes,  becomes  134  lilies  or  1^  lines.  By  the  less  accurate  observa¬ 
tions  of  others,  the  same  was  made  about  2  lines.  And  this  disagreement  might 
arise  partly  from  the  errors  of  the  observations,  partly  from  the  dissimilitude 
of  the  internal  parts  of  the  earth,  and  the  height  of  mountains;  partly  from  the 
different  temperatures  of  the  air. 

I  take  an  iron  rod  3  feet  long  to  be  shorter  by  a  sixth  part  of  one  line  in  winter 
time  with  us  here  in  England  than  in  the  summer.  Because  of  the  great  heats 
under  the  equator,  subtract  this  quantity  from  the  difference  of  134  lines  ob¬ 
served  by  M.  Richer,  and  there  will  remain  1)42  lines,  which  agrees  very  well 
with  Iyooo  lines,  obtained  earlier  by  the  theory.  M .  Richer  repeated  his  observa¬ 
tions,  made  in  the  island  of  Cayenne,  every  week  for  ten  months  together,  and 
compared  the  lengths  of  the  pendulum  which  he  had  there  noted  in  the  iron 
rods  with  the  lengths  thereof  which  he  observed  in  France.  This  diligence  and 
care  seems  to  have  been  wanting  to  the  other  observers.  If  this  gentleman’s 
observations  are  to  be  depended  on,  the  earth  is  higher  under  the  equator  than 
at  the  poles,  and  that  by  an  excess  of  about  17  miles;  as  appeared  above  by 
the  theory. 


Proposition  21.  Theorem  17 

That  the  equinoctial  points  go  backwards,  and  that  the  axis  of  the  earth,  by  a 
nutation  in  every  annual  revolution,  twice  vibrates  towards  the  ecliptic,  and  as  often 
returns  to  its  former  position. 

The  Proposition  appears  from  Cor.  xx.  Prop.  66,  Book  i;  but  that  motion  of 
nutation  must  be  very  small,  and,  indeed,  scarcely  perceptible. 

Proposition  22.  Theorem  18 

That  all  the  motions  of  the  moon,  and  all  the  inequalities  of  those  motions,  follow 
from  the  principles  which  we  have  laid  down. 

That  the  greater  planets,  while  they  are  carried  about  the  sun,  may  in  the 
meantime  carry  other  lesser  planets,  revolving  about  them,  and  that  those 
lesser  planets  must  move  in  ellipses  which  have  their  foci  in  the  centres  of  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  295 

greater,  appears  from  Prop.  65,  Book  i.  But  then  their  motions  will  be  in 
several  ways  disturbed  by  the  action  of  the  sun,  and  they  mil  suffer  such  in¬ 
equalities  as  are  observed  in  our  moon.  Thus  our  moon  (by  Cor.  ii,  iii,  iv,  and 
V,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  moves  faster,  and,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  earth,  de¬ 
scribes  an  area  greater  for  the  time,  and  has  its  orbit  less  curved,  and  therefore 
approaches  nearer  to  the  earth  in  the  syzygies  than  in  the  quadratures,  except¬ 
ing  so  far  as  these  effects  are  hindered  by  the  motion  of  eccentricity;  for  (by 
Cor.  IX,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  the  eccentricity  is  greatest  when  the  apogee  of  the 
moon  is  in  the  syzygies,  and  least  when  the  same  is  in  the  quadratures;  and 
upon  this  account  the  perigean  moon  is  swifter,  and  nearer  to  us,  but  the 
apogean  moon  slower  and  farther  from  us,  in  the  syzygies  than  in  the  quad¬ 
ratures.  Moreover,  the  apogee  goes  forwards,  and  the  nodes  backwards;  and 
this  is  done  not  with  a  regular  but  an  unequal  motion.  For  (by  Cor.  vii  and 
VIII,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  the  apogee  goes  more  swiftly  forwards  in  its  syzygies, 
more  slowly  backwards  in  its  quadratures;  and,  by  the  excess  of  its  progress 
above  its  regress,  advances  yearly  forwards.  But  the  nodes,  on  the  contrary 
(by  Cor.  xi.  Prop.  66,  Book  i),  are  quiescent  in  their  syzygies,  and  go  fastest 
back  in  their  quadratures.  Further,  the  greatest  latitude  of  the  moon  (by  Cor. 
X,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  is  greater  in  the  quadratures  of  the  moon  than  in  its 
syzygies.  And  (by  Cor.  vi,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon  is 
slower  in  the  perihelion  of  the  earth  than  in  its  aphelion.  And  these  are  the 
principal  inequalities  (of  the  moon)  taken  notice  of  by  astronomers. 

But  there  are  yet  other  inequalities  not  observed  by  former  astronomers,  by 
which  the  motions  of  the  moon  are  so  disturbed  that  to  this  day  we  have  not 
been  able  to  bring  them  under  any  certain  rule.  For  the  velocities  or  hourly 
motions  of  the  apogee  and  nodes  of  the  moon,  and  their  equations,  as  well  as 
the  difference  between  the  greatest  eccentricity  in  the  syzygies  and  the  least 
eccentricity  in  the  quadratures,  and  that  inequality  which  we  call  the  varia¬ 
tion,  are  (by  Cor.  xiv.  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  in  the  course  of  the  year  augmented 
and  diminished  as  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  apparent  diameter.  And  besides  (by 
Cor.  I  and  ii,  Lem.  10,  and  Cor.  xvi.  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  the  variation  is  aug¬ 
mented  and  diminished  nearly  as  the  square  of  the  time  between  the  quad¬ 
ratures.  But,  in  astronomical  calculations,  this  inequality  is  commonly  thrown 
into  and  combined  with  the  equation  of  the  moon’s  centre. 

Proposition  23.  Problem  5 

To  derive  the  unequal  motions  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  from  the 
motions  of  our  moon. 

From  the  motions  of  our  moon  we  deduce  the  corresponding  motions  of  the 
moons  or  satellites  of  Jupiter  in  this  manner,  by  Cor.  xvi.  Prop.  66,  Book  i.  The 
mean  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  outmost  satellite  of  Jupiter  is  to  the  mean 
motion  of  the  nodes  of  our  moon  in  a  proportion  compounded  of  the  squared 
ratio  of  the  periodic  times  of  the  earth  about  the  sun  to  the  periodic  times  of 
Jupiter  about  the  sun,  and  the  simple  ratio  of  the  periodic  time  of  the  satellite 
about  Jupiter  to  the  periodic  time  of  our  moon  about  the  earth;  and  therefore, 
those  nodes,  in  the  space  of  an  hundred  years,  are  carried  8°  24'  backwards  or 
forwards.  The  mean  motions  of  the  nodes  of  the  inner  satellites  are  to  the 
mean  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  outmost  as  their  periodic  times  are  to  the 
periodic  time  of  the  former,  by  the  same  Corollary,  and  are  thence  given.  And 


296  Mathematical  Principles 

the  forward  motion  of  the  apse  of  every  satellite  is  to  the  backward  motion  of 
its  nodes  as  the  motion  of  the  apogee  of  our  moon  to  the  motion  of  its  nodes  (by 
the  same  Corollary),  and  is  thence  given.  But  the  motions  of  the  apsides  thus 
found  must  be  diminished  in  the  proportion  of  5  to  9,  or  of  about  1  to  2,  on 
account  of  a  cause  which  I  cannot  here  stop  to  explain.  The  greatest  equations 
of  the  nodes,  and  of  the  apse  of  every  satellite,  are  to  the  greatest  equations  of 
the  nodes,  and  apogee  of  our  moon  respectively,  as  the  motions  of  the  nodes 
and  apsides  of  the  satellites,  in  the  time  of  one  revolution  of  the  former  equa¬ 
tions,  to  the  motions  of  the  nodes  and  apogee  of  our  moon,  in  the  time  of  one 
revolution  of  the  latter  equations.  The  variation  of  a  satellite  seen  from  Jupiter 
is  to  the  variation  of  our  moon  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  whole  motions  of 
their  nodes  respectively  during  the  times  in  which  the  satellite  and  our  moon 
(after  parting  from)  are  revolved  (again)  to  the  sun,  by  the  same  Corollary; 
and  therefore  in  the  outmost  satellite  the  variation  does  not  exceed  5®  12*^. 

Proposition  24.  Theorem  19 

That  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  sea  arise  from  the  actions  of  the  sun  and  moon. 

By  Cor.  xix  and  xx.  Prop.  66,  Book  i,  it  appears  that  the  waters  of  the  sea 
ought  twice  to  rise  and  t^vice  to  fall  every  day,  as  well  lunar  as  solar;  and  that 
the  greatest  height  of  the  waters  in  the  open  and  deep  seas  ought  to  follow  the 
approach  of  the  luminaries  to  the  meridian  of  the  place  by  a  less  interval  than 
six  hours;  as  happens  in  all  that  eastern  tract  of  the  Atlantic  and  Ethiopic  seas 
between  France  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope;  and  on  the  coasts  of  Chile  and 
Peru  in  the  South  Sea;  in  all  which  shores  the  flood  falls  out  about  the  second, 
third,  or  fourth  hour,  unless  where  the  motion  propagated  from  the  deep  ocean 
is  by  the  shallowness  of  the  channels,  through  which  it  passes  to  some  partic¬ 
ular  places,  retarded  to  the  fifth,  sixth,  or  seventh  hour,  and  even  later.  The 
hours  I  reckon  from  the  approach  of  each  luminary  to  the  meridian  of  the 
place,  as  well  under  as  above  the  horizon;  and  by  the  hours  of  the  lunar  day  I 
understand  the  24th  parts  of  that  time  which  the  moon,  by  its  apparent  diurnal 
motion,  employs  to  come  about  again  to  the  meridian  of  the  place  which  it  left 
the  day  before.  The  force  of  the  sun  or  moon  in  raising  the  sea  is  greatest  in  the 
approach  of  the  luminary  to  the  meridian  of  the  place;  but  the  force  impressed 
upon  the  sea  at  that  time  continues  a  little  while  after  the  impression,  and  is 
afterwards  increased  by  a  new  though  less  force  still  acting  upon  it.  This  makes 
the  sea  rise  higher  and  higher,  till,  this  new  force  becoming  too  weak  to  raise  it 
any  more,  the  sea  rises  to  its  greatest  height.  And  this  vdW  come  to  pass,  per¬ 
haps,  in  one  or  two  hours,  but  more  frequently  near  the  shores  in  about  three 
hours,  or  even  more,  where  the  sea  is  shallow. 

The  two  luminaries  excite  two  motions,  which  mil  not  appear  distinctly,  but 
between  them  mil  arise  one  mixed  motion  compounded  out  of  both.  In  the 
conjunction  or  opposition  of  the  luminaries  their  forces  will  be  conjoined,  and 
bring  on  the  greatest  flood  and  ebb.  In  the  quadratures  the  sun  mil  raise  the 
waters  which  the  moon  depresses,  and  depress  the  waters  w'hich  the  moon 
raises,  and  from  the  difference  of  their  forces  the  smallest  of  all  tides  mil  follow. 
And  because  (as  experience  tells  us)  the  force  of  the  moon  is  greater  than  that 
of  the  sun,  the  greatest  height  of  the  waters  will  happen  about  the  third  lunar 
hour.  Out  of  the  syzygies  and  quadratures,  the  greatest  tide,  which  by  the 
single  force  of  the  moon  ought  to  fall  out  at  the  third  lunar  hour,  and  by  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  297 

single  force  of  the  sun  at  the  third  solar  hour,  by  the  compounded  forces  of  both 
must  fall  out  in  an  intermediate  time  that  approaches  nearer  to  the  third  hour 
of  the  moon  than  to  that  of  the  sun.  And,  therefore,  while  the  moon  is  passing 
from  the  syzygies  to  the  quadratures,  during  which  time  the  third  hour  of  the 
sun  precedes  the  third  hour  of  the  moon,  the  greatest  height  of  the  waters  Anil 
also  precede  the  third  hour  of  the  moon,  and  that,  by  the  greatest  interval,  a 
little  after  the  octants  of  the  moon;  and,  by  like  intervals,  the  greatest  tide  will 
follow  the  third  lunar  hour,  Avhile  the  moon  is  passing  from  the  quadratures  to 
the  syzygies.  Thus  it  happens  in  the  open  sea;  for  in  the  mouths  of  rivers  the 
greater  tides  come  later  to  their  height. 

But  the  effects  of  the  luminaries  depend  upon  their  distances  from  the  earth; 
for  Avhen  they  are  less  distant,  their  effects  are  greater,  and  AAhen  more  distant, 
their  effects  are  less,  and  that  as  the  cube  of  their  apparent  diameter.  Therefore 
it  is  that  the  sun,  in  the  Annter  time,  being  then  in  its  perigee,  has  a  greater 
effect,  and  makes  the  tides  in  the  syzygies  somewhat  greater,  and  those  in  the 
quadratures  somewhat  less  than  in  the  summer  season;  and  every  month  the 
moon,  Avhile  in  the  perigee,  raises  greater  tides  than  at  the  distance  of  fifteen 
days  before  or  after,  when  it  is  in  its  apogee.  From  this  it  comes  to  pass  that 
tAvo  highest  tides  do  not  folloAV  one  the  other  in  two  immediately  succeeding 
syzygies. 

The  effect  of  either  luminary  doth  likeAAise  depend  upon  its  declination  or 
distance  from  the  equator;  for  if  the  luminary  AA^as  placed  at  the  pole,  it  Avould 
constantly  attract  all  the  parts  of  the  Avaters  AAithout  any  intensification  or 
remission  of  its  action,  and  could  cause  no  reciprocation  of  motion.  And,  there¬ 
fore,  as  the  luminaries  decline  from  the  equator  toAA^ards  either  pole  they  aaiII, 
by  degrees,  lose  their  force,  and  on  this  account  aatU  excite  lesser  tides  in  the 
solstitial  than  in  the  equinoctial  syzygies.  But  in  the  solstitial  quadratures  they 
aatU  raise  greater  tides  than  in  the  quadratures  about  the  equinoxes;  because 
the  force  of  the  moon,  then  situated  in  the  equator,  most  exceeds  the  force  of 
the  sun.  Therefore  the  greatest  tides  occur  in  those  syzygies,  and  the  least  in 
those  quadratures,  AA'hich  happen  about  the  time  of  both  equinoxes;  and  the 
greatest  tide  in  the  syzygies  is  alAA^ays  succeeded  by  the  least  tide  in  the  quad¬ 
ratures,  as  AA'e  find  by  experience.  But,  because  the  sun  is  less  distant  from  the 
earth  in  AAinter  than  in  summer,  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  greatest  and  least 
tides  more  frequently  appear  before  than  after  the  vernal  equinox,  and  more 
frequently  after  than  before  the  autunmal. 

Moreover,  the  effects  of  the  luminaries  depend  upon  the  latitudes  of  places. 
Let  ApEP  represent  the  earth  covered  AAuth  deep  AA^aters;  C  its  centre;  P,  p  its 
poles;  AE  the  equator;  F  any  place  AAdthout  the  equator;  F/  the  parallel  of  the 

place;  Dd  the  correspondent  parallel  on 
the  other  side  of  the  equator;  L  the  place 
of  the  moon  three  hours  before;  H  the 
place  of  the  earth  directly  under  it ;  h  the 
opposite  place;  K,  k  the  places  at  90  de¬ 
grees  distance ;  CH,  Ch,  the  greatest  heights 
of  the  sea  from  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and 
CK,  CA"  its  least  heights;  and  if  AATth  the 
axes  H/i,  KA’,  an  elhpse  is  described,  and 
by  the  revolution  of  that  ellipse  about  its 


298  Mathematical  Principles 

longer  axis  H/i  a  spheroid  HFKhpk  is  formed,  this  spheroid  wll  nearly  repre¬ 
sent  the  figure  of  the  sea;  and  CF,  C/,  CD,  Cd,  will  represent  the  heights  of 
the  sea  in  the  places  F/,  Dd.  But  further;  in  the  said  revolution  of  the  ellipse 
any  point  N  describes  the  circle  NM  cutting  the  parallels  F/,  Dd,  in  any  places 
RT,  and  the  equator  AE  in  S;  CN  wll  represent  the  height  of  the  sea  in  all 
those  places,  R,  S,  T,  situated  in  this  circle.  Therefore,  in  the  diurnal  revolution 
of  any  place  F,  the  greatest  flood  vdll  be  in  F,  at  the  third  hour  after  the  ap- 
pulse  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian  above  the  horizon;  and  afterwards  the 
greatest  ebb  in  Q,  at  the  third  hour  after  the  setting  of  the  moon;  and  then  the 
greatest  flood  in  /,  at  the  third  hour  after  the  appulse  of  the  moon  to  the  merid¬ 
ian  under  the  horizon;  and,  lastly,  the  greatest  ebb  in  Q,  at  the  third  hour  after 
the  rising  of  the  moon ;  and  the  latter  flood  in  /  will  be  less  than  the  preceding 
flood  in  F.  For  the  whole  sea  is  divided  into  two  hemispherical  floods,  one  in 
the  hemisphere  KHA-  on  the  north  side,  the  other  in  the  opposite  hemisphere 
K/iA-,  which  we  may  therefore  call  the  northern  and  the  southern  floods.  These 
floods,  being  always  opposite  the  one  to  the  other,  come  by  turns  to  the  merid¬ 
ians  of  all  places,  after  an  interval  of  twelve  lunar  hours.  And  as  the  northern 
countries  partake  more  of  the  northern  flood,  and  the  southern  countries  more 
of  the  southern  flood,  thence  arise  tides,  alternately  greater  and  less  in  all 
places  \vithout  the  equator,  in  which  the  luminaries  rise  and  set.  But  the  great¬ 
est  tide  will  happen  when  the  moon  declines  towards  the  vertex  of  the  place, 
about  the  third  hour  after  the  appulse  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian  above  the 
horizon;  and  when  the  moon  changes  its  declination  to  the  other  side  of  the 
equator,  that  which  was  the  greater  tide  wll  be  changed  into  a  lesser.  And  the 
greatest  difference  of  the  floods  will  fall  out  about  the  times  of  the  solstices; 
especially  if  the  ascending  node  of  the  moon  is  about  the  first  of  Aries.  So  it  is 
found  by  experience  that  the  morning  tides  in  vdnter  exceed  those  of  the  eve¬ 
ning,  and  the  evening  tides  in  summer  exceed  those  of  the  morning;  at  Plym¬ 
outh  by  the  height  of  one  foot,  but  at  Bristol  by  the  height  of  fifteen  inches, 
according  to  the  observations  of  Colepress  and  Sturmy. 

But  the  motions  which  we  have  been  describing  suffer  some  alteration  from 
that  force  of  reciprocation,  which  the  waters,  being  once  moved,  retain  a  little 
while  hy  their  inertia.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  tides  may  continue  for 
some  time,  though  the  actions  of  the  luminaries  should  cease.  This  power  of 
retaining  the  impressed  motion  lessens  the  difference  of  the  alternate,  tides, 
and  makes  those  tides  which  immediately  succeed  after  the  syzygies  greater, 
and  those  which  follow  next  after  the  quadratures  less.  And  hence  it  is  that 
the  alternate  tides  at  Plymouth  and  Bristol  do  not  differ  much  more  from  each 
other  than  by  the  height  of  a  foot  or  fifteen  inches,  and  that  the  greatest  tides 
at  those  ports  are  not  the  first  but  the  third  after  the  syzygies.  And,  besides, 
all  the  motions  are  retarded  in  their  passage  through  shallow  channels,  so  that 
the  greatest  tides  of  all,  in  some  straits  and  mouths  of  rivers,  are  the  fourth  or 
even  the  fifth  after  the  syzygies. 

Further,  it  may  happen  that  the  tide  may  be  propagated  from  the  ocean 
through  different  channels  towards  the  same  port,  and  may  pass  quicker 
through  some  channels  than  through  others;  in  which  case  the  same  tide, 
divided  into  two  or  more  succeeding  one  another,  may  compound  new  motions 
of  different  kinds.  Let  us  suppose  two  equal  tides  fiovdng  towards  the  same 
port  from  different  places,  one  preceding  the  other  by  six  hours;  and  suppose 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  299 

the  first  tide  to  happen  at  the  third  hour  of  the  approach  of  the  moon  to  the 
meridian  of  the  port.  If  the  moon  at  the  time  of  the  approach  to  the  meridian 
was  in  the  equator,  every  six  hours  alternately  there  would  arise  equal  floods, 
which,  meeting  wth  as  many  equal  ebbs,  would  so  balance  each  other  that  for 
that  day  the  water  would  stagnate  and  be  quiet.  If  the  moon  then  declined 
from  the  equator,  the  tides  in  the  ocean  would  be  alternately  greater  and  less, 
as  was  said;  and  from  thence  two  greater  and  two  less  tides  would  be  alter¬ 
nately  propagated  towards  that  port.  But  the  two  greater  floods  would  make 
the  greatest  height  of  the  waters  to  fall  out  in  the  middle  time  between  both; 
and  the  greater  and  less  floods  would  make  the  waters  to  rise  to  a  mean  height 
in  the  middle  time  between  them,  and  in  the  middle  time  between  the  two  less 
floods  the  waters  would  rise  to  their  least  height.  Thus  in  the  space  of  twenty- 
four  hours  the  waters  would  come,  not  twice,  as  commonly,  but  once  only  to 
their  greatest,  and  once  only  to  their  least  height;  and  their  greatest  height,  if 
the  moon  declined  towards  the  elevated  pole,  would  happen  at  the  sixth  or 
thirtieth  hour  after  the  approach  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian;  and  when  the 
moon  changed  its  declination,  this  flood  would  be  changed  into  an  ebb.  An 
example  of  this  Dr.  Halley  has  given  us,  from  the  observations  of  seamen  in 
the  port  of  Batshaw,  in  the  kingdom  of  Tunquin,  in  the  latitude  of  20®  50' 
north.  In  that  port,  on  the  day  which  follows  after  the  passage  of  the  moon 
over  the  equator,  the  waters  stagnate :  when  the  moon  declines  to  the  north, 
they  begin  to  flow  and  ebb,  not  twice,  as  in  other  ports,  but  once  only  every 
day;  and  the  flood  happens  at  the  setting,  and  the  greatest  ebb  at  the  rising  of 
the  moon.  This  tide  increases  with  the  declination  of  the  moon  till  the  seventh 
or  eighth  day;  then  for  the  seven  or  eight  days  following  it  decreases  at  the 
same  rate  as  it  had  increased,  and  ceases  when  the  moon  changes  its  declina¬ 
tion,  crossing  over  the  equator  to  the  south.  After  which  the  flood  is  immedi¬ 
ately  changed  into  an  ebb ;  and  thenceforth  the  ebb  happens  at  the  setting  and 
the  flood  at  the  rising  of  the  moon;  till  the  moon,  again  passing  the  equator, 
changes  its  declination.  There  are  two  inlets  to  this  port  and  the  neighboring 
channels,  one  from  the  seas  of  China,  between  the  continent  and  the  island  of 
Leuconia;  the  other  from  the  Indian  Sea,  between  the  continent  and  the  island 
of  Borneo.  But  whether  there  be  really  two  tides  propagated  through  the  said 
channels,  one  from  the  Indian  Sea  in  the  space  of  twelve  hours,  and  one  from 
the  sea  of  China  in  the  space  of  six  hours,  which  therefore  happening  at  the 
third  and  ninth  lunar  hours,  by  being  compounded  together,  produce  those 
motions;  or  whether  there  be  any  other  circumstances  in  the  state  of  those 
seas,  I  leave  to  be  determined  by  observations  on  the  neighboring  shores. 

Thus  I  have  explained  the  causes  of  the  motions  of  the  moon  and  of  the  sea. 
Now  it  is  fit  to  subjoin  something  concerning  the  amount  of  those  motions. 

Proposition  25.  Problem  6 

To  find  the  forces  with  which  the  sun  disturbs  the  motions  of  the  moon. 

Let  S  represent  the  sun,  T  the  earth,  P  the  moon,  CADB  the  moon's  orbit. 
In  SP  take  SK  equal  to  ST ;  and  let  SL  be  to  SK  as  the  square  of  SK  to  SP : 
draw  LM  parallel  to  PT ;  and  if  ST  or  SK  is  supposed  to  represent  the  accel¬ 
erated  force  of  gravity  of  the  earth  towards  the  sun,  SL  will  represent  the 
accelerative  force  of  gravity  of  the  moon  towards  the  sun.  But  that  force  is 


300  Mathematical  Principles 

compounded  of  the  parts  SM  and  LM,  of  which  the  force  LM,  and  that  part 
of  SM  which  is  represented  by  TM,  disturb  the  motion  of  the  moon,  as  we  have 
shown  in  Prop.  66,  Book  i,  and  its  Corollaries.  Forasmuch  as  the  earth  and 
moon  are  revolved  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  the  motion  of  the 
earth  about  that  centre  ^vill  be  also  disturbed  by  the  like  forces;  but  we  may 
consider  the  sums  both  of  the  forces 
and  of  the  motions  as  in  the  moon, 
and  represent  the  sum  of  the  forces 
by  the  lines  TM  and  ML,  which  are 
analogous  to  them  both.  The  force 
ML  (in  its  mean  amount)  is  to  the 
centripetal  force  by  which  the  moon 
may  be  retained  in  its  orbit  revolv¬ 
ing  about  the  earth  at  rest,  at  the 
distance  PT,  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  periodic  time  of  the  moon  about 
the  earth  to  the  periodic  time  of  the  earth  about  the  sun  (by  Cor.  xvii,  Prop. 
66,  Book  i);  that  is,  as  the  square  of  27*^  •7*' •43™-  to  365^  •6''- 9“  • ;  or  as  1000 
to  178725;  or  as  1  to  178^3^0-  But  in  Prop.  4  of  this  book  we  found  that,  if 
both  earth  and  moon  were  revolved  about  their  common  centre  of  gravity, 
the  mean  distance  of  the  one  from  the  other  would  be  nearly  603^  mean  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  earth;  and  the  force  by  which  the  moon  may  be  kept  revolving 
in  its  orbit  about  the  earth  at  rest  at  the  distance  PT  of  603^  semidiameters  of 
the  earth,  is  to  the  force  by  which  it  may  be  revolved  in  the  same  time,  at  the 
distance  of  60  semidiameters,  as  603^  is  to  60:  and  this  force  is  to  the  force  of 
gravity  \vith  us  very  nearly  as  1  is  to  60-60.  Therefore  the  mean  force  ML  is 
to  the  force  of  gravity  on  the  surface  of  our  earth  as  1  •  603^  to  60  •  60  •  60  • 
178^3^0,  or  as  1  to  638092.6;  hence,  by  the  proportion  of  the  lines  TM,  ML, 
the  force  TM  is  also  given;  and  these  are  the  forces  with  which  the  sun  disturbs 
the  motions  of  the  moon.  q.e.i. 

Proposition  26.  Problem  7 

To  find  the  hourly  increment  of  the  area  which  the  moon,  by  a  radius  drawn  to 
the  earth,  describes  in  a  circular  orbit. 

We  have  above  sho^vn  that  the  area  which  the  moon  describes  by  a  radius 
drawn  to  the  earth  is  proportional  to  the  time  of  description,  excepting  so  far 
as  the  moon’s  motion  is  disturbed  by  the  action  of  the  sun;  and  here  we  propose 
to  investigate  the  inequality  of  the  moment,  or  hourly  increment  of  that  area  or 
motion  so  disturbed.  To  render  the  calculus  more  easy,  we  shall  suppose  the 
orbit  of  the  moon  to  be  circular,  and  neglect  all  inequalities  but  that  only 
which  is  now  under  consideration;  and,  because  of  the  immense  distance  of  the 
sun,  we  shall  further  suppose  that  the  lines  SP  and  ST  are  parallel.  By  this 
means,  the  force  LM  m\\  be  always  reduced  to  its  mean  amount  TP,  as  well  as 
the  force  TM  to  its  mean  amount  3PK.  These  forces  (by  Cor.  ii  of  the  Laws  of 
Motion)  compose  the  force  TL;  and  this  force,  by  letting  fall  the  perpendicular 
LE  upon  the  radius  TP,  is  resolved  into  the  forces  TE,  EL;  of  which  the  force 
TE,  acting  constantly  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  TP,  neither  accelerates  nor 
retards  the  description  of  the  area  TPC  made  by  that  radius  TP;  but  EL, 
acting  on  the  radius  TP  in  a  perpendicular  direction,  accelerates  or  retards  the 
description  of  the  area  in  proportion  as  it  accelerates  or  retards  the  moon.  That 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  301 

acceleration  of  the  moon,  in  its  passage  from  the  quadrature  C  to  the  conjunc¬ 
tion  A,  is  in  every  moment  of  time  as  the  generating  accelerative  force  EL, 
3PKTK 

that  is,  as  — — .  Let  the  time  be  represented  by  the  mean  motion  of  the 

moon,  or  (which  comes  to  the  same  thing)  by  the  angle  CTP,  or  even  by  the 
arc  CP.  At  right  angles  upon  CT  erect  CG  equal  to  CT;  and,  supposing  the 


quadrantal  arc  AC  to  be  divided  into  an  infinite  number  of  equal  parts  Pp, 
&c.,  these  parts  may  represent  the  like  infinite  number  of  the  equal  parts  of 
time.  Let  fall  pk  perpendicular  on  CT,  and  draw  TG  meeting  with  KP,  kp 
produced  in  F  and/;  then  will  FK  be  equal  to  TK,  and  Kk  be  to  PK  as  Pp  is  to 
Tp,  that  is,  in  a  given  proportion;  and  therefore  FK-K/r,  or  the  area  FK/r/, 


will  be  as 


3PKTK 
TP  ’ 


that  is,  as  EL;  and,  compounding,  the  whole  area  GCKF 


will  vary  as  the  sum  of  all  the  forces  EL  impressed  upon  the  moon  in  the  whole 
time  CP;  and  therefore  also  as  the  velocity  generated  by  that  sum,  that  is,  as 
the  acceleration  of  the  description  of  the  area  CTP,  or  as  the  increment  of  the 
moment  thereof.  The  force  by  which  the  moon  may  in  its  periodic  time  CADB 
of  27*^.  7^.  43“.  be  retained  revolving  about  the  earth  at  rest  at  the  distance 
TP,  would  cause  a  body  falling  in  the  time  CT  to  describe  the  length  3^CT, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  acquire  a  velocity  equal  to  that  with  which  the  moon 
is  moved  in  its  orbit.  This  appears  from  Cor.  ix.  Prop.  4,  Book  i.  But  since 
Kd,  drawn  perpendicular  on  TP,  is  hut  a  third  part  of  EL,  and  equal  to  the  half 
of  TP,  or  ML,  in  the  octants,  the  force  EL  in  the  octants,  where  it  is  greatest, 
will  exceed  the  force  ML  in  the  ratio  of  3  to  2;  and  therefore  will  be  to  that 
force  by  which  the  moon  in  its  periodic  time  may  be  retained  revolving  about 
the  earth  at  rest  as  100  is  to  ^-178723^,  or  11915;  and  in  the  time  CT  will 
generate  a  velocity  equal  to  tt^tf  parts  of  the  velocity  of  the  moon;  but  in 
the  time  CPA  will  generate  a  greater  velocity  in  the  proportion  of  CA  to  CT 
or  TP.  Let  the  greatest  EL  force  in  the  octants  be  represented  by  the  area 
FK  •  K^,  or  by  the  rectangle  HTP  •  Pp,  which  is  equal  thereto;  and  the  velocity 
which  that  greatest  force  can  generate  in  any  time  CP  will  be  to  the  velocity 
which  any  other  lesser  force  EL  can  generate  in  the  same  time  as  the  rectangle 
b^TP  •  CP  to  the  area  KCGF ;  but  the  velocities  generated  in  the  whole  time 
CPA  will  be  one  to  the  other  as  the  rectangle  3r^TP  •  CA  is  to  the  triangle  TCG, 


302  Mathematical  Principles 

or  as  the  quadrantal  arc  CA  is  to  the  radius  TP;  and  therefore  the  latter 
velocity  generated  in  the  whole  time  will  be  tytit  parts  of  the  velocity  of  the 
moon.  To  this  velocity  of  the  moon,  which  is  proportional  to  the  mean  moment 
of  the  area  (supposing  this  mean  moment  to  be  represented  by  the  number 
11,915),  we  add  and  subtract  the  half  of  the  other  velocity;  the  sum  11,9154-50, 
or  11,965,  will  represent  the  greatest  moment  of  the  area  in  the  syzygy  A;  and 
the  difference  1 1,915-50,  or  11,865,  the  least  moment  thereof  in  the  quadratures. 
Therefore  the  areas  which  in  equal  times  are  described  in  the  syzygies  and 
quadratures  are  one  to  the  other  as  11,965  to  11,865.  And  if  to  the  least  moment 
11,865  we  add  a  moment  which  shall  be  to  100,  the  difference  of  the  two  former 
moments,  as  the  trapezium  FKCG  is  to  the  triangle  TCG,  or,  which  comes  to 
the  same  thing,  as  the  square  of  the  sine  PK  is  to  the  square  of  the  radius  TP 
(that  is,  as  Pd  to  TP),  the  sum  mil  represent  the  moment  of  the  area  when  the 
moon  is  in  any  intermediate  place  P. 

But  these  things  take  place  only  in  the  hypothesis  that  the  sun  and  the 
earth  are  at  rest,  and  that  the  synodical  revolution  of  the  moon  is  finished  in 
21^.  7^.  43’".  But  since  the  moon’s  synodical  period  is  really  29^.  12^.  44“.,  the 
increments  of  the  moments  must  be  enlarged  in  the  same  proportion  as  the 
time  is,  that  is,  in  the  proportion  of  1,080,853  to  1,000,000.  Upon  which  account, 
the  whole  increment,  which  was  ri  parts  of  the  mean  moment,  mil  now 
become  i  ^  parts  thereof;  and  therefore  the  moment  of  the  area  in  the  quad¬ 
rature  of  the  moon  mil  be  to  the  moment  thereof  in  the  syzygy  as  11,023  —  50  to 
11,023+50;  or  as  10,973  to  11,073;  and  to  the  moment  thereof,  when  the  moon  is 
in  any  intermediate  place  P,  as  10,973  to  10,973 +Pd ;  that  is,  supposing  TP  =  100. 

The  area,  therefore,  which  the  moon,  by  a  radius  dra-wn  to  the  earth,  de¬ 
scribes  in  the  several  little  equal  parts  of  time,  is  nearly  as  the  sum  of  the 
number  219.46,  and  the  versed  sine  of  the  double  distance  of  the  moon  from 
the  nearest  quadrature,  considered  in  a  circle  which  hath  unity  for  its  radius. 
Thus  it  is  when  the  variation  in  the  octants  is  in  its  mean  quantity.  But  if  the 
variation  there  is  greater  or  less,  that  versed  sine  must  be  augmented  or  dimin¬ 
ished  in  the  same  proportion. 

Proposition  27.  Problem  8 

From  the  hourly  motion  of  the  moon  to  find  its  distance  from  the  earth. 

The  area  which  the  moon,  by  a  radius  dra^vn  to  the  earth,  describes  in  every 
moment  of  time,  is  as  the  hourly  motion  of  the  moon  and  the  square  of  the 
distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  conjointly.  And  therefore  the  distance  of 
the  moon  from  the  earth  varies  directly  as  the  square  root  of  the  area  and 
inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  hourly  motion,  taken  jointly.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  moon  is  given;  for  it  is  inversely 
as  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth.  Let  astronomers  try  how  accu¬ 
rately  this  rule  agrees  mth  the  phenomena. 

Cor.  II.  Hence  also  the  orbit  of  the  moon  may  be  more  exactly  defined  from 
the  phenomena  than  hitherto  could  be  done. 

Proposition  28.  Problem  9 

To  find  the  diameters  of  the  orbit,  in  which,  without  eccentricity,  the  moon  would  move. 

The  curvature  of  the  orbit  which  a  body  describes,  if  attracted  in  lines  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  orbit,  is  directly  as  the  force  of  attraction,  and  inversely  as 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


303 


the  square  of  the  velocity.  I  estimate  the  curvatures  of  lines  compared  one 
Avith  another  according  to  the  evanescent  ratio  of  the  sines  or  tangents  of  their 
angles  of  contact  to  equal  radii,  supposing  those  radii  to  be  infinitely  dimin¬ 
ished.  But  the  attraction  of  the  moon  towards  the  earth  in  the  syzygies  is  the 
excess  of  its  gravity  towards  the  earth  above  the  force  of  the  sun  2PK  (see 
Fig.,  Prop.  25),  by  which  force  the  accelerative  gravity  of  the  moon  towards 
the  sun  exceeds  the  accelerative  gravity  of  the  earth  toAvards  the  sun  or  is 
exceeded  by  it.  But  in  the  quadratures  that  attraction  is  the  sum  of  the  gravity 
of  the  moon  toAvards  the  earth,  and  the  sun’s  force  KT,  by  AA’hich  the  moon  is 

AT-bCT 

attracted  toAvards  the  earth.  And  these  attractions,  putting  N  for - - - , 


are  nearly  as 


178725  2000 


,  178725  ,  1000 
and  — h  .  ^  ^ 


or  as  178,725N-CT2- 


AT2  CT  N  CT2  '  AT  N’ 

2000AT2.CT,  and  178,725N  •  AT^+IOOOCT^- AT.  For  if  the  accelerative 
gravity  of  the  moon  toAvards  the  earth  be  represented  by  the  number  178,725, 
the  mean  force  ML,  AA'hich  in  the  quadratures  is  PT  or  TK,  and  draAvs  the 
moon  toAvards  the  earth,  Avill  be  1000,  and  the  mean  force  TM  in  the  syzygies 
Avill  be  3000;  from  Avhich,  if  Ave  subtract  the  mean  force  ML,  there  Avill  remain 
2000,  the  force  by  AA’hich  the  moon  in  the  syzygies  is  draAvn  from  the  earth, 
and  Avhich  we  above  called  2PK.  But  the  velocity  of  the  moon  in  the 
syzygies  A  and  B  is  to  its  velocity  in  the  quadratures  C  and  D  as  CT  is  to 
AT,  and  as  the  moment  of  the  area,  Avhich  the  moon  by  a  radius  draAAm  to 
the  earth  describes  in  the  syzygies,  is  to  the  moment  of  that  area  described 
in  the  quadratures  conjointly;  that  is,  as  ll,073CTisto  10,973AT.  Take  the 
square  of  this  ratio  inversely,  and  the  former  ratio  directly,  and  the  curvature 
of  the  moon’s  orbit  in  the  syzygies  Avill  be  to  the  curvature  thereof  in  the 
quadratures  as  120,406,729  •  178,725AT2  •  CT^  •  N  - 120,406,729  •  2000AT^  •  CT  is 
to  122,611,329  •  178,725AT2  •  CT^  •  N  +  122,611,329  •  lOOOCT^  •  AT,  that  is,  as 
2, 151,969AT  •  CT  •  N  - 24,081AT3  is  to  2, 191,371AT  •  CT  •  N-b  12,261CT3. 

Because  the  figure  of  the  moon’s  orbit  is  unknoAAUi,  let  us,  in  its  stead,  assume 
the  ellipse  DBCA,  in  the  centre  of  AA’hich  aa’c  suppose  the  earth  to  be  situated, 
and  the  greater  axis  DC  to  lie  betAveen  the  quadratures  as  the  lesser  AB  be- 
tAA’een  the  syzygies.  But  since  the  plane  of  this  ellipse  is  revolved  about  the 

earth  by  an  angular  motion,  and  the  orbit, 
Avhose  curvature  Ave  noAV  examine,  should  be 
described  in  a  plane  void  of  such  motion,  AA^e 
are  to  consider  the  figure  Avhich  the  moon,  Avhile 
it  is  revolved  in  that  ellipse,  describes  in  this 
plane,  that  is  to  say,  the  figure  Cpa,  the  several 
points  p  of  Avhich  are  found  by  assuming  any 
point  P  in  the  ellipse,  AA’hich  may  represent  the 
place  of  the  moon,  and  draAA’ing  Tp  equal  to  TP 
in  such  manner  that  the  angle  PTp  may  be  equal 
to  the  apparent  motion  of  the  sun  from  the  time 
of  the  last  quadrature  in  C;  or  (Avhich  comes  to 
the  same  thing)  that  the  angle  CTp  may  be  to 
the  angle  CTP  as  the  time  of  the  synodic  rev¬ 
olution  of  the  moon  to  the  time  of  the  periodic 
revolution  thereof,  or  as  29*^.  12^.  44“.  to  27*^. 


304 


Mathematical  Pkinciples 


7''.  43'".  If,  therefore,  in  this  proportion  we  take  the  angle  CTa  to  the  right 
angle  CTA.  and  make  Ta  of  equal  length  with  TA,  we  shall  have  a  the  lower 
and  C  the  upper  apse  of  this  orbit  Cpa.  But,  by  computation,  I  find  that  the 
difference  between  the  curvature  of  this  orbit  Cpa  at  the  vertex  a,  and  the 
curvature  of  a  circle  described  about  the  centre  T  with  the  interval  TA,  is  to 
the  difference  between  the  curvature  of  the  ellipse  at  the  vertex  A,  and  the  cur¬ 
vature  of  the  same  circle,  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  angle  CTP  to  the 
angle  CTp;  and  that  the  curvature  of  the  ellipse  in  A  is  to  the  curvature  of 
that  circle  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  TA  is  to  TC;  and  the  curvature  of  that 
circle  is  to  the  curvature  of  a  circle  described  about  the  centre  T  Avith  the 
radius  TC  as  TC  is  to  TA;  but  that  the  curvature  of  this  last  arch  is  to  the 
curvature  of  the  ellipse  in  C  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  TA  is  to  TC;  and 
that  the  difference  between  the  curvature  of  the  ellipse  in  the  vertex  C,  and 
the  curvature  of  this  last  circle,  is  to  the  difference  between  the  curvature  of 
the  figure  Tpa,  at  the  vertex  C,  and  the  curvature  of  this  same  last  circle,  as 
the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  angle  CTp  to  the  angle  CTP.  All  these  relations 
are  easily  derived  from  the  sines  of  the  angles  of  contact,  and  of  the  differences 
of  those  angles.  But,  by  comparing  those  ratios,  we  find  the  curvature  of  the 
figure  Cpa  at  a  to  be  to  its  curvature  at  C  as  AT®— CT'^-AT  is  to 
CT®-1-tVi^V  AT®-CT;  where  the  number  represents  the  difference  of 

the  squares  of  the  angles  CTP  and  CTp,  divided  by  the  square  of  the  lesser 
angle  CTP ;  or  (which  is  all  one)  the  difference  of  the  squares  of  the  times  21^. 
7'\  43“.  and  29^.  12‘".  44"".  divided  by  the  square  of  the  time  27^^.  7^.  43'". 

Since,  therefore,  a  represents  the  syzygy  of  the  moon,  and  C  its  quadrature, 
the  ratio  now  found  must  be  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  curvature  of  the 
moon’s  orb  in  the  syzygies  to  the  curvature  thereof  in  the  quadratures,  which 
we  found  above.  Therefore,  in  order  to  find  the  ratio  of  CT  to  AT,  let  us 
multiply  the  extremes  and  the  means  of  the  resulting  proportion,  and  the 
terms  which  come  out,  divided  by  AT-CT,  yield  the  following  equation: 
2062.79CT^  -  2,151,969N  •  CT®  +  368,676N  •  AT  •  CT® -t-  36,342AT2  •  CT®- 
362,047N  •  AT®  •  CT  -b  2,191,371N  •  AT®  +  4051.4AT4  =  0.  Now  if  for  the  half 
sum  N  of  the  terms  AT  and  CT  we  put  1,  and  x  for  their  half  difference, 
then  CT  will  be  =  1  -fa:,  and  AT  =  1  —  a:.  And  substituting  those  values  in  the 
equation,  after  resolving  thereof,  we  shall  find  a:  =  0.00719;  and  from  thence 
the  semidiameter  CT=  1.00719,  and  the  semidiameter  AT  =  0. 99281,  which 
numbers  are  nearly  as  70/^4,  and  693/24.  Therefore  the  moon’s  distance  from 
the  earth  in  the  syzygies  is  to  its  distance  in  the  quadratures  (setting  aside 
the  consideration  of  eccentricity)  as  693/24  to  703^^4;  or,  in  round  numbers,  as 


69  to  70. 


Proposition  29.  Problem  10 


To  find  the  variation  of  the  moon. 

This  inequality  is  due  partly  to  the  elliptic  figure  of  the  moon’s  orbit,  partly 
to  the  inequality  of  the  moments  of  the  area  which  the  moon  by  a  radius 
drawn  to  the  earth  describes.  If  the  moon  P  revolved  in  the  ellipse  DBCA 
about  the  earth  quiescent  in  the  centre  of  the  ellipse,  and  by  the  radius  TP, 
drawn  to  the  earth,  described  the  area  CTP,  proportional  to  the  time  of  de¬ 
scription;  and  the  greatest  semidiameter  CT  of  the  ellipse  was  to  the  least  TA 
as  70  to  69;  the  tangent  of  the  angle  CTP  would  be  to  the  tangent  of  the  angle 
of  the  mean  motion,  computed  from  the  quadrature  C,  as  the  semidiameter 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  305 

TA  of  the  ellipse  to  its  semidiameter  TC,  or  as  69  to  70.  But  the  description  of 
the  area  CTP  as  the  moon  advances  from  the  quadrature  to  the  syzygy,  ought 
to  be  in  such  manner  accelerated,  that  the  moment  of  the  area  in  the  moon’s 
syzygy  may  be  to  the  moment  thereof  in  its  quadrature  as  11,073  to  10,973;  and 
that  the  excess  of  the  moment  in  any  intermediate  place  P  above  the  moment 
in  the  quadrature  may  be  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  angle  CTP;  which  we 
may  effect  \vith  accuracy  enough,  if  we  diminish  the  tangent  of  the  angle  CTP 
in  the  ratio  obtained  from  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  number  10,973  to 
the  number  11,073,  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  the  number  68.6877  to  the  number 
69.  On  this  account  the  tangent  of  the  angle  CTP  vdll  now  be  to  the  tangent  of 
the  mean  motion  as  68.6877  is  to  70;  and  the  angle  CTP  in  the  octants,  where 
the  mean  motion  is  45°,  will  be  found  44°  27'  28",  which  subtracted  from  45°, 
the  angle  of  the  mean  motion,  leaves  the  greatest  variation  32'  32".  Thus  it 
would  be,  if  the  moon,  in  passing  from  the  quadrature  to  the  syzygy,  described 
an  angle  CTA  of  90°  only.  But  because  of  the  motion  of  the  earth,  by  which  the 
sun  is  apparently  transferred  forwards,  the  moon,  before  it  overtakes  the  sun, 
describes  an  angle  CTa,  greater  than  a  right  angle,  in  the  ratio  of  the  time  of 
the  synodic  revolution  of  the  moon  to  the  time  of  its  periodic  revolution,  that 
is,  in  the  ratio  of  29'^.  12^.  44®.  to  27'^.  7^.  43®.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  all 
the  angles  about  the  centre  T  are  dilated  in  the  same  ratio;  and  the  greatest 
variation,  which  otherwise  would  be  hut  32'  32",  now  augmented  in  the  said 
proportion,  becomes  35'  10". 

And  this  is  its  magnitude  in  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth, 
neglecting  the  differences  which  may  arise  from  the  curvature  of  the  great 
orbit,  and  the  stronger  action  of  the  sun  upon  the  moon  when  horned  and  new, 
than  when  gibbous  and  full.  In  other  distances  of  the  sun  from  the  earth,  the 
greatest  variation  is  in  a  ratio  compounded,  directly  of  the  square  of  the  ratio 
of  the  time  of  the  synodic  revolution  of  the  moon  (the  time  of  the  year  being 
given),  and  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  ratio  of  the  distance  of  the  sun  from 
the  earth.  And,  therefore,  in  the  apogee  of  the  sun,  the  greatest  variation  is 
33'  14",  and  in  its  perigee  37'  11",  if  the  eccentricity  of  the  sun  is  to  the  trans¬ 
verse  semidiameter  of  the  great  orbit  as  16  to  1000. 

Hitherto  we  have  investigated  the  variation  in  an  orbit  not  eccentric,  in 
which,  to  wit,  the  moon  in  its  octants  is  ahvays  in  its  mean  distance  from  the 
earth.  If  the  moon,  on  account  of  its  eccentricity,  is  more  or  less  removed  from 
the  earth  than  if  placed  in  this  orbit,  the  variation  may  be  something  greater, 
or  something  less,  than  according  to  this  rule.  But  I  leave  the  excess  or  defect 
to  the  determination  of  astronomers  from  the  phenomena. 

Proposition  30.  Problem  11 

To  find  the  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  moon  in  a  circular  orbit. 

Let  S  represent  the  sun,  T  the  earth,  P  the  moon,  NPw  the  orbit  of  the  moon, 
Npw  the  orthographic  projection  of  the  orbit  upon  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic; 
X,  n  the  nodes,  nTNw  the  line  of  the  nodes  produced  indefinitely;  PI,  PK 
perpendiculars  upon  the  lines  ST,  Qg;  Pp  a  perpendicular  upon  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic;  A,  B  the  moon’s  syzygies  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  AZ  a  perpen¬ 
dicular  let  fall  upon  Nn,  the  line  of  the  nodes;  Q,  q  the  quadratures  of  the  moon 
in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  pK  a  perpendicular  on  the  line  Qg  lying  be¬ 
tween  the  quadratures.  The  force  of  the  sun  to  disturb  the  motion  of  the  moon 


306 


Mathematical  Principles 


(by  Prop.  25)  is  twofold,  one  proportional  to  the  line  LM,  the  other  to  the  line 
MT,  in  the  scheme  of  that  Proposition;  and  the  moon  by  the  former  force  is 
drawn  towards  the  earth,  by  the  latter  towards  the  sun,  in  a  direction  parallel 
to  the  right  line  ST  joining  the  earth  and  the  sun.  The  former  force  LM  acts  in 
the  direction  of  the  plane  of  the  moon’s  orbit,  and  therefore  makes  no  change 
upon  the  situation  thereof,  and  is  upon  that  account  to  be  neglected;  the  latter 
force  MT,  by  which  the  plane  of  the  moon’s  orbit  is  disturbed,  is  the  same  with 
the  force  3PK  or  3IT.  And  this  force  (by  Prop.  25)  is  to  the  force  by  which  the 
moon  may,  in  its  periodic  times,  be  uniformly  revolved  in  a  circle  about  the 
earth  at  rest,  as  3IT  to  the  radius  of  the  circle  multiplied  by  the  number 
178.725,  or  as  IT  to  the  radius  thereof  multiplied  by  59.575.  But  in  this  cal¬ 
culus,  and  all  that  follows,  I  consider  all  the  lines  drawn  from  the  moon  to  the 
sun  as  parallel  to  the  line  which  joins  the  earth  and  the  sun;  because  what 
inclination  there  is  almost  as  much  diminishes  all  effects  in  some  cases  as  it 
augments  them  in  others;  and  we  are  now  inquiring  after  the  mean  motions 
of  the  nodes,  neglecting  such  niceties  as  are  of  no  moment  and  would  only  serve 
to  render  the  calculus  more  complicated. 

Now  suppose  PM  to  represent  an  arc  which  the  moon  describes  in  the  least 
moment  of  time,  and  ML  a  little  line,  the  half  of  which  the  moon,  by  the  im¬ 
pulse  of  the  said  force  3IT,  would  describe  in  the  same  time;  and  joining  PL, 
MP,  let  them  be  produced  to  m  and  I,  where  they  cut  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic, 
and  upon  Tw  let  fall  the  perpendicular  PH.  Now,  since  the  right  line  ML  is 
parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  therefore  can  never  meet  with  the  right 
line  ml  which  lies  in  that  plane,  and  yet  both  those  right  lines  lie  in  one  common 
plane  LMPfnl,  they  vill  be  parallel,  and  upon  that  account  the  triangles  LMP, 
ImF  mil  be  similar.  And  seeing  MPm  lies  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit,  in  which  the 
moon  did  move  while  in  the  place  P,  the  point  m  mil  fall  upon  the  line  Nn, 
which  passes  through  the  nodes  N,  n,  of  that  orbit.  And  because  the  force  by 
which  the  half  of  the  little  line  LM  is  generated,  if  the  Achole  had  been  together, 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  307 

and  at  once  impressed  in  the  point  P,  would  have  generated  that  whole  line, 
and  caused  the  moon  to  move  in  the  arc  whose  chord  is  LP;  that  is  to  say, 
would  have  transferred  the  moon  from  the  plane  MPmT  into  the  plane  LPZT; 
therefore  the  angular  motion  of  the  nodes  generated  by  that  force  Avill  be  equal 
to  the  angle  mTl.  But  ml  is  to  ?wP  as  ML  to  MP;  and  since  MP,  because  of  the 
time  given,  is  also  given,  ml  vdll  be  as  the  rectangle  ML  •  mP,  that  is,  as  the 

771/1 

rectangle  IT  -mP.  And  if  Tml  is  a  right  angle,  the  angle  mTl  mil  be  as  and 

Im 

IT  *  P772 

therefore  as  ,  that  is  (because  Tw  and  wP,  TP  and  PH  are  proper- 

IT  •  PH 

tional),  as  — therefore,  because  TP  is  given,  as  IT -PH.  But  if  the 

angle  TwZ  or  STN  is  oblique,  the  angle  wTZ  will  be  yet  less,  in  proportion  of  the 
sine  of  the  angle  STN  to  the  radius,  or  AZ  to  AT.  And  therefore  the  velocity 
of  the  nodes  is  as  IT  •  PH  •  AZ,  or  as  the  product  of  the  sines  of  the  three  angles 
TPI,  PTN,  and  STN. 

If  these  are  right  angles,  as  happens  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadratures, 
and  the  moon  in  the  syzygy,  the  little  line  ml  will  be  removed  to  an  infinite 
distance,  and  the  angle  mTl  mil  become  equal  to  the  angle  wPZ.  But  in  this 
case  the  angle  mPl  is  to  the  angle  PTM,  which  the  moon  in  the  same  time  by 
its  apparent  motion  describes  about  the  earth,  as  1  to  59.575.  For  the  angle 
mPZ  is  equal  to  the  angle  LPM,  that  is,  to  the  angle  of  the  moon’s  deflection 
from  a  rectilinear  path;  which  angle,  if  the  gravity  of  the  moon  should  have 
then  ceased,  the  said  force  of  the  sun  SIT  would  by  itself  have  generated  in 
that  given  time;  and  the  angle  PTM  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  the  moon’s  deflec¬ 
tion  from  a  rectilinear  path;  which  angle,  if  the  force  of  the  sun  SIT  should 
have  then  ceased,  the  force  alone  by  which  the  moon  is  retained  in  its  orbit 
would  have  generated  in  the  same  time.  And  these  forces  (as  we  have  above 
shown)  are  the  one  to  the  other  as  1  to  59.575.  Since,  therefore,  the  mean 
hourly  motion  of  the  moon  (in  respect  of  the  fixed  stars)  is  32""  56®  27^*^  123^*"^ 
the  hourly  motion  of  the  node  in  this  case  will  be  33®  10^*'  33*"^  12^.  But  in  other 
cases  the  hourly  motion  mil  be  to  33®  10^*'  33*"^  12'^  as  the  product  of  the  sines 
of  the  three  angles  TPI,  PTN,  and  STN  (or  of  the  distances  of  the  moon  from 
the  quadrature,  of  the  moon  from  the  node,  and  of  the  node  from  the  sun)  to 
the  cube  of  the  radius.  And  as  often  as  the  sine  of  any  angle  is  changed  from 
positive  to  negative,  and  from  negative  to  positive,  so  often  must  the  regressive 
be  changed  into  a  progressive,  and  the  progressive  into  a  regressive  motion. 
Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  nodes  are  progressive  as  often  as  the  moon 
happens  to  be  placed  between  either  quadrature,  and  the  node  nearest  to  that 
quadrature.  In  other  cases  they  are  regressive,  and  by  the  excess  of  the  regress 
above  the  progress,  they  are  monthly  transferred  backwards. 

Cor.  I.  Hence  if  from  P  and  M,  the  extreme  points  of  a  least  arc  PM,  on  the 
line  Qg  joining  the  quadratures  we  let  fall  the  perpendiculars  PK,  Mk,  and 
produce  the  same  till  they  cut  the  line  of  the  nodes  Nn  in  D  and  d,  the  hourly 
motion  of  the  nodes  will  be  as  the  area  MPDd,  and  the  square  of  the  line  AZ, 
conjointly.  For  let  PK,  PH,  and  AZ  be  the  three  said  sines,  viz.,  PK  the  sine 
of  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  quadrature,  PH  the  sine  of  the  distance 
of  the  moon  from  the  node,  and  AZ  the  sine  of  the  distance  of  the  node  from 
the  sun;  and  the  velocity  of  the  node  will  be  as  the  product  PK-PH-AZ.  But 


308  Mathematical  Principles 

PT  is  to  PK  as  PM  to  Kk;  and,  therefore,  because  PT  and  PM  are  given,  K/r 
will  be  as  PK.  Likewise  AT  is  to  PD  as  AZ  is  to  PH,  and  therefore  PH  is  as  the 
rectangle  PD-AZ;  and,  by  compounding  those  proportions,  PK-PH  is  as  the 
solid  content  K/r -PD-AZ,  and  PK-PH-AZ  as  KA^-PD-AZ^;  that  is,  as  the 
area  PDdM  and  KT?  conjointly.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  II.  In  any  given  position  of  the  nodes  their  mean  hourly  motion  is  half 
their  hourly  motion  in  the  moon’s  syzygies;  and  therefore  is  to  16®  35*^  16*'' 36^"  as 
the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  syzygies  is  to  the 
square  of  the  radius,  or  as  KT?  to  AT^.  For  if  the  moon,  by  an  uniform  motion, 
describes  the  semicircle  QAg,  the  sum  of  all  the  areas  PDdM,  during  the  time 
of  the  moon’s  passage  from  Q  to  M,  will  make  up  the  area  QMdE,  terminating 
at  the  tangent  QE  of  the  circle;  and  by  the  time  that  the  moon  has  arrived  at 
the  point  n,  that  sum  mil  make  up  the  whole  area  EQAn  described  by  the  line 
PD:  but  when  the  moon  proceeds  from  n  to  q,  the  line  PD  mil  fall  without  the 
circle,  and  describe  the  area  nqe,  terminating  at  the  tangent  qe  of  the  circle, 
which  area,  because  the  nodes  were  before  regressive,  but  are  now  progressive. 


must  be  subtracted  from  the  former  area,  and,  being  itself  equal  to  the  area 
QEN,  will  leave  the  semicircle  NQAw.  While,  therefore,  the  moon  describes  a 
semicircle,  the  sum  of  all  the  areas  PDdM  mil  be  the  area  of  that  semicircle; 
and  while  the  moon  describes  a  complete  circle,  the  sum  of  those  areas  will  be 
the  area  of  the  whole  circle.  But  the  area  PDdM,  when  the  moon  is  in  the  syzy¬ 
gies,  is  the  rectangle  of  the  arc  PM  into  the  radius  PT;  and  the  sum  of  all  the 
areas,  every  one  equal  to  this  area,  in  the  time  that  the  moon  describes  a  com¬ 
plete  circle,  is  the  rectangle  of  the  whole  circumference  into  the  radius  of  the 
circle;  and  this  rectangle,  being  double  the  area  of  the  circle,  will  be  double  the 
former  sum.  If,  therefore,  the  nodes  went  on  with  that  velocity  uniformly  con¬ 
tinued  which  they  acquire  in  the  moon’s  syzygies,  they  would  describe  a  space 
double  that  which  they  describe  in  fact;  and,  therefore,  the  mean  motion,  by 
which,  if  uniformly  continued,  they  would  describe  the  same  space  mth  that 
which  they  do  in  fact  describe  by  an  unequal  motion,  is  hut  one-half  of  that 
motion  which  they  are  possessed  of  in  the  moon’s  syzygies.  Wherefore,  since 
their  greatest  hourly  motion,  if  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadratures,  is  33®  10*'*' 
33iv  12^,  their  mean  hourly  motion  in  this  case  will  be  16®  35**'  16*'^  36'".  And 
seeing  the  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  is  everywhere  as  AZ^  and  the  area  PDrfM 
conjointly,  and,  therefore,  in  the  moon’s  syzygies,  the  hourly  motion  of  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  309 

nodes  is  as  AZ^  and  the  area  PDdM  conjointly,  that  is  (because  the  area 
PDdM  described  in  the  syzygies  is  given),  as  AZ^,  therefore  the  mean  motion 
also  will  be  as  AZ^;  and,  therefore,  when  the  nodes  are  mthout  the  quadra¬ 
tures,  this  motion  will  be  to  16®  35*^  16*’^  36"^  as  AZ^  to  AT^.  q.e.d. 

Proposition  31.  Problem  12 

To  find  the  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  moon  in  an  elliptic  orbit. 

Let  Qpmaq  represent  an  ellipse  described  with  the  greater  axis  Qg  and  the 
less  axis  ah ;  Q AgB  a  circle  circumscribed ;  T  the  earth  in  the  common  centre  of 
both;  S  the  sun;  p  the  moon  moving  in  this  ellipse;  and  pm  an  arc  which  it 
describes  in  the  least  moment  of  time;  N  and  n  the  nodes  joined  by  the  line 
Nn;  pK  and  mk  perpendiculars  upon  the  axis  Qg,  produced  both  ways  till  they 
meet  the  circle  in  P  and  M,  and  the  line  of  the  nodes  in  D  and  d.  And  if  the 
moon,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  earth,  describes  an  area  proportional  to  the 
time  of  description,  the  hourly  motion  of  the  node  in  the  ellipse  will  be  as  the 
area  pDdm  and  AZ^  conjointly. 

For  let  PF  touch  the  circle  in  P,  and  produced  meet  TN  in  F;  and  pf  touch 
the  ellipse  in  p,  and  produced  meet  the  same  TN  in/,  and  both  tangents  concur 
in  the  axis  TQ  at  Y ;  and  let  ML  represent  the  space  which  the  moon,  by  the 
impulse  of  the  above-mentioned  force  3IT  or  3PK,  would  describe  with  a 
transverse  motion,  in  the  meantime  while  revolving  in  the  circle  it  describes 
the  arc  PM ;  and  ml  denote  the  space  which  the  moon  revolving  in  the  ellipse 
would  describe  in  the  same  time  by  the  impulse  of  the  same  force  3IT  or  3PK; 
and  let  LP  and  Ip  be  produced  till  they  meet  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  in  G  and  g, 
and  FG  and  fg  be  joined,  of  which  FG  produced  may  cut  pf,  pg,  and  TQ,  in 


310 


Mathematical  Principles 


c.  e,  and  R  respectively;  and  fg  produced  may  cut  TQ  in  r.  Because  the  force 
SIT  or  3PK  in  the  circle  is  to  the  force  SIT  or  3pK  in  the  ellipse  as  PK  to  pK, 
or  as  AT  to  aT,  the  space  ML  generated  by  the  former  force  will  be  to  the 
space  ?nl  generated  by  the  latter  as  PK  to  pK;  that  is,  because  of  the  similar 
figures  PYKp  and  FYRc,  as  FR  to  cR.  But  (because  of  the  similar  triangles 
PLM,  PGF)  ML  is  to  FG  as  PL  is  to  PG,  that  is  (on  account  of  the  parallels 
Lk,  PK,  GR),  as  pi  is  to  pe,  that  is  (because  of  the  similar  triangles  plm,  cpe), 
as  bn  is  to  ce;  and  inversely  as  LM  is  to  hn,  or  as  FR  is  to  cR,  so  is  FG  to  ce. 
And  therefore  iifg  was  to  ce  as/?/  to  cY,  that  is,  as/r  to  cR  (that  is,  as/r  to  FR 
and  FR  to  cR  conjointly,  that  is,  as/T  to  FT,  and  FG  to  ce  conjointly),  because 
the  ratio  of  FG  to  ce,  expunged  on  both  sides,  leaves  the  ratios  fg  to  FG  and 
/T  to  FT,  fg  would  be  to  FG  as/T  to  FT;  and,  therefore,  the  angles  which  FG 
and  fg  would  subtend  at  the  earth  T  would  be  equal  to  each  other.  But  these 
angles  (by  what  we  have  shown  in  the  preceding  Proposition)  are  the  motions 
of  the  nodes,  while  the  moon  describes  in  the  circle  the  arc  PM,  in  the  ellipse 
the  arc  pm;  and  therefore  the  motions  of  the  nodes  in  the  circle  and  in  the 
ellipse  would  be  equal  to  each  other.  Thus,  I  say,  it  would  be,  if  fg  was  to  ce  as 

C6  *  f  Y 

/Y  to  cY,  that  is,  if  fg  was  equal  to  ‘  because  of  the  similar  triangles 

C6  •  fv 

fgp,  cep,  fg  is  to  ce  as/p  to  cp;  and  therefore /gf  is  equal  to  — and  therefore 

cp 

the  angle  which  fg  subtends  in  fact  is  to  the  former  angle  which  FG  subtends, 
that  is  to  say,  the  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  ellipse  is  to  the  motion  of  the 

same  in  the  circle  as  this  fg  or  — —  to  the  former/^  or  — that  is,  as/p-cY 

cp  c  1 

to /Y -cp,  or  as  fp  to /Y,  and  cY  to  cp;  that  is,  if  ph  parallel  to  TN  meet  FP  in 
h,  as  Fh  to  FY  and  FY  to  FP;  that  is,  as  Fh  to  FP  or  Dp  to  DP,  and  therefore 
as  the  area  Dprnd  to  the  area  DPMd.  And,  therefore,  seeing  (by  Cor.  i.  Prop. 
30)  the  latter  area  and  AZ^  conjointly  are  proportional  to  the  hourly  motion  of 
the  nodes  in  the  circle,  the  former  area  and  AZ-  conjointly  will  be  proportional 
to  the  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  ellipse.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Since,  therefore,  in  any  given  position  of  the  nodes,  the  sum  of  all  the 
areas  pF)dm,  in  the  time  while  the  moon  is  carried  from  the  quadrature  to  any 
place?/?,  is  the  area  mpQEd  terminated  at  the  tangent  of  the  ellipse  QE;  and  the 
sum  of  all  those  areas,  in  one  entire  revolution,  is  the  area  of  the  whole  ellipse; 
the  mean  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  ellipse  vill  be  to  the  mean  motion  of  the 
nodes  in  the  circle  as  the  ellipse  to  the  circle;  that  is,  as  Ta  to  TA,  or  69  to  70. 
And,  therefore,  since  (by  Cor.  ii.  Prop.  30)  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes 
in  the  circle  is  to  16®  35*^  ,16''^  36^  as  AZ^  to  AT“,  if  we  take  the  angle  16®  21**^  3*'^ 
30^  to  the  angle  16®  35*^  16“''  36"^  as  69  to  70,  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes 
in  the  ellipses  will  be  to  16®  3*'^  30'^  as  AZ^  to  AT^;  that  is,  as  the  square  of 

the  sine  of  the  distance  of  the  node  from  the  sun  to  the  square  of  the  radius. 

But  the  moon,  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  earth,  describes  the  area  in  the 
syzygies  with  a  greater  velocity  than  it  does  that  in  the  quadratures,  and  upon 
that  account  the  time  is  contracted  in  the  syzygies,  and  prolonged  in  the  quad¬ 
ratures;  and  together  with  the  time  the  motion  of  the  nodes  is  likewise  aug¬ 
mented  or  diminished.  But  the  moment  of  the  area  in  the  quadratures  of  the 
moon  was  to  the  moment  thereof  in  the  syzygies  as  10,973  to  11,073;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  mean  moment  in  the  octants  is  to  the  excess  in  the  syzygies,  and  to  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  311 

defect  in  the  quadratures,  as  11,023,  the  half-sum  of  those  numbers,  is  to  their 
half-difference  50.  Wherefore,  since  the  time  of  the  moon  in  the  several  little 
equal  parts  of  its  orbit  is  inversely  as  its  velocity,  the  mean  time  in  the  octants 
will  be  to  the  excess  of  the  time  in  the  quadratures,  and  to  the  defect  of  the 
time  in  the  syzygies  arising  from  this  cause,  nearly  as  11,023  to  50.  But,  reckon¬ 
ing  from  the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies,  I  find  that  the  excess  of  the  moments 
of  the  area,  in  the  several  places  above  the  least  moment  in  the  quadratures, 
is  nearly  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  moon’s  distance  from  the  quadratures; 
and  therefore  the  difference  between  the  moment  in  any  place,  and  the  mean 
moment  in  the  octants,  is  as  the  difference  between  the  square  of  the  sine  of 
the  moon’s  distance  from  the  quadratures,  and  the  square  of  the  sine  of  45 
degrees,  or  half  the  square  of  the  radius;  and  the  increment  of  the  time  in  the 
several  places  between  the  octants  and  quadratures,  and  the  decrement  thereof 
between  the  octants  and  syzygies,  is  in  the  same  proportion.  But  the  motion  of 
the  nodes,  while  the  moon  describes  the  several  little  equal  parts  of  its  orbit, 
is  accelerated  or  retarded  as  the  square  of  the  time;  for  that  motion,  while  the 
moon  describes  PM,  is  (other  things  being  equal)  as  ML,  and  ML  varies  as  the 
square  of  the  time.  Wherefore,  the  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  syzygies,  in  the 
time  while  the  moon  describes  given  little  parts  of  its  orbit,  is  diminished  as 
the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  number  11,073  to  the  number  11,023;  and  the 
decrement  is  to  the  remaining  motion  as  100  to  10,973;  but  to  the  whole  motion 
is  as  100  to  11,073,  nearly.  But  the  decrement  in  the  places  between  the  octants 
and  syzygies,  and  the  increment  in  the  places  between  the  octants  and  quad¬ 
ratures,  is  to  this  decrement  nearly  as  the  whole  motion  in  these  places  to  the 
whole  motion  in  the  syzygies,  and  the  difference  between  the  square  of  the 
sine  of  the  moon’s  distance  from  the  quadrature,  and  the  half-square  of  the 
radius,  is  to  the  half-square  of  the  radius  conjointly.  Wherefore,  if  the  nodes 
are  in  the  quadratures,  and  we  take  two  places,  one  on  one  side,  one  on  the 
other,  equally  distant  from  the  octant  and  other  two  distant  by  the  same  inter¬ 
val,  one  from  the  syzygy,  the  other  from  the  quadrature,  and  from  the  decre¬ 
ments  of  the  motions  in  the  two  places  between  the  syzygy  and  octant  we 
subtract  the  increments  of  the  motions  in  the  two  other  places  between  the 
octant  and  the  quadrature,  the  remaining  decrement  ^xi\\  be  equal  to  the  decre¬ 
ment  in  the  syzygy,  as  will  easily  appear  by  computation;  and  therefore  the 
mean  decrement,  which  ought  to  be  subtracted  from  the  mean  motion  of  the 
nodes,  is  the  fourth  part  of  the  decrement  in  the  syzygy.  The  whole  hourly 
motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  syzygies  (when  the  moon  by  a  radius  dravm  to  the 
earth  was  supposed  to  describe  an  area  proportional  to  the  time)  was  32®  42‘^ 
7“'^.  And  we  have  shown  that  the  decrement  of  the  motion  of  the  nodes,  in  the 
time  while  the  moon,  now  moving  with  greater  velocity,  describes  the  same 
space,  was  to  this  motion  as  100  to  11,073;  and  therefore  this  decrement  is  17‘^ 
43 IV  j^j^v  fourth  part  of  which  4^^  25^"^  subtracted  from  the  mean  hourly 
motion  above  found,  16®  2P^  3'"^  30^,  leaves  16®  16*^  37‘'^  42"^,  their  correct  mean 
hourly  motion. 

If  the  nodes  are  without  the  quadratures,  and  two  places  are  considered, 
one  on  one  side,  one  on  the  other,  equally  distant  from  the  syzygies,  the  sum 
of  the  motions  of  the  nodes,  when  the  moon  is  in  those  places,  will  be  to  the 
sum  of  their  motions,  when  the  moon  is  in  the  same  places  and  the  nodes  in  the 
quadratures,  as  AZ-  to  AT^.  And  the  decrements  of  the  motions  arising  from 


312  Mathematical  Principles 

the  causes  but  now  explained  will  be  mutually  as  the  motions  themselves,  and 
therefore  the  remaining  motions  will  be  mutually  between  themselves  as  AZ^ 
to  AT^;  and  the  mean  motions  vdll  be  as  the  remaining  motions.  And,  therefore, 
in  any  given  position  of  the  nodes,  their  correct  mean  hourly  motion  is  to  16® 
16th  37iv  42v  ^2^  to  AT^;  that  is,  as  the  square  of  the  sine  of  the  distance  of 

the  nodes  from  the  syzygies  to  the  square  of  the  radius. 

Proposition  32.  Problem  13 

To  find  the  mean  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  moon. 

The  yearly  mean  motion  is  the  sum  of  all  the  mean  hourly  motions  through¬ 
out  the  course  of  the  year.  Suppose  that  the  node  is  in  N,  and  that,  after  every 
hour  is  elapsed,  it  is  drawn  back  again  to  its  former  place;  so  that,  notwith¬ 
standing  its  proper  motion,  it  may  constantly  remain  in  the  same  situation 
vith  respect  to  the  fixed  stars;  while  in  the  meantime  the  sun  S,  by  the  motion 
of  the  earth,  is  seen  to  leave  the  node,  and  to  proceed  till  it  completes  its  ap¬ 
parent  annual  course  by  an  uniform  motion.  Let  Aa  represent  a  given  least  arc, 
which  the  right  line  TS  always  drawn  to  the  sun,  by  its  intersection  wth  the 
circle  NAn,  describes  in  the  least  given  moment  of  time;  and  the  mean  hourly 
motion  (from  what  we  have  above  shown)  vdll  be  as  AZ^  that  is  (because  AZ 
and  ZY  are  proportional),  as  the  rectangle  of  AZ  into  ZY,  that  is,  as  the  area 
AZYa;  and  the  sum  of  all  the  mean  hourly  motions  from  the  beginning  will  be 
as  the  sum  of  all  the  areas  aYZA,  that  is,  as  the  area  NAZ.  But  the  greatest 
AZYa  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  of  the  arc  Aa  into  the  radius  of  the  circle;  and 
therefore  the  sum  of  all  these  rectangles  in  the  whole  circle  wall  be  to  the  like 
sum  of  all  the  greatest  rectangles  as  the  area  of  the  whole  circle  to  the  rectangle 
of  the  whole  circumference  into  the  radius,  that  is,  as  1  to  2.  But  the  hourly 
motion  corresponding  to  that  greatest  rectangle  was  16®  16*^  37 42''  and  this 
motion  in  the  complete  course  of  the  sidereal  year,  365^.  6^.  9®.,  amounts  to 
39°  38'  7"  50'";  and  therefore  the  half  thereof,  19°  49'  3"  55'",  is  the  mean 
motion  of  the  nodes  corresponding  to  the  whole  circle.  And  the  motion  of  the 
nodes,  in  the  time  while  the  sun  is  carried  from  N  to  A,  is  to  19°  49'  3"  55'"  as 
the  area  NAZ  to  the  whole  circle. 

Thus  it  would  be  if  the  node  was  after  every  hour  drawn  back  again  to  its 
former  place,  that  so,  after  a  complete  revolution,  the  sun  at  the  year’s  end 
would  be  found  again  in  the  same  node  which  it  had  left  when  the  year  began. 
But,  because  of  the  motion  of  the  node  in  the  meantime,  the  sun  must  needs 
meet  the  node  sooner ;  and  now  it  remains  that  we  compute  the  abbreviation 
of  the  time.  Since,  then,  the  sun,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  travels  360  degrees, 
and  the  node  in  the  same  time  by  its  greatest  motion  would  be  carried  39°  38' 
7"  50'",  or  39.6355  degrees;  and  the  mean  motion  of  the  node  in  any  place  N 
is  to  its  mean  motion  in  its  quadratures  as  AZ^  to  AT^;  the  motion  of  the  sun 
\\t11  be  to  the  motion  of  the  node  in  N  as  360  AT^  to  39.6355AZ2;  that  is,  as 
9.0827646AT2  to  AZ^  Therefore,  if  we  suppose  the  circumference  NAw  of  the 
whole  circle  to  be  divided  into  little  equal  parts,  such  as  Aa,  the  time  in  which 
the  sun  would  describe  the  little  arc  Aa,  if  the  circle  was  quiescent,  will  be  to 
the  time  in  which  it  w^ould  describe  the  same  arc,  supposing  the  circle  together 
with  the  nodes  to  be  revolved  about  the  centre  T,  inversely  as  9.0827646AT^ 
to  9.0827646AT^-|-AZ^;  for  the  time  is  inversely  as  the  velocity  with  wLich  the 
little  arc  is  described,  and  this  velocity  is  the  sum  of  the  velocities  of  both  sun 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  313 

and  node.  If,  therefore,  the  sector  NTA  represent  the  time  in  which  the  sun  by 
itself,  without  the  motion  of  the  node,  would  describe  the  arc  NA,  and  the 
indefinite!}"  small  part  ATa  of  the  sector  represent  the  little  moment  of  the 

time  in  which  it  would  describe 
the  least  arc  Aa;  and  (letting  fall 
aY  perpendicular  upon  Nw)  if  in 
AZ  we  take  dZ  of  such  length  that 
the  rectangle  of  dZ  into  ZY  may  be 
to  the  least  part  ATa  of  the  sector 
as  AZ2  to  9.0827646AT2+ AZ2;  that 
is  to  say,  that  dZ  may  be  to  ^AZ 
as  AT2  to  9.0827646AT2+AZ2;  the 
rectangle  of  dZ  into  ZY  wdll  repre¬ 
sent  the  decrement  of  the  time 
arising  from  the  motion  of  the  node, 
while  the  arc  Aa  is  described;  and 
if  the  curve  NdGw  is  the  locus  where  the  point  d  is  always  found,  the  curvi¬ 
linear  area  XdZ  vnW  be  as  the  whole  decrement  of  time  while  the  whole  arc 
NA  is  described;  and,  therefore,  the  excess  of  the  sector  NAT  above  the  area 
NdZ  will  be  as  the  whole  time.  But  because  the  motion  of  the  node  in  a  less 
time  is  less  in  proportion  to  the  time,  the  area  AaYZ  must  also  be  diminished 
in  the  same  proportion;  which  may  be  done  by  taking  in  AZ  the  line  eZ  of 
such  length,  that  it  may  be  to  the  length  of  AZ  as  A2?  to  9.0827646AT2-(-AZ2; 
for  so  the  rectangle  of  eZ  into  ZY  will  be  to  the  area  AZYa  as  the  decrement 
of  the  time  in  which  the  arc  Aa  is  described  to  the  whole  time  in  which  it  would 
have  been  described,  if  the  node  had  been  quiescent;  and,  therefore,  that  rec¬ 
tangle  vdll  be  as  the  decrement  of  the  motion  of  the  node.  And  if  the  curve 
NeFn  is  the  locus  of  the  point  e,  the  whole  area  NeZ,  w^hich  is  the  sum  of  all 
the  decrements  of  that  motion,  will  be  as  the  whole  decrement  thereof  during 
the  time  in  which  the  arc  AN  is  described;  and  the  remaining  area  NAe  wall  be 
as  the  remaining  motion,  which  is  the  true  motion  of  the  node,  during  the  time 
in  which  the  whole  arc  NA  is  described  by  the  joint  motions  of  both  sun  and 
node.  Now  the  area  of  the  semicircle  is  to  the  area  of  the  figure  NeFn  found 
by  the  method  of  infinite  series  nearly  as  793  to  60.  But  the  motion  correspond¬ 
ing  or  proportional  to  the  whole  circle  was  19°  49'  3"  55'";  and  therefore  the 
motion  corresponding  to  double  the  figure  NeFn  is  1°  29'  58"  2'",  which  taken 
from  the  former  motion  leaves  18°  19'  5"  53'",  the  whole  motion  of  the  node 
with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars  in  the  interval  between  two  of  its  conjunctions 
with  the  sun;  and  this  motion  subtracted  from  the  annual  motion  of  the  sun, 
360°,  leaves  341°  40'  54"  7'",  the  motion  of  the  sun  in  the  interval  between 
the  same  conjunctions.  But  as  this  motion  is  to  the  annual  motion  360°,  so  is 
the  motion  of  the  node  but  just  now  found  18°  19'  5"  53'"  to  its  annual  mo¬ 
tion,  which  will  therefore  be  19°  18'  1"  23'";  and  this  is  the  mean  motion  of 
the  nodes  in  the  sidereal  year.  By  astronomical  tables,  it  is  19°  21'  21"  50'". 
The  difference  is  less  than  part  of  the  w'hole  motion,  and  seems  to  arise 
from  the  eccentricity  of  the  moon’s  orbit,  and  its  inclination  to  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic.  By  the  eccentricity  of  this  orbit  the  motion  of  the  nodes  is  too  much 
accelerated ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  inclination  of  the  orbit,  the  motion 
of  the  nodes  is  somewhat  retarded,  and  reduced  to  its  just  velocity. 


N 


314 


Mathematical  Principles 


Proposition  33.  Problem  14 

To  find  the  true  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  moon. 

In  the  time  which  is  as  the  area  NTA  — NdZ  (in  the  preceding  Fig.)  that 
motion  is  as  the  area  NAe,  and  hence  is  given;  but  because  the  calculus  is  too 
difficult,  it  will  be  better  to  use  the  following  construction  of  the  Problem. 
About  the  centre  C,  with  any  radius  CD,  describe  the  circle  BEFD;  produce 
DC  to  A  so  as  AB  may  be  to  AC  as  the  mean  motion  to  half  the  mean  true 
motion  when  the  nodes  are  in  their  quadratures  (that  is,  as  19°  18'  1"  23'"  to 
19°  49'  3"  55'";  and  therefore  BC  is  to  AC  as  the  difference  of  those  motions 
0°  31'  2"  32'"  to  the  latter  motion  19°  49'  3"  55'",  that  is,  as  1  to  SS/^io).  Then 
through  the  point  D  draw  the 
indefinite  lineGg,  touching  the  Gl— 
circle  in  D ;  and  if  we  take  the 
angle  BCE,  or  BCF,  equal  to 
the  double  distance  of  the  sun 
from  the  place  of  the  node,  as 
found  by  the  mean  motion,  and 
drawing  AE  or  AF  cutting  the 
perpendicular  DG  in  G,  we 
take  another  angle  which  shall  be  to  the  whole  motion  of  the  node  in  the  interval 
between  its  syzygies  (that  is,  to  9°  11'  3")  as  the  tangent  DG  to  the  whole 
circumference  of  the  circle  BED,  and  add  this  last  angle  (for  which  the  angle 
DAG  may  be  used)  to  the  mean  motion  of  the  nodes,  while  they  are  passing  from 
the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies,  and  subtract  it  from  their  mean  motion  while 
they  are  passing  from  the  syzygies  to  the  quadratures,  we  shall  have  their  true 
motion;  for  the  true  motion  so  found  will  nearly  agree  with  the  true  motion 
which  comes  out  from  assuming  the  times  as  the  area  NTA  — NdZ,  and  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  node  as  the  area  NAe;  as  anyone  who  chooses  to  examine  and  make 
the  computations  will  find :  and  this  is  the  semimenstrual  equation  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  nodes.  But  there  is  also  a  menstrual  equation,  but  which  is  by  no 
means  necessary  for  finding  of  the  moon’s  latitude;  for  since  the  variation  of 
the  inclination  of  the  moon’s  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  is  liable  to  a 
twofold  inequality,  the  one  semimenstrual,  the  other  menstrual,  the  menstrual 
inequality  of  this  variation,  and  the  menstrual  equation  of  the  nodes,  so  mod¬ 
erate  and  correct  each  other,  that  in  computing  the  latitude  of  the  moon  both 
may  be  neglected. 

Cor.  From  this  and  the  preceding  Proposition  it  appears  that  the  nodes  are 
quiescent  in  their  syzygies,  but  regressive  in  their  quadratures,  by  an  hourly 
motion  of  16®  19*^'  26’^’;  and  that  the  equation  of  the  motion  of  the  nodes  in 
the  octants  is  1°  30';  all  of  which  exactly  agree  with  the  phenomena  of  the 
heavens. 


Scholium 

Mr.  Machin,  Professor  Gresham,  and  Dr.  Henry  Pemberton,  separately 
found  out  the  motion  of  the  nodes  by  a  different  method.  Mention  has  been 
made  of  this  method  in  another  place.  Their  papers,  which  I  have  seen,  con¬ 
tained  tAvo  Propositions,  and  exactly  agreed  with  each  other  in  both  of  them. 
Mr.  Machin’s  paper,  coming  first  to  my  hands,  I  shall  here  insert. 


THE  MOTION  OF  THE  MOON’S  NODES 


“Proposition  1 

“The  mean  motion  of  the  sun  from  the  node  is  defined  by  a  geometric  mean  'pro¬ 
portional  bet'ween  the  mean  motion  of  the  sun  and  that  mean  motion  with  which  the 
sun  recedes  with  the  greatest  swiftness  from  the  node  in  the  quadratures. 

“Let  T  be  the  earth’s  place,  Nn  the  line  of  the  moon’s  nodes  at  any  given 
time,  KTM  a  perpendicular  thereto,  TA  a  right  line  revolving  about  the  centre 
with  the  same  angular  velocity  with  which  the  sun  and  the  node  recede  from 
each  other,  in  such  sort  that  the  angle  between  the  quiescent  right  line  Nw  and 
the  revolving  line  TA  may  be  always  equal  to  the  distance  of  the  places  of  the 
sun  and  node.  Now  if  any  right  line  TK  be  divided  into  parts  TS  and  SK,  and 
those  parts  be  taken  as  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  sun  to  the  mean  hourly 
motion  of  the  node  in  the  quadratures,  and  there  be  taken  the  right  line  TH, 
a  mean  proportional  between  the  part  TS  and  the  whole  TK,  this  right  line  will 
be  proportional  to  the  sun’s  mean  motion  from  the  node. 

“For  let  there  be  described  the  circle  NKnM  from  the  centre  T  and  with  the 
radius  TK,  and  about  the  same  centre,  with  the  semiaxes  TH  and  TN,  let 
there  be  described  an  ellipse  NHnL;  and  in  the  time  in  which  the  sun  recedes 
from  the  node  through  the  arc  Na,  if  there  be  drawn  the  right  line  Tba,  the  area 
of  the  sector  NTa  wdll  be  the  exponent  of  the  sum  of  the  motions  of  the  sun  and 
node  in  the  same  time.  Let,  therefore,  the  extremely  small  arc  aA  be  that  which 
the  right  line  Tba,  revolving  according  to  the  aforesaid  law,  will  uniformly 
describe  in  a  given  interval  of  time,  and  the  extremely  small  sector  TAa  will  be 
as  the  sum  of  the  velocities  with  which  the  sun  and  node  are  carried  two  differ¬ 
ent  ways  in  that  time.  Now  the  sun’s  velocity  is  almost  uniform,  its  inequality 
being  so  small  as  scarcely  to  produce  the  least  inequality  in  the  mean  motion 
of  the  nodes.  The  other  part  of  this  sum,  namely,  the  mean  quantity  of  the 
velocity  of  the  node,  is  increased  in  the  recess  from  the  syzygies  in  a  squared 
ratio  of  the  sine  of  its  distance  from  the  sun  (by  Cor.,  Prop.  31  of  this  book), 
and,  being  greatest  in  its  quadratures  "with  the  sun  in  K,  is  in  the  same  ratio  to 
the  sun’s  velocity  as  SK  to  TS,  that  is,  as  (the  difference  of  the  squares  of  TK 
and  TH,  or)  the  rectangle  KHM  to  TH^.  But  the  ellipse  NBH  divides  the 
sector  ATa,  the  exponent  of  the  sum  of  these  two  velocities,  into  two  parts 
AB6a  and  BT6,  proportional  to  the  velocities.  For,  produce  BT  to  the  circle  in 
/3,  and  from  the  point  B  let  fall  upon  the  greater  axis  the  perpendicular  BG, 
which  being  produced  both  ways  may  meet  the  circle  in  the  points  F  and  / ;  and 
because  the  space  ABba  is  to  the  sector  TB5  as  the  rectangle  AB/3  is  to  BT- 
(that  rectangle  being  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  squares  of  TA  and  TB,  be¬ 
cause  the  right  line  A/3  is  equally  cut  in  T,  and  unequally  in  B),  therefore  when 
the  space  AB6a  is  the  greatest  of  all  in  K,  this  ratio  will  be  the  same  as  the  ratio 
of  the  rectangle  KHM  to  HT^.  But  the  greatest  mean  velocity  of  the  node  was 
shown  above  to  be  in  that  very  ratio  to  the  velocity  of  the  sun;  and  therefore  in 

315 


316  Mathematical  Principles 

the  quadratures  the  sector  ATa  is 
divided  into  parts  proportional  to  the 
velocities.  And  because  the  rectangle 
KHM  is  to  HT2  as  FB/  to  BG^,  and 
the  rectangle  AB/3  is  equal  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  FB/,  therefore  the  little  area 
ABba,  where  it  is  greatest,  is  to  the 
remaining  sector  TBb  as  the  rectangle 
ABjS  is  to  BG^.  But  the  ratio  of  these 
little  areas  always  was  as  the  rectangle 
AB/3  to  BT^;  and  therefore  the  little 
area  AB6o  in  the  place  A  is  less  than 
its  correspondent  little  area  in  the 
quadratures  in  the  squared  ratio  of 
BG  to  BT,  that  is,  in  the  squared 
ratio  of  the  sine  of  the  sun’s  distance  from  the  node.  And  therefore  the  sum 
of  all  the  little  areas  AB5a,  namely,  the  space  ABN,  vdll  be  as  the  motion  of 
the  node  in  the  time  in  which  the  sun  hath  been  going  over  the  arc  NA  since  he 
left  the  node;  and  the  remaining  space,  namely,  the  elliptic  sector  NTB,  will 
be  as  the  sun’s  mean  motion  in  the  same  time.  And  because  the  mean  annual 
motion  of  the  node  is  that  motion  which  it  performs  in  the  time  that  the  sun 
completes  one  period  of  its  course,  the  mean  motion  of  the  node  from  the 
sun  will  be  to  the  mean  motion  of  the  sun  itself  as  the  area  of  the  circle  is  to 
the  area  of  the  ellipse;  that  is,  as  the  right  line  TK  to  the  right  lineTH,  which  is 
a  mean  proportional  between  TK  and  TS;  or,  which  comes  to  the  same,  as  the 
mean  proportional  TH  to  the  right  line  TS. 

“Proposition  2 

“The  mean  motion  of  the  moon's  nodes  being  given,  to  find  their  true  motion. 

“Let  the  angle  A  be  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  mean  place  of  the  node, 

or  the  sun’s  mean  motion  from  the 
node.  Then  if  we  take  the  angle  B, 
whose  tangent  is  to  the  tangent  of  the 
angle  A  as  TH  to  TK,  that  is,  as  the 
square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  mean 
hourly  motion  of  the  sun  to  the  mean 
hourly  motion  of  the  sun  from  the 
node,  when  the  node  is  in  the  quadra¬ 
ture,  that  angle  B  will  be  the  distance 
of  the  sun  from  the  node’s  true  place. 
For  join  FT,  and,  by  the  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  the  last  Proposition,  the  angle 
FTN  ndll  be  the  distance  of  the  sun 
from  the  mean  place  of  the  node,  and 
the  angle  ATN  the  distance  from  the 
true  place,  and  the  tangents  of  these 
angles  are  between  themselves  as  TK  to  TH. 

“Cor.  Hence  the  angle  FTA  is  the  equation  of  the  moon’s  nodes;  and  the 
sine  of  this  angle,  where  it  is  greatest  in  the  octants,  is  to  the  radius  as  KH  is 


N 


N 


M 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  317 

to  TK+TH.  But  the  sine  of  this  equation  in  any  other  place  A  is  to  the  greatest 
sine  as  the  sine  of  the  sums  of  the  angles  FTN+ATN  is  to  the  radius;  that  is, 
nearly  as  the  sine  of  double  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  mean  place  of  the 
node  (namely,  2FTN)  to  the  radius. 

'‘Scholium 

"If  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  quadratures  be  16"  16'" 
37iv  42v^  is^  in  a  whole  sidereal  year,  39°  38'  7"  50'",  TH  will  be  to  TK  as 
the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  number  9.0827646  to  the  number  10.0827646, 
that  is,  as  18.6524761  to  19.6524761.  And,  therefore,  TH  is  to  HK  as  18.6524761 
to  1 ;  that  is,  as  the  motion  of  the  sun  in  a  sidereal  year  to  the  mean  motion  of 
the  node  19°  18'  1"  23%'". 

"But  if  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon’s  nodes  in  20  Julian  years  is  386°  50' 
16",  as  is  obtained  from  the  observations  made  use  of  in  the  theory  of  the  moon, 
the  mean  motion  of  the  nodes  in  one  sidereal  year  will  be  19°  20'  31"  58'"  and 
TH  will  be  to  HK  as  360°  to  19°  20'  31"  58'";  that  is,  as  18.61214  to  1 :  and  from 
hence  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes  in  the  quadratures  will  come  out 
16"  18'"  48'^.  And  the  greatest  equation  of  the  nodes  in  the  octants  will  be 
1°  29'  57".’’ 


Proposition  34.  Problem  15 

To  find  the  hourly  variation  of  the  inclination  of  the  moon's  orbit  to  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic. 

Let  A  and  a  represent  the  syzygies;  Q  and  q  the  quadratures;  N  and  n  the 
nodes;  P  the  place  of  the  moon  in  its  orbit;  p  the  orthographic  projection  of 
that  place  upon  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic ;  and  mTl  the  momentary  motion  of 
the  nodes  as  above.  If  upon  Tm  we  let  fall  the  perpendicular  PG,  and  joining 


318 


Mathematical  Principles 


pG  we  produce  it  till  it  meet  Tl  in  g,  and  join  also  Pg,  the  angle  PGp  will  be  the 
inclination  of  the  moon’s  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  when  the  moon  is  in 
P;  and  the  angle  Fgp  will  be  the  inclination  of  the  same  after  a  small  moment 
of  time  is  elapsed;  and  therefore  the  angle  GPg  will  be  the  momentary  variation 
of  the  inclination.  But  this  angle  GFg  is  to  the  angle  GTg  as  TG  to  PG  and  Pp 
to  PG  conjointly.  And,  therefore,  if  for  the  moment  of  time  we  assume  an  hour, 
since  the  angle  GTg  (by  Prop.  30)  is  to  the  angle  33"  10'"  33'^  as  IT-PG- AZ 
to  AT®,  the  angle  GPgr  (or  the  hourly  variation  of  the  inclination)  will  be  to  the 

angle  33"  10"'  33‘^  as  IT-AZ-TG-^  to  AT®.  q.e.i. 

And  thus  it  would  be  if  the  moon  were  uniformly  revolved  in  a  circular  orbit. 
But  if  the  orbit  is  elliptical,  the  mean  motion  of  the  nodes  vdll  be  diminished  in 
proportion  of  the  less  axis  to  the  greater,  as  we  have  shown  above;  and  the 
variation  of  the  inclination  will  be  also  diminished  in  the  same  proportion. 

Cor.  I.  Upon  Nn  erect  the  perpendicular  TF,  and  let  pM  be  the  hourly 
motion  of  the  moon  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  upon  QT  let  fall  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  pK,  Mk,  and  produce  them  till  they  meet  TF  in  H  and  h]  then  IT  wll 
be  to  AT  as  KA*  to  Mp;  and  TG  to  Hp  as  TZ  to  AT ;  and,  therefore,  IT  •  TG  ^vill 

be  equal  to  — ^  that  is,  equal  to  the  area  HpM/i  multiplied  into  the 


TZ 


Mp 


// 


ratio  and  therefore  the  hourly  variation  of  the  inclination  \vill  be  to  33 

10'"  33*^  as  the  area  HpM/i  multiplied  into 

Cor.  II.  And,  therefore,  if  the  earth  and  nodes  were  after  every  hour  drawn 
back  from  their  new  and  instantly  restored  to  their  old  places,  so  that  their 
situation  might  continue  given  for  a  whole  periodic  month  together,  the  whole 
variation  of  the  inclination  during  that  month  would  be  to  33"  10'"  33'^  as  the 
aggregate  of  all  the  areas  HpM/i,  generated  in  the  time  of  one  revolution  of  the 
point  p  (mth  due  regard  in  summing  to  their  proper  signs  H — ),  multiplied 
Pp 

into  AZ-TZ-:^^  to  Mp-AT®;  that  is,  as  the  whole  circle  Q,Aqa  multiplied  into 

X  (jr 

Pp 

AZ-TZ-^  to  Mp-AT®,  that  is,  as  the  circumference  QAqa  multiplied  into 
AZ-TZ-pg  to  2Mp-AT®. 

Cor.  III.  And,  therefore,  in  a  given  position  of  the  nodes,  the  mean  hourly 
variation,  from  which,  if  uniformly  continued  through  the  whole  month,  that 

menstrual  variation  might  be  generated,  is  to  33"  10'"  33"'^  as  AZ 


2AT®,  or  as  Pp 


AZ-TZ 
'  >^AT 


TZ  is  to 


is  to  PG  •4AT ;  that  is  (because  Pp  is  to  PG  as  the  sine 


of  the  aforesaid  inclination  to  the  radius,  and 


AZ-TZ 


to  4AT  as  the  sine  of 


3^AT 

double  the  angle  ATn  to  four  times  the  radius),  as  the  sine  of  the  same  inclin¬ 
ation  multiplied  into  the  sine  of  double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  sun 
to  four  times  the  square  of  the  radius. 

Cor.  IV.  Seeing  the  hourly  variation  of  the  inclination,  when  the  nodes  are 
in  the  quadratures,  is  (by  this  Prop.)  to  the  angle  33"  10'"  33'"^  as  IT- AZ-TG- 


319 


is  to  AT3,  that  is,  as 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 
IT-TG  Pp 


to  2AT,  that  is,  as  the  sine  of  double  the 


Pp 

distance  of  the  moon  from  the  quadratures  multiplied  into  15^  is  to  twice  the 

radius,  the  sum  of  all  the  hourly  variations  during  the  time  that  the  moon,  in 
this  situation  of  the  nodes,  passes  from  the  quadrature  to  the  syzygy  (that  is, 
in  the  space  of  177H  hours)  mil  be  to  the  sum  of  as  many  angles  33"  10'"  33"'^ 
or  5878",  as  the  sum  of  all  the  sines  of  double  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the 

quadratures  multiplied  into  is  to  the  sum  of  as  many  diameters;  that  is,  as 

PG 

P77 

the  diameter  multiplied  into  -5^  is  to  the  circumference;  that  is,  if  the  inclin- 

PCjr 

ation  be  5°  1',  as  7  •  10000  is  to  22,  or  as  278  to  10,000.  And,  therefore,  the  whole 
variation,  composed  out  of  the  sum  of  all  the  hourly  variations  in  the  aforesaid 
time,  is  163",  or  2'  43". 


Proposition  35.  Problem  16 

To  a  given  time  to  find  the  inclination  of  the  moon’s  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

Let  AD  be  the  sine  of  the  greatest  inclination,  and  AB  the  sine  of  the  least. 
Bisect  BD  in  C;  and  round  the  centre  C,  mth  the  radius  BC,  describe  the  circle 


BGD.  In  AC  take  CE  in  the  same  proportion  to  EB  as  EB  to  Gvice  BA.  And  if 
to  the  time  given  we  set  off  the  angle  AEG  equal  to  double  the  distance  of  the 
nodes  from  the  quadratures,  and  upon  AD  let  fall  the  perpendicular  GH,  AH 
mil  be  the  sine  of  the  inclination  required. 

For  GE^  is  equal  to 

GH24-HE2  =  BHD+HE2  =  HBD+HE2-BH2  =  HBD+BE2- 


2BH  •  BE  =  BE2 + 2EC  •  BH  =  2EC  •  AB + 2EC  •  BH  =  2EC  •  AH ; 
wherefore,  since  2EC  is  given,  GE^  mil  be  as  AH.  Now  let  AEg'  represent 
double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  quadratures,  in  a  given  moment  of 
time  after,  and  the  arc  G^,  on  account  of  the  given  angle  GE^,  will  be  as  the 
distance  GE.  But  Hh  is  to  G^  as  GH  to  GC,  and,  therefore,  H/i  is  as  the  rec¬ 


tangle  GH  •  Ggf,  or  GH  •  GE,  that  is,  as 


GH 

GE 


•GE2,  or 


GH 

GE 


•AH;  that  is,  as  AH  and 


the  sine  of  the  angle  AEG  conjointly.  If,  therefore,  in  any  one  case,  AH  be  the 
sine  of  inclination,  it  will  increase  by  the  same  increments  as  the  sine  of  inclin¬ 
ation  doth  (by  Cor.  iii  of  the  preceding  Prop.),  and  therefore  will  always  con¬ 
tinue  equal  to  that  sine.  But  when  the  point  G  falls  upon  either  point  B  or  D, 
AH  is  equal  to  this  sine,  and  therefore  remains  always  equal  thereto,  q.e.d. 

In  this  demonstration  I  have  supposed  that  the  angle  BEG,  representing 
double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  quadratures,  increaseth  uniformly; 
for  I  cannot  descend  to  every  minute  circumstance  of  inequality.  Now  suppose 
that  BEG  is  a  right  angle,  and  that  Gg  is  in  this  case  the  hourly  increment  of 


320  Mathematical  Principles 

double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  sun;  then  (by  Cor.  iii  of  the  last 
Prop.)  the  hourly  variation  of  the  inclination  in  the  same  case  Avill  be  to  33" 
10"'  33‘^  as  the  rectangle  of  AH,  the  sine  of  the  inclination,  into  the  sine  of  the 
right  angle  BEG,  double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  sun,  is  to  four  times 
the  square  of  the  radius;  that  is,  as  AH,  the  sine  of  the  mean  inclination,  is  to 
four  times  the  radius;  that  is,  seeing  the  mean  inclination  is  about  5®  83^',  as 
its  sine  896  is  to 40,000,  the  quadruple  of  the  radius,  or  as  224  to  10,000.  But  the 
whole  variation  corresponding  to  BD,  the  difference  of  the  sines,  is  to  this 
hourly  variation  as  the  diameter  BD  is  to  the  arc  G^,  that  is,  conjointly  as  the 
diameter  BD  to  the  semicircumference  BGD,  and  as  the  time  of  2079^^0  hours, 
in  which  the  node  proceeds  from  the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies,  is  to  one 
hour,  that  is,  as  7  to  11,  and  2079^/10  to  1.  Therefore  compounding  all  these 
proportions,  we  shall  have  the  whole  variation  BD  to  33"  10"'  33'^  as  224  -  7  • 
2079^^0  is  to  110,000,  that  is,  as  29,645  to  1000;  and  from  thence  that  variation 
BD  will  come  out  16'  233^". 

And  this  is  the  greatest  variation  of  the  inclination,  abstracting  from  the 
situation  of  the  moon  in  its  orbit;  for,  if  the  nodes  are  in  the  syzygies,  the  in¬ 
clination  suffers  no  change  from  the  various  positions  of  the  moon.  But  if  the 
nodes  are  in  the  quadratures,  the  inclination  is  less  when  the  moon  is  in  the 
syzygies  than  when  it  is  in  the  quadratures  by  a  difference  of  2'  43",  as  we 
showed  (Cor.  iv  of  the  preceding  Prop.) ;  and  the  whole  mean  variation  BD, 
diminished  by  1'  213^",  the  half  of  this  excess,  becomes  15'  2",  when  the  moon 
is  in  the  quadratures;  and,  increased  by  the  same,  becomes  17'  45"  when  the 
moon  is  in  the  syzygies.  If,  therefore,  the  moon  be  in  the  syzygies,  the  whole 
variation  in  the  passage  of  the  nodes  from  the  quadratures  to  the  syzygies  will 
be  17'  45";  and,  therefore,  if  the  inclination  be  5°  17'  20",  when  the  nodes 
are  in  the  syzygies,  it  will  be  4°  59'  35"  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  quadra¬ 
tures  and  the  moon  in  the  syzygies.  The  truth  of  all  this  is  confirmed  by  ob¬ 
servations.  ” 

Now  if  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  should  be  required  when  the  moon  is  in 
the  syzygies,  and  the  nodes  anywhere  between  them  and  the  quadratures,  let 
AB  be  to  AD  as  the  sine  of  4°  59'  35"  is  to  the  sine  of  5°  17'  20",  and  take  the 
angle  AEG  equal  to  double  the  distance  of  the  nodes  from  the  quadratures; 
and  AH  mil  be  the  sine  of  the  inclination  desired.  To  this  inclination  of  the 
orbit  the  inclination  of  the  same  is  equal,  when  the  moon  is  90°  distant  from 
the  nodes.  In  other  situations  of  the  moon,  this  menstrual  inequality,  to  which 
the  variation  of  the  inclination  is  subject  in  the  calculus  of  the  moon’s  latitude, 
is  balanced,  and  in  a  manner  taken  off,  by  the  menstrual  inequality  of  the 
motion  of  the  nodes  (as  we  said  before),  and  therefore  may  be  neglected  in  the 
computation  of  the  said  latitude. 


Scholium 

By  these  computations  of  the  lunar  motions  I  was  desirous  of  showing  that 
by  the  theory  of  gravity  the  motions  of  the  moon  could  be  calculated  from  their 
physical  causes.  By  the  same  theory  I  moreover  found  that  the  annual  equation 
of  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon  arises  from  the  varying  dilatation  which  the 
orbit  of  the  moon  suffers  from  the  action  of  the  sun  according  to  Cor.  vi.  Prop. 
66,  Book  I.  The  force  of  this  action  is  greater  in  the  perigean  sun,  and  dilates 
the  moon’s  orbit;  in  the  apogean  sun  it  is  less,  and  permits  the  orbit  to  be  again 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  321 

contracted.  The  moon  moves  slower  in  the  dilated  and  faster  in  the  contracted 
orbit;  and  the  annual  equation,  by  which  this  inequality  is  regulated,  vanishes 
in  the  apogee  and  perigee  of  the  sun.  In  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the 
earth  it  rises  to  about  11'  50";  in  other  distances  of  the  sun  it  is  proportional  to 
the  equation  of  the  sun’s  centre,  and  is  added  to  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon, 
while  the  earth  is  passing  from  its  aphelion  to  its  perhelion,  and  subtracted 
while  the  earth  is  in  the  opposite  semicircle.  Taking  for  the  radius  of  the  great 
orbit  1000,  and  for  the  earth’s  eccentricity,  this  equation,  when  of  the 
greatest  magnitude,  by  the  theory  of  gravity  comes  out  11'  49".  But  the  eccen¬ 
tricity  of  the  earth  seems  to  be  somewhat  greater,  and  mth  the  eccentricity 
this  equation  mil  be  augmented  in  the  same  proportion.  Suppose  the  eccen¬ 
tricity  16^^2,  and  the  greatest  equation  mil  be  11'  51". 

Further,  I  found  that  the  apogee  and  nodes  of  the  moon  move  faster  in  the 
perihelion  of  the  earth,  where  the  force  of  the  sun’s  action  is  greater,  than  in 
the  aphelion  thereof,  and  that  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  ratio  of  the  earth’s 
distance  from  the  sun;  and  hence  arise  annual  equations  of  those  motions 
proportional  to  the  equation  of  the  sun’s  centre.  Now  the  motion  of  the  sun 
varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  earth’s  distance  from  the  sun;  and  the 
greatest  equation  of  the  centre  which  this  inequality  generates  is  1°  56'  20", 
corresponding  to  the  above-mentioned  eccentricity  of  the  sun,  16^3^2-  But  if 
the  motion  of  the  sun  had  been  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  this  in- 
equahty  would  have  generated  the  greatest  equation  2°  54'  30";  and  therefore 
the  greatest  equations  which  the  inequahties  of  the  motions  of  the  moon’s 
apogee  and  nodes  do  generate  are  to  2®  54'  30"  as  the  mean  diurnal  motion  of 
the  moon’s  apogee  and  the  mean  diurnal  motion  of  its  nodes  are  to  the  mean 
diurnal  motion  of  the  sun.  Hence  the  greatest  equation  of  the  mean  motion  of 
the  apogee  comes  out  19'  43",  and  the  greatest  equation  of  the  mean  motion 
of  the  nodes  9'  24".  The  former  equation  is  added,  and  the  latter  subtracted, 
while  the  earth  is  passing  from  its  perihelion  to  its  aphelion,  and  contrariwise 
when  the  earth  is  in  the  opposite  semicircle. 

By  the  theory  of  gravity  I  likemse  found  that  the  action  of  the  sun  upon  the 
moon  is  somewhat  greater  when  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  moon’s  orbit 
passes  through  the  sun  than  when  the  same  is  perpendicular  upon  the  line 
which  joins  the  earth  and  the  sun;  and  therefore  the  moon’s  orbit  is  somewhat 
larger  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  case.  And  hence  arises  another  equation 
of  the  moon’s  mean  motion,  depending  upon  the  situation  of  the  moon’s  apogee 
in  respect  of  the  sun,  which  is  greatest  when  the  moon’s  apogee  is  in  the  octants 
of  the  sun,  and  vanishes  when  the  apogee  arrives  at  the  quadratures  or  syzygies; 
and  it  is  added  to  the  mean  motion  while  the  moon’s  apogee  is  passing  from 
the  quadrature  of  the  sun  to  the  syzygy,  and  subtracted  while  the  apogee 
is  passing  from  the  syzygy  to  the  quadrature.  This  equation,  which  I  shall  call 
the  semiannual,  when  greatest  in  the  octants  of  the  apogee,  arises  to  about 
3'  45",  so  far  as  I  could  determine  from  the  phenomena:  and  this  is  its  quantity 
in  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth.  But  it  is  increased  and  dimin¬ 
ished  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  distance,  and  therefore  is  nearly  3'  34" 
when  that  distance  is  greatest,  and  3'  56"  when  least.  But  when  the  moon’s 
apogee  is  without  the  octants,  it  becomes  less,  and  is  to  its  greatest  amount  as 
the  sine  of  double  the  distance  of  the  moon’s  apogee  from  the  nearest  syzygy  or 
quadrature  is  to  the  radius. 


322  Mathematical  Principles 

By  the  same  theory  of  gravity,  the  action  of  the  sun  upon  the  moon  is  some¬ 
what  greater  when  the  line  of  the  moon’s  nodes  passes  through  the  sun  than 
when  it  is  at  right  angles  with  the  line  which  joins  the  sun  and  the  earth;  and 
hence  arises  another  equation  of  the  moon’s  mean  motion,  which  I  shall  call 
the  second  semiannual ;  and  this  is  greatest  when  the  nodes  are  in  the  octants 
of  the  sun,  and  vanishes  when  they  are  in  the  syzygies  or  quadratures;  and  in 
other  positions  of  the  nodes  is  proportional  to  the  sine  of  double  the  distance 
of  either  node  from  the  nearest  syzygy  or  quadrature.  And  it  is  added  to  the 
mean  motion  of  the  moon,  if  the  sun  is  behind  the  node  which  is  nearest  to  him, 
and  is  subtracted,  if  forward;  and  in  the  octants,  where  it  is  of  the  greatest 
magnitude,  it  arises  to  47"  in  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth,  as  I 
find  from  the  theory  of  gravity.  In  other  distances  of  the  sun,  this  equation, 
greatest  in  the  octants  of  the  nodes,  is  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  earth;  and  therefore  in  the  sun’s  perigee  it  comes  to  about  49", 
and  in  its  apogee  to  about  45". 

By  the  same  theory  of  gravity,  the  moon’s  apogee  goes  forwards  at  the 
greatest  rate  when  it  is  either  in  conjunction  mth  or  in  opposition  to  the  sun, 
but  in  its  quadratures  with  the  sun  it  goes  backwards;  and  the  eccentricity 
comes,  in  the  former  case,  to  its  greatest  quantity;  in  the  latter,  to  its  least,  by 
Cor.  VII,  VIII,  and  ix.  Prop.  66,  Book  i.  And  those  inequalities,  by  the  Corol¬ 
laries  we  have  named,  are  very  great,  and  generate  the  principle  which  I  call 
the  semiannual  equation  of  the  apogee;  and  this  semiannual  equation  in  its 
greatest  quantity  comes  to  about  12®  18',  as  nearly  as  I  could  determine  from 
the  phenomena.  Our  countryman,  Horrox,  was  the  first  who  advanced  the 
theory  of  the  moon’s  moving  in  an  ellipse  about  the  earth  placed  in  its  lower 
focus.  Dr.  Halley  improved  the  notion,  by  putting  the  centre  of  the  ellipse  in 
an  epicycle  whose  centre  is  uniformly  revolved  about  the  earth;  and  from  the 
motion  in  this  epicycle  the  mentioned  inequalities  in  the  progress  and  regress 
of  the  apogee,  and  in  the  quantity  of  eccentricity,  do  arise.  Suppose  the  mean 
distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  to  be  divided  into  100,000  parts,  and  let  T 
represent  the  earth,  and  TC  the  moon’s  mean  eccentricity  of  5505  such  parts. 
Produce  TC  to  B,  so  as  CB  may  be  the  sine  of  the  greatest  semiannual  equation 
12®  18'  to  the  radius  TC;  and  the  circle  BDA  described  about  the  centre  C, 
with  the  radius  CB,  will  be  the  epicycle  spoken  of, 
in  which  the  centre  of  the  moon’s  orbit  is  placed, 
and  revolved  according  to  the  order  of  the  letters 
BDA.  Set  off  the  angle  BCD  equal  to  t\vice  the 
annual  argument,  or  tvdce  the  distance  of  the 
sun’s  true  place  from  the  place  of  the  moon’s  apogee 
once  corrected,  and  CTD  Avill  be  the  semiannual 
equation  of  the  moon’s  apogee,  and  TD  the  eccentricity  of  its  orbit,  tending 
to  the  place  of  the  apogee  now  tvdce  corrected.  But,  having  the  moon’s  mean 
motion,  the  place  of  its  apogee,  and  its  eccentricity,  as  well  as  the  longer  axis  of 
its  orbit  200,000,  from  these  data  the  true  place  of  the  moon  in  its  orbit,  to¬ 
gether  wth  its  distance  from  the  earth,  may  be  determined  by  the  methods 
commonly  known. 

In  the  perihelion  of  the  earth,  where  the  force  of  the  sun  is  greatest,  the 
centre  of  the  moon’s  orbit  moves  faster  about  the  centre  C  than  in  the  aphelion, 
and  that  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  distance  from  the  earth.  But,  be- 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  323 

cause  the  equation  of  the  sun’s  centre  is  included  in  the  annual  argument,  the 
centre  of  the  moon’s  orbit  moves  faster  in  its  epicycle  BDA,  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  sun’s  distance  from  the  earth.  Therefore,  that  it  may  move  yet 
faster,  inversely  as  the  distance,  suppose  that  from  D,  the  centre  of  the  orbit,  a 
right  line  DE  is  drawn,  tending  towards  the  moon’s  apogee  once  corrected,  that 
is,  parallel  to  TC;  and  set  off  the  angle  EDF  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  afore¬ 
said  annual  argument  above  the  distance  of  the  moon’s  apogee  from  the  sun’s 
perigee  forwards;  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  take  the  angle  CDF  equal 
to  the  complement  of  the  sun’s  true  anomaly  to  360°;  and  let  DF  be  to  DC  as 
twdce  the  eccentricity  of  the  great  orbit  to  the  sun’s  mean  distance  from  the 
earth,  and  the  sun’s  mean  diurnal  motion  from  the  moon’s  apogee  to  the  sun’s 
mean  diurnal  motion  from  its  own  apogee  conjointly,  that  is,  as  33%  to  1000, 
and  52'  27"  16'"  to  59'  8"  10'"  conjointly,  or  as  3  to  100;  and  imagine  the  centre 
of  the  moon’s  orbit  placed  in  the  point  F  to  be  revolved  in  an  epicycle  whose 
centre  of  the  moon’s  orbit  placed  in  the  point  F  to  be  revolved  in  an  epicycle 
whose  centre  is  D,  and  radius  DF,  while  the  point  D  moves  in  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  the  circle  DABD:  for  by  this  means  the  centre  of  the  moon’s  orbit 
comes  to  describe  a  certain  curved  line  about  the  centre  C,  with  a  velocity 
which  will  be  almost  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  distance  from  the  earth, 
as  it  ought  to  be. 

The  calculus  of  this  motion  is  difficult,  but  may  be  rendered  easier  by  the 
following  approximation.  Assuming,  as  above,  the  moon’s  mean  distance  from 
the  earth  of  100,000  parts,  and  the  eccentricity  TC  of  5505  such  parts,  the  line 
CB  or  CD  -svill  be  found  1172%,  and  DF  3534  of  those  parts;  and  this  line  DF 
at  the  distance  TC  subtends  the  angle  at  the  earth,  which  the  removal  of  the 
centre  of  the  orbit  from  the  place  D  to  the  place  F  generates  in  the  motion  of 
this  centre;  and  double  this  line  DF  in  a  parallel  position,  at  the  distance  of  the 
upper  focus  of  the  moon’s  orbit  from  the  earth,  subtends  at  the  earth  the  same 
angle  as  DF  did  before,  which  that  removal  generates  in  the  motion  of  this 
upper  focus;  but  at  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  this  double  line 
2DF  at  the  upper  focus,  in  a  parallel  position  to  the  first  line  DF,  subtends  an 
angle  at  the  moon,  which  the  said  removal  generates  in  the  motion  of  the  moon, 
which  angle  may  be  therefore  called  the  second  equation  of  the  moon’s  centre; 
and  this  equation,  in  the  mean  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth,  is  nearly  as 
the  sine  of  the  angle  which  that  line  DF  contains  with  the  line  drawn  from  the 
point  F  to  the  moon,  and  when  greatest  amounts  to  2'  25".  But  the  angle  which 
the  line  DF  contains  with  the  line  drawn  from  the  point  F  to  the  moon  is  found 
either  by  subtracting  the  angle  EDF  from  the  mean  anomaly  of  the  moon,  or 
by  adding  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  sun  to  the  distance  of  the  moon’s 
apogee  from  the  apogee  of  the  sun;  and  as  the  radius  is  to  the  sine  of  the  angle 
thus  found,  so  is  2'  25"  to  the  second  equation  of  the  centre :  to  be  added,  if  the 
fore-mentioned  sum  be  less  than  a  semi-circle;  to  be  subtracted,  if  greater.  And 
from  the  moon’s  place  in  its  orbit  thus  corrected,  its  longitude  may  be  found  in 
the  syzygies  of  the  luminaries. 

The  atmosphere  of  the  earth  to  the  height  of  35  or  40  miles  refracts  the  sun’s 
light.  This  refraction  scatters  and  spreads  the  light  over  the  earth’s  shadow; 
and  the  dissipated  light  near  the  limits  of  the  shadow  dilates  the  shadow.  On 
this  account,  to  the  diameter  of  the  shadow,  as  it  comes  out  by  the  parallax,  I 
add  1  or  1%  minutes  in  lunar  eclipses. 


324  Mathematical  Principles 

But  the  theory  of  the  moon  ought  to  be  examined  and  proved  from  the 
phenomena,  first  in  the  syzygies,  then  in  the  quadratures,  and  last  of  all  in  the 
octants;  and  whoever  pleases  to  undertake  the  -work  will  find  it  not  amiss  to 
assume  the  following  mean  motions  of  the  sun  and  moon  at  the  Royal  Observ¬ 
atory  of  Greenwich,  to  the  last  day  of  December  at  noon,  in  the  year  1700,  o.s. : 
the  mean  motion  of  the  sun  20°  43'  40",  and  of  its  apogee  ^  7°  44'  30";  the 
mean  motion  of  the  moon  »  15°  21'  00";  of  its  apogee,  ^  8°  20'  00";  and  of  its 
ascending  node  Q  27°  24'  20";  and  the  difference  of  meridians  between  the 
Observatory  at  Greenwich  and  the  Royal  Observatory  at  Paris,  0*'.  O'".  20®.: 
but  the  mean  motion  of  the  moon  and  of  its  apogee  are  not  yet  obtained  with 
sufficient  accuracy. 

Proposition  36.  Problem  17 

To  find  the  force  of  the  sun  to  move  the  sea. 

The  sun’s  force  ML  or  PT  to  disturb  the  motions  of  the  moon  was  (by  Prop. 
25),  in  the  moon’s  quadratures,  to  the  force  of  gravity  with  us,  as  1  to  638092.6; 
and  the  force  TM  —  LM  or  2PK  in  the  moon’s  syzygies  is  double  that  quantity. 
But,  descending  to  the  surface  of  the  earth,  these  forces  are  diminished  in  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  that  is,  in  the  proportion 
of  603^  to  1 ;  and  therefore  the  former  force  on  the  earth’s  surface  is  to  the  force 
of  gravity  as  1  to  38,604,600;  and  by  this  force  the  sea  is  depressed  in  such  places 
as  are  90  degrees  distant  from  the  sun.  But  by  the  other  force,  which  is  twice 
as  great,  the  sea  is  raised  not  only  in  the  places  directly  under  the  sun,  but  in 
those  also  which  are  directly  opposed  to  it;  and  the  sum  of  these  forces  is  to  the 
force  of  gravity  as  1  to  12,868,200.  And  because  the  same  force  excites  the  same 
motion,  whether  it  depresses  the  waters  in  those  places  which  are  90  degrees 
distant  from  the  sun,  or  raises  them  in  the  places  which  are  directly  under  and 
directly  opposed  to  the  sun,  the  aforesaid  sum  will  be  the  total  force  of  the  sun 
to  disturb  the  sea,  and  will  have  the  same  effect  as  if  the  whole  was  employed 
in  raising  the  sea  in  the  places  directly  under  and  directly  opposed  to  the  sun, 
and  did  not  act  at  all  in  the  places  which  are  90  degrees  removed  from  the  sun. 

And  this  is  the  force  of  the  sun  to  disturb  the  sea  in  any  given  place,  where 
the  sun  is  at  the  same  time  both  vertical,  and  in  its  mean  distance  from  the 
earth.  In  other  positions  of  the  sun,  its  force  to  raise  the  sea  is  directly  as  the 
versed  sine  of  double  its  altitude  above  the  horizon  of  the  place,  and  inversely 
as  the  cube  of  the  distance  from  the  earth. 

Cor.  Since  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  parts  of  the  earth,  arising  from  the 
earth’s  diurnal  motion,  which  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  1  is  to  289,  raises  the 
waters  under  the  equator  to  a  height  exceeding  that  under  the  poles  by  85,472 
Paris  feet,  as  above,  in  Prop.  19,  the  force  of  the  sun,  which  we  have  now  shown 
to  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  as  1  is  to  12,868,200,  and  therefore  is  to  that  centrif¬ 
ugal  force  as  289  to  12,868,200,  or  as  1  to  44,527,  will  be  able  to  raise  the  waters 
in  the  places  directly  under  and  directly  opposed  to  the  sun  to  a  height  exceed¬ 
ing  that  in  the  places  which  are  90  degrees  removed  from  the  sun  only  by  one 
Paris  foot  and  1133/30  inches;  for  this  measure  is  to  the  measure  of  85,472  feet  as 
1  to  44,527. 

Proposition  37.  Problem  18 

To  find  the  force  of  the  moon  to  move  the  sea. 

The  force  of  the  moon  to  move  the  sea  is  to  be  deduced  from  its  ratio  to  the 
force  of  the  sun,  and  this  ratio  is  to  be  determined  from  the  ratio  of  the  motions 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  325 

of  the  sea,  which  are  the  effects  of  those  forces.  Before  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Avon,  three  miles  below  Bristol,  the  height  of  the  ascent  of  the  water  in  the 
vernal  and  autumnal  syzygies  of  the  luminaries  (by  the  observations  of  Samuel 
Sturmy)  amounts  to  about  45  feet,  but  in  the  quadratures  to  25  only.  The 
former  of  those  heights  arises  from  the  sum  of  the  aforesaid  forces,  the  latter 
from  their  difference.  If,  therefore,  S  and  L  are  supposed  to  represent  respec¬ 
tively  the  forces  of  the  sun  and  moon  while  they  are  in  the  equator,  as  well  as  in 
their  mean  distances  from  the  earth,  we  shall  have  L+S  to  L  — S  as  45  to  25, 
or  as  9  to  5. 

At  Plymouth  (by  the  observations  of  Samuel  Colepress)  the  tide  in  its  mean 
height  rises  to  about  16  feet,  and  in  the  spring  and  autumn  the  height  thereof 
in  the  syzygies  may  exceed  that  in  the  quadratures  by  more  than  7  or  8  feet. 
Suppose  the  greatest  difference  of  those  heights  to  be  9  feet,  and  L4-S  \vill  be 
to  L  — S  as  203^  to  113^,  or  as  41  to  23;  a  proportion  that  agrees  well  enough 
with  the  former.  But  because  of  the  great  tide  at  Bristol,  we  are  rather  to  de¬ 
pend  upon  the  observations  of  Sturmy;  and,  therefore,  till  we  procure  some¬ 
thing  that  is  more  certain,  we  shall  use  the  proportion  of  9  to  5. 

But  because  of  the  reciprocal  motions  of  the  waters,  the  greatest  tides  do  not 
happen  at  the  times  of  the  syzygies  of  the  luminaries,  but,  as  we  have  said 
before,  are  the  third  in  order  after  the  syzygies;  or  (reckoning  from  the  syzygies) 
follow  next  after  the  third  approach  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian  of  the  place 
after  the  syzygies;  or  rather  (as  Sturmy  observes)  are  the  third  after  the  day  of 
the  new  or  full  moon,  or  rather  nearly  after  the  twelfth  hour  from  the  new  or 
full  moon,  and  therefore  fall  nearly  upon  the  forty-third  hour  after  the  new  or 
full  moon.  But  in  this  port  they  come  to  pass  about  the  seventh  hour  after  the 
approach  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian  of  the  place;  and  therefore  follow  next 
after  the  approach  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian,  when  the  moon  is  distant  from 
the  sun,  or  from  opposition  with  the  sun  by  about  18  or  19  degrees  forwards.  So 
the  summer  and  winter  seasons  come  not  to  their  height  in  the  solstices  them¬ 
selves,  but  when  the  sun  is  advanced  beyond  the  solstices  by  about  a  tenth  part 
of  its  whole  course,  that  is,  by  about  36  or  37  degrees.  In  like  manner,  the 
greatest  tide  is  raised  after  the  approach  of  the  moon  to  the  meridian  of  the 
place,  when  the  moon  has  passed  by  the  sun,  or  the  opposition  thereof,  by  about 
a  tenth  part  of  the  whole  motion  from  one  greatest  tide  to  the  next  following 
greatest  tide.  Suppose  that  distance  about  183^  degrees;  and  the  sun’s  force  in 
this  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  syzygies  and  quadratures  vdll  be  of  less 
moment  to  augment  and  diminish  that  part  of  the  motion  of  the  sea  which 
proceeds  from  the  motion  of  the  moon  than  in  the  syzygies  and  quadratures 
themselves  in  the  proportion  of  the  radius  to  the  cosine  of  double  this  distance, 
or  of  an  angle  of  37  degrees;  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  10,000,000  to  7,986,355;  and, 
therefore,  in  the  preceding  analogy,  in  place  of  S  we  must  put  0.7986355S. 

But  further,  the  force  of  the  moon  in  the  quadratures  must  be  diminished, 
on  account  of  its  declination  from  the  equator;  for  the  moon  in  those  quad¬ 
ratures,  or  rather  in  183^  degrees  past  the  quadratures,  declines  from  the  equa¬ 
tor  by  about  23°  13';  and  the  force  of  either  luminary  to  move  the  sea  is  dimin¬ 
ished  as  it  declines  from  the  equator  nearly  as  the  square  of  the  cosine  of  the 
declination;  and  therefore  the  force  of  the  moon  in  those  quadratures  is  only 
0.8570327L;  hence  we  have  L+0.7986355S  to  0.8570327L  — 0.7986355S  as  9 
to  5. 


326  Mathematical  Principles 

Further  yet,  the  diameters  of  the  orbit  in  which  the  moon  should  move, 
setting  aside  the  consideration  of  eccentricity,  are  one  to  the  other  as  69  to  70; 
and  therefore  the  moon’s  distance  from  the  earth  in  the  syzygies  is  to  its  dis¬ 
tance  in  the  quadratures,  other  things  being  equal,  as  69  to  70;  and  its  distances, 
when  18H  degrees  advanced  beyond  the  syzygies,  where  the  greatest  tide  was 
excited,  and  when  18^  degrees  passed  by  the  quadratures,  where  the  least  tide 
was  produced,  are  to  its  mean  distance  as  69.098747  and  69.897345  to  69}/^. 
But  the  force  of  the  moon  to  move  the  sea  varies  inversely  as  the  cube  of  its 
distance;  and  therefore  its  forces,  in  the  greatest  and  least  of  those  distances, 
are  to  its  force  in  its  mean  distance  as  0.9830427  and  1.017522  is  to  1.  From  this 
we  have  1.017522L -0.79863558  to  0.9830427  •0.8570327L-0.7986355S  as  9  to 
5;  and  S  to  L  as  1  to  4.4815.  Therefore,  since  the  force  of  the  sun  is  to  the  force 
of  gravity  as  1  to  12,868,200,  the  moon’s  force  will  be  to  the  force  of  gravity  as 
1  to  2,871,400. 

Cor.  I.  Since  the  waters  attracted  by  the  sun’s  force  rise  to  the  height  of  1 
foot  and  11^30  inches,  the  moon’s  force  will  raise  the  same  to  the  height  of  8 
feet  and  7^2  inches;  and  the  joint  forces  of  both  \vill  raise  the  same  to  the 
height  of  10^  feet;  and  when  the  moon  is  in  its  perigee  to  the  height  of  12^ 
feet,  and  more,  especially  when  the  wind  sets  the  same  way  as  the  tide.  And  a 
force  of  that  amount  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  produce  all  the  motions  of  the 
sea,  and  agrees  well  ^vith  the  ratio  of  those  motions;  for  in  such  seas  as  lie  free 
and  open  from  east  to  west,  as  in  the  Pacific  sea,  and  in  those  tracts  of  the 
Atlantic  and  Ethiopic  seas  which  lie  without  the  tropics,  the  waters  commonly 
rise  to  6,  9,  12,  or  15  feet;  but  in  the  Pacific  sea,  which  is  of  a  greater  depth,  as 
well  as  of  a  larger  extent,  the  tides  are  said  to  be  greater  than  in  the  Atlantic 
and  Ethiopic  seas;  for,  to  have  a  full  tide  raised,  an  extent  of  sea  from  east  to 
west  is  required  of  no  less  than  90  degrees.  In  the  Ethiopic  sea,  the  waters  rise 
to  a  less  height  ^vithin  the  tropics  than  in  the  temperate  zones :  because  of  the 
narrowness  of  the  sea  between  Africa  and  the  southern  parts  of  America.  In 
the  middle  of  the  open  sea  the  waters  cannot  rise  without  falling  together,  and 
at  the  same  time,  upon  both  the  eastern  and  western  shores,  when,  notmth- 
standing,  in  our  narrow  seas,  they  ought  to  fall  on  those  shores  by  alternate 
turns;  upon  this  account  there  is  commonly  but  a  small  flood  and  ebb  in  such 
islands  as  lie  far  distant  from  the  continent.  On  the  contrary,  in  some  ports, 
where  to  fill  and  empty  the  bays  alternately  the  waters  are  with  great  violence 
forced  in  and  out  through  shallow  channels,  the  flood  and  ebb  must  be  greater 
than  ordinary;  as  at  Plymouth  and  Chepstow  Bridge  in  England,  at  the  moun¬ 
tains  of  St.  Michael,  and  the  town  of  Avranches,  in  Normandy,  and  at  Cam- 
baia  and  Pegu  in  the  East  Indies.  In  these  places  the  sea  is  hurried  in  and  out 
with  such  violence  as  sometimes  to  lay  the  shores  under  water,  sometimes  to 
leave  them  dry  for  many  miles.  Nor  is  this  force  of  the  influx  and  efflux  to  be 
stopped  till  it  has  raised  and  depressed  the  waters  to  30,  40,  or  50  feet  and 
above.  And  a  like  account  is  to  be  given  of  long  and  shallow  channels  or  straits, 
such  as  the  Magellanic  straits,  and  those  channels  which  environ  England.  The 
tide  in  such  ports  and  straits,  by  the  violence  of  the  influx  and  efflux,  is  aug¬ 
mented  greatly.  But  on  such  shores  as  lie  towards  the  deep  and  open  sea  with 
a  steep  descent,  where  the  waters  may  freely  rise  and  fall  \vithout  that  pre¬ 
cipitation  of  influx  and  efflux,  the  ratio  of  the  tides  agrees  mth  the  forces  of  the 
sun  and  moon. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  327 

Cor.  II.  Since  the  moon’s  force  to  move  the  sea  is  to  the  force  of  gravity  as 
1  to  2,871,400,  it  is  evident  that  this  force  is  inappreciable  in  statical  or  hydro- 
statical  experiments,  or  even  in  those  of  pendulums.  It  is  in  the  tides  only  that 
this  force  shows  itself  by  any  sensible  effect. 

Cor.  III.  Because  the  force  of  the  moon  for  moving  the  sea  is  to  the  like  force 
of  the  sun  as  4.4815  to  1,  and  those  forces  (by  Cor.  xiv.  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  are 
as  the  densities  of  the  bodies  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  the  cubes  of  their 
apparent  diameters  conjointly,  the  density  of  the  moon  vdll  be  to  the  density 
of  the  sun  directly  as  4.4815  to  1,  and  inversely  as  the  cube  of  the  moon’s 
diameter  to  the  cube  of  the  sun’s  diameter;  that  is  (seeing  the  mean  apparent 
diameters  of  the  moon  and  sun  are  31'  16^",  and  32'  12"),  as  4891  to  1000. 
But  the  density  of  the  sun  was  to  the  density  of  the  earth  as  1000  to  4000;  and 
therefore  the  density  of  the  moon  is  to  the  density  of  the  earth  as  4891  is  to 
4000,  or  as  11  to  9.  Therefore  the  body  of  the  moon  is  more  dense  and  more 
earthly  than  the  earth  itself. 

Cor.  IV.  And  since  the  true  diameter  of  the  moon  (from  the  observations  of 
astronomers)  is  to  the  true  diameter  of  the  earth  as  100  to  365,  the  mass  of 
matter  in  the  moon  will  be  to  the  mass  of  matter  in  the  earth  as  1  to  39.788. 

Cor.  V.  And  the  accelerative  gravity  on  the  surface  of  the  moon  will  be  about 
three  times  less  than  the  accelerative  gravity  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

Cor.  VI.  And  the  distance  of  the  moon’s  centre  from  the  centre  of  the  earth 
^vill  be  to  the  distance  of  the  moon’s  centre  from  the  common  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  earth  and  moon  as  40.788  to  39.788. 

Cor.  VII.  And  the  mean  distance  of  the  centre  of  the  moon  from  the  centre 
of  the  earth  mtII  be  (in  the  moon’s  octants)  nearly  60%  of  the  greatest  semi¬ 
diameters  of  the  earth;  for  the  greatest  semidiameter  of  the  earth  was  19,658,600 
Paris  feet,  and  the  mean  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  earth  and  moon,  consist¬ 
ing  of  60%  such  semidiameters,  is  equal  to  1, 187,379,440  feet.  And  this  distance 
(by  the  preceding  Cor.)  is  to  the  distance  of  the  moon’s  centre  from  the  com¬ 
mon  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth  and  moon  as  40.788  to  39.788;  which  latter 
distance,  therefore,  is  1,158,268,534  feet.  And  since  the  moon,  in  respect  of  the 
fixed  stars,  performs  its  revolution  in  27^^.  7^.  43i“.,  the  versed  sine  of  that 
angle  which  the  moon  in  a  minute  of  time  describes  is  12,752,341  to  the  radius 
1,000,000,000,000,000;  and  as  the  radius  is  to  this  versed  sine,  so  are  1, 158,268,534 
feet  to  14.7706353  feet.  The  moon,  therefore,  falling  towards  the  earth  by  that 
force  which  retains  it  in  its  orbit,  would  in  one  minute  of  time  describe  14.7706353 
feet;  and,  if  we  augment  this  force  in  the  proportion  of  178^%o  to  177^%o,  we 
shall  have  the  total  force  of  gravity  at  the  orbit  of  the  moon,  by  Cor.,  Prop.  3; 
and  the  moon  falling  by  this  force,  in  one  minute  of  time  would  describe 
14.8538067  feet.  And  at  the  60th  part  of  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the 
earth’s  centre,  that  is,  at  the  distance  of  197,896,573  feet  from  the  centre  of  the 
earth,  a  body  falling  by  its  weight,  would,  in  one  second  of  time,  likemse  de¬ 
scribe  14.8538067  feet.  And,  therefore,  at  the  distance  of  19,615,800,  which 
compose  one  mean  semidiameter  of  the  earth,  a  heavy  body  would  describe  in 
falling  15.11175,  or  15  feet,  1  inch,  and  4%i  lines,  in  the  same  time.  This  vdll 
be  the  descent  of  bodies  in  the  latitude  of  45  degrees.  And  by  the  foregoing 
table,  to  be  found  under  Prop.  20,  the  descent  in  the  latitude  of  Paris  will  be  a 
little  greater  by  an  excess  of  about  %  parts  of  a  line.  Therefore,  by  this  com¬ 
putation,  heavy  bodies  in  the  latitude  of  Paris  falling  in  a  vacuum  'wdll  describe 


328  Mathematical  Principles 

15  Paris  feet,  1  inch,  lines,  very  nearly,  in  one  second  of  time.  And  if  the 
gravity  be  diminished  by  taking  away  a  quantity  equal  to  the  centrifugal  force 
arising  in  that  latitude  from  the  earth’s  diurnal  motion,  heavy  bodies  falling 
there  will  describe  in  one  second  of  time  15  feet,  1  inch,  and  13^  lines.  And  with 
this  velocity  heavy  bodies  do  really  fall  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  as  we  have 
shown  above  in  Props.  4  and  19. 

Cor.  VIII.  The  mean  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  earth  and  moon  in  the 
syzygies  of  the  moon  is  equal  to  60  of  the  greatest  semidiameters  of  the  earth, 
subtracting  only  about  one  30th  part  of  a  semidiameter;  and  in  the  moon’s 
quadratures  the  mean  distance  of  the  same  centres  is  60^  such  semidiameters 
of  the  earth;  for  these  two  distances  are  to  the  mean  distance  of  the  moon  in 
the  octants  as  69  and  70  to  69^,  by  Prop.  28. 

Cor.  IX.  The  mean  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  earth  and  moon  in  the 
syzygies  of  the  moon  is  60  mean  semidiameters  of  the  earth,  and  a  10th  part  of 
one  semidiameter;  and  in  the  moon’s  quadratures  the  mean  distance  of  the  same 
centres  is  61  mean  semidiameters  of  the  earth,  subtracting  one  30th  part  of  one 
semidiameter. 

Cor.  X.  In  the  moon’s  syzygies  its  mean  horizontal  parallax  in  the  latitudes 
of  0,  30,  38,  45,  52,  60,  90  degrees  is  57'  20",  57'  16",  57'  14",  57'  12",  57'  10", 
57'  8",  57'  4",  respectively. 

In  these  computations  I  do  not  consider  the  magnetic  attraction  of  the  earth, 
whose  quantity  is  very  small  and  unkno^^^l:  if  this  quantity  should  ever  be 
found  out,  and  the  measures  of  degrees  upon  the  meridian,  the  lengths  of 
isochronous  pendulums  in  different  parallels,  the  laws  of  the  motions  of  the  sea, 
and  the  moon’s  parallax,  with  the  apparent  diameters  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
should  be  more  exactly  determined  from  phenomena:  we  should  then  be  en¬ 
abled  to  bring  this  calculation  to  a  greater  accuracy. 

Proposition  38.  Problem  19 
To  find  the  figure  of  the  moon’s  body. 

If  the  moon’s  body  were  fluid  like  our  sea,  the  force  of  the  earth  to  raise  that 
fluid  in  the  nearest  and  remotest  parts  would  be  to  the  force  of  the  moon  by 
which  our  sea  is  raised  in  the  places  under  and  opposite  to  the  moon  as  the 
accelerative  gravity  of  the  moon  towards  the  earth  is  to  the  accelerative  grav¬ 
ity  of  the  earth  towards  the  moon,  and  the  diameter  of  the  moon  is  to  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  earth  conjointly;  that  is,  as  39.788  to  1,  and  100  to  365  conjointly, 
or  as  1081  to  100.  Therefore,  since  our  sea,  by  the  force  of  the  moon,  is  raised 
to  8^/5  feet,  the  lunar  fluid  would  be  raised  by  the  force  of  the  earth  to  93  feet; 
and  upon  this  account  the  figure  of  the  moon  would  be  a  spheroid,  whose 
greatest  diameter  produced  would  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and 
exceed  the  diameters  perpendicular  thereto  by  186  feet.  Such  a  figure,  there¬ 
fore,  the  moon  possesses,  and  must  have  had  from  the  beginning.  q.e.i. 

Cor.  Hence  it  is  that  the  same  face  of  the  moon  always  is  turned  toward  the 
earth;  nor  can  the  body  of  the  moon  possibly  rest  in  any  other  position,  but 
would  return  always  by  a  libratory  motion  to  this  situation ;  but  those  librations, 
however,  must  be  exceedingly  slow,  because  of  the  weakness  of  the  forces 
which  excite  them;  so  that  the  face  of  the  moon,  which  should  be  always  di¬ 
rected  to  the  earth,  may,  for  the  reason  assigned  in  Prop.  17,  be  turned  towards 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  329 

the  other  focus  of  the  moon’s  orbit,  mthout  being  immediately  drawn  back, 
and  turned  again  towards  the  earth. 

Lemma  1 

If  APEp  represent  the  earth  uniformly  dense,  marled  with  the  centre  C,  the  poles 
P,  p,  and  the  equator  AE;  and  if  about  the  centre  C,  with  the  radius  CP,  we  suppose 
the  sphere  Pape  to  he  described,  and  QR  to  denote  the  plane  on  which  a  right  line, 
drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,  stands  at  right  angles;  and 
further  suppose  that  the  several  particles  of  the  whole  exterior  earth  PapAPepE, 
without  the  height  of  the  said  sphere,  endeavor  to  recede  towards  this  side  and  that 
side  from  the  plane  QR,  every  particle  by  a  force  proportional  to  its  distance  from 
that  plane;  I  say,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  whole  force  and  efficacy  of  all  the  par¬ 
ticles  that  are  situated  in  AE,  the  circle  of  the  equator,  and  disposed  uniformly 
without  the  globe,  encompassing  the  same  after  the  manner  of  a  ring,  to  wheel  the 
earth  about  its  centre,  is  to  the  whole  force  and  efficacy  of  as  many  particles  in  that 
point  A  of  the  equator  which  is  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the  plane  QR,  to  wheel 
the  earth  about  its  centre  with  a  like  circular  motion  as  is  1  to  2.  And  that  circular 
motion  will  be  performed  about  an  axis  lying  in  the  common  section  of  the  equator 
and  the  plane  QR. 

For  let  there  be  described  from  the  centre  K,  with  the  diameter  IL,  the 
semicircle  INL.  Suppose  the  semicircumference  INL  to  be  divided  into  in¬ 
numerable  equal  parts,  and  from  the  several  parts  N  to  the  diameter  IL  let  fall 
the  sines  NM.  Then  the  sums  of  the  squares  of  all  the  sines  NM  will  be  equal 


to  the  sums  of  the  squares  of  the  sines  KM,  and  both  sums  together  wll  be 
equal  to  the  sums  of  the  squares  of  as  many  semidiameters  KN ;  and  therefore 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  all  the  sines  NM  will  be  but  half  so  great  as  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  as  many  semidiameters  KN. 

Suppose  now  the  circumference  of  the  circle  AE  to  be  divided  into  the  like 
number  of  little  equal  parts,  and  from  every  such  part  F  a  perpendicular  FG  to 
be  let  fall  upon  the  plane  QR,  as  well  as  the  perpendicular  AH  from  the  point 
A.  Then  the  force  by  which  the  particle  F  recedes  from  the  plane  QR  ^vill  (by 
supposition)  be  as  that  perpendicular  FG;  and  this  force  multiplied  by  the 
distance  CG  mil  represent  the  power  of  the  particle  F  to  turn  the  earth  round 
its  centre.  And,  therefore,  the  power  of  a  particle  in  the  place  F  will  be  to  the 
power  of  a  particle  in  the  place  A  as  FG-GC  is  to  AH-HC;  that  is,  as  FC^  to 
AC^:  and  therefore  the  whole  power  of  all  the  particles  F,  in  their  proper  places 


330  Mathematical  Principles 

F,  will  be  to  the  power  of  the  like  number  of  particles  in  the  place  A  as  the  sum 
of  all  the  FC-  is  to  the  sum  of  all  the  AC-,  that  is  (by  what  w’e  have  demon¬ 
strated  before),  as  1  to  2.  q.e.d. 

And  because  the  action  of  those  particles  is  exerted  in  the  direction  of  lines 
perpendicularly  receding  from  the  plane  QR,  and  that  equally  from  each  side 
of  this  plane,  they  will  wheel  about  the  circumference  of  the  circle  of  the  equa¬ 
tor,  together  with  the  adherent  body  of  the  earth,  round  an  axis  which  lies  as 
well  in  the  plane  QR  as  in  that  of  the  equator. 

Lemma  2 

The  same  things  still  supposed,  I  say,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  total  force  or 
power  of  all  the  particles  situated  everywhere  about  the  sphere  to  turn  the  earth  about 
the  said  axis  is  to  the  whole  force  of  the  like  number  of  particles,  uniformly  disposed 
round  the  whole  circumference  of  the  equator  AE  in  the  fashion  of  a  ring,  to  turn  the 
whole  earth  about  with  the  like  circidar  motion  as  is  2  to  5. 

For  let  IK  be  any  lesser  circle  parallel  to  the  equator  AE,  and  let  hi  be  any 
two  equal  particles  in  this  circle,  situated  without  the  sphere  Fape;  and  if  upon 
the  plane  QR,  which  is  at  right  angles  with  a  radius  drawn  to  the  sun,  we  let 
fall  the  perpendiculars  LM,  Im,  the  total  forces  by  which  these  particles  recede 
from  the  plane  QR  will  be  proportional  to  the  perpendiculars  LM,  hn.  Let  the 
right  line  hi  be  drawm  parallel  to  the  plane  Pape,  and  bisect  the  same  in  X;  and 
through  the  point  X  draw'  Nn  parallel  to 
the  plane  QR,  and  meeting  the  perpendic¬ 
ulars  LM,  Im,  in  N  and  n;  and  upon  the 
plane  QR  let  fall  the  perpendicular  XY. 

And  the  contrary  forces  of  the  particles  L 
and  I  to  w'heel  about  the  earth  contrariwise 
are  as  LM-MC,  and  Im-mC;  that  is,  as 
LN-MC+NM-MC,  and  In-mC—nm-mC; 
or  LN-MC+NM-MC,  and  LN-mC- 
NM-mC,  and  LN-Mm-NM- (MC+mC), 
the  difference  of  the  tw'o,  is  the  force  of  both 
taken  together  to  turn  the  earth  round.  The 
positive  part  of  this  difference  LN  -  Mm,  or 
2LN-NX,  is  to  2AH-HC,  the  force  of  tw'o 
particles  of  the  same  size  situated  in  A,  as  LX^  to  AC^;  and  the  negative  part 
NM  -  (MC+mC),  or  2XY -CY,  is  to  2AH  -HC,  the  force  of  the  same  tw^o  par¬ 
ticles  situated  in  A,  as  CX^  to  AC^.  And  therefore  the  difference  of  the  parts, 
that  is,  the  force  of  the  tw'o  particles  L  and  I,  taken  together,  to  w'heel  the 
earth  about,  is  to  the  force  of  tw'o  particles,  equal  to  the  former  and  situated  in 
the  place  A,  to  turn  in  like  manner  the  earth  round,  as  LX^  — CX^  is  to  AC^. 
But  if  the  circumference  IK  of  the  circle  IK  is  supposed  to  be  divided  into  an 
infinite  number  of  little  equal  parts  L,  all  the  LX-  wall  be  to  the  like  number  of 
IX-  as  1  to  2  (by  Lem.  1) ;  and  to  the  same  number  of  AC^  as  IX^  is  to  2AC^; 
and  the  same  number  of  CX^  to  as  many  AC-  as  2CX?  is  to  2AC-.  Therefore  the 
united  forces  of  all  the  particles  in  the  circumference  of  the  circle  IK  are  to  the 
joint  forces  of  as  many  particles  in  the  place  A  as  IX^  — 2CX-  is  to  2AC^;  and 
therefore  (by  Lem.  1)  to  the  united  forces  of  as  many  particles  in  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  the  circle  AE  as  IX^  —  2CX2  is  to  AC^. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  331 

Now  if  Pp,  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  is  conceived  to  be  divided  into  an 
infinite  number  of  equal  parts,  upon  which  a  like  number  of  circles  IK  are 
supposed  to  stand,  the  matter  in  the  circumference  of  every  circle  IK  will  be  as 
IX^;  and  therefore  the  force  of  that  matter  to  turn  the  earth  about  wll  be  as 
IX^  into  IX^  — 2CX2;  and  the  force  of  the  same  matter,  if  it  was  situated  in  the 
circumference  of  the  circle  AE,  would  be  as  IX^  into  AC^  And  therefore  the 
force  of  all  the  particles  of  the  whole  matter  situated  without  the  sphere  in  the 
circumferences  of  all  the  circles  is  to  the  force  of  the  like  number  of  particles 
situated  in  the  circumference  of  the  greatest  circle  AE  as  all  the  IX^  into 
IX^  — 2CX-  is  to  as  many  IX^  into  AC^;  that  is,  as  all  the  AC^  — CX^  into 
AC-— 3CX-  to  as  many  AC^  — CX^  into  AC^;  that  is,  as  all  the  AC^— 4AC2- 
CX2+3CX^  to  as  many  AC^  — AC’-CX^;  that  is,  as  the  whole  fluent  quantity 
whose  fluxion  is  AC^  — 4AC2-CX‘+3CX^,  is  to  the  whole  fluent  quantity, 
whose  fluxion  is  AC'^  — AC^-CX^;  and,  therefore,  by  the  method  of  fluxions,  as 
AC'  •  CX  -^AC2  •  CX®+%CX5  is  AC  •  CX  -  ^AC^  •  CX®;  that  is,  if  for  CX 
we  write  the  whole  Cp,  or  AC,  as  ^^sAC®  is  to  AC®;  that  is,  as  2  is  to  5.  q.e.d. 

Lemma  3 

The  same  things  still  supposed,  I  say,  in  the  third  place,  that  the  motion  of  the 
whole  earth  about  the  axis  above  named  arising  from  the  motions  of  all  the  particles, 
will  be  to  the  motion  of  the  aforesaid  ring  about  the  same  axis  in  a  ratio  compounded 
of  the  ratio  of  the  matter  in  the  earth  to  the  matter  in  the  ring;  and  the  ratio  of  three 
squares  of  the  quadrantal  arc  of  any  circle  to  two  squares  of  its  diameter,  that  is,  in  the 
ratio  of  the  matter  to  the  matter,  and  of  the  number  925,275  to  the  number  1,000,000. 

For  the  motion  of  a  cylinder  revolved  about  its  quiescent  axis  is  to  the 
motion  of  the  inscribed  sphere  revolved  together  wth  it  as  any  four  equal 
squares  are  to  three  circles  inscribed  in  three  of  those  squares,  and  the  motion 
of  this  cylinder  is  to  the  motion  of  an  exceedingly  thin  ring  surrounding  both 
sphere  and  cylinder  in  their  common  contact  as  double  the  matter  in  the 
cylinder  is  to  triple  the  matter  in  the  ring;  and  this  motion  of  the  ring,  uni¬ 
formly  continued  about  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  is  to  the  uniform  motion  of  the 
same  about  its  own  diameter  performed  in  the  same  periodic  time  as  is  the 
circumference  of  a  circle  to  double  its  diameter. 

HYPOTHESIS  II 

IF  THE  OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE  EARTH  WERE  TAKEN  AWAY,  AND  THE  REMAINING 
RING  WAS  CARRIED  ALONE  ABOUT  THE  SUN  IN  THE  ORBIT  OF  THE  EARTH  BY 
THE  ANNUAL  MOTION,  WHILE  BY  THE  DIURNAL  MOTION  IT  WAS  IN  THE  MEAN¬ 
TIME  REVOLVED  ABOUT  ITS  OWN  AXIS  INCLINED  TO  THE  PLANE  OF  THE  ECLIPTIC 
BY  AN  ANGLE  OF  2334  DEGREES,  THE  MOTION  OF  THE  EQUINOCTIAL  POINTS 
WOULD  BE  THE  SAME,  WHETHER  THE  RING  WERE  FLUID,  OR  WHETHER  IT 
CONSISTED  OF  A  HARD  AND  RIGID  MATTER. 

Proposition  39.  Problem  20 
To  find  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes. 

The  middle  hourly  motion  of  the  moon’s  nodes  in  a  circular  orbit,  Avhen  the 
nodes  are  in  the  quadratures,  was  16"  35'"  16*"^  36^;  the  half  of  which,  8"  17"' 
38  iv  (fQj.  reasons  above  explained),  is  the  mean  hourly  motion  of  the  nodes 
in  such  an  orbit,  which  motion  in  a  whole  sidereal  year  becomes  20°  11'  46". 


332  Mathematical  Principles 

Since,  therefore,  the  nodes  of  the  moon  in  such  an  orbit  would  be  yearly 
transferred  20°  11'  46"  backwards,  and,  if  there  were  more  moons,  the  motion 
of  the  nodes  of  every  one  (by  Cor.  xvi,  Prop.  66,  Book  i)  would  be  as  its  peri¬ 
odic  time,  if  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  a  moon  was  revolved  in  the  time  of  a 
sidereal  day,  the  annual  motion  of  the  nodes  of  this  moon  would  be  to  20°  11' 
46"  as  23^.  56"'.,  the  sidereal  day,  is  to  27*^.  7^.  43"'.,  the  periodic  time  of  our 
moon,  that  is,  as  1436  is  to  39,343.  And  the  same  thing  would  happen  to  the 
nodes  of  a  ring  of  moons  encompassing  the  earth,  whether  these  moons  did  not 
mutually  touch  each  the  other,  or  whether  they  were  molten,  and  formed  into 
a  continued  ring,  or  whether  that  ring  should  become  rigid  and  inflexible. 

Let  us,  then,  suppose  that  this  ring  is  in  quantity  of  matter  equal  to  the 
whole  exterior  earth  PapAPepE,  which  lies  without  the  sphere  Pape  (see  Fig., 
Lem.  2) ;  and  because  this  sphere  is  to  that  exterior  earth  as  aC^  is  to  AC^  — aC^ 
that  is  (seeing  PC  or  aC  the  least  semidiameter  of  the  earth  is  to  AC  the  great¬ 
est  semidiameter  of  the  same  as  229  is  to  230),  as  52,441  is  to  459;  if  this  ring 
encompassed  the  earth  round  the  equator,  and  both  together  were  revolved 
about  the  diameter  of  the  ring,  the  motion  of  the  ring  (by  Lem.  3)  would  be  to 
the  motion  of  the  inner  sphere  as  459  to  52,441  and  1,000,000  to  925,275  con¬ 
jointly,  that  is,  as  4590  to  485,223;  and  therefore  the  motion  of  the  ring  would 
be  to  the  sum  of  the  motions  of  both  ring  and  sphere  as  4590  is  to  489,813. 
Therefore,  if  the  ring  adheres  to  the  sphere,  and  communicates  its  motion  to 
the  sphere,  by  which  its  nodes  or  equinoctial  points  recede,  the  motion  remain¬ 
ing  in  the  ring  will  be  to  its  former  motion  as  4590  is  to  489,813;  on  account  of 
which  the  motion  of  the  equinoctial  points  will  be  diminished  in  the  same  ratio. 
Therefore,  the  annual  motion  of  the  equinoctial  points  of  the  body,  composed 
of  both  ring  and  sphere,  will  be  to  the  motion  20°  11'  46"  as  1436  to  39,343  and 
4590  to  489,813  conjointly,  that  is,  as  100  to  292,369.  But  the  forces  by  which 
the  nodes  of  a  number  of  moons  (as  we  explained  above),  and  therefore  by 
which  the  equinoctial  points  of  the  ring  recede  (that  is,  the  forces  3IT,  in  Fig., 
Prop.  30),  are  in  the  several  particles  as  the  distances  of  those  particles  from 
the  plane  QR;  and  by  these  forces  the  particles  recede  from  that  plane:  and 
therefore  (by  Lem.  2)  if  the  matter  of  the  ring  was  spread  all  over  the  surface  of 
the  sphere,  after  the  fashion  of  the  figure  PapAPepE,  in  order  to  make  up  that 
exterior  part  of  the  earth,  the  total  force  or  power  of  all  the  particles  to  wheel 
about  the  earth  round  any  diameter  of  the  equator,  and  therefore  to  move  the 
equinoctial  points,  would  become  less  than  before  in  the  proportion  of  2  to  5. 
Therefore  the  annual  regress  of  the  equinoxes  now  would  be  to  20°  11'  46"  as 
10  is  to  73,092;  that  is,  would  be  9"  56'"  50'^. 

But  because  the  plane  of  the  equator  is  inclined  to  that  of  the  ecliptic,  this 
motion  is  to  be  diminished  in  the  ratio  of  the  sine  91,706  (which  is  the  cosine  of  233^ 
degrees)  to  the  radius  100,000;  and  the  remaining  motion  will  now  be  9"7'"20*A 
which  is  the  annual  precession  of  the  equinoxes  arising  from  the  force  of  the  sun. 

But  the  force  of  the  moon  to  move  the  sea  was  to  the  force  of  the  sun  nearly 
as  4.4815  to  1 ;  and  the  force  of  the  moon  to  move  the  equinoxes  is  to  that  of  the 
sun  in  the  same  proportion.  Whence  the  annual  precession  of  the  equinoxes 
proceeding  from  the  force  of  the  moon  comes  out  40"  52'"  52''",  and  the  total 
annual  precession  arising  from  the  united  forces  of  both  will  be  50"  00'"  12*'^, 
the  amount  of  which  motion  agrees  with  the  phenomena;  for  the  precession  of 
the  equinoxes,  by  astronomical  observations,  is  about  50"  yearly. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  333 

If  the  height  of  the  earth  at  the  equator  exceeds  its  height  at  the  poles  by 
more  than  17^  miles,  the  matter  thereof  will  be  more  rare  near  the  surface 
than  at  the  centre ;  and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  will  be  augmented  by 
the  excess  of  height,  and  diminished  by  the  greater  rarity. 

And  now  we  have  described  the  system  of  the  sun,  the  earth,  moon,  and 
planets,  it  remains  that  we  add  something  about  the  comets. 

Lemma  4 

The  comets  are  more  remote  than  the  moon,  and  are  in  the  regions  of  the  planets. 

As  the  comets  were  placed  by  astronomers  beyond  the  moon,  because  they 
were  found  to  have  no  diurnal  parallax,  so  their  annual  parallax  is  a  convincing 
proof  of  their  descending  into  the  regions  of  the  planets;  for  all  the  comets 
which  move  in  a  direct  course  according  to  the  order  of  the  signs,  about  the 
end  of  their  appearance  become  more  than  ordinarily  slow  or  retrograde,  if  the 
earth  is  between  them  and  the  sun;  and  more  than  ordinarily  swift,  if  the  earth 
is  approaching  to  a  heliocentric  opposition  with  them;  on  the  other  hand, 
those  which  move  against  the  order  of  the  signs,  towards  the  end  of  their 
appearance  appear  softer  than  they  ought  to  be,  if  the  earth  is  between  them 
and  the  sun;  and  slower,  and  perhaps  retrograde,  if  the  earth  is  in  the  other 
side  of  its  orbit.  And  these  appearances  proceed  chiefly  from  the  diverse  situ¬ 
ations  which  the  earth  acquires  in  the  course  of  its  motion,  after  the  same 
manner  as  it  happens  to  the  planets,  which  appear  sometimes  retrograde,  some¬ 
times  more  slowly,  and  sometimes  more  swiftly,  progressive,  according  as  the 
motion  of  the  earth  falls  in  with  that  of  the  planet,  or  is  directed  in  the  contrary 
way.  If  the  earth  move  the  same  way  wdth  the  comet,  but,  by  an  angular 
motion  about  the  sun,  so  much  swfter  that  right  lines  drawn  from  the  earth  to 
the  comet  converge  towards  the  parts  beyond  the  comet,  the  comet  seen  from 
the  earth,  because  of  its  slower  motion,  will  appear  retrograde;  and  even  if  the 
earth  is  slower  than  the  comet,  the  motion  of  the  earth  being  subtracted,  the 
motion  of  the  comet  wall  at  least  appear  retarded;  but  if  the  earth  tends  the 
contrary  way  to  that  of  the  comet,  the  motion  of  the  comet  will  from  thence 
appear  accelerated;  and  from  this  apparent  acceleration,  or  retardation,  or 
regressive  motion,  the  distance  of  the  comet  may  be  inferred  in  this  manner. 

Let  TQA,  TQB,  TQC  be  three  observed 
longitudes  of  the  comet  about  the 
time  of  its  first  appearing,  and  TQF  its 
last  observed  longitude  before  its  dis¬ 
appearing.  Draw  the  right  line  ABC, 
whose  parts  AB,  BC,  intercepted  be¬ 
tween  the  right  lines  QA  and  QB,  QB 
and  QC,  may  be  one  to  the  other  as  the 
two  times  between  the  three  first  obser¬ 
vations.  Produce  AC  to  G,  so  that  AG 
may  be  to  AB  as  the  time  between  the  first  and  last  observations  is  to  the  time 
between  the  first  and  second;  and  join  QG.  Now  if  the  comet  did  move  uni¬ 
formly  in  a  right  line,  and  the  earth  either  stood  still,  or  was  likewise  carried 
forwards  in  a  right  line  by  an  uniform  motion,  the  angle  TQG  w’ould  be  the 
longitude  of  the  comet  at  the  time  of  the  last  observation.  Therefore,  the  angle 
FQG,  which  is  the  difference  of  the  longitude,  proceeds  from  the  inequality 


334  Mathematical  Principles 

of  the  motions  of  the  comet  and  the  earth;  and  if  the  earth  and  comet  move 
contrary  ways,  this  angle  is  added  to  the  angle  TQG,  and  accelerates  the 
apparent  motion  of  the  comet;  but  if  the  comet  moves  the  same  way  with  the 
earth,  it  is  subtracted,  and  either  retards  the  motion  of  the  comet,  or  perhaps 
renders  it  retrograde,  as  we  have  just  now  explained.  This  angle,  therefore, 
proceeding  chiefly  from  the  motion  of  the  earth,  is  justly  to  be  esteemed  the 
parallax  of  the  comet,  there  being  neglected  thereby  some  little  increment  or 
decrement  that  may  arise  from  the  unequal  motion  of  the  comet  in  its  orbit. 
From  this  parallax  we  thus  deduce  the  distance  of  the  comet.  Let  S  represent 
the  sun,  acT  the  great  orbit,  a  the  earth’s 
place  in  the  first  observation,  c  the  place 
of  the  earth  in  the  third  observation,  T 
the  place  of  the  earth  in  the  last  observa¬ 
tion,  and  TT  a  right  line  dra^Ti  to  the 
beginning  of  Aries.  Set  off  the  angle  TTV 
equal  to  the  angle  TQF,  that  is,  equal 
to  the  longitude  of  the  comet  at  the  time 
when  the  earth  is  in  T ;  join  ac,  and  pro¬ 
duce  it  to  g,  so  that  ag  may  be  to  ac  as 
AG  is  to  AC;  and  g  mtII  be  the  place  at 
which  the  earth  would  have  arrived  in 
the  time  of  the  last  observation,  if  it  had 
continued  to  move  uniformly  in  the  right 
line  ac.  Therefore,  if  we  draw  gT  parallel 
to  TT,  and  make  the  angle  TgY  equal  to  the  angle  TQG,  this  angle  TgY  Mill 
be  equal  to  the  longitude  of  the  comet  seen  from  the  place  g,  and  the  angle  TVg 
will  be  the  parallax  which  arises  from  the  earth’s  being  transferred  from  the 
place  g  into  the  place  T ;  and  therefore  V  will  be  the  place  of  the  comet  in  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic.  And  this  place  V  is  commonly  lower  than  the  orbit  of  Jupiter. 

The  same  thing  may  be  deduced  from  the  incurvation  of  the  way  of  the 
comets;  for  these  bodies  move  almost  in  great  circles,  while  their  velocity  is 
great;  but  about  the  end  of  their  course,  when  that  part  of  their  apparent 
motion  which  arises  from  the  parallax  bears  a  greater  proportion  to  their  whole 
apparent  motion,  they  commonly  deviate  from  those  circles,  and  when  the 
earth  goes  to  one  side,  they  deviate  to  the  other;  and  this  deflection,  because  of 
its  corresponding  with  the  motion  of  the  earth,  must  arise  chiefly  from  the 
parallax;  and  the  quantity  thereof  is  so  considerable,  as,  by  my  computation, 
to  place  the  disappearing  comets  a  good  deal  lower  than  Jupiter.  Hence  it 
follows  that  when  they  approach  nearer  to  us  in  their  perigees  and  perihelions 
they  often  descend  below  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  the  inferior  planets. 

The  near  approach  of  the  comets  is  further  confirmed  from  the  light  of  their 
heads;  for  the  light  of  a  celestial  body,  illuminated  by  the  sun,  and  receding  to 
remote  parts,  diminishes  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  distance;  namely,  as  the 
square,  on  account  of  the  increase  of  the  distance  from  the  sun,  and  as  another 
square,  on  account  of  the  decrease  of  the  apparent  diameter.  Therefore,  if  both 
the  quantity  of  light  and  the  apparent  diameter  of  a  comet  are  given,  its  dis¬ 
tance  Mill  be  given  also,  by  taking  the  distance  of  the  comet  to  the  distance  of  a 
planet  directly  as  their  diameters  and  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  their 
lights.  Thus,  in  the  comet  of  the  year  1682,  Mr.  Flamsteed  observed  with  a 


Book  III :  The  System  of  the  World  335 

telescope  of  16  feet,  and  measured  Avith  a  micrometer,  the  least  diameter  of  its 
head,  2'  00" ;  but  the  nucleus  or  star  in  the  middle  of  the  head  scarcely  amounted 
to  the  tenth  part  of  this  measure,  and  therefore  its  diameter  AA'as  only  11"  or 
12";  but  in  the  light  and  splendor  of  its  head  it  surpassed  that  of  the  comet  in 
the  year  1680,  and  might  be  compared  AA'ith  the  stars  of  the  first  or  second 
magnitude.  Let  us  suppose  that  Saturn  Avith  its  ring  AA^as  about  four  times  more 
lucid;  and  because  the  light  of  the  ring  Avas  almost  equal  to  the  light  of  the 
globe  AATthin,  and  the  apparent  diameter  of  the  globe  is  about  21",  and  there¬ 
fore  the  united  light  of  both  globe  and  ring  AA^ould  be  equal  to  the  light  of  a 
globe  AA'hose  diameter  is  30",  it  folloAA's  that  the  distance  of  the  comet  AA'as  to  the 
distance  of  Saturn  inversely  as  1  to  \/4,  and  directly  as  12"  to  30";  that  is,  as 
24  to  30,  or  4  to  5.  Again;  the  comet  in  the  month  of  April,  1665,  as  HeAA^elcke 
informs  us,  excelled  almost  all  the  fixed  stars  in  splendor,  and  even  Saturn 
itself,  as  being  of  a  much  more  vivid  color;  for  this  comet  Avas  more  lucid  than 
that  other  Avhich  had  appeared  about  the  end  of  the  preceding  year,  and  had 
been  compared  to  the  stars  of  the  first  magnitude.  The  diameter  of  its  head 
AA'as  about  6' ;  but  the  nucleus,  compared  AAith  the  planets  by  means  of  a  tele¬ 
scope,  AA'as  plainly  less  than  Jupiter;  and  sometimes  judged  less,  sometimes 
judged  equal,  to  the  globe  of  Saturn  AAuthin  the  ring.  Since,  then,  the  diameters 
of  the  heads  of  the  comets  seldom  exceed  8'  or  12',  and  the  diameter  of  the 
nucleus  or  central  star  is  but  about  a  tenth  or  perhaps  fifteenth  part  of  the 
diameter  of  the  head,  it  appears  that  these  stars  are  generally  of  about  the 
same  apparent  magnitude  AAuth  the  planets.  But  since  their  light  may  be  often 
compared  AAuth  the  light  of  Saturn,  yea,  and  sometimes  exceeds  it,  it  is  evident 
that  all  comets  in  their  perihelions  must  either  be  placed  beloAv  or  not  far  above 
Saturn;  and  they  are  much  mistaken  AA'ho  remove  them  almost  as  far  as  the 
fixed  stars;  for  if  it  AA'ere  so,  the  comets  could  receive  no  more  light  from  our  sun 
than  our  planets  do  from  the  fixed  stars. 

So  far  AA'e  have  gone,  AAdthout  considering  the  obscuration  AA'hich  comets  suffer 
from  that  plenty  of  thick  smoke  AA'hich  encompasses  their  heads,  and  through 
AA'hich  the  heads  alAA'ays  shoAv  dull,  as  through  a  cloud.  But  the  more  a  body  is 
obscured  by  this  smoke,  the  nearer  must  it  be  alloAA'ed  to  come  to  the  sun,  that 
it  may  vie  AA'ith  the  planets  in  the  quantity  of  light  AA'hich  it  reflects.  Hence  it  is 
probable  that  the  comets  descend  far  beloAV  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  as  AA'e  proA'ed 
before  from  their  parallax.  But,  above  all,  the  thing  is  eAunced  from  their  tails, 
AA'hich  must  be  due  either  to  the  sun’s  light  reflected  by  a  smoke  arising  from 
them,  and  dispersing  itself  through  the  ether,  or  to  the  light  of  their  oaa'u  heads. 
In  the  former  case,  AA'e  must  shorten  the  distance  of  the  comets,  lest  AA'e  be 
obliged  to  alloAv  that  the  smoke  arising  from  their  heads  is  propagated  through 
such  a  vast  extent  of  space,  and  AA'ith  such  a  velocity  and  expansion  as  AA'ill  seem 
altogether  incredible;  in  the  latter  case,  the  AA'hole  light  of  both  head  and  tail  is 
to  be  ascribed  to  the  central  nucleus.  But,  then,  if  AA'e  suppose  all  this  light  to  be 
united  and  condensed  AA'ithin  the  disk  of  the  nucleus,  certainly  the  nucleus  AA'ill 
by  far  exceed  Jupiter  itself  in  splendor,  especially  Avhen  it  emits  a  very  large 
and  lucid  tail.  If,  therefore,  under  a  less  apparent  diameter,  it  reflects  more 
light,  it  must  be  much  more  illuminated  by  the  sun,  and  therefore  much  nearer 
to  it;  and  the  same  argument  AA'ill  bring  doAA'n  the  heads  of  comets  sometimes 
AA'ithin  the  orbit  of  Venus,  viz.,  AA'hen,  being  hid  under  the  sun’s  rays,  they  emit 
such  huge  and  splendid  tails,  like  beams  of  fire,  as  sometimes  they  do ;  for  if  all 


336  Mathematical  Principles 

that  light  was  supposed  to  be  gathered  together  into  one  star,  it  would  some¬ 
times  exceed  not  one  Venus  only,  but  a  great  many  such  united  into  one. 

Lastly,  the  same  thing  is  inferred  from  the  light  of  the  heads,  which  increases 
in  the  recess  of  the  comets  from  the  earth  towards  the  sun,  and  decreases  in 
their  return  from  the  sun  towards  the  earth.  Thus,  the  comet  of  the  year  1665 
(by  the  observations  of  Hewelcke),  from  the  time  that  it  was  first  seen,  was 
always  losing  of  its  apparent  motion,  and  therefore  had  already  passed  its 
perigee;  but  yet  the  splendor  of  its  head  was  daily  increasing,  till,  being  hid 
under  the  sun’s  rays,  the  comet  ceased  to  appear.  The  comet  of  the  year  1683 
(by  the  observations  of  the  same  Hewelcke),  about  the  end  of  July,  when  it 
first  appeared,  moved  at  a  very  slow  rate,  advancing  only  about  40  or  45 
minutes  in  its  orbit  in  a  day’s  time;  but  from  that  time  its  diurnal  motion  was 
continually  upon  the  increase,  till  September  4,  when  it  arose  to  about  5  de¬ 
grees;  and  therefore,  in  all  this  interval  of  time,  the  comet  was  approaching  to 
the  earth.  This  is  likewise  proved  from  the  diameter  of  its  head,  measured  with 
a  micrometer;  for,  on  August  6,  Hewelcke  found  it  only  6'  5",  including  the 
coma,  which,  on  September  2,  he  observed  to  be  9'  7";  and  therefore  its  head 
appeared  far  less  about  the  beginning  than  towards  the  end  of  the  motion, 
though  about  the  beginning,  because  nearer  to  the  sun,  it  appeared  far  more 
lucid  than  towards  the  end,  as  the  same  Hewelcke  declares.  Therefore  in  all  this 
interval  of  time,  on  account  of  its  recess  from  the  sun,  it  decreased  in  splendor, 
notwithstanding  its  approach  towards  the  earth.  The  comet  of  the  year  1618, 
about  the  middle  of  December,  and  that  of  the  year  1680,  about  the  end  of  the 
same  month,  did  both  move  with  their  greatest  velocity,  and  w^ere  therefore 
then  in  their  perigees,  but  the  greatest  splendor  of  their  heads  was  seen  two 
weeks  before,  when  they  had  just  got  clear  of  the  sun’s  rays,  and  the  greatest 
splendor  of  their  tails  a  little  earlier,  when  yet  nearer  to  the  sun.  The  head  of 
the  former  comet  (according  to  the  observations  of  Cysat),  on  December  1, 
appeared  greater  than  the  stars  of  the  first  magnitude;  and,  on  December  16 
(then  in  the  perigee),  it  was  diminished  but  little  in  magnitude,  but  much 
diminished  in  the  splendor  and  brightness  of  its  light.  On  January  7,  Kepler, 
being  uncertain  about  the  head,  left  off  observing.  On  December  12,  the  head 
of  the  latter  comet  was  seen  and  observed  by  Mr.  Flamsteed,  when  but  9  de¬ 
grees  distant  from  the  sun,  wLich  is  scarcely  to  be  done  in  a  star  of  the  third 
magnitude.  On  December  15  and  17,  it  appeared  as  a  star  of  the  third  magni¬ 
tude,  its  luster  being  diminished  by  the  brightness  of  the  clouds  near  the  setting 
sun.  On  December  26,  when  it  moved  with  the  greatest  velocity,  being  almost 
in  its  perigee,  it  w'as  less  than  the  mouth  of  Pegasus,  a  star  of  the  third  magni¬ 
tude.  On  January  3,  it  appeared  as  a  star  of  the  fourth.  On  January  9,  as  one  of 
the  fifth.  On  January  13,  it  w'as  hid  by  the  splendor  of  the  moon,  then  in  her 
increase.  On  January  25,  it  w'as  scarcely  equal  to  the  stars  of  the  seventh 
magnitude.  If  we  compare  equal  intervals  of  time,  taken  on  one  side  of  the 
perigee  and  then  on  the  other,  w^e  shall  find  that  the  head  of  the  comet,  which 
at  both  intervals  of  time  w'as  far,  but  yet  equally  removed  from  the  earth,  and 
should  therefore  have  shone  with  equal  splendor,  appeared  brightest  on  the 
side  of  the  perigee  tow'ards  the  sun,  and  disappeared  on  the  other.  Therefore, 
from  the  great  difference  of  light  in  the  one  situation  and  in  the  other,  we  con¬ 
clude  the  great  vicinity  of  the  sun  and  comet  in  the  former,  for  the  light  of 
comets  tends  to  be  regular,  and  to  appear  greatest  when  the  heads  move  fast- 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  337 

est,  and  are  therefore  in  their  perigees,  except  so  far  as  it  is  increased  by  their 
nearness  to  the  sun. 

Cor.  I.  Therefore  the  comets  shine  by  the  sun’s  light,  M'hich  they  reflect. 

Cor.  II.  From  what  has  been  said,  we  may  likewise  understand  Avhy  comets 
are  so  frequently  seen  in  that  region  in  which  the  sun  is,  and  so  seldom  in  the 
other.  If  they  were  visible  in  the  regions  far  above  Saturn,  they  would  appear 
more  frequently  in  the  parts  opposite  to  the  suii;  for  such  as  were  in  those  parts 
would  be  nearer  to  the  earth,  whereas  the  presence  of  the  sun  must  obscure  and 
hide  those  that  appear  in  the  region  in  which  he  is.  Yet,  looking  over  the  history 
of  comets,  I  find  that  four  or  five  times  more  have  been  seen  in  the  hemisphere 
towards  the  sun  than  in  the  opposite  hemisphere;  besides,  A^Tthout  doubt,  not 
a  few,  which  have  been  hid  by  the  light  of  the  sun :  for  comets  descending  into 
our  parts  neither  emit  tails,  nor  are  so  well  illuminated  by  the  sun  as  to  reveal 
themselves  to  our  naked  eyes,  until  they  have  come  nearer  to  us  than  Jupiter. 
But  the  far  greater  part  of  that  spherical  space,  which  is  described  about  the 
sun  vith  so  small  a  radius,  lies  on  that  side  of  the  earth  which  faces  the  sun; 
and  the  comets  in  that  greater  part  are  commonly  more  strongly  illuminated, 
for  they  are  for  the  most  part  nearer  to  the  sun. 

Cor.  III.  Hence  also  it  is  evident  that  the  celestial  spaces  are  void  of  resist¬ 
ance  ;  for  though  the  comets  are  carried  in  oblique  paths,  and  sometimes  con¬ 
trary  to  the  course  of  the  planets,  yet  they  move  every  way  AAith  the  greatest 
freedom,  and  preserve  their  motions  for  an  exceeding  long  time,  even  Avhere 
contrary  to  the  course  of  the  planets.  I  am  out  in  my  judgment,  if  they  are  not 
a  sort  of  planets  revolving  in  orbits  returning  into  themselves  AAdth  a  continual 
motion;  for  the  opinion  of  some  Avriters,  that  they  are  no  other  than  meteors, 
an  opinion  based  on  the  continual  changes  that  happen  to  their  heads,  seems  to 
have  no  foundation;  for  the  heads  of  comets  are  encompassed  AAuth  huge  atmos¬ 
pheres,  and  the  loA\'ermost  parts  of  these  atmospheres  must  be  the  densest;  and 
therefore  it  is  in  the  clouds  only,  not  in  the  bodies  of  the  comets  themselves, 
that  these  changes  are  seen.  Thus  the  earth,  if  it  AA-ere  AueAA'ed  from  the  planets, 
Avould,  AATthout  all  doubt,  shine  by  the  light  of  its  clouds,  and  the  solid  body 
Avould  scarcely  appear  through  the  surrounding  clouds.  Thus  also  the  belts  of 
Jupiter  are  formed  in  the  clouds  of  that  planet,  for  they  change  their  position 
to  each  other,  and  the  solid  body  of  Jupiter  is  hardly  to  be  seen  through  them; 
and  much  more  must  the  bodies  of  comets  be  hid  under  their  atmospheres, 
AA'hich  are  both  deeper  and  thicker. 

Proposition  40.  Theorem  20 

That  the  comets  move  in  some  of  the  conic  sections,  having  their  foci  in  the  centre  of 
the  sun,  and  by  radii  drawn  to  the  sun  describe  areas  'proportional  to  the  times. 

This  Proposition  appears  from  Cor.  i.  Prop.  13,  Book  i,  compared  Avith 
Props.  8,  12,  and  13,  Book  iii. 

Cor.  i.  Hence  if  comets  revolve  in  orbits  returning  into  themselves,  the 
orbits  aatII  be  ellipses;  and  their  periodic  times  aatU  be  to  the  periodic  times  of 
the  planets  as  the  %th  poAA^er  of  their  principal  axes.  And  therefore  the  comets, 
AA’hich  for  the  most  part  of  their  course  are  more  remote  than  the  planets,  and 
upon  that  account  describe  orbits  AAith  greater  axes,  aatII  require  a  longer  time 
to  finish  their  revolutions.  Thus  if  the  axis  of  a  comet’s  orbit  AA’as  four  times 
greater  than  the  axis  of  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  the 


338  Mathematical  Principles 

comet  would  be  to  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  Saturn,  that  is,  to  30  years,  as 
4\/4  (or  8)  is  to  1,  and  would  therefore  be  240  years. 

Cor.  II.  But  their  orbits  vill  be  so  near  to  parabolas,  that  parabolas  may  be 
used  for  them  without  sensible  error. 

Cor.  III.  And,  therefore,  by  Cor.  vii.  Prop.  16,  Book  i,  the  velocity  of  every 
comet  will  always  be  to  the  velocity  of  any  planet,  supposed  to  be  revolved  at 
the  same  distance  in  a  circle  about  the  sun,  nearly  as  the  square  root  of  double 
the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  the  distance  of  the 
comet  from  the  sun’s  centre.  Let  us  suppose  the  radius  of  the  great  orbit,  or  the 
greatest  semidiameter  of  the  ellipse  which  the  earth  describes,  to  consist  of 
100,000,000  parts;  and  then  the  earth  by  its  mean  diurnal  motion  will  describe 
1,720,212  of  those  parts,  and  71,6753^  by  its  hourly  motion.  And  therefore  the 
comet,  at  the  same  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  with  a  velocity 
which  is  to  the  velocity  of  the  earth  as  \/2  to  1,  would  by  its  diurnal  motion 
describe  2,432,747  parts,  and  101,3643/^  parts  by  its  hourly  motion.  But  at 
greater  or  less  distances  both  the  diurnal  and  hourly  motion  will  be  to  this 
diurnal  and  hourly  motion  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  the  distances,  and  is 
therefore  given. 

Cor.  IV.  Therefore  if  the  latus  rectum  of  the  parabola  is  four  times  the  radius 
of  the  great  orbit,  and  the  square  of  that  radius  is  supposed  to  consist  of 
100,000,000  parts,  the  area  which  the  comet  will  daily  describe  by  a  radius 
drawn  to  the  sun  will  be  1,216,3733^  parts,  and  the  hourly  area  wll  be  50,68234 
parts.  But,  if  the  latus  rectum  is  greater  or  less  in  any  ratio,  the  diurnal  and 
hourly  area  will  be  less  or  greater  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  that  ratio. 


Lemma  5 

To  find  a  curved  line  of  the  parabolic  kind  which  shall  pass  through  any  given 
number  of  points. 

Let  those  points  be  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  &c.,  and  from  the  same  to  any  right 
line  HN,  given  in  position,  let  fall  as  many  perpendiculars  AH,  BI,  CK,  DL, 
EM,  FN,  &c. 


6  26 

36 

46  56 

c 

2c 

3c 

4c 

d 

2d 

e 

2e 

M 

A^- — ' 

I 

\  M  N 

H  ] 

[  S  K  ] 

I 

f 

Case  1.  If  HI,  IK,  KL,  &c.,  the  intervals 
of  the  points  H,  I,  K,  L,  M,  N,  &c.,  are  equal, 
take  b,  2b,  36,  46,  56,  &c.,  the  first  differences 
of  the  perpendiculars  AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.;  their  second  differences,  c,  2c,  3c,  4c, 
&c.;  their  third,  d,  2d,  3d,  &c.,  that  is  to  say,  so  as  AH— BI  may  be  =  6,  BI  — 
CK  =  26,  CK-DL  =  36,  DL+EM  =  46,  -EM+FN  =  56,  &c.;  then  6-26  =  c, 
&c.,  and  so  on  to  the  last  difference,  which  is  here  /.  Then,  erecting  any  per¬ 
pendicular  RS,  which  may  be  considered  as  an  ordinate  of  the  curve  required, 
in  order  to  find  the  length  of  this  ordinate,  suppose  the  intervals  HI,  IK,  KL, 
LM,  &c.,  to  be  units,  and  let  AH  =  a,  —  HS  =  p,  3^p  into  — IS  =  g,  into 
+SK  =  r,  34r  into+SL  =  s,  345  nto+SM  =  ^;  proceeding  in  this  manner,  to 
ME,  the  last  perpendicular  but  one,  and  prefixing  negative  signs  before  the 
terms  HS,  IS,  &c.,  which  lie  from  S  towards  A;  and  positive  signs  before  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  339 


terms  SK,  SL,  &c.,  which  lie  on  the  other  side  of  the  point  S;  and,  observing 
well  the  signs,  RS  will  be  =a-\-bp-\-cg-\-dr-\-es-\-ft,  +&c. 

Case  2.  But  if  HI,  IK,  &c.,  the  intervals  of  the  points  H,  I,  K,  L,  &c.,  are 
unequal,  take  b,  2b,  36,  46,  56,  &c.,  the  first  differences  of  the  perpendiculars 
AH,  BI,  CK,  &c.,  divided  by  the  intervals  between  those  perpendiculars;  c,  2c, 
3c,  4c,  &c.,  their  second  differences,  divided  by  the  intervals  between  every  two; 
d,  2d,  3d,  &c.,  their  third  differences,  divided  by  the  intervals  between  every 
three;  e,  2e,  &c.,  their  fourth  differences,  divided  by  the  intervals  between 


every  four;  and  so  forth;  that  is,  in  such  manner,  that  6  may  be  = 


AH-BI 


HI  ’ 

BI-CK  CK-DL  „  ,,  6-26  „  26-36  ,,  36-46  , 

26  =  — — ,  36  =  — - ,  &c.,  then  c  =  ,  2c  =  — — ,  3c  =  ,  &c.. 


IK 

then  d  =  ^  2d  - 

JjLL 


KL 
2c  — 3c 
~IM“ 


HK 


IL 


KM 


,  &c.  And  those  differences  being  found,  let  AH  be 


=  a,  —  HS  =  p,  pinto  —  IS  =  g,  ginto  +SK  =  r,  rinto  +SL  =  s,  sinto  +SM  =  ^; 
proceeding  in  this  manner  to  ME,  the  last  perpendicular  but  one;  and  the 
ordinate  RS  will  be  =  a+6p+cg'4-dr+es+/^+&c. 

Cor.  Hence  the  areas  of  all  curves  may  be  nearly  found;  for  if  some  number 
of  points  of  the  curve  to  be  squared  are  found,  and  a  parabola  be  supposed  to 
be  dra\vn  through  those  points,  the  area  of  this  parabola  will  be  nearly  the  same 
with  the  area  of  the  curvilinear  figure  proposed  to  be  squared :  but  the  parabola 
can  be  always  squared  geometrically  by  methods  generally  known. 


Lemma  6 

Certain  observed  places  of  a  comet  being  given,  to  find  the  place  of  the  same  at  any 
intermediate  given  time. 

Let  HI,  IK,  KL,  LM  (in  the  preceding  Fig.)  represent  the  times  between  the 
observations;  HA,  IB,  KC,  LD,  ME,  five  observed  longitudes  of  the  comet; 
and  HS  the  given  time  between  the  first  observation  and  the  longitude  re¬ 
quired.  Then  if  a  regular  curve  ABCDE  is  supposed  to  be  drawn  through  the 
points  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  and  the  ordinate  RS  is  found  out  by  the  preceding  Lem¬ 
ma,  RS  will  be  the  longitude  required. 

By  the  same  method,  from  five  observed  latitudes,  we  may  find  the  latitude 
at  a  given  time. 

If  the  differences  of  the  observed  longitudes  are  small,  let  us  say  4  or  5 
degrees,  then  three  or  four  observations  will  be  sufficient  to  find  a  new  longi¬ 
tude  and  latitude;  but  if  the  differences  are  greater,  as  of  10  or  20  degrees,  five 
observations  ought  to  be  used. 

Lemma  7 

Through  a  given  point  P  to  drawn  a  right  line  BC,  whose  parts  PB,  PC,  cut  off 

by  two  right  lines  AB,  AC,  given  in  position,  may  be 
one  to  the  other  in  a  given  ratio. 

From  the  given  point  P  suppose  any  right  line  PD 
to  be  drawn  to  either  of  the  right  lines  given,  as  AB ; 
and  produce  the  same  towards  AC,  the  other  given 
right  line,  as  far  as  E,  so  as  PE  may  be  to  PD  in  the 
given  ratio.  Let  EC  be  parallel  to  AD.  Draw  CPB, 
and  PC  mil  be  to  PB  as  PE  to  PD. 


q.e.f. 


340 


Mathematical  Principles 


Lemma  8 

Let  ABC  he  a  'parabola,  having  its  focus  in  S.  B'y  the  chord  AC  bisected  in  I  cut 
off  the  segment  ABCI,  whose  diameter  is  I/i  and  vertex  fx.  In  Ifx  produced  take 
nO  equal  to  one-half  of  l/x.  Join  OS,  and  produce  it  to  so  that  S|  may  be  equal 
to  2SO.  Now,  supposing  a  comet  to  revolve  in  the  arc  CBA,  draw  ^B,  cutting  AC 
in  E:  I  say,  the  point  E  will  cut  off  from  the  chord  AC  the  segment  AE,  nearly 
proportional  to  the  time. 

For  if  we  join  EO,  cutting  the  parabolic  arc  ABC  in  Y,  and  draw  //X  touch¬ 
ing  the  same  arc  in  the  vertex  ix,  and  meeting  EO  in  X,  the  curvilinear  area 
AEX/xA  will  be  to  the  curvilinear  area  ACY^iA  as  AE  to  AC;  and,  therefore. 


since  the  triangle  ASE  is  to  the  triangle  ASC  in  the  same  ratio,  the  whole  area 
ASEX/iA  will  be  to  the  whole  area  ASCY/^A  as  AE  is  to  AC.  But,  because  |0 
is  to  SO  as  3  to  1,  and  EO  to  XO  in  the  same  ratio,  SX  will  be  parallel  to  EB; 
and,  therefore,  joining  BX,  the  triangle  SEB  wll  be  equal  to  the  triangle  XEB. 
Therefore,  if  to  the  area  ASEX^iA  we  add  the  triangle  EXB,  and  from  the  sum 
subtract  the  triangle  SEB,  there  will  remain  the  area  ASBXjuA,  equal  to  the 
area  ASEX^uA,  and  therefore  in  the  ratio  to  the  area  ASCY//A  as  AE  to  AC. 
But  the  area  ASBY^iA  is  nearly  equal  to  the  area  ASBX^uA;  and  this  area 
ASBYjuA  is  to  the  area  ASCY^uA  as  the  time  of  description  of  the  arc  AB  is  to 
the  time  of  description  of  the  whole  arc  AC;  and,  therefore,  AE  is  to  AC  nearly 
in  the  proportion  of  the  times.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  When  the  point  B  falls  upon  the  vertex  /x  of  the  parabola,  AE  is  to 
AC  accurately  in  the  proportion  of  the  times. 

Scholium 

If  we  join  fx^  cutting  AC  in  8,  and  in  it  take  in  proportion  to  ixB  as  27MI 
to  16  Mm,  and  draw  Bn,  this  Bn  will  cut  the  chord  AC,  in  the  ratio  of  the  times, 
more  accurately  than  before;  but  the  point  n  is  to  be  taken  beyond  or  on  this 
side  the  point  according  as  the  point  B  is  more  or  less  distant  from  the  prin¬ 
cipal  vertex  of  the  parabola  than  the  point  y. 


Lemma  9 


AP 


The  right  lines  l/x  and  yM,  and  the  length  equal  among  themselves. 

For  4Sm  is  the  latus  rectum  of  the  parabola  belonging  to  the  vertex  y. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


341 


Lemma  10 

Produce  Sm  to  N  and.  P,  so  that  yuN  may  he  one-third  of  fxl,  and  SP  may  he  to  SN 
as  SN  to  Sm;  and  in  the  time  that  a  comet  would  describe  the  arc  AyC,  if  it  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  move  always  forwards  with  the  velocity  which  it  has  in  a  height  equal  to 
SP,  it  would  describe  a  length  equal  to  the  chord  AC. 

For  if  the  comet  "with  the  velocity  which  it  hath  in  y  was  in  the  said  time 
supposed  to  move  uniformly  forwards  in  the  right  line  which  touches  the 
parabola  in  y,  the  area  Avhich  it  would  describe  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  point  S 

would  be  equal  to  the  parabolic  area  ASC/xA; 
and  therefore  the  space  contained  under  the 
length  described  in  the  tangent  and  the  length 
'^y  Avould  be  to  the  space  contained  under  the 
lengths  AC  and  SM  as  the  area  ASC/xA  is  to 
the  triangle  ASC,  that  is,  as  SN  to  SM.  There¬ 
fore  AC  is  to  the  length  described  in  the  tan¬ 
gent  as  S^i  to  SN.  But  since  the  velocity  of  the 
comet  in  the  height  SP  (by  Cor.  vi.  Prop.  16, 
Book  i)  is  to  the  velocity  of  the  same  in  the 
height  Sm,  inversely  as  the  square  root  of  SP 
to  S^t,  that  is,  in  the  ratio  of  Sm  to  SN,  it  follows  that  the  length  described 
with  this  velocity  will  be  to  the  length  in  the  same  time  described  in  the  tan¬ 
gent,  as  Sm  to  SN.  Therefore,  since  AC,  and  the  length  described  Avith  this  new 
velocity,  are  in  the  same  proportion  to  the  length  described  in  the  tangent, 
they  must  be  equal  betAveen  themselves.  q.e.d. 

Cor.  Therefore  a  comet,  Avith  that  velocity  which  it  hath  in  the  height 
would  in  the  same  time  nearly  describe  the  chord  AC. 


Lemma  11 

If  a  comet  void  of  all  motion  was  let  fall  from  the  height  SN,  or  ^y-\-}/^ly,  towards 
the  sun,  and  was  still  impelled  to  the  sun  by  the  same  force  uniformly  continued 
by  which  it  was  impelled  at  first,  the  same,  in  one-half  of  that  time  in  which  it 
might  describe  the  arc  AC  in  its  own  orbit,  would  in  descending  describe  a  space 
equal  to  the  length  ly. 

For  in  the  same  time  that  the  comet  would  require  to  describe  the  parabolic 
arc  AC,  it  would  (by  the  last  Lemma),  AAdth  that  velocity  Avhich  it  hath  in  the 
height  SP,  describe  the  chord  AC ;  and,  there¬ 
fore  (by  Cor.  vii.  Prop.  16,  Book  i),  if  it  Avas 
in  the  same  time  supposed  to  revolve  by  the 
force  of  its  own  graAuty  in  a  circle  Avhose  semi¬ 
diameter  Avas  SP,  it  would  describe  an  arc  of 
that  circle,  the  length  of  Avhich  Avould  be  to 
the  chord  of  the  parabolic  arc  AC  in  the  ratio 
of  1  to  V2.  Therefore,  if  AAith  that  Aveight, 
which  in  the  height  SP  it  hath  towards  the 
sun,  it  should  fall  from  that  height  toAvards 
the  sun,  it  Avould  (by  Cor.  ix.  Prop.  16,  Book 
i)  in  half  the  said  time  describe  a  space  equal  to  the  square  of  half  the  said 
chord,  divided  by  four  times  the  height  SP,  that  is,  it  AA'ould  describe  the  space 


Mathematical  Principles 


342 

AI2 

But  since  the  weight  of  the  comet  towards  the  sun  in  the  height  SN  is 

4bP 

to  the  weight  of  the  same  towards  the  sun  in  the  height  SP  as  SP  to  S^,  the 
comet,  by  the  weight  which  it  hath  in  the  height  SN,  in  falling  from  that 

AP 

height  towards  the  sun,  would  in  the  same  time  describe  the  space  that 
is,  a  space  equal  to  the  length  l/j.  or  q.e.d. 


Proposition  41.  Problem  21 

From  three  given  observations  to  determine  the  orbit  of  a  comet  moving  in  a 

parabola. 

This  being  a  Problem  of  very  great  difficulty,  I  tried  many  methods  of 
resolving  it;  and  several  of  those  Problems,  the  composition  whereof  I  have 
given  in  the  first  book,  tended  to  this  purpose.  But  afterwards  I  contrived  the 
following  solution,  which  is  somewhat  more  simple. 

Select  three  observations  distant  one  from  another  by  intervals  of  time 
nearly  equal;  but  let  that  interval  of  time  in  which  the  comet  moves  more 
slowly  be  somewhat  greater  than  the  other;  namely,  so  that  the  difference  of 
the  times  may  be  to  the  sum  of  the  times  as  the  sum  of  the  times  is  to  about 
600  days;  or  that  the  point  E  may  fall  nearly  upon  M  and  may  err  therefrom 
rather  towards  I  than  towards  A.  If  such  direct  observations  are  not  at  hand, 
a  new  place  of  the  comet  must  be  found,  by  Lemma  6. 

Let  S  represent  the  sun;  T,  t,  r  three  places  of  the  earth  in  the  earth’s  orbit; 
TA,  tB,  rC  three  observed  longitudes  of  the  comet;  V  the  time  between  the 
first  observation  and  the  second;  W  the  time  between  the  second  and  the  third; 
X  the  length  which  in  the  whole  time  V+W  the  comet  might  describe  with 
that  velocity  which  it  has  in  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun, 
which  length  is  to  be  found  by  Cor.  iii.  Prop,  xl.  Book  iii;  and  tY  a  perpendic¬ 
ular  upon  the  chord  Tr.  In  the  mean  observed  longitude  fB  take  at  pleasure 


the  point  B,  for  the  place  of  the  comet  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic;  and  from 
thence,  towards  the  sun  S,  draw  the  line  BE,  which  may  be  to  the  perpendic¬ 
ular  tY  as  the  product  of  SB  and  is  to  the  cube  of  the  hypothenuse  of  the 
right-angled  triangle  whose  sides  are  SB  and  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  of  the 
comet  in  the  second  observation  to  the  radius  tB.  And  through  the  point  E  (by 
Lem.  7)  draw  the  right  fine  AEC,  whose  parts  AE  and  EC,  terminating  in  the 
right  lines  TA  and  rC,  may  be  one  to  the  other  as  the  times  V  and  W ;  then  A 
and  C  will  be  nearly  the  places  of  the  comet  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  in  the 
first  and  third  observations,  if  B  was  its  place  rightly  assumed  in  the  second. 

Upon  AC,  bisected  in  I,  erect  the  perpendicular  If.  Through  B  imagine  the 


343 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


line  Bi  drawn  parallel  to  AC.  Imagine  the  line  Sf  drawn,  cutting  AC  in  X,  and 
complete  the  parallelogram  ilX/j,.  Take  Icr  equal  to  3IX;  and  through  the  sun  S 
imagine  the  line  cr|  drawn  equal  to  3S(r+3tX.  Then,  canceling  the  letters  A, 
E,  C,  I,  from  the  point  B  towards  the  point  |,  imagine  the  new  line  BE  drawn, 
which  may  be  to  the  former  BE  as  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  distance  BS  to 
the  quantity  And  through  the  point  E  draw  again  the  right  line 

AEC  by  the  same  rule  as  before ;  that  is,  so  that  its  parts  AE  and  EC  may  be 
one  to  the  other  as  the  times  V  and  W  between  the  observations.  Thus  A  and  C 
will  be  the  places  of  the  comet  more  accurately. 

Upon  AC,  bisected  in  I,  erect  the  perpendiculars  AM,  CN,  10,  of  which  AM 
and  CN  may  be  the  tangents  of  the  latitudes  in  the  first  and  third  observa¬ 
tions,  to  the  radii  TA  and  rC.  Join  MN,  cutting  10  and  0.  Draw  the  rec¬ 
tangular  parallelogram  flX^u,  as  before.  In  lA  produced  take  ID  equal  to 
S/u+^fX.  Then  in  MN,  towards  N,  take  MP,  which  may  be  to  the  above-found 
length  X  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from 
the  sun  (or  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  earth’s  orbit)  to  the  distance  OD.  If  the 
point  P  fall  upon  the  point  N ;  A,  B,  and  C  will  be  three  places  of  the  comet, 
through  which  its  orbit  is  to  be  described  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  But  if  the 
point  P  falls  not  upon  the  point  N,  in  the  right  line  AC  take  CG  equal  to  NP, 
so  that  the  points  G  and  P  may  lie  on  the  same  side  of  the  line  NC. 

By  the  same  method  as  the  points  E,  A,  C,  G  were  found  from  the  assumed 
point  B,  from  other  points  6  and  /3  assumed  at  pleasure,  find  out  the  new  points 
e,  a,  c,  g;  and  e,  a,  K,y.  Then  through  G,  g,  and  y  draw  the  circumference  of  a 
circle  Ggy,  cutting  the  right  line  rC  in  Z:  and  Z  will  be  one  place  of  the  comet 
in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  And  in  AC,  ac,  aK,  taking  AF,  af,  a0,  equal  re¬ 
spectively  to  CG,  eg,  Ky ;  through  the  points  F,  /,  and  0,  draw  the  circumference 
of  a  circle  F/0,  cutting  the  right  line  AT  in  X;  and  the  point  X  mil  be  another 
place  of  the  comet  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  And  at  the  points  X  and  Z, 
erecting  the  tangents  of  the  latitudes  of  the  comet  to  the  radii  TX  and  tZ, 
two  places  of  the  comet  in  its  own  orbit  -will  be  determined.  Lastly,  if  (by  Prop. 
19,  Book  i)  to  the  focus  S  a  parabola  is  described  passing  through  those  two 
places,  this  parabola  mil  be  the  orbit  of  the  comet.  q.e.i. 

The  demonstration  of  this  construction  follows  from  the  preceding  Lemmas, 
because  the  right  line  AC  is  cut  in  E  in  the  proportion  of  the  times,  by  Lemma 


344  Mathematical  Principles 

7,  as  it  ought  to  be  by  Lemma  8;  and  BE,  by  Lemma  11,  is  a  portion  of  the 
right  line  BS  or  B^  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  intercepted  between  the  arc 
ABC  and  the  chord  AEC;  and  MP  (by  Cor.,  Lem.  10)  is  the  length  of  the 
chord  of  that  arc,  which  the  comet  should  describe  in  its  proper  orbit  between 
the  first  and  third  observations,  and  therefore  is  equal  to  MN,  providing  B  is  a 
true  place  of  the  comet  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic. 

But  it  will  be  convenient  to  assume  the  points  B,  h,  j3,  not  at  random,  but 
nearly  true.  If  the  angle  AQt,  at  which  the  projection  of  the  orbit  in  the  plane 
of  the  ecliptic  cuts  the  right  line  tB,  is  roughly  known,  at  that  angle  with  B^ 
draw  the  line  AC,  which  may  be  to  ^Tt  as  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  SQ 
to  S^;  and,  drawing  the  right  line  SEB  so  as  its  part  EB  may  be  equal  to  the 
length  Yt,  the  point  B  will  be  determined,  which  we  are  to  use  for  the  first  time. 
Then,  canceling  the  right  line  AC  and  dramng  anew  AC  according  to  the 
preceding  construction,  and,  moreover,  finding  the  length  MP,  in  tB  take  the 
point  b,  by  this  rule,  that,  if  TA  and  tC  intersect  each  other  in  Y,  the  distance 
Yh  may  be  to  the  distance  YB  in  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  MP  to 
MN,  and  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  SB  to  S6.  And  by  the  same  method 
you  may  find  the  third  point  /3,  if  you  please  to  repeat  the  operation  the  third 
time ;  but  if  this  method  is  followed,  two  operations  generally  will  be  sufficient; 
for  if  the  distance  Bb  happens  to  be  very  small,  after  the  points  F,  /,  and  G,  g, 
are  found,  draw  the  right  lines  F/  and  (3^,  and  they  will  cut  TA  and  tC  in  the 
points  required,  X  and  Z. 


EXAMPLE 

Let  the  comet  of  the  year  1680  be  proposed.  The  following  table  shows  the 
motion  thereof,  as  observed  by  Flamsteed,  and  calculated  afterwards  by  him 
from  his  observations,  and  corrected  by  Dr.  Halley  from  the  same  observa¬ 
tions. 


Time 

Sun^s  longitude 

ComeVe 

Apparent 

True 

Longitude 

Latitude  north 

h  m 

h  m  s 

O  f  If 

Q  f  ff 

o  /  // 

1680,  Dec.  12 

4.46 

4.46.  0 

1.51.23 

V3  6.32.30 

8.28.  0 

21 

6.321^ 

6.36.59 

11.06.44 

««  5.08.12 

21.42.13 

24 

6.12 

6.17.52 

14.09.26 

18.49.23 

25.23.  5 

26 

5.14 

5.20.44 

16.09.22 

28..  24. 13 

27.00.52 

29 

7.55 

8.03.02 

19.19.43 

Kl3. 10.41 

28.09.58 

30 

8.02 

8.10.26 

20.21.09 

17.38.20 

28.11.53 

1681,  Jan.  5 

5.51 

6.01.38 

26.22.18 

T  8.48.53 

26.15.  7 

9 

6.49 

7.00.53 

«  0.29.02 

18.44.04 

24.11.56 

10 

5.54 

6.06.10 

1.27.43 

20.40.50 

23.43.52 

13 

6.56 

7.08.55 

4.33.20 

25.59.48 

22.17.28 

25 

7.44 

7.58.42 

16.45.36 

V  9.35.  0 

17.56.30 

30 

8.07 

8.21.53 

21.49.58 

13.19.51 

16.42.18 

Feh.  2 

6.20 

6.34.51 

24.46.59 

15.13.53 

16.04.  1 

5 

6.50 

7.04.41 

27.49.51 

16.59.06 

15.27.  3 

To  these  you  may  add  some  observations  of  mine. 

These  observations  were  made  by  a  telescope  of  7  feet,  with  a  micrometer 
and  threads  placed  in  the  focus  of  the  telescope;  by  these  instruments  we 
determined  the  positions  both  of  the  fixed  stars  among  themselves,  and  of  the 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


345 


Apparent 

time 

ComeVs 

Longitude 

Latitude  north 

h  m 

O  f  if 

0  f  it 

1681,  Feb.  25 

8.30 

V26. 18.35 

12.46.46 

27 

8.15 

27.04.30 

12.36.12 

Mar.  1 

11.  0 

27.52.42 

12.23.40 

2 

8.  0 

28.12.48 

12.19.38 

5 

11.30 

29.18.  0 

12.03.16 

7 

9.30 

M  0.  4.  0 

11.57.  0 

9 

8.30 

0.43.  4 

11.45.52 

comet  in  respect  of  the  fixed  stars.  Let  A  represent  the  star  of  the  fourth  mag¬ 
nitude  in  the  left  heel  of  Perseus  (Bayer’s  o),  B  the  following  star  of  the  third 
magnitude  in  the  left  foot  (Bayer’s  f),  C  a  star  of  the  sixth  magnitude  (Bayer’s 


n)  in  the  heel  of  the  same  foot,  and  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I,  K,  L,  M,  N,  0,  Z,  a,  jS, 
y,  8  other  smaller  stars  in  the  same  foot;  and  let  p,  P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  V,  X  represent 
the  places  of  the  comet  in  the  observations  above  set  down;  and,  reckoning  the 
distance  AB  of  80^2  parts,  AC  was  523^  of  those  parts;  BC,  58%;  AD,  57%2; 
BD,  82Mi;  CD,  23%;  AE,  29%;  CE,  57%;  DE,  49%;  AI,  27%;  BI,  52%;  Cl, 
36%2;  DI,  53%i;  AK,  38%;  BK,  43;  CK,  31%;  FK,  29;  FB,  23;  FC,  36%; 
AH,  18%;  DH,  50%;  BN,  46%2;  CN,  31%;  BL,  45%2;  NL,  31%.  HO  was 
to  HI  as  7  to  6,  and,  produced,  did  pass  between  the  stars  D  and  E,  so  as  the 
distance  of  the  star  D  from  this  right  line  was  %CD.  LM  was  to  LN  as  2 
to  9,  and,  produced,  did  pass  through  the  star  H.  Thus  were  the  positions  of 
the  fixed  stars  determined  in  respect  to  one  another. 


The  fixed 

stars 

Their 

longitudes 

Latitude 

north 

The  fixed 
stars 

Their 

longitudes 

Latitude 

north 

O  f  it 

o  f  if 

O  /  // 

0  f  it 

A 

V26.41.50 

12.  8.36 

L 

V29.33.34 

12.  7.48 

B 

28.40.23 

11.17.54 

M 

29.18.54 

12.  7.20 

C 

27.58.30 

12.40.25 

N 

28.48.29 

12.31.  9 

E 

26.27.17 

12.52.  7 

Z 

29.44.48 

11.57.13 

F 

28.28.37 

11.52.22 

a 

29.52.  3 

11.55.48 

G 

26.56.  8 

12.  4.58 

/3 

V  0.  8.23 

11.48.56 

H 

27.11.45 

12.  2.  1 

7 

0.40.10 

11.55.18 

I 

27  25.  2 

11. '53. 11 

8 

1.  3.20 

11.30.42 

K 

27.42.  7 

11.53.26 

346  Mathematical  Principles 

Mr.  Pound  has  since  observed  a  second  time  the  positions  of  these  fixed  stars 
amongst  themselves,  and  obtained  their  longitudes  and  latitudes  according  to 
the  preceding  table. 

The  positions  of  the  comet  to  these  fixed  stars  were  observed  to  be  as 
follows: 

Friday,  February  25,  o.s.,  at  8}^^.  p.m.,  the  distance  of  the  comet  in  p  from 
the  star  E  was  less  than  3^3  AE,  and-  greater  than  j/s-^E,  and  therefore  nearly 
equal  to  3^4AE;  and  the  angle  ApE  was  a  little  obtuse,  but  almost  right.  For 
from  A,  letting  fall  a  perpendicular  on  pE,  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  that 
perpendicular  was  VspE. 

The  same  night,  at  93^^.,  the  distance  of  the  comet  in  P  from  the  star  E  was 
greater  than  AE,  and  less  than  AE,  and  therefore  nearly  equal  to  ^4^  of 
AE,  or  3^9  AE.  But  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  perpendicular  let  fall 
from  the  star  A  upon  the  right  line  PE  was  %PE. 

Sunday,  February  27,  83-^*'.  p.m.,  the  distance  of  the  comet  in  Q  from  the  star 
0  was  equal  to  the  distance  of  the  stars  0  and  H;  and  the  right  line  QO  pro¬ 
duced  passed  between  the  stars  K  and  B.  I  could  not,  by  reason  of  intervening 
clouds,  determine  the  position  of  the  star  to  greater  accuracy. 

Tuesday,  March  1,  11^.  p.m.,  the  comet  in  R  lay  exactly  in  a  line  between 
the  stars  K  and  C,  so  as  the  part  CR  of  the  right  line  CRK  was  a  little  greater 
than  34CK,  and  a  little  less  thani^CK-bJ^CR,  and  therefore  =  3^CK+3^6CR, 
or  '%5CK. 

Wednesday,  March  2,  S’’,  p.m.,  the  distance  of  the  comet  in  S  from  the  star  C 
was  nearly  3^FC;  the  distance  of  the  star  F  from  the  right  line  CS  produced 
was  3^4FC;  and  the  distance  of  the  star  B  from  the  same  right  line  was  five 
times  greater  than  the  distance  of  the  star  F ;  and  the  right  line  NS  produced 
passed  between  the  stars  H  and  I  five  or  six  times  nearer  to  the  star  H  than  to 
the  star  I. 

Saturday,  March  5,  113^’'.  p.m.,  when  the  comet  was  in  T,  the  right  line  MT 
was  equal  to  3^ML,  and  the  right  line  LT  produced  passed  between  B  and  F 
four  or  five  times  nearer  to  F  than  to  B,  cutting  off  from  BF  a  fifth  or  sixth  part 
thereof  towards  F ;  and  MT  produced  passed  on  the  outside  of  the  space  BF 
towards  the  star  B  four  times  nearer  to  the  star  B  than  to  the  star  F.  M  was  a 
very  small  star,  scarcely  to  be  seen  by  the  telescope;  but  the  star  L  was 
greater,  and  of  about  the  eighth  magnitude. 

Monday,  March  7,  93^^.  p.m.,  the  comet  being  in  V,  the  right  line  Va  pro¬ 
duced  did  pass  between  B  and  F,  cutting  off,  from  BF  towards  F,  3/io  of  BF, 
and  w^as  to  the  right  line  V|3  as  5  to  4.  And  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the 
right  line  a/3  was  3^V/3. 

Wednesday,  March  9,  8)4^.  p.m.,  the  comet  being  in  X,  the  right  line  7X 
was  equal  to  8;  and  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  star  8  upon  the  right 
line  7X  was  %  of  y8. 

The  same  night,  at  12^.,  the  comet  being  in  Y,  the  right  line  7Y  was  equal 
to  34  of  75,  or  a  little  less,  as  perhaps  Me  of  y8;  and  a  perpendicular  let  fall 
from  the  star  8  on  the  right  line  7Y  was  equal  to  about  j/e  or  3^7  7^.  But  the 
comet,  being  then  extremely  near  the  horizon,  was  scarcely  discernible,  and 
therefore  its  place  could  not  be  determined  vith  the  same  certainty  as  in  the 
foregoing  observations. 

From  these  observations,  by  constructions  of  figures  and  calculations,  I 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  347 

deduced  the  longitudes  and  latitudes  of  the  comet;  and  Mr.  Pound,  by  cor¬ 
recting  the  places  of  the  fixed  stars,  has  determined  more  correctly  the  places 
of  the  comet,  which  correct  places  are  set  down  above.  Though  my  micrometer 
was  none  of  the  best,  yet  the  errors  in  longitude  and  latitude  (as  derived  from 
my  observations)  scarcely  exceed  one  minute.  The  comet  (according  to  my 
observations),  about  the  end  of  its  motion,  began  to  decline  sensibly  towards 
the  north,  from  the  parallel  which  it  described  about  the  end  of  February. 

Now,  in  order  to  determine  the  orbit  of  the  comet  from  the  observations 
above  described,  I  selected  those  three  which  Flamsteed  made  (Dec.  21,  Jan. 
5,  and  Jan.  25) ;  from  which  I  found  of  9842.1  parts,  and  Yt  of  455,  supposing 
the  semidiameter  of  the  earth’s  orbit  contains  10,000.  Then,  for  the  first  obser¬ 
vation,  assuming  tB  of  5657  of  those  parts,  I  found  SB  9747,  BE  for  the  first 
time  412,  Sm  9503,  fX413,  BE  for  the  second  time  421,  OD  10,186,  X  8528.4, 
PM  8450,  MN  8475,  NP  25;  from  this,  by  the  second  operation,  I  obtained  the 
distance  tb  5640;  and  by  this  operation  I  at  last  deduced  the  distances  TX  4775 
and  rZ  11,322.  From  these  values,  determining  the  orbit,  I  found  its  descending 
node  in  and  ascending  node  in  1°  53';  the  inclination  of  its  plane  to  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic  61°  20^^',  the  vertex  thereof  (or  the  perihelion  of  the  comet) 
distant  from  the  node  8°  38',  and  in  27°  43',  ^vith  latitude  7°  34'  south;  its 
latus  rectum  236.8;  and  the  diurnal  area  described  by  a  radius  drawn  to  the 
sun  93,585,  supposing  the  square  of  the  semidiameter  of  the  earth’s  orbit 
100,000,000;  that  the  comet  in  this  orbit  moved  directly  according  to  the  order 
of  the  signs,  and  on  Dec.  8*^.  00^.  04“'.  p.m.  was  in  the  vertex  or  perihelion  of  its 
orbit.  All  this  I  determined  by  scale  and  compass,  and  the  chords  of  angles, 
taken  from  the  table  of  natural  sines,  in  a  pretty  large  figure,  in  which,  to  wit, 
the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit  (consisting  of  10,000  parts)  was  equal  to  16)^ 
inches  of  an  English  foot. 

Lastly,  in  order  to  discover  whether  the  comet  did  truly  move  in  the  orbit 
so  determined,  I  investigated  its  places  in  this  orbit  partly  by  arithmetical 
operations,  and  partly  by  scale  and  compass,  to  the  times  of  some  of  the  ob¬ 
servations,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  following  table: 


The  Comefs 


Distance 
from  sun 

Longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

computed 

Longitude 

observed 

Latitude 

observed 

Difference 

longitude 

Difference 

latitude 

Dec.  12 

2792 

V3  6°  32' 

8° 183^ 

V3  6°31L^ 

8°  26 

+1 

- 

29 

8403 

K13.13H 

28.00 

K13.11M 

28.IOM2 

+2 

-IOK2 

Feb.  5 

16669 

^17.00 

15.29^ 

^16.597^ 

15.2734 

+0 

+  23^ 

Mar.  5 

21737 

29.19K 

12.  4 

29 . 20^4 

12.  3M 

-1 

+  3^ 

But  afterwards  Dr.  Halley  did  determine  the  orbit  to  a  greater  accuracy  by 
an  arithmetical  calculus  than  could  be  done  by  graphic  operations;  and,  retain¬ 
ing  the  place  of  the  nodes  in  and  1°  53',  and  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of 
the  orbit  to  the  ecliptic  61°  20)>^',  as  well  as  the  time  of  the  comet’s  being  in 
perihehon,  Dec.  8'^.  00^.  04“'.  he  found  the  distance  of  the  perihelion  from  the 
ascending  node  measured  in  the  comet’s  orbit  9°  20',  and  the  latus  rectum  of 
the  parabola  2430  parts,  supposing  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth 
to  be  100,000  parts;  and  from  these  data  by  an  accurate  arithmetical  calculus, 
he  computed  the  places  of  the  comet  to  the  times  of  the  observations  as  given 
in  the  table  on  page  348. 


348  Mathematical  Principles 

This  comet  also  appeared  in  the  November  before,  and  at  Coburg,  in  Saxony, 
was  observed  by  Mr.  Gottfried  Kirch,  on  the  4th  of  that  month,  on  the  6th  and 
11th,  o.s. ;  from  its  positions  to  the  nearest  fixed  stars  observed  with  sufficient 
accuracy,  sometimes  with  a  two-foot,  and  sometimes  wth  a  ten-foot  telescope; 
from  the  difference  of  longitudes  of  Coburg  and  London,  11®;  and  from  the 
places  of  the  fixed  stars  observed  by  Mr.  Pound,  Dr.  Halley  has  determined 
the  places  of  the  comet  as  follows: 

Nov.  3,  17*'.  2"'.,  apparent  time  at  London,  the  comet  was  in  q  29°  5P,  with 
1°  17'  45"  latitude  north. 

Nov.  5,  15**.  the  comet  was  in  ny  3°  23',  with  1°  6'  latitude  north. 

Nov.  10,  16*'.  31”'.,  the  comet  was  equally  distant  from  two  stars  in  q, 
which  are  designated  a  and  r  in  Bayer;  but  it  had  not  quite  touched  the  right 
line  that  joins  them,  but  was  very  little  distant  from  it.  In  Flamsteed’s  cat¬ 


True  time 

The  Comefs 

Errors  in 

Distance 
from  the  sun 

Longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

computed 

Longitude 

Latitude 

d  h  m 

0  t  n 

Oft/ 

f  tf 

/  tf 

Dec.  12.  4.46. 

28028 

V3  6.29.25 

8.26.  0  bor. 

-3.  5 

-2.  0 

21.  6.37. 

61076 

«  5.  6.30 

21.43.20 

-1.42 

+1.  7 

24.  6.18. 

70008 

18.48.20 

25.22.40 

-1.  3 

-0.25 

26.  5.20. 

75576 

28.22.45 

27.  1.36 

-1.28 

+0.44 

29.  8.  3. 

84021 

K13. 12.40 

28.10.10 

+  1.59 

+0.12 

30.  8.10. 

86661 

17.40.  5 

28.11.20 

+  1.45 

-0.33 

Jan.  5.  6.  \.]4, 

101440 

T  8.49.49 

26.15.15 

+0.56 

+0.  8 

9.  7.  0. 

110959 

18.44.36 

24.12.54 

+0.32 

+0.58 

10.  6.  6. 

113162 

20.41.  0 

23.44.10 

+0.10 

+0.18 

13.  7.  9. 

120000 

26.  0.21 

22.17.30 

+0.33 

+0.  2 

25.  7.59. 

145370 

^  9.33.40 

17.57.55 

-1.20 

+  1.25 

30.  8.22. 

155303 

13.17.41 

16.42.  7 

-2.10 

-0.11 

Feh.  2.  6.35. 

160951 

15.11.11 

16.  4.15 

-2.42 

+0.14 

5.  7.  4.K 

166686 

16.58.55 

15.29.13 

-0.41 

+2.  0 

25.  8.41. 

202570 

26.15.46 

12.48.  0 

-2.49 

+  1.10 

Mar.  5.11.39. 

216205 

29.18.35 

12.  5.40 

+0.35 

+2.14 

alogue  this  star  cr  was  then  in  ITP  14°  15',  Avith  1°  41'  latitude  north  nearly,  and 
T  in  ^17°  33^'  with  0°  34'  latitude  south;  and  the  middle  point  between  those 
stars  was  m  15°  3934^  'vith  0°  33^'  latitude  north.  Let  the  distance  of  the 
comet  from  that  right  line  be  about  10'  or  12';  and  the  difference  of  the  longi¬ 
tude  of  the  comet  and  that  middle  point  will  be  7';  and  the  difference  of  the 
latitude  nearly  73^';  and  thence  it  follows  that  the  comet  was  in  nj  15°  32', 
with  about  26'  latitude  north. 

The  first  observation  from  the  position  of  the  comet  with  respect  to  certain 
small  fixed  stars  had  all  the  exactness  that  could  be  desired;  the  second  also  was 
accurate  enough.  In  the  third  observation,  which  was  the  least  accurate,  there 
might  be  an  error  of  6'  or  7',  but  hardly  greater.  The  longitude  of  the  comet,  as 
found  in  the  first  and  most  accurate  observation,  being  computed  in  the  afore¬ 
said  parabolic  orbit,  comes  out  Q  29°  30'  32",  its  latitude  north  1°  25'  7",  and 
its  distance  from  the  sun  115,546. 

Moreover,  Dr.  Halley,  observing  that  a  remarkable  comet  had  appeared 
four  times  at  equal  intervals  of  575  years  (that  is,  in  the  month  of  September 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  349 

after  Julius  Caesar  was  killed;  [in  a.d.]  531,  in  the  consulate  of  Lampadius  and 
Orestes;  [in]  1106,  in  the  month  of  February:  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  1680; 
and  that  with  a  long  and  remarkable  tail,  except  when  it  was  seen  after 
Caesar’s  death,  at  which  time,  by  reason  of  the  inconvenient  situation  of  the 
earth,  the  tail  was  not  so  conspicuous) ,  set  himself  to  find  out  an  elliptic  orbit 
whose  greater  axis  should  be  1,382,957  parts,  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth 
from  the  sun  containing  10,000  such;  in  this  orbit  a  comet  might  revolve  in  575 
years;  and,  placing  the  ascending  node  in  ^3  2°  2',  the  inclination  of  the  plane 
of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  in  an  angle  of  61°  6'  48",  the  perihelion 
of  the  comet  in  this  plane  in  ^  22°  44'  25",  the  equal  time  of  the  perihelion 
Dec.  1^.  23^.  9"".,  the  distance  of  the  perihelion  from  the  ascending  node  in  the 


True  time 

Longitude 

observed 

Latitude  N 
observed 

Longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

computed 

Errors  in 
longitude 

Errors  in 
latitude 

d 

h 

m 

o 

/ 

// 

o 

/ 

ff 

O  ( 

If 

o 

f 

ft 

f 

n 

/  ff 

Nov.  3 

16 

.47 

.51 

0 

1 

.17 

.45 

P29.51 

.22 

1 

.17 

.32  N 

+0 

.22 

-0.13 

5 

15 

.37 

HP  3 

.23 

0 

1 

6 

0 

HP  3.24 

.32 

1 

.  6 

.  9 

+1 

.32 

+0.  9 

10, 

.16 

.18 

15 

.32 

.  0 

0 

.27 

.  0 

15.33 

.  2 

0 

.25 

.  7 

+1 

.  2 

-1.53 

16. 

.17 

.00 

^  8.16 

.45 

0 

.53 

.  7S 

18, 

,21 

.34 

18.52 

.15 

1 

.26 

,54 

20, 

17 

.  0 

28.10 

.36 

1 

.53 

.35 

23, 

17 

.  5 

H113.22 

.42 

2 

.29 

.  0 

Dec.  12. 

,  4 

.46 

V3  6 

.32, 

.30 

8 

.28 

.  0 

6.31 

.20 

8 

.29 

.6  N 

-1, 

.10 

+  1.  6 

21. 

6 

.37 

«  5 

.  8, 

.12 

21 

.42, 

.13 

5.  6 

.14 

21 

.44, 

.42 

-1 

.58 

+2.29 

24. 

6 

.18 

18 

.49, 

,23 

25 

.23, 

.  5 

18.47, 

,30 

25 

.23 

.35 

-1 

.53 

+0.30 

26. 

5 

.21 

28 

.24, 

.13 

27 

.  0, 

.52 

28.21, 

.42 

27 

.  2. 

,  1 

-2 

,31 

+  1.  9 

29. 

8, 

,  3 

K13 

.10, 

41 

28 

.  9, 

.58 

K13.il, 

.14 

28, 

.10. 

.38 

+0, 

.33 

+0.40 

30. 

8, 

.10 

17 

.38. 

0 

28, 

,11. 

53 

17.38. 

27 

28. 

11. 

37 

+0, 

,  7 

-0.16 

Jan.  5 . 

6. 

IM 

T  8, 

.48. 

53 

26. 

,15. 

7 

T  8.48. 

,51 

26. 

,14. 

57 

-0. 

2 

-0.10 

9. 

7. 

,  1 

18, 

.44. 

4 

24. 

,11. 

56 

18.43. 

51 

24. 

12. 

17 

-0. 

13 

+0.21 

10. 

6, 

.  6 

20. 

,4C. 

50 

23. 

43. 

32 

20.40. 

23 

23. 

43. 

25 

-0. 

27 

-0.  7 

13. 

7. 

9 

25. 

,59. 

48 

22. 

17. 

28 

26.  0. 

8 

22. 

16. 

32 

+0. 

20 

-0.56 

25. 

7. 

59 

^  9. 

35. 

0 

17. 

56. 

30 

K  9.34. 

11 

17. 

56. 

6 

-0. 

49 

-0.24 

30. 

8. 

22 

13. 

19. 

51 

16. 

42. 

18 

13.18. 

28 

16. 

40. 

5 

-1. 

23 

-2.13 

Feb.  2. 

6. 

35 

15. 

13. 

53 

16. 

4. 

1 

15.11. 

59 

16. 

2. 

17 

-1. 

54 

-1.54 

5. 

7. 

16. 

59. 

6 

15. 

27. 

3 

16.59. 

17 

15. 

27. 

0 

+0. 

11 

-0.  3 

25. 

8. 

41 

26. 

18. 

35 

12. 

46. 

46 

26.16. 

59 

12. 

45. 

22 

-1. 

36 

-1.24 

Mar.  1 . 

11. 

10 

27. 

52. 

42 

12. 

23. 

40 

27.51. 

47 

12. 

22. 

28 

-0. 

55 

-1.12 

5. 

11. 

39 

29. 

18. 

0 

12. 

3. 

16 

29.20. 

11 

12. 

2. 

50 

+2. 

11 

-0.26 

9. 

8. 

38 

M  0. 

43. 

4 

11. 

45. 

52 

K0.42. 

43 

11. 

45. 

35 

-0. 

21 

-0.17 

plane  of  the  ecliptic  9°  17'  35",  and  its  conjugate  axis  18,481.2,  he  computed  the 
motions  of  the  comet  in  this  elliptic  orbit.  The  places  of  the  comet,  as  deduced 
from  the  observations,  and  as  arising  from  computation  made  in  this  orbit, 
may  be  seen  in  the  preceding  table. 

The  observations  of  this  comet  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  agree  as  per¬ 
fectly  \vith  the  motion  of  the  comet  in  the  orbit  just  now  described  as  the 
motions  of  the  planets  do  mth  the  theories  from  whence  they  are  calculated, 
and  by  this  agreement  plainly  evince  that  it  was  one  and  the  same  comet  that 
appeared  all  that  time,  and  also  that  the  orbit  of  that  comet  is  here  rightly 
defined. 

In  the  foregoing  table  we  have  omitted  the  observations  of  Nov.  16, 18,  20, 
and  23,  as  not  sufficiently  accurate,  for  at  those  times  several  persons  had 
observed  the  comet.  Nov.  17,  o.s.,  Ponthio  and  his  companions,  at  6^.  in  the 


350  Mathematical  Principles 

morning  at  Rome  (that  is,  5^.  10"".  at  London),  by  threads  directed  to  the 
fixed  stars,  observed  the  comet  in  8°  30',  with  latitude  0°  40'  south.  Their 
observations  may  be  seen  in  a  treatise  which  Ponthio  published  concerning 
this  comet.  Cellio,  who  was  present,  and  communicated  his  observations  in  a 
letter  to  Cassini,  saw  the  comet  at  the  same  hour  in  =  8°  30',  with  latitude  0® 
30'  south.  It  was  likemse  seen  by  Gallet  at  the  same  hour  at  Avignon  (that  is, 
at  5*".  42"*.  morning  at  London)  in  :=  8°  without  latitude.  But  by  the  theory  the 
comet  was  at  that  time  in  =  8°  16'  45",  and  its  latitude  was  0°  53'  7"  south. 

Nov.  18,  at  6**.  30"*.  in  the  morning  at  Rome  (that  is,  at  5^.40°*.  at  London), 
Ponthio  observed  the  comet  in  ^  13°  30',  with  latitude  1°  20'  south;  and  Cellio 
in  ^  13°  30',  Avith  latitude  1°  00'  south.  But  at  5**.  30°*.  in  the  morning  at 
Avignon,  Gallet  saw  it  in  13°  00',  with  latitude  1°  00'  south.  In  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  La  Fleche,  in  France,  at  5^.  in  the  morning  (that  is,  at  5^.  9"*.  at 
London),  it  was  seen  by  Ango,  in  the  middle  between  two  small  stars,  one  of 
which  is  the  middle  of  the  three  which  lie  in  a  right  line  in  the  southern  hand  of 
Virgo,  Bayer’s  *L;  and  the  other  is  the  outmost  of  the  mng,  Bayer’s  d.  Hence, 
the  comet  was  then  in  ^1=  12°  46'  "with  latitude  50'  south.  And  I  was  informed 
by  Dr.  Halley,  that  on  the  same  day  at  Boston  in  New  England,  in  the  latitude 
of  423^',  at  5**.  in  the  morning  (that  is,  at  9^.  44"*.  in  the  morning  at  London) 
the  comet  was  seen  near  ^^14°,  with  latitude  1°  30'  south. 

Nov,  19,  at  43^^.  at  Cambridge,  the  comet  (by  the  observation  of  a  young 
man)  was  distant  from  Spica  HF  about  2°  towards  the  northwest.  Now  the 
Spike  was  at  that  time  in  =  19°  23'  47",  with  latitude  2°  1'  59"  south.  The 
same  day,  at  5^.  in  the  morning,  at  Boston  in  New  England,  the  comet  was 
distant  from  Spica  IIP  1°,  with  the  difference  of  40'  in  latitude.  The  same  day, 
in  the  island  of  Jamaica,  it  was  about  1°  distant  from  Spica  up.  The  same  day, 
Mr.  Arthur  Storer,  at  the  river  Patuxent,  near  Hunting  Creek,  in  Maryland,  in 
the  confines  of  Virginia  in  latitude  383^°,  at  5**.  in  the  morning  (that  is,  at  10^. 
at  London),  saw  the  comet  above  Spica  HP,  and  very  nearly  joined  vdth  it,  the 
distance  between  them  being  about  ^  of  one  degree.  And  from  these  observa¬ 
tions  compared,  I  conclude,  that  at  9**.  44"*.  at  London  the  comet  was  in 

18°  50',  with  about  1°  25'  latitude  south.  Now  by  the  theory  the  comet  was 
at  that  time  in  18°  52'  15",  with  1°  26'  54"  latitude  south. 

Nov.  20,  Montenari,  Professor  of  Astronomy  at  Padua,  at  6^.  in  the  morning 
at  Venice  (that  is,  5^.  10"*.  at  London),  saw  the  comet  in  ^  23°,  with  latitude 
1°  30'  south.  The  same  day,  at  Boston,  it  was  distant  from  Spica  tip  by  about 
4°  of  longitude  east,  and  therefore  was  in  23°  24',  nearly. 

Nov.  21,  Ponthio  and  his  companions,  at  734^-  in  morning,  observed  the 
comet  in  si:  27°  50',  with  latitude  1°  16'  south;  Cellio,  in  28°;  Ango  at  5^. 
in  the  morning,  in  :=  27°  45';  Montenari  in  27°  51'.  The  same  day,  in  the 
island  of  Jamaica,  it  was  seen  near  the  beginning  of  lU,  and  of  about  the  same 
latitude  mth  Spica  TIP,  that  is,  2°  2'.  The  same  day,  at  5**.  morning,  at  Bal- 
lasore,  in  the  East  Indies  (that  is,  at  lU.  20"*.  of  the  night  preceding  at  Lon¬ 
don),  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  Spica  Tip  was  taken  7°  35'  to  the  east.  It 
was  in  a  right  line  between  the  Spike  and  the  Balance,  and  therefore  was  then 
in  =  26°  58',  with  about  1°  11'  latitude  south;  and  after  5^.  40°*.  (that  is,  at 
5**.  in  the  morning  at  London),  it  was  in  ^  28°  12'  with  1°  16'  latitude  south. 
Now  by  the  theory  the  comet  was  then  in  28°  10'  36",  with  1°  53'  35" 
latitude  south. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  351 

Nov.  22,  the  comet  was  seen  by  Montenari  in  Tti  2°  33';  but  at  Boston  in  New 
England  it  was  found  in  about  na  3®,  and  mth  almost  the  same  latitude  as  be¬ 
fore,  that  is,  1°  30'.  The  same  day,  at  5^.  morning  at  Ballasore,  the  comet  was 
observed  in  rri  1°  50';  and  therefore  at  5*^.  morning  at  London,  the  comet  was 
in  Rl  3®  5',  nearly.  The  same  day  at  6}^^.  in  the  morning  at  London,  Dr.  Hooke 
observed  it  in  about  1TI  3®  30',  and  that  in  the  right  line  which  passeth  through 
Spica  Tip  and  Cor  Leonis;  not,  indeed,  exactly,  but  deviating  a  little  from  that 
line  towards  the  north.  Montenari  likewise  observed,  that  this  day,  and  some 
days  after,  a  right  line  drawn  from  the  comet  through  Spica  passed  by  the 
south  side  of  Cor  Leonis  at  a  very  small  distance  therefrom.  The  right  line 
through  Cor  Leonis  and  Spica  Tip  did  cut  the  ecliptic  in  up  3®  46'  at  an  angle  of 
2®  5T;  and,  if  the  comet  had  been  in  this  line  and  in  lu  3®,  its  latitude  would 
have  been  2®  26';  but  since  Hooke  and  Montenari  agree  that  the  comet  was  at 
some  small  distance  from  this  line  towards  the  north,  its  latitude  must  have 
been  somewhat  less.  On  the  20th,  by  the  observation  of  Montenari,  its  latitude 
was  almost  the  same  with  that  of  Spica  RP,  that  is,  about  1®  30'.  But  by  the 
agreement  of  Hooke,  Montenari,  and  Ango,  the  latitude  was  continually  in¬ 
creasing,  and  therefore  must  now,  on  the  22d,  be  sensibly  greater  than  1®  30'; 
and,  taking  a  mean  between  the  extreme  limits  but  now  stated,  2®  26'  and 
1®  30',  the  latitude  will  be  about  1®  58'.  Hooke  and  Montenari  agree  that  the 
tail  of  the  comet  was  directed  towards  Spica  RP,  declining  a  little  from  that 
star  towards  the  south  according  to  Hooke,  but  towards  the  north  according  to 
Montenari;  and,  therefore,  that  declination  was  scarcely  sensible;  and  the  tail, 
lying  nearly  parallel  to  the  equator,  deviated  a  little  rrom  the  opposition  of  the 
sun  towards  the  north. 

Nov.  23,  O.S.,  at  5*^.  morning,  at  Nuremberg  (that  is,  at  43^*^.  at  London), 
Mr.  Zimmerman  saw  the  comet  in  Ri  8®  8',  mth  2®  31'  south  latitude,  its  place 
being  obtained  by  taking  its  distances  from  fixed  stars. 

Nov.  24,  before  sunrise,  the  comet  was  seen  by  Montenari  in  Rfi  12®  52'  on 
the  north  side  of  the  right  line  through  Cor  Leonis  and  Spica  RP,  and  therefore 
its  latitude  was  somewhat  less  than  2®  38';  and  since  the  latitude,  as  we  said, 
by  the  concurring  observations  of  Montenari,  Ango,  and  Hooke,  was  con¬ 
tinually  increasing,  therefore,  it  was  now,  on  the  24th,  somewhat  greater  than 
1®  58';  and,  taking  the  mean  quantity,  may  be  reckoned  2®  18',  without  any 
considerable  error.  Ponthio  and  Gallet  mil  have  it  that  the  latitude  was  now 
decreasing;  and  Cellio,  and  the  observer  in  New  England,  that  it  continued  the 
same,  viz.,  of  about  1®,  or  1)^®.  The  observations  of  Ponthio  and  Cellio  are 
rougher,  especially  those  which  were  made  by  taking  the  azimuths  and  alti¬ 
tudes;  as  are  also  the  observations  of  Gallet.  Those  are  better  which  were  made 
by  taking  the  position  of  the  comet  to  the  fixed  stars  by  Montenari,  Hooke, 
Ango,  and  the  observer  in  New  England,  and  sometimes  by  Ponthio  and 
Cellio.  The  same  day,  at  5^.  morning,  at  Ballasore,  the  comet  was  observed  in 
Rl  11®  45';  and,  therefore,  at  5*".  morning  at  London,  was  in  Rp  13®,  nearly. 
And,  by  the  theory,  the  comet  was  at  that  time  in  Rp  13®  22'  42". 

Nov.  25,  before  sunrise,  Montenari  observed  the  comet  in  RP  17%®,  nearly; 
and  Cellio  observed  at  the  same  time  that  the  comet  was  in  a  right  line  be¬ 
tween  the  bright  star  in  the  right  thigh  of  Virgo  and  the  southern  scale  of 
Libra;  and  this  right  line  cuts  the  comet’s  way  in  Rpl  8®  36'.  And,  by  the  theory, 
the  comet  was  in  Rp  18)^®,  nearly. 


352  Mathematical  Principles 

From  all  this  it  is  plain  that  these  observations  agree  "with  the  theory,  so  far 
as  they  agree  Mth  one  another;  and  by  this  agreement  it  is  made  clear  that  it 
was  one  and  the  same  comet  that  appeared  all  the  time  from  Nov.  4  to  Mar,  9. 
The  path  of  this  comet  did  tAvice  cut  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  therefore  was 
not  a  right  line.  It  did  cut  the  ecliptic  not  in  opposite  parts  of  the  heavens,  but 
in  the  end  of  Virgo  and  beginning  of  Capricorn,  including  an  arc  of  about  98°; 
and  therefore  the  way  of  the  comet  did  very  much  deviate  from  the  path  of  a 
great  circle;  for  in  the  month  of  Nov.  it  declined  at  least  3°  from  the  ecliptic 
towards  the  south;  and  in  the  month  of  Dec.  following  it  declined  29°  from  the 
ecliptic  towards  the  north;  the  two  parts  of  the  orbit  in  which  the  comet 
descended  towards  the  sun,  and  ascended  again  from  the  sun,  declining  one 
from  the  other  by  an  apparent  angle  of  above  30°,  as  observed  by  Montenari. 
This  comet  traveled  over  nine  signs,  namely,  from  the  last  degree  of  Q  to  the 
beginning  of  Jt,  beside  the  sign  of  Q,  through  which  it  passed  before  it  began 
to  be  seen ;  and  there  is  no  other  theory  by  which  a  comet  can  go  over  so  great  a 
part  of  the  heavens  Avith  a  regular  motion.  The  motion  of  this  comet  was  very 
unequable;  for  about  the  20th  of  Nov.  it  described  about  5°  a  day.  Then  its 
motion  being  retarded  between  Nov.  26  and  Dec.  12,  to  Avit,  in  the  space  of 
153^  days,  it  described  only  40°.  But  the  motion  thereof  being  afterAvards 
accelerated,  it  described  near  5°  a  day,  till  its  motion  began  to  be  again  re¬ 
tarded.  And  the  theory  Avhich  justly  corresponds  Avith  a  motion  so  unequable, 
and  through  so  great  a  part  of  the  heavens,  AA^hich  observes  the  same  laws  AAdth 
the  theory  of  the  planets,  and  Avhich  accurately  agrees  AAdth  accurate  astronom¬ 
ical  observations,  cannot  be  otherAvise  than  true. 

And,  thinking  it  Avould  not  be  improper,  I  have  given  in  the  annexed  figure, 
plotted  in  the  plane  of  the  curve,  a  true  representation  of  the  orbit  Avhich  this 
comet  described,  and  of  the  tail  Avhich  it  emitted  in  several  places.  In  this 
draAving  ABC  represents  the  orbit  of  the  comet,  D  the  sun,  DE  the  axis  of  the 
orbit,  DF  the  line  of  the  nodes,  GH  the  intersection  of  the  sphere  of  the  earth’s 


orbit  Avith  the  plane  of  the  comet’s  orbit,  I  the  place  of  the  comet  Nov.  4, 
1680;  K  the  place  of  the  same  Nov.  11;  L  the  place  of  the  same  Nov.  19;  M  its 
place  Dec.  12;  N  its  place  Dec.  21 ;  0  its  place  Dec.  29;  P  its  place  Jan.  5  folloAV- 
ing;  Q  its  place  Jan.  25;  R  its  place  Feb.  5;  S  its  place  Feb.  25;  T  its  place 
March  5;  and  V  its  place  March  9.  In  determining  the  length  of  the  tail,  I 
made  the  folloAving  observations: 

Nov.  4  and  6,  the  tail  did  not  appear;  Nov.  11,  the  tail  just  began  to  shoAv 
itself,  but  did  not  appear  above  3^  degree  long  through  a  10-foot  telescope; 
Nov.  17,  the  tail  Avas  seen  by  Ponthio  more  than  15°  long;  Nov.  18,  in  New 
England,  the  tail  appeared  30°  long,  and  directly  opposite  to  the  sun,  extending 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  353 

itself  to  the  planet  ^Nlars,  which  was  then  in  TTf.  9°  54';  Xov.  19,  in  ^vlaryland, 
the  tail  was  found  15°  or  20°  long;  Dec.  10  (by  the  observation  of  Mr.  Flam¬ 
steed),  the  tail  passed  through  the  middle  of  the  distance  intercepted  between 
the  tail  of  the  serpent  of  Ophiuchus  and  the  star  d  in  the  south  ving  of  Aquila, 
and  did  terminate  near  the  stars  A,  oj,  b  in  Bayer’s  tables.  Therefore  the  end  of 
the  tail  was  in  193/^°,  with  latitude  about  34)4°  north;  Dec.  11.  it  ascended 
to  the  head  of  Sagitta  (Bayer’s  a,  /S),  terminating  in  26°  43',  with  latitude 
38°  34'  north;  Dec.  12,  it  passed  through  the  middle  of  Sagitta,  nor  did  it  reach 
much  farther;  terminating  in  ==  4°,  vdth  latitude  423/9°  north,  nearly.  But  these 
things  are  to  be  understood  of  the  length  of  the  brighter  part  of  the  tail;  for, 
with  a  more  faint  light,  observed,  too,  perhaps,  in  a  serener  sk^v  at  Rome, 
Dec.  12,  5*^.  40™.,  b}^  the  observation  of  Ponthio,  the  tail  arose  to  10°  above  the 
rump  of  the  Swan,  and  the  side  thereof  towards  the  west  and  towards  the  north 
was  45'  distant  from  this  star.  But  about  that  time  the  tail  was  3°  broad 
towards  the  upper  end;  and  therefore  the  middle  thereof  was  2°  15'  distant 
from  that  star  tow’ards  the  south,  and  the  upper  end  was  in  ^  22°,  with  latitude 
61°  north;  and  thence  the  tail  w^as  about  70°  long;  Dec.  21,  it  extended  almost 
to  Cassiopeia’s  Chair,  equally  distant  from  j3  and  from  Schedir,  so  as  its  dis¬ 
tance  from  either  of  the  two  was  equal  to  the  distance  of  the  one  from  the 
other,  and  therefore  did  terminate  in  t  24°,  with  latitude  473^°;  Dec.  29,  it 
reached  to  a  contact  with  Scheat  on  its  left,  and  exactly  filled  up  the  space 
between  the  two  stars  in  the  northern  foot  of  Andromeda,  being  54°  in  length; 
and  therefore  terminated  in  19°,  with  35°  of  latitude;  Jan.  5,  it  touched  the 
star  T  in  the  breast  of  Andromeda  on  its  right  side,  and  the  star  ii  of  the  girdle 
on  its  left;  and,  according  to  our  observations,  was  40°  long;  but  it  was  curved, 
and  the  convex  side  thereof  lay  to  the  south;  and  near  the  head  of  the  comet  it 
made  an  angle  of  4°  with  the  circle  which  passed  through  the  sun  and  the 
comet’s  head;  but  townrds  the  other  end  it  was  inclined  to  that  circle  in  an 
angle  of  about  10°  or  11°;  and  the  chord  of  the  tail  contained  with  that  circle  an 
angle  of  8°.  Jan.  13,  the  tail  terminated  between  Alamech  and  Algol,  with  a 
light  that  w'as  sensible  enough;  but  with  a  faint  light  it  ended  over  against  the 
star  K  in  Perseus’  side.  The  distance  of  the  end  of  the  tail  from  the  circle  passing 
through  the  sun  and  the  comet  was  3°  50';  and  the  inclination  of  the  chord  of 
the  tail  to  that  circle  was  8}^°.  Jan.  25  and  26,  it  shone  with  a  faint  light  to  the 
length  of  6°  or  7°;  and,  for  a  night  or  two  after,  when  there  was  a  very  clear 
sky,  it  extended  to  the  length  of  12°,  or  somewhat  more,  with  a  light  that  was 
very  faint  and  very  hardly  to  be  seen;  but  the  axis  thereof  was  exactly  directed 
to  the  bright  star  in  the  eastern  shoulder  of  Auriga,  and  therefore  de^iated 
from  the  opposition  of  the  sun  tow'ards  the  north  by  an  angle  of  10°.  Lastly, 
Feb.  10,  with  a  telescope  I  observed  the  tail  2°  long;  for  that  fainter  light  which 
I  spoke  of  did  not  appear  through  the  glasses.  But  Ponthio  writes  that,  on 
Feb.  7,  he  saw  the  tail  12°  long.  Feb.  25,  the  comet  was  without  a  tail,  and  so 
continued  till  it  disappeared. 

Now'  if  one  reflects  upon  the  orbit  described,  and  dulj^  considers  the  other 
appearances  of  this  comet,  he  will  be  easity  satisfied  that  the  bodies  of  comets 
are  solid,  compact,  fixed,  and  durable,  like  the  bodies  of  the  planets;  for  if  they 
w'ere  nothing  else  but  the  vapors  or  exhalations  of  the  earth,  of  the  sun,  and 
other  planets,  this  comet,  in  its  passage  by  the  neighborhood  of  the  sun.  wmuld 
have  been  immediately  dissipated;  for  the  heat  of  the  sun  is  as  the  density  of 


354  Mathp^matical  Prin'ciples 

its  rays,  that  is,  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  places  from  the 
sun.  Therefore,  since  on  Dec.  8,  when  the  comet  was  in  its  perihelion,  the  dis¬ 
tance  thereof  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  was  to  the  distance  of  the  earth  from 
the  same  as  about  6  to  1000,  the  sun’s  heat  on  the  comet  was  at  that  time  to 
the  heat  of  the  summer-sun  with  us  as  1,000,000  to  36,  or  as  28,000  to  1.  But  the 
heat  of  boiling  water  is  about  three  times  greater  than  the  heat  which  dry  earth 
acquires  from  the  summer-sun,  as  I  have  tried;  and  the  heat  of  red-hot  iron 
(if  my  conjecture  is  right)  is  about  three  or  four  times  greater  than  the  heat  of 
boiling  water.  And  therefore  the  heat  which  dry  earth  on  the  comet,  while  in 
its  perihelion,  might  have  received  from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  was  about  2000 
times  greater  than  the  heat  of  red-hot  iron.  But  by  so  fierce  a  heat,  vapors  and 
exhalations,  and  every  volatile  matter,  must  have  been  immediately  consumed 
and  dissipated. 

This  comet,  therefore,  must  have  received  an  immense  heat  from  the  sun, 
and  retained  that  heat  for  an  exceeding  long  time;  for  a  globe  of  iron  of  an  inch 
in  diameter,  exposed  red-hot  to  the  open  air,  will  scarcely  lose  all  its  heat  in  an 
hour’s  time ;  but  a  greater  globe  would  retain  its  heat  longer  in  the  ratio  of  its 
diameter,  because  the  surface  (in  proportion  to  which  it  is  cooled  by  the  con¬ 
tact  of  the  ambient  air)  is  in  that  ratio  less  in  respect  of  the  quantity  of  the 
included  hot  matter;  and  therefore  a  globe  of  red-hot  iron  equal  to  our  earth, 
that  is,  about  40,000,000  feet  in  diameter,  would  scarcely  cool  in  an  equal  num¬ 
ber  of  days,  or  in  above  50,000  years.  But  I  suspect  that  the  duration  of  heat 
may,  on  account  of  some  latent  causes,  increase  in  a  yet  less  ratio  than  that  of 
the  diameter;  and  I  should  be  glad  that  the  true  ratio  was  investigated  by 
experiments. 

It  is  further  to  be  observed,  that  the  comet  in  the  month  of  December,  just 
after  it  had  been  heated  by  the  sun,  did  emit  a  much  longer  tail,  and  much 
more  splendid,  than  in  the  month  of  November  before,  when  it  had  not  yet 
arrived  at  its  perihelion;  and,  universally,  the  greatest  and  most  fulgent  tails 
always  arise  from  comets  immediately  after  their  passing  by  the  neighborhood 
of  the  sun.  Therefore  the  heat  received  by  the  comet  conduces  to  the  greatness 
of  the  tail:  from  this,  I  think  I  may  infer,  that  the  tail  is  nothing  else  but  a  very 
fine  vapor,  which  the  head  or  nucleus  of  the  comet  emits  by  its  heat. 

But  we  have  had  three  several  opinions  about  the  tails  of  comets:  for  some 
\vi\\  have  it  that  they  are  nothing  else  but  the  beams  of  the  sun’s  light  trans¬ 
mitted  through  the  comets’  heads,  which  they  suppose  to  be  transparent; 
others,  that  they  proceed  from  the  refraction  which  light  suffers  in  passing 
from  the  comet’s  head  to  the  earth;  and,  lastly,  others,  that  they  are  a  sort  of 
cloud  or  vapor  constantly  rising  from  the  comets’  heads,  and  tending  towards 
the  parts  opposite  to  the  sun.  The  first  is  the  opinion  of  such  as  are  yet  un¬ 
acquainted  with  optics;  for  the  beams  of  the  sun  are  seen  in  a  darkened  room 
only  in  consequence  of  the  light  that  is  reflected  from  them  by  the  little  par¬ 
ticles  of  dust  and  smoke  which  are  always  flying  about  in  the  air;  and,  for  that 
reason,  in  air  impregnated  with  thick  smoke,  those  beams  appear  mth  great 
brightness,  and  impress  the  eye  more  strongly;  in  a  yet  finer  air  they  appear 
more  faint,  and  are  less  easily  discerned;  but  in  the  heavens,  where  there  is  no 
matter  to  reflect  the  light,  they  can  never  be  seen  at  all.  Light  is  not  seen  as  it 
is  in  the  beam,  but  as  it  is  thence  reflected  to  our  eyes;  for  vision  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  in  no  other  way  than  by  rays  falling  upon  the  eyes;  and,  therefore,  there 


Book  HI:  The  System  of  the  World  355 

must  be  some  reflecting  matter  in  those  parts  where  the  tails  of  the  comets  are 
seen:  for  otherwise,  since  all  the  celestial  spaces  are  equally  illuminated  by  the 
sun’s  light,  no  part  of  the  heavens  could  appear  with  more  splendor  than  an¬ 
other.  The  second  opinion  is  liable  to  many  difficulties.  The  tails  of  comets  are 
never  seen  variegated  with  those  colors  which  commonly  are  inseparable  from 
refraction;  and  the  distinct  transmission  of  the  light  of  the  fixed  stars  and 
planets  to  us  is  a  denionstration  that  the  ether  or  celestial  medium  is  not  en¬ 
dowed  wdth  any  refractive  power:  for,  as  to  what  is  alleged,  that  the  fixed  stars 
have  been  sometimes  seen  by  the  Egyptians  environed  with  a  coma,  because 
that  has  but  rarely  happened,  it  is  rather  to  be  ascribed  to  a  casual  refraction  of 
clouds;  and  so  the  radiation  and  scintillation  of  the  fixed  stars  to  the  refrac¬ 
tions  both  of  the  eyes  and  air;  for,  upon  laying  a  telescope  to  the  eye,  those 
radiations  and  scintillations  immediately  disappear.  By  the  tremulous  agita¬ 
tion  of  the  air  and  ascending  vapors,  it  happens  that  the  rays  of  light  are 
alternately  turned  aside  from  the  narrow  space  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye;  but  no 
such  thing  can  have  place  in  the  much  wider  aperture  of  the  object  glass  of  a 
telescope:  and  hence  it  is  that  a  scintillation  is  occasioned  in  the  former  case, 
which  ceases  in  the  latter;  and  this  cessation  in  the  latter  case  is  a  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  the  regular  transmission  of  light  through  the  heavens,  without  any 
perceptible  refraction.  But,  to  obviate  an  objection  that  may  be  made  from 
the  appearing  of  no  tail  in  such  comets  as  shine  but  with  a  faint  light,  as  if  the 
secondary  rays  w'ere  then  too  w^eak  to  affect  the  eyes,  and  for  that  reason  it  is 
that  the  tails  of  the  fixed  stars  do  not  appear,  we  are  to  consider,  that  by  the 
means  of  telescopes  the  light  of  the  fixed  stars  may  be  augmented  above  an 
hundredfold,  and  yet  no  tails  are  seen;  that  the  light  of  the  planets  is  yet  more 
copious  mthout  any  tail ;  but  that  comets  are  seen  sometimes  with  huge  tails, 
when  the  light  of  their  heads  is  but  faint  and  dull.  For  so  it  happened  in  the 
comet  of  the  year  1680,  when  in  the  month  of  December  it  was  scarcely  equal 
in  light  to  the  stars  of  the  second  magnitude,  and  yet  emitted  a  notable  tail, 
extending  to  the  length  of  40°,  50°,  60°,  or  70°,  and  upw^ards;  and  afterwards, 
on  the  27th  and  28th  of  January,  when  the  head  appeared  but  as  a  star  of  the 
7th  magnitude,  yet  the  tail  (as  we  said  above),  with  a  light  that  was  clearly 
perceptible,  though  faint,  was  stretched  out  to  6°  or  7°  in  length,  and  with  a 
languishing  light  that  was  more  difficult  to  see,  even  to  12°,  and  upw^ards.  But 
on  the  9th  and  10th  of  February,  when  to  the  naked  eye  the  head  appeared  no 
more,  through  a  telescope  I  viewed  the  tail  of  2°  in  length.  But  further:  if  the 
tail  was  due  to  the  crumbling  of  the  celestial  matter,  and  did  deviate  from  the 
opposition  of  the  sun,  according  to  the  figure  of  the  heavens,  that  deviation  in 
the  same  places  of  the  heavens  should  be  always  directed  towards  the  same 
parts.  But  the  comet  of  the  year  1680,  December  28^^.  83^*".  p.m.  at  London, 
was  seen  in  k  8°  41',  with  latitude  north  28°  6';  w'hile  the  sun  was  in  v3  18° 
26'.  And  the  comet  of  the  year  1577,  December  29^^.,  was  in  k  8°  41',  wdth 
latitude  north  28°  40',  and  the  sun,  as  before,  in  about  s5  18°  26'.  In  both  cases 
the  situation  of  the  earth  w-as  the  same,  and  the  comet  appeared  in  the  same 
place  of  the  heavens;  yet  in  the  former  case  the  tail  of  the  comet  (as  w^ell  by  my 
observations  as  by  the  observations  of  others)  deviated  from  the  opposition  of 
the  sun  towards  the  north  by  an  angle  of  4)/^  degrees;  wLereas  in  the  latter 
there  w^as  (according  to  the  observations  of  Tycho)  a  deviation  of  21  degrees 
tow^ards  the  south.  The  crumbling,  therefore,  of  the  heavens  being  thus  dis- 


356  Mathematical  Principles 

proved,  it  remains  that  the  phenomena  of  the  tails  of  comets  must  be  derived 
from  some  reflecting  matter. 

And  that  the  tails  of  comets  do  arise  from  their  heads,  and  tend  towards  the 
parts  opposite  to  the  sun,  is  further  confirmed  from  the  laws  which  the  tails 
observe:  As  that,  lying  in  the  planes  of  the  comets’  orbits  which  pass  through 
the  sun,  they  constantly  deviate  from  the  opposition  of  the  sun  towards  the 
parts  which  the  comets’  heads  in  their  progress  along  these  orbits  have  left. 
That  to  a  spectator,  placed  in  those  planes,  they  appear  in  the  parts  directly 
opposite  to  the  sun;  but,  as  the  spectator  recedes  from  those  planes,  their 
deviation  begins  to  appear,  and  daily  becomes  greater.  That  the  deviation, 
other  things  being  equal,  appears  less  when  the  tail  is  more  oblique  to  the  orbit 
of  the  comet,  as  well  as  when  the  head  of  the  comet  approaches  nearer  to  the 
sun,  especially  if  the  angle  of  deviation  is  estimated  near  the  head  of  the  comet. 
That  the  tails  which  have  no  deviation  appear  straight,  but  the  tails  which 
deviate  are  likewise  bended  into  a  certain  curvature.  That  this  curvature  is 
greater  when  the  deviation  is  greater;  and  is  more  sensible  when  the  tail,  other 
things  being  equal,  is  longer;  for  in  the  shorter  tails  the  curvature  is  hardly  to 
be  perceived.  That  the  angle  of  deviation  is  less  near  the  comet’s  head,  but 
greater  towards  the  other  end  of  the  tail;  and  that  because  the  convex  side  of 
the  tail  regards  the  parts  from  which  the  deviation  is  made,  and  which  lie  in  a 
right  line  drawn  out  infinitely  from  the  sun  through  the  comet’s  head.  And 
that  the  tails  that  are  long  and  broad,  and  shine  with  a  stronger  light,  appear 
more  resplendent  and  more  exactly  defined  on  the  convex  than  on  the  concave 
side.  Upon  these  accounts  it  is  plain  that  the  phenomena  of  the  tails  of  comets 
depend  upon  the  motions  of  their  heads,  and  by  no  means  upon  the  places  of 
the  heavens  in  which  their  heads  are  seen;  and  that,  therefore,  the  tails  of 
comets  do  not  proceed  from  the  refraction  of  the  heavens,  but  from  their  own 
heads,  which  furnish  the  matter  that  forms  the  tail.  For,  as  in  our  air,  the 
smoke  of  a  heated  body  ascends  either  perpendicularly  if  the  body  is  at  rest,  or 
obliquely  if  the  body  is  moved  obliquely,  so  in  the  heavens,  where  all  bodies 
gravitate  towards  the  sun,  smoke  and  vapor  must  (as  we  have  already  said) 
ascend  from  the  sun,  and  either  rise  perpendicularly  if  the  smoking  body  is  at 
rest,  or  obliquely  if  the  body,  in  all  the  progress  of  its  motion,  is  always  leaving 
those  places  from  which  the  upper  or  higher  parts  of  the  vapor  had  risen  before; 
and  that  obliquity  will  be  least  where  the  vapor  ascends  with  most  velocity, 
namely,  near  the  smoking  body,  when  that  is  near  the  sun.  But,  because  the 
obliquity  varies,  the  column  of  vapor  will  be  incurvated;  and  because  the  vapor 
in  the  preceding  side  is  something  more  recent,  that  is,  has  ascended  something 
more  late  from  the  body,  it  will  therefore  be  somewhat  more  dense  on  that  side, 
and  must  on  that  account  reflect  more  light,  as  well  as  be  better  defined.  I  add 
nothing  concerning  the  sudden  uncertain  agitation  of  the  tails  of  comets,  and 
their  irregular  figures,  which  authors  sometimes  describe,  because  they  may 
arise  from  the  mutations  of  our  air,  and  the  motions  of  our  clouds,  in  part 
obscuring  those  tails;  or,  perhaps,  from  parts  of  the  Milky  Way  which  might 
have  been  confounded  vdth  and  mistaken  for  parts  of  the  tails  of  the  comets 
as  they  passed  by. 

But  that  the  atmospheres  of  comets  may  furnish  a  supply  of  vapor  great 
enough  to  fill  so  immense  spaces,  we  may  easily  understand  from  the  rarity  of 
our  own  air;  for  the  air  near  the  surface  of  our  earth  possesses  a  space  850 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  357 

times  greater  than  water  of  the  same  weight;  and  therefore  a  cylinder  of  air 
850  feet  high  is  of  equal  weight  with  a  cylinder  of  water  of  the  same  breadth, 
and  but  one  foot  high.  But  a  cylinder  of  air  reaching  to  the  top  of  the  atmos¬ 
phere  is  of  equal  weight  with  a  cylinder  of  w’ater  about  33  feet  high:  and,  there¬ 
fore,  if  from  the  w'hole  cylinder  of  air  the  low^er  part  of  850  feet  high  is  taken 
aw'ay,  the  remaining  upper  part  will  be  of  equal  w^eight  with  a  cylinder  of 
water  32  feet  high:  and  from  thence  (and  by  the  hypothesis,  confirmed  by 
many  experiments,  that  the  compression  of  air  is  as  the  w'eight  of  the  incum¬ 
bent  atmosphere,  and  that  the  force  of  gravity  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the 
distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth)  proceeding  by  calculation,  by  Cor.,  Prop. 
22,  Book  II,  I  found,  that,  at  the  height  of  one  semidiameter  of  the  earth, 
reckoned  from  the  earth’s  surface,  the  air  is  more  rare  than  with  us  in  a  far 
greater  ratio  than  that  of  the  whole  space  within  the  orbit  of  Saturn  to  a 
spherical  space  one  inch  in  diameter;  and  therefore,  if  a  sphere  of  our  air  of 
but  one  inch  in  thickness  w^as  equally  rarefied  with  the  air  at  the  height  of  one 
semidiameter  of  the  earth  from  the  earth’s  surface,  it  w'ould  fill  all  the  regions 
of  the  planets  to  the  orb  of  Saturn,  and  far  beyond  it.  Therefore,  since  the  air 
at  greater  distances  is  immensely  rarefied,  and  the  coma  or  atmosphere  of 
comets  is  ordinarily  about  ten  times  higher,  reckoning  from  their  centres,  than 
the  surface  of  the  nucleus,  and  the  tails  rise  yet  higher,  they  must  therefore  be 
exceedingly  rare ;  and  though,  on  account  of  the  much  thicker  atmospheres  of 
comets,  and  the  great  gravitation  of  their  bodies  towards  the  sun,  as  w’ell  as  of 
the  particles  of  their  air  and  vapors  towards  each  other,  it  may  happen  that 
the  air  in  the  celestial  spaces  and  in  the  tails  of  comets  is  not  so  vastly  rarefied, 
yet  from  this  computation  it  is  plain  that  a  very  small  quantity  of  air  and 
vapor  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  produce  all  the  appearances  of  the  tails  of 
comets;  for  that  they  are,  indeed,  of  a  very  notable  rarity  appears  from  the 
shining  of  the  stars  through  them.  The  atmosphere  of  the  earth,  illuminated  by 
the  sun’s  light,  though  but  of  a  few-  miles  in  thickness,  quite  obscures  and  ex¬ 
tinguishes  the  light  not  only  of  all  the  stars,  but  even  of  the  moon  itself;  w’here- 
as  the  smallest  stars  are  seen  to  shine  through  the  immense  thickness  of  the 
tails  of  comets,  likewise  illuminated  by  the  sun,  without  the  least  diminution 
of  their  splendor.  Nor  is  the  brightness  of  the  tails  of  most  comets  ordinarily 
greater  than  that  of  our  air,  an  inch  or  tw'o  in  thickness,  reflecting  in  a  dark¬ 
ened  room  the  light  of  the  sunbeams  let  in  by  a  hole  of  the  mndow  shutter. 

And  w'e  may  pretty  nearly  determine  the  time  spent  during  the  ascent  of  the 
vapor  from  the  comet’s  head  to  the  extremity  of  the  tail,  by  dra’wing  a  right 
line  from  the  extremity  of  the  tail  to  the  sun,  and  marking  the  place  where 
that  right  line  intersects  the  comet’s  orbit;  for  the  vapor  that  is  now  in  the 
extremity  of  the  tail,  if  it  has  ascended  in  a  right  line  from  the  sun,  must  have 
begun  to  rise  from  the  head  at  the  time  w'hen  the  head  was  in  the  point  of 
intersection.  It  is  true,  the  vapor  does  not  rise  in  a  right  line  from  the  sun,  but, 
retaining  the  motion  which  it  had  from  the  comet  before  its  ascent,  and  com¬ 
pounding  that  motion  with  its  motion  of  ascent,  arises  obliquely;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  the  solution  of  the  Problem  will  be  more  exact,  if  we  di’aw'  the  line  w^hich 
intersects  the  orbit  parallel  to  the  length  of  the  tail;  or  rather  (because  of  the 
curvilinear  motion  of  the  comet)  diverging  a  little  from  the  line  or  length  of 
the  tail.  And  by  means  of  this  principle  I  found  that  the  vapor  which,  January 
25,  was  in  the  extremity  of  the  tail,  had  begun  to  rise  from  the  head  before 


358  Mathematical  Prixciples 

December  11,  and  therefore  had  spent  in  its  whole  ascent  45  days;  but  that  the 
whole  tail  which  appeared  on  December  10  had  finished  its  ascent  in  the  space 
of  the  tw'o  days  then  elapsed  from  the  time  of  the  comet’s  being  in  its  peri¬ 
helion.  The  vapor,  therefore,  about  the  beginning  and  in  the  neighborhood  of 
the  sun  rose  with  the  greatest  velocity,  and  afterwards  continued  to  ascend 
with  a  motion  constantly  retarded  by  its  own  gravity;  and  the  higher  it  as¬ 
cended,  the  more  it  added  to  the  length  of  the  tail;  and  while  the  tail  con¬ 
tinued  to  be  seen,  it  was  made  up  of  almost  all  that  vapor  which  had  risen  since 
the  time  of  the  comet’s  being  in  its  perihelion;  nor  did  that  part  of  the  vapor 
which  had  risen  first,  and  which  formed  the  extremity  of  the  tail,  cease  to  ap¬ 
pear,  till  its  too  great  distance,  as  well  from  the  sun,  from  which  it  received  its 
light,  as  from  our  eyes,  rendered  it  invisible.  Whence  also  it  is  that  the  tails 
of  other  comets  which  are  short  do  not  rise  from  their  heads  Mth  a  swift  and 
continued  motion,  and  soon  after  disappear,  but  are  permanent  and  lasting 
columns  of  vapors  and  exhalations,  which,  ascending  from  the  heads  vith  a 
slow  motion  of  many  days,  and  partaking  of  the  motion  of  the  heads  which 
they  had  from  the  beginning,  continue  to  go  along  together  with  them  through 
the  heavens.  From  this  again  we  have  another  argument  proving  the  celestial 
spaces  to  be  free,  and  without  resistance,  since  in  them  not  only  the  solid 
bodies  of  the  planets  and  comets,  but  also  the  extremely  rare  vapors  of  comets’ 
tails,  maintain  their  rapid  motions  with  great  freedom,  and  for  an  exceeding 
long  time. 

Kepler  ascribes  the  ascent  of  the  tails  of  the  comets  to  the  atmospheres  of 
their  heads;  and  their  direction  towards  the  parts  opposite  to  the  sun  to  the 
action  of  the  rays  of  light  carrying  along  with  them  the  matter  of  the  comets’ 
tails;  and  without  any  great  incongruity  we  may  suppose  that,  in  so  free 
spaces,  so  fine  a  matter  as  that  of  the  ether  may  yield  to  the  action  of  the  rays 
of  the  sun’s  light,  though  those  rays  are  not  able  sensibly  to  move  the  gross 
substances  in  our  parts,  which  are  clogged  with  so  palpable  a  resistance.  An¬ 
other  author  thinks  that  there  may  be  a  sort  of  particles  of  matter  endowed 
with  a  principle  of  levity,  as  w'ell  as  others  are  with  a  power  of  gravity;  that 
the  matter  of  the  tails  of  comets  may  be  of  the  former  sort,  and  that  its  ascent 
from  the  sun  may  be  owing  to  its  levity;  but,  considering  that  the  gravity  of 
terrestrial  bodies  is  as  the  matter  of  the  bodies,  and  therefore  can  be  neither 
more  nor  less  in  the  same  quantity  of  matter,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  this 
ascent  may  rather  proceed  from  the  rarefaction  of  the  matter  of  the  comets’ 
tails.  The  ascent  of  smoke  in  a  chimney  is  due  to  the  impulse  of  the  air  with 
which  it  is  entangled.  The  air  rarefied  by  heat  ascends,  because  its  specific 
gravity  is  diminished,  and  in  its  ascent  carries  along  with  it  the  smoke  which 
floats  in  it;  and  why  may  not  the  tail  of  a  comet  rise  from  the  sun  after  the  same 
manner?  For  the  sun’s  rays  do  not  act  upon  the  mediums  w'hich  they  pervade 
otherwise  than  by  reflection  and  refraction;  and  those  reflecting  particles 
heated  by  this  action,  heat  the  matter  of  the  ether  wKich  is  involved  with  them. 
That  matter  is  rarefied  by  the  heat  w'hich  it  acquires,  and  because,  by  this 
rarefaction,  the  specific  gravity  with  w'hich  it  tended  tow'ards  the  sun  before  is 
diminished,  it  will  ascend  therefrom,  and  carry  along  with  it  the  reflecting 
particles  of  w^hich  the  tail  of  the  comet  is  composed.  But  the  ascent  of  the 
vapors  is  further  promoted  by  their  circumgyration  about  the  sun;  in  conse¬ 
quence  thereof  they  endeavor  to  recede  from  the  sun,  while  the  sun’s  atm  os- 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  359 

phere  and  the  other  matter  of  the  heavens  are  either  altogether  quiescent,  or 
are  onh^  moved  Math  a  slower  circumgyration  derived  from  the  rotation  of  the 
sun.  And  these  are  the  causes  of  the  ascent  of  the  tails  of  the  comets  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  sun,  where  their  orbits  are  bent  into  a  greater  curvature, 
and  the  comets  themselves  are  plunged  into  the  denser  and  therefore  heavier 
parts  of  the  sun’s  atmosphere:  upon  which  account  they  do  then  emit  tails  of 
an  huge  length;  for  the  tails  which  then  arise,  retaining  their  own  proper  mo¬ 
tion,  and  in  the  meantime  gravitating  towards  the  sun,  must  be  revolved  in 
ellipses  about  the  sun  in  like  manner  as  the  heads  are,  and  by  that  motion 
must  always  accompany  the  heads,  and  freely  adhere  to  them.  For  the  gravi¬ 
tation  of  the  vapors  towards  the  sun  can  no  more  force  the  tails  to  abandon 
the  heads,  and  descend  to  the  sun,  than  the  gravitation  of  the  heads  can  oblige 
them  to  fall  from  the  tails.  They  must  by  their  common  gravity  either  fall 
together  towards  the  sun,  or  be  retarded  together  in  their  common  ascent 
therefrom;  and,  therefore  (whether  from  the  causes  already  described,  or  from 
any  others),  the  tails  and  heads  of  comets  may  easily  acquire  and  freely  retain 
any  position  one  to  the  other,  without  disturbance  or  impediment  from  that 
common  gravitation. 

The  tails,  therefore,  that  rise  in  the  perihelian  positions  of  the  comets  will 
go  along  with  their  heads  into  far  remote  parts,  and  together  Avith  the  heads 
Mill  either  return  again  from  thence  to  us,  after  a  long  course  of  years,  or  rather 
will  be  there  rarefied,  and  by  degrees  quite  vanish  away;  for  afterAvards,  in  the 
descent  of  the  heads  toAvards  the  sun,  neAv  short  tails  aatII  be  emitted  from  the 
heads  AAith  a  sIoav  motion;  and  those  tails  by  degrees  aatII  be  augmented  im¬ 
mensely,  especially  in  such  comets  as  in  their  perihelian  distances  descend  as 
loAv  as  the  sun’s  atmosphere;  for  all  vapor  in  those  free  spaces  is  in  a  perpetual 
state  of  rarefaction  and  dilatation;  and  from  hence  it  is  that  the  tails  of  all 
comets  are  broader  at  their  upper  extremity  than  near  their  heads.  And  it  is 
not  unlikely  but  that  the  vapor,  thus  continually  rarefied  and  dilated,  may  be 
at  last  dissipated  and  scattered  through  the  AA’hole  heavens,  and  by  little  and 
little  be  attracted  toAA’ards  the  planets  by  its  gravity,  and  mixed  AAuth  their 
atmosphere;  for  as  the  seas  are  absolutely  necessary  to  the  constitution  of  our 
earth,  that  from  them,  the  sun,  by  its  heat,  may  exhale  a  sufficient  quantity  of 
vapors,  AA’hich,  being  gathered  together  into  clouds,  may  drop  doAvn  in  rain, 
for  AA’atering  of  the  earth,  and  for  the  production  and  nourishment  of  vege¬ 
tables;  or,  being  condensed  AA*ith  cold  on  the  tops  of  mountains  (as  some  philos¬ 
ophers  AATth  reason  judge),  may  run  doAA'n  in  springs  and  rivers;  so  for  the 
conservation  of  the  seas,  and  fluids  of  the  planets,  comets  seem  to  be  required, 
that,  from  their  exhalations  and  vapors  condensed,  the  Avastes  of  the  planetary 
fluids  spent  upon  vegetation  and  putrefaction,  and  converted  into  dry  earth, 
may  be  continually  supplied  and  made  up;  for  all  vegetables  entirely  derive 
their  groAvths  from  fluids,  and  afterAvards,  in  great  measure,  are  turned  into 
dry  earth  by  putrefaction;  and  a  sort  of  slime  is  ahvays  found  to  settle  at  the 
bottom  of  putrefied  fluids;  and  hence  it  is  that  the  bulk  of  the  solid  earth  is 
continually  increased;  and  the  fluids,  if  they  are  not  supplied  from  AAuthout, 
must  be  in  a  continual  decrease,  and  quite  fail  at  last.  I  suspect,  moreover,  that 
it  is  chiefi}'^  from  the  comets  that  spirit  comes,  AA’hich  is  indeed  the  smallest  but 
the  most  subtle  and  useful  part  of  our  air,  and  so  much  required  to  sustain  the 
life  of  all  things  AAuth  us. 


360  Mathematical  Principles 

The  atmospheres  of  comets,  in  their  descent  towards  the  sun,  by  running 
out  into  the  tails,  are  spent  and  diminished,  and  become  narrower,  at  least  on 
that  side  which  regards  the  sun;  and  in  receding  from  the  sun,  when  they  less 
run  out  into  the  tails,  they  are  again  enlarged,  if  Hewelcke  has  justly  marked 
their  appearances.  But  they  are  seen  least  of  all  just  after  they  have  been  most 
heated  by  the  sun,  and  on  that  account  then  emit  the  longest  and  most  re¬ 
splendent  tails;  and,  perhaps,  at  the  same  time,  the  nuclei  are  environed  with 
a  denser  and  blacker  smoke  in  the  lowermost  parts  of  their  atmosphere;  for 
smoke  that  is  raised  by  a  great  and  intense  heat  is  commonly  the  denser  and 
blacker.  Thus  the  head  of  that  comet  which  we  have  been  describing,  at  equal 
distances  both  from  the  sun  and  from  the  earth,  appeared  darker  after  it  had 
passed  by  its  perihelion  than  it  did  before;  for  in  the  month  of  December  it 
was  commonly  compared  with  the  stars  of  the  third  magnitude,  but  in  No¬ 
vember  with  those  of  the  first  or  second;  and  such  as  saw  both  appearances 
have  described  the  first  as  of  another  and  greater  comet  than  the  second.  For, 
November  19,  this  comet  appeared  to  a  young  manat  Cambridge,  though  mth  a 
pale  and  dull  light,  yet  equal  to  Spica  Virginis;  and  at  that  time  it  shone  with 
greater  brightness  than  it  did  afterwards.  And  Montenari,  November  20,  o.s., 
observed  it  larger  than  the  stars  of  the  first  magnitude,  its  tail  being  then  2 
degrees  long.  And  Mr.  Storer  (by  letters  which  have  come  into  my  hands) 
writes  that  in  the  month  of  December,  when  the  tail  appeared  of  the  greatest 
bulk  and  splendor,  the  head  was  but  small,  and  far  less  than  that  which  was 
seen  in  the  month  of  November  before  sun  rising;  and,  conjecturing  at  the 
cause  of  the  appearance,  he  judged  it  to  proceed  from  the  existence  of  a  greater 
quantity  of  matter  in  the  head  at  first,  which  was  afterwards  gradually  spent. 

And,  for  the  same  reason,  I  find,  that  the  heads  of  other  comets,  which  did 
put  forth  tails  of  the  greatest  bulk  and  splendor,  have  appeared  but  obscure 
and  small.  For  in  Brazil,  March  5,  1668,  n.s.,  7^.  p.m.,  Valentin  Estancel  saw 
a  comet  near  the  horizon,  and  towards  the  southwest,  with  a  head  so  small  as 
scarcely  to  be  discerned,  but  with  a  tail  above  measure  splendid,  so  that  the 
reflection  thereof  from  the  sea  was  easily  seen  by  those  who  stood  on  the  shore; 
it  looked  like  a  fiery  beam  extended  23  degrees  in  length  from  the  west  to 
south,  almost  parallel  to  the  horizon.  But  this  excessive  splendor  continued 
only  three  days,  decreasing  apace  afterwards;  and  while  the  splendor  was  de¬ 
creasing,  the  bulk  of  the  tail  increased:  also  in  Portugal  it  is  said  to  have  taken 
up  one-quarter  of  the  heavens,  that  is,  45  degrees,  extending  from  west  to  east 
with  a  very  notable  splendor,  though  the  whole  tail  was  not  seen  in  those  parts, 
because  the  head  was  always  hid  under  the  horizon:  and  from  the  increase  of 
the  bulk  and  decrease  of  the  splendor  of  the  tail,  it  appears  that  the  head  was 
then  in  its  recess  from  the  sun,  and  had  been  very  near  to  it  in  its  perihelion,  as 
the  comet  of  1680  was.  And  we  read,  in  the  Saxon  Chronicle,  of  a  like  comet 
appearing  in  the  year  1106,  the  star  whereof  was  small  and  obscure  (as  that  of 
1680),  hut  the  splendor  of  its  tail  was  very  bright,  and  like  a  huge  fiery  beam 
stretched  out  in  a  direction  between  the  east  and  north,  as  Hewelcke  has  it  also 
from  Simeon,  the  monk  of  Durham.  This  comet  appeared  in  the  beginning  of 
February,  about  the  evening,  and  towards  the  southwest  part  of  heaven;  from 
this,  and  from  the  position  of  the  tail,  we  infer  that  the  head  was  near  the  sun. 
Matthew  Paris  says.  It  was  distant  from  the  sun  by  about  a  cubit,  from  three 
o'clock  (rather  six)  till  nine,  putting  forth  a  long  tail.  Such  also  was  that  re- 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World 


361 


splendent  comet  described  by  Aristotle,  Meteorology,  i,  6.  The  head  whereof 
could  not  be  seen,  because  it  had  set  before  the  sun,  or  at  least  was  hid  under  the 
sun’s  rays;  but  next  day  it  was  seen  as  well  as  might  be;  for,  having  left  the  sun  but 
a  very  little  way,  it  set  immediately  after  it.  And  the  scattered  light  of  the  head, 
obscured  by  the  too  great  splendor  (of  the  tail)  did  not  yet  appear.  But  afterwards 
(as  Aristotle  says)  when  the  splendor  (of  the  tail)  had  diminished,  (the  head  of) 
the  comet  recovered  its  native  brightness;  and  the  splendor  (of  its  tail)  reached  now 
to  a  third  part  of  the  heavens  (that  is,  to  60°).  This  appearance  was  in  the  winter 
season  (the  fourth  year  of  the  101st  Olympiad),  and,  rising  to  Orion’s  girdle,  it 
there  vanished  away.  It  is  true  that  the  comet  of  1618,  which  came  out  directly 
from  under  the  sun’s  rays  with  a  very  large  tail,  seemed  to  equal,  if  not  to 
exceed,  the  stars  of  the  first  magnitude;  but  then,  abundance  of  other  comets 
have  appeared  yet  greater  than  this,  that  put  forth  shorter  tails;  some  of  which 
are  said  to  have  appeared  as  big  as  Jupiter,  others  as  big  as  Venus,  or  even  as 
the  moon. 

We  have  said  that  comets  are  a  sort  of  planets  revolved  in  very  eccentric 

orbits  about  the  sun;  and  as,  in  the  planets  which  are  vdthout  tails,  those  are 

commonly  less  which  are  revolved  in  lesser  orbits,  and  nearer  to  the  sun,  so  in 

comets  it  is  probable  that  those  which  in  their  perihelion  approach  nearer  to 

the  sun  are  generally  of  less  magnitude,  that  they  may  not  agitate  the  sun  too 

much  by  their  attractions.  But  as  to  the  transverse  diameters  of  their  orbits, 

and  the  periodic  times  of  their  revolutions,  I  leave  them  to  be  determined  by 

comparing  comets  together  which  after  long  intervals  of  time  return  again  in 

the  same  orbit.  In  the  meantime,  the  following  Proposition  may  give  some  light 

in  that  inquiry.  ^ 

Proposition  42.  Problem  22 


To  correct  a  comet’s  orbit  found  as  above. 

Operation  1.  Assume  that  position  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  which  was 
determined  according  to  the  preceding  Proposition;  and  select  three  places  of 
the  comet,  deduced  from  very  accurate  observations,  and  at  great  distances 
one  from  the  other.  Then  suppose  A  to  represent  the  time  between  the  first 
observation  and  the  second,  and  B  the  time  between  the  second  and  the  third; 
but  it  will  be  convenient  that  in  one  of  those  times  the  comet  be  in  its  perigee, 
or  at  least  not  far  from  it.  From  those  apparent  places  find,  by  trigonometric 
operations,  the  three  true  places  of  the  comet  in  that  assumed  plane  of  the 
orbit;  then  through  the  places  found,  and  about  the  centre  of  the  sun  as  the 
focus,  describe  a  conic  section  by  arithmetical  operations,  according  to  Prop. 
21,  Book  I.  Let  the  areas  of  this  figure  which  are  terminated  by  radii  drawn 
from  the  sun  to  the  places  found  be  D  and  E;  namely,  D  the  area  between  the 
first  observation  and  the  second,  and  E  the  area  between  the  second  and  third; 
and  let  T  represent  the  whole  time  in  which  the  whole  area  D+E  should  be 
described  with  the  velocity  of  the  comet  found  by  Prop.  16,  Book  i. 

Oper.  2.  Retaining  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic,  let  the  longitude  of  the  nodes  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  be  increased 
by  the  addition  of  20'  or  30',  which  call  P.  Then  from  the  aforesaid  three 
observed  places  of  the  comet  let  the  three  true  places  be  found  (as  before)  in 
this  new  plane;  as  also  the  orbit  passing  through  those  places,  and  the  two 
areas  of  the  same  described  between  the  two  observations,  which  call  d  and  e; 
and  let  t  be  the  whole  time  in  which  the  whole  area  d+e  should  be  described. 


362  Mathematical  Prixciples 

Oper.  3.  Retaining  the  longitude  of  the  nodes  in  the  first  operation,  let  the 
inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  be  increased  by 
adding  thereto  20'  or  30',  which  call  Q.  Then  from  the  aforesaid  three  observed 
apparent  places  of  the  comet  let  the  three  true  places  be  found  in  this  new 
plane,  as  well  as  the  orbit  passing  through  them,  and  the  two  areas  of  the  same 
described  between  the  observation,  which  call  5  and  e ;  and  let  t  be  the  whole 
time  in  which  the  whole  area  5+e  should  be  described. 

Then  taking  C  to  1  as  A  to  B;  and  G  to  1  as  D  to  E;  and  gr  to  1  as  d  to  e; 
and  7  to  1  as  5  to  e;  let  S  be  the  true  time  between  the  first  observation  and  the 
third ;  and,  observing  well  the  signs  +  and  — ,  let  such  numbers  w  and  n  be 
found  out  as  will  make  2G  — 2C  =  mG  — mg'+nG  — ny;  and  2T  —  2S  =  mT  —  mt 
+nT  — nr.  And  if,  in  the  first  operation,  I  represents  the  inclination  of  the 
plane  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  K  the  longitude  of  either 
node,  then  I+nQ  vnW  be  the  true  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  to  the 
plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  K+mP  the  true  longitude  of  the  node.  And,  lastly, 
if  in  the  first,  second,  and  third  operations,  the  quantities  R,  r,  and  p,  represent 
,  ,  .  ,  ,  ..111, 

the  parameters  of  the  orbit,  and  the  quantities  Y'J’y>  transverse  diameters 

of  the  same,  then  R+wr  — mR+np  — nR  will  be  the  true  parameter,  and 

T—, — \ - T  will  be  the  true  transverse  diameter  of  the  orbit  which 

L+mt  —  mL +n^  —  nL 

the  comet  describes;  and  from  the  transverse  diameter  given  the  periodic  time 
of  the  comet  is  also  given,  q.e.i.  But  the  periodic  times  of  the  revolutions  of 
comets,  and  the  transverse  diameters  of  their  orbits,  cannot  be  accurately 
enough  determined  but  by  comparing  comets  together  which  appear  at  differ¬ 
ent  times.  If,  after  equal  intervals  of  time,  several  comets  are  found  to  have 
described  the  same  orbit,  we  may  thence  conclude  that  they  are  all  but  one  and 
the  same  comet  revolved  in  the  same  orbit;  and  then  from  the  times  of  their 
revolutions  the  transverse  diameters  of  their  orbits  wall  be  given,  and  from 
those  diameters  the  elliptic  orbits  themselves  will  be  determined. 

To  this  purpose  the  orbits  of  many  comets  ought  to  be  computed,  supposing 
those  orbits  to  be  parabolic ;  for  such  orbits  will  always  nearly  agree  wdth  the 
phenomena,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  parabolic  orbit  of  the  comet  of  the 
year  1680,  which  I  compared  above  with  the  observations,  but  likewise  from 
that  of  the  notable  comet  w’hich  appeared  in  the  year  1664  and  1665,  and  was 
observed  by  Hew^elcke,  who,  from  his  owm  observations,  calculated  the  longi¬ 
tudes  and  latitudes  thereof,  though  with  little  accuracy.  But  from  the  same 
observations  Dr.  Halley  did  again  compute  its  places;  and  from  those  new 
places  determined  its  orbit,  finding  its  ascending  node  in  it  21°  13'  55";  the 
inclination  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  21°  18'  40";  the  distance  of 
its  perihelion  from  the  node,  estimated  in  the  comet’s  orbit,  49°  27'  30",  its 
perihelion  in  8°  40'  30",  with  heliocentric  latitude  south  16°  01'  45";  the 
comet  to  have  been  in  its  perihelion  November  24*^.  IH.  52"*.  p.m.  equal  time 
at  London,  or  13^.  8"*.  at  Danzig,  o.s.;  and  that  the  latus  rectum  of  the  parab¬ 
ola  w'as  410,286  of  such  parts  as  the  sun’s  mean  distance  from  the  earth  is 
supposed  to  contain  100,000.  And  hoW'  nearly  the  places  of  the  comet  computed 
in  this  orbit  agree  with  the  observations,  wall  appear  from  the  table  calculated 
by  Dr.  Halley  (p  364). 

In  February,  the  beginning  of  the  year  1665,  the  first  star  of  Aries,  which  I 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  363 

shall  hereafter  call  y,  ^Yas  in  T  28°  30'  15",  ^^Tth  7°  8'  58"  north  latitude;  the 
second  star  of  Aries  was  in  T  29°  17'  18",  with  8°  28'  16"  north  latitude; 
another  star  of  the  seventh  magnitude,  which  I  call  A,  was  in  T  28°  24'  45", 
mth  8°  28'  33"  north  latitude.  The  comet  Feb.  7’^.  7^.  30“.  at  Paris  (that  is, 
Feb.  7^.  8^.  37“\  at  Danzig),  o.s.,  made  a  triangle  with  those  stars  y  and  A, 
which  was  right-angled  in  y;  and  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  star  y  was 
equal  to  the  distance  of  the  stars  y  and  A,  that  is,  1°  19'  46"  of  a  great  circle; 
and  therefore  in  the  parallel  of  the  latitude  of  the  star  y  it  Avas  1°  20'  26". 
Therefore  if  from  the  longitude  of  the  star  y  there  be  subtracted  the  longitude 
1°  20'  26",  there  will  remain  the  longitucle  of  the  comet  T  27°  9'  49".  M. 
Auzout,  from  this  observation  of  his,  placed  the  comet  in  T  27°  O',  nearly;  and, 
by  the  drawing  in  which  Dr.  Hooke  delineated  its  motion,  it  was  then  in  T 
26°  59'  24".  I  place  it  in  T  27°  4'  46",  taking  the  middle  between  the  two 
extremes. 

From  the  same  observations,  M.  Auzout  made  the  latitude  of  the  comet  at 
that  time  7°  and  4'  or  5'  to  the  north;  but  he  had  done  better  to  have  made  it 
7°  3'  29",  the  difference  of  the  latitudes  of  the  comet  and  the  star  y  being 
equal  to  the  difference  of  the  longitude  of  the  stars  y  and  A. 

February  22'^.  7^'.  30“.  at  London,  that  is,  February  22'^.  8^.  46“.  at  Danzig, 
the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  star  A,  according  to  Dr.  Hooke’s  observa¬ 
tion,  as  was  delineated  by  himself  in  a  scheme,  and  also  by  the  observations  of 
M.  Auzout,  delineated  in  like  manner  by  M.  Petit,  was  a  fifth  part  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  betAveen  the  star  A  and  the  first  star  of  Aries,  or  15'  57";  and  the  distance 
of  the  comet  from  a  right  fine  joining  the  star  A  and  the  first  of  Aries  was  a 
fourth  part  of  the  same  fifth  part,  that  is,  4';  and  therefore  the  comet  was  in 
T  28°  29'  46",  with  8°  12'  36"  north  latitude. 

March  1,  7^.  0™.  at  London,  that  is,  March  1,  8^.  16“.  at  Danzig,  the  comet 
was  observed  near  the  second  star  in  Aries,  the  distance  between  them  being 
to  the  distance  betw'een  the  first  and  second  stars  in  Aries,  that  is,  to  1°  33', 
as  4  to  45  according  to  Dr.  Hooke,  or  as  2  to  23  according  to  M.  Gottignies. 
And,  therefore,  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  second  star  in  Aries  w’as 
8'  16"  according  to  Dr.  Hooke,  or  8'  5"  according  to  M.  Gottignies;  or,  taking 
a  mean  between  both,  8'  10".  But,  according  to  M.  Gottignies,  the  comet  had 
gone  beyond  the  second  star  of  Aries  about  a  fourth  or  a  fifth  part  of  the  space 
that  it  commonly  went  over  in  a  day,  to  vut,  about  1'  35"  (in  which  he  agrees 
very  well  wuth  M.  Auzout);  or,  according  to  Dr.  Hooke,  not  quite  so  much,  as 
perhaps  only  1'.  Therefore  if  to  the  longitude  of  the  first  star  in  Aries  we  add 
1',  and  8'  10"  to  its  latitude,  we  shall  have  the  longitude  of  the  comet  T  29°  18', 
with  8°  36'  26"  north  latitude. 

March  7,  7^.  30"“.  at  Paris,  that  is,  March  7,  7^.  37“.  at  Danzig,  from  the 
observations  of  M.  Auzout,  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  second  star  in 
Aries  w^as  equal  to  the  distance  of  that  star  from  the  star  A,  that  is,  52'  29"; 
and  the  difference  of  the  longitude  of  the  comet  and  the  second  star  in  Aries 
was  45'  or  46',  or,  taking  a  mean  quantity,  45'  30";  and  therefore  the  comet  was 
in  b'  0°2'48".  From  the  drawing  constructed  by  M.  Petit,  based  on  the  obser¬ 
vations  of  M.  Auzout,  Hewelcke  determined  the  latitude  of  the  comet  8°  54'. 
But  the  engraver  did  not  rightly  trace  the  curvature  of  the  comet’s  wuy  to- 
w'ards  the  end  of  the  motion;  and  Hevelius,  in  the  drawing  of  M.  Auzout’s 
observations  which  he  constructed  himself,  corrected  this  irregular  curvature, 


364  Mathematical  Principles 


Apparent 
time  at 
Danzig 

The  observed  distances  of  the  comet  from 

The  observed  places 

The  places 
computed  in 
the  orbit 

December 
d  h  m 
3.18.29H 

o  f  tf 

The  Lion’s  heart  46.24. 20 

The  Virgin’s  spike  22.52.10 

O  f  If 

Long.  ^  7.01.00 

Lat.  S.  21.39.  0 

O  f  ff 

7.  1.29 
21.38.50 

4.18. 

The  Lion^s  heart  46.  2.45 

The  Virgin^s  spike  23.52. 40 

Long.  ^  6.15.  0 

Lat.  S.  22.24.  0 

:=  6.16.  5 

22.24.  0 

7.17.48 

The  Lion’s  heart  44.48.  0 

The  Virgin’s  spike  27.56. 40 

Long.  ~  3.  6.  0  ^ 

Lat.  S.  25.22.  0 

3.  7.33 
25.21.40 

17.14.43 

The  Liori^s  heart  53.15.15 

Orients  right  shoulder  45.43. 30 

Long.  Q  2.56.  0 
Lat.  S.  49.25.  0 

D  2.56.  0 
49.25.  0 

19.  9.25 

Procyon  35.13.50 

Bright  star  of  Whale’s  jaw  52.56.  0 

Long.  M  28.40.30 
Lat.  S.  45.48.  0  | 

Jt  28.43.  0 
45.46.  0 

20.  9.533^ 

Procyon  40.49.  0 

Bright  star  of  Whalers  jaw  40.04.  0 

Long.  Jt  13.03.  0 
Lat.  S.  39.54.  0 

Jt  13.  5.  0 
39.53.  0 

21.  9.  9H 

Orion’s  right  shoulder  26.21.25 

Bright  star  of  Whale’s  jaw  29.28.  0 

Long.  Jt  2.16.  0 
Lat.  S.  33.41.  0 

Jt  2.18.30 
33.39.40 

22.  9.  0 

Orion’s  right  shoulder  29.47.  0 

Bright  star  of  Whale’s  jaw  20.29.30 

Long,  b'  24.24.  0 
Lat.  S.  27.45.  0 

j  b  24.27.  0 
27.46.  0 

26.  7.58 

The  bright  star  of  Aries  23.20.  0 

Aldebaran  26.44.  0 

Long,  b  9.  0.  0 
Lat.  S.  12.36.  0 

1  b  9.  2.28 

1  12.34.13 

27.  6.45 

The  bright  star  of  Aries  20.45.  0 

Aldebaran  28.10.  0 

Long,  b  7.  5.40 
Lat.  S.  10.23.  0 

1 

b  7.  8.45 
10.23.13 

28.  7.39 

The  bright  star  of  Aries  18.29.  0 

Palilicium  29.37.  0 

I  Long,  b  5.24.45 
Lat.  S.  8.22.50 

b  5.27.52 
8.23.37 

31.  6.45 

Andromeda's  girdle  30.48. 10 

Palilicium  32.53. 30 

Long,  b  2.  7.40 

1  Lat.  S.  4.13.  0 

b  2.  8.20 
4.16.25 

Jan.  1665 
7.  7.37>^ 

Andromeda’s  girdle  25.11.  0 

Palilicium  37.12.25 

Long.  T  28.24.47 
Lat.  N.  0.54.  0 

T  28.24.  0 
0.53.  0 

13.  7.  0 

Andromeda’s  head  28.  7.10 

Palilicium  38.55.20 

1  Long.  T  27.  6.54 
Lat.  N.  3.  6.50 

T  27.  6.39 
3.  7.40 

24.  7.29 

Andromeda’s  girdle  20.32.15 

Palilicium  40.  5.  0 

Long.  T  26.29.15 
Lat.  N.  5.25.50 

T  26.28.50 
5.26.  0 

February 

7.  8.37 

Long.  T  27.  4.46 
Lat.  X.  7.  3.29 

T  27.24.55 
7.  3.15 

22.  8.46 

Long.  T  28.29.46 
Lat.  X.  8.12.36 

T  28.29.58 
8.10.25 

March 

1.  8.16 

Long.  T  29.18.15 
Lat.  X.  8.36.26 

T  29.18.20 
8.36.12 

7.  8.37 

Long.  b  0.  2.48 

Lat.  X.  8.56.30 

b  0.  2.42 
8.56.56 

Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  365 

and  so  made  the  latitude  of  the  comet  8°  55'  30".  And,  by  further  correcting 
this  irregularity,  the  latitude  may  become  8°  56',  or  8°  57'. 

This  comet  was  also  seen  March  9,  and  at  that  time  its  place  must  have  been 
in  'a'  0°  18',  vdth  9°  33^'  north  latitude,  nearly. 

This  comet  appeared  for  three  months,  in  which  space  of  time  it  traveled 
over  almost  six  signs,  and  in  one  of  the  days  described  almost  20  degrees.  Its 
course  did  very  much  deviate  from  a  great  circle,  bending  towards  the  north, 
and  its  motion  towards  the  end  from  retrograde  became  direct;  and,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  its  course  was  so  uncommon,  yet  by  the  table  it  appears  that 
the  theory,  from  beginning  to  end,  agrees  with  the  observations  no  less  accu¬ 
rately  than  the  theories  of  the  planets  usually  do  with  the  observations  of  them ; 
but  we  are  to  subtract  about  2'  when  the  comet  was  swiftest,  which  we  may 
effect  by  taking  off  12"  from  the  angle  between  the  ascending  node  and  the 
perihelion,  or  by  making  that  angle  49°  27'  18".  The  annual  parallax  of  both 
these  comets  (this  and  the  preceding)  was  very  conspicuous,  and  by  its  quan¬ 
tity  demonstrates  the  annual  motion  of  the  earth  in  the  earth’s  orbit. 

This  theory  is  likewise  confirmed  by  the  motion  of  that  comet,  which  in  the 
year  1683  appeared  retrograde,  in  an  orbit  whose  plane  contained  almost  a 
right  angle  mth  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  Avhose  ascending  node  (by  the 
computation  of  Dr.  Halley)  was  in  n?  23°  23';  the  inclination  of  its  orbit  to 
the  ecliptic  83°  11';  its  perihelion  in  jx  25°  29'  30";  its  perihelian  distance  from 
the  sun  56,020  of  such  parts  as  the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit  contains  100,000; 
and  the  time  of  its  perihelion  was  July  2'^.  3‘'.  50™.  And  the  places  thereof, 
computed  by  Dr.  Halley  in  this  orbit,  are  compared  mth  the  places  observed 
by  Mr.  Flamsteed,  in  the  following  table. 

This  theory  is  yet  further  confirmed  by  the  motion  of  that  retrograde  comet 
which  appeared  in  the  year  1682.  The  ascending  node  of  this  (by  Dr.  Halley’s 


1683 

Equatorial 

time 

Sun^s 

place 

ComeVs 

longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

north 

computed 

ComeVs 

longitude 

observed 

Latitude 

north 

observed 

Dif¬ 

ference 

longitude 

Dif¬ 

ference 

latitude 

d  h  m 

o  r  If 

Off/ 

o  /  // 

O  t  u 

O  f  tf 

f  ft 

f  if 

July  13.12.55 

Q.  1.02.30 

^  13.05.42 

29.28.13 

2=13.  6.42 

29.28.20 

+  1.00 

+0.07 

15.11.15 

2.53.12 

11.37.48 

29.34.  0 

11.39.43 

29. 34.. 50 

+  1.55 

+0.50 

17.10.20 

4.45.45 

10.  7.  6 

29.33.30 

10.  8.40 

29.34.  0 

+  1.34 

+0.30 

23.13.40 

10.38.21 

5.10.27 

28.51.42 

5.11.30 

28.50.28 

+  1.03 

-1.14 

25.14.  5 

12.35.28 

3.27.53 

24.24.47 

3.27.  0 

28.23.40 

-0.53 

-1.  7 

31.  9.42 

18.09.22 

H27.55.  3 

26.22.52 

JX  27. 54. 24 

26.22.25 

-0.39 

-0.27 

31.14.55 

18.21.53 

27.41.  7 

26.16.57 

27.41.  8 

26.14.50 

+0.  1 

-2.  7 

Aug.  2.14.56 

20.17.16 

25.29.32 

25.16.19 

25.28.46 

25.17.28 

-0.46 

+  1.  9 

4.10.49 

22.02.50 

23.18.20 

24.10.49 

23.16.55 

24.12.19 

-1.25 

+  1.30 

6.10.  9 

23.56.45 

20.42.23 

22.47.  5 

20.40.32 

22.49.  5 

-1.51 

+2.  0 

9.10.26 

26.50.52 

16.  7.57 

20.  6.37 

16.  5.55 

20.  6.10 

-2.  2 

-0.27 

15.14.  1 

n?  2.47.13 

3.30.48 

11.37.33 

3.26.18 

11.32.  1 

-4.30 

-5.32 

16.15.10 

3.48.  2 

0.43.  7 

9.34.16 

0.41.55 

9.34.13 

-1.12 

-0.  3 

18.15.44 

5.45.33 

■o' 24. 52. 53 

5.11.15 

South 

J^24.49.  5 

5.  9.11 

South 

-3.48 

-2.  4 

22.14.44 

9.35.49 

11.  7.14 

5.16.58 

11.07.12 

5.16.58 

-0.  2 

-0.  3 

23.15.52 

10.36.48 

7.  2.18 

8.17.  9 

7.  1.17 

8.16.41 

-1.  1 

-0.28 

26.16.  2 

13.31.10 

T24.45.31 

16.38.  o| 

T24.44.00 

16.38.20 

-1.31 

+0.20 

366  Mathematical  Principles 

computation)  was  in 'd  21®  16' 30";  the  inclination  of  its  orbit  to  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic  17®  56'  00" ;  its  perihelion  in  «  2®  52'  50" ;  its  perihelian  distance 
from  the  sun  58,328  parts,  of  which  the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit  contains 
100,000;  the  equal  time  of  the  comet’s  being  in  its  perihelion  September  4*^.  T*'. 
39"*.  And  its  places  determined  from  Mr.  Flamsteed’s  observations,  are  com¬ 
pared  with  its  places  computed  from  our  theory  in  the  following  table; 


1682 

App.  time 

Sun's 

place 

Comet's 

longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

north 

computed 

Comet's 

longitude 

observed 

Latitude 

north 

observed 

Dif¬ 

ference 

longitude 

Dif¬ 

ference 

latitude 

d 

h  m 

o 

f 

// 

O  f  tf 

O  f  tf 

O  f  ft 

o  / 

ft 

f  ft 

t  ft 

Aug.  19. 

16.38 

W  7. 

.  0. 

.  7 

18. 14.28 

25.50.  7 

18. 14.40 

25.49, 

.55 

-0.12 

4-0.12 

20. 

15.38 

7. 

.55. 

.52 

24.46.23 

26.14.42 

24.46.22 

26.12, 

,52 

+0.  1 

4-1.50 

21. 

8.21 

8. 

36 

.14 

29.37.15 

26.20.  3 

29.38.02 

26.17, 

,37 

-0.47 

4-2.26 

22. 

8.  8 

9. 

33. 

.55 

TIP  6.29.53 

26.  8.42 

HP  6.30.  3 

26.  7. 

12 

-0.10 

4-1.30 

29. 

08.20 

16. 

.22. 

.40 

^12.37.54 

18.37.47 

^12.37.49 

18.34, 

,  5 

+0.  5 

4-3.42 

30. 

7.45 

17. 

19. 

41 

15.36.  1 

17.26.43 

15.35.18 

17.27, 

,17 

-t-0.43 

-0.34 

SepL  1 . 

7.33 

19. 

16. 

.  9 

20.30.53 

15.13.  0 

20.27.  4 

15.  9. 

.49 

4-3.49 

4-3.11 

4, 

7.22 

22. 

11. 

.28 

25.42.  0 

12.23.48 

25.40.58 

12.22. 

,  0 

+  1.  2 

4-1.48 

5. 

7.32 

23. 

10. 

29 

27.  0.46 

11.33.08 

26.59.24 

11.33, 

,51 

4-1.22 

-0.43 

8. 

7.16 

26. 

5. 

58 

29.58.44 

9.26.46 

29.58.45 

9.26, 

,43 

-0.  1 

4-0.  3 

9. 

7.26 

27. 

5. 

9 

m  0.44.10 

8.49.10 

m  0.44.  4 

8.48, 

,25 

4-0.  6 

4-0.45 

This  theory  is  also  confirmed  by  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  comet  that 
appeared  in  the  year  1723.  The  ascending  node  of  this  comet  (according  to  the 
computation  of  Mr.  Bradley,  Savilian  Professor  of  Astronomy  at  Oxford)  was 
in  T  14®  16',  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  49®  59'.  Its 
perihelion  was  in  d  12®  15' 20",  its  perihelian  distance  from  the  sun  998,651 
parts,  of  which  the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit  contains  1,000,000,  and  the  equal 
time  of  its  perihelion  September  16*^.  16**.  10"*.  The  places  of  this  comet  com¬ 
puted  in  this  orbit  by  Mr.  Bradley,  and  compared  with  the  places  observed  by 
himself,  his  uncle  Mr.  Pound,  and  Dr.  Halley,  may  be  seen  in  the  following  table. 


1723 

Equatorial 

time 

Comet's 

longitude 

observed 

Latitude 

north 

observed 

Comet's 

longitude 

computed 

Latitude 

north 

computed 

Difference 

longitude 

Difference 

latitude 

d  h  m 

0  t  ft 

o  1  „ 

o  /  ft 

0  f  » 

ft 

ft 

Oct.  9.8.  5 

«7.22.15 

5.  2.  0 

«.7.21.26 

5.  2.47 

-f49 

-47 

10.6.21 

6.41.12 

7.44.13 

6.41.42 

7.43.18 

-50 

4-55 

12.7.22 

5.39.58 

11.55.  0 

5.40.19 

11.54.55 

-21 

4-  5 

14.8.57 

4.59.49 

14.43.50 

5.  0.37 

14.44.  1 

-48 

-11 

15.6.35 

4.47.41 

15.40.51 

4.47,45 

15.40.55 

-  4 

-  4 

21.6.22 

4.  2.32 

19.41.49 

4.  2.21 

19.42.  3 

-t-11 

-14 

22.6.24 

3.59.  2 

20.  8.12 

3.59.10 

20.  8.17 

-  8 

-  5 

24.8.  2 

3.55.29 

20.55.18 

3.55.11 

20.55.  9 

-M8 

4-  9 

29.8.56 

3.56,17 

22.20.27 

3.56.42 

22.20.10 

-25 

4-17 

30.6.20 

3.58.  9 

22.32.28 

3.58.17 

22.32.12 

-  8 

4-16 

Nov.  5.5.53 

4.16.30 

23.38.33 

4.16.23 

23.38.  7 

-h  7 

4-26 

8.7.  6 

4.29.36 

24.  4.30 

4.29.54 

24.  4.40 

-18 

-10 

14.6.20 

5.  2.16 

24.48.46 

5.  2.51 

24.48.16 

-35 

4-30 

20.7.45 

5.42.20 

25.24.45 

5.43.13 

25.25.17 

-53 

-32 

Dec.  7.6.45 

8.  4.13 

26.54. 18 

8.  3.55 

26.53.42 

-M8 

4-36 

Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  367 

From  these  examples  it  is  abundantly  evident  that  the  motions  of  comets 
are  no  less  accurately  represented  by  our  theory  than  the  motions  of  the  plan¬ 
ets  commonly  are  by  the  theories  of  them;  and,  therefore,  by  means  of  this 
theory,  we  may  enumerate  the  orbits  of  comets,  and  so  discover  the  periodic 
time  of  a  comet’s  revolution  in  any  orbit;  hence,  at  last,  we  shall  have  the 
transverse  diameters  of  their  elliptic  orbits  and  their  aphelian  distances. 

That  retrograde  comet  which  appeared  in  the  year  1607  described  an  orbit 
whose  ascending  node  (according  to  Dr.  Halley’s  computation)  was  in 'd  20° 
21';  and  the  inclination  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic 
17°  2';  whose  perihelion  was  in  =  2°  16';  and  its  perihelian  distance  from  the 
sun  58,680  of  such  parts  as  the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit  contains  100,000;  and 
the  comet  was  in  its  perihelion  October  3^.  50"*.;  which  orbit  agrees  very 
nearly  Muth  the  orbit  of  the  comet  which  was  seen  in  1682.  If  these  were  not 
tw'o  different  comets,  but  one  and  the  same,  that  comet  will  finish  one  revolu¬ 
tion  in  the  space  of  75  years;  and  the  greater  axis  of  its  orbit  Avill  be  to  the 
greater  axis  of  the  earth’s  orbit  as  ^75'^  to  1,  or  as  1778  to  100,  nearly.  And  the 
aphelian  distance  of  this  comet  from  the  sun  vdll  be  to  the  mean  distance  of 
the  earth  from  the  sun  as  about  35  to  1 ;  from  these  data  it  mtII  be  no  hard  mat¬ 
ter  to  determine  the  elliptic  orbit  of  this  comet.  But  these  things  are  to  be 
supposed  on  condition  that,  after  the  space  of  75  years,  the  same  comet  shall 
return  again  in  the  same  orbit.  The  other  comets  seem  to  ascend  to  greater 
heights,  and  to  require  a  longer  time  to  perform  their  revolutions. 

But,  because  of  the  great  number  of  comets,  of  the  great  distance  of  their 
aphelions  from  the  sun,  and  of  the  slowness  of  their  motions  in  the  aphelions, 
they  will,  by  their  mutual  gravitations,  disturb  each  other;  so  that  their  eccen¬ 
tricities  and  the  times  of  their  revolutions  vill  be  sometimes  a  little  increased, 
and  sometimes  diminished.  Therefore,  we  are  not  to  expect  that  the  same 
comet  vfill  return  exactly  in  the  same  orbit,  and  in  the  same  periodic  times :  it 
will  be  sufficient  if  we  find  the  changes  no  greater  than  may  arise  from  the 
causes  just  spoken  of. 

And  hence  a  reason  may  be  assigned  why  comets  are  not  comprehended 
within  the  limits  of  a  zodiac,  as  the  planets  are;  but,  being  confined  to  no 
bounds,  are  -with  various  motions  dispersed  all  over  the  heavens;  namely,  to 
this  purpose,  that  in  their  aphelions,  where  their  motions  are  exceedingly  slow, 
receding  to  greater  distances  one  from  another,  they  may  suffer  less  disturb¬ 
ance  from  their  mutual  gravitations:  and  hence  it  is  that  the  comets  which 
descend  the  lowest,  and  therefore  move  the  slowest  in  their  aphelions,  ought 
also  to  ascend  the  highest. 

The  comet  which  appeared  in  the  year  1680  was  in  its  perihelion  less  distant 
from  the  sun  than  by  a  sixth  part  of  the  sun’s  diameter;  and  because  of  its 
extreme  velocity  in  that  proximity  to  the  sun,  and  some  density  of  the  sun’s 
atmosphere,  it  must  have  suffered  some  resistance  and  retardation;  and  there¬ 
fore,  being  attracted  somewhat  nearer  to  the  sun  in  every  revolution,  vdll  at 
last  fall  dovTi  upon  the  body  of  the  sun.  Nay,  in  its  aphelion,  where  it  moves  the 
slowest,  it  may  sometimes  happen  to  be  yet  further  retarded  by  the  attractions 
of  other  comets,  and  in  consequence  of  this  retardation  descend  to  the  sun.  So 
fixed  stars,  that  have  been  gradually  wasted  by  the  light  and  vapors  emitted 
from  them  for  a  long  time,  may  be  recruited  by  comets  that  fall  upon  them; 
and  from  this  fresh  supply  of  new  fuel  those  old  stars,  acquiring  new  splendor. 


368  Mathematical  Principles 

may  pass  for  new  stars.  Of  this  kind  are  such  fixed  stars  as  appear  on  a  sudden, 
and  shine  mth  a  wonderful  brightness  at  first,  and  afterwards  vanish  by  little 
and  little.  Such  was  that  star  which  appeared  in  Cassiopeia’s  Chair;  which 
Cornelis  Gemma  did  not  see  upon  the  8th  of  November,  1572,  though  he  was 
observing  that  part  of  the  heavens  upon  that  very  night,  and  the  sky  was 
perfectly  serene;  but  the  next  night  (November  9)  he  saw  it  shining  much 
brighter  than  any  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  scarcely  inferior  to  Venus  in  splendor. 
Tycho  Brahe  saw  it  upon  the  11th  of  the  same  month,  when  it  shone  mth  the 
greatest  lustre ;  and  from  that  time  he  observed  it  to  decay  by  little  and  little ; 
and  in  16  months’  time  it  entirely  disappeared.  In  the  month  of  November, 
when  it  first  appeared,  its  light  was  equal  to  that  of  Venus.  In  the  month  of 
December,  its  light  was  a  little  diminished,  and  was  now  become  equal  to  that 
of  Jupiter.  In  January,  1573,  it  was  less  than  Jupiter,  and  greater  than  Sirius, 
and  about  the  end  of  February  and  the  beginning  of  March  became  equal  to 
that  star.  In  the  months  of  April  and  May  it  was  equal  to  a  star  of  the  second 
magnitude;  in  June,  July,  and  August,  to  a  star  of  the  third  magnitude;  in 
September,  October,  and  November,  to  those  of  the  fourth  magnitude;  in  De¬ 
cember  and  January,  1574,  to  those  of  the  fifth;  in  February  to  those  of  the 
sixth  magnitude;  and  in  March  it  entirely  vanished.  Its  color  at  the  beginning 
was  clear,  bright,  and  inclining  to  white;  afterwards  it  turned  a  little  yellow; 
and  in  March,  1573,  it  became  ruddy,  like  Mars  or  Aldebaran;  in  May  it 
turned  to  a  kind  of  dusky  whiteness,  like  that  we  observe  in  Saturn ;  and  that 
color  it  retained  ever  after,  but  grooving  always  more  and  more  obscure.  Such 
also  was  the  star  in  the  right  foot  of  Serpentarius,  which  Kepler’s  scholars 
first  observed  September  30,  o.s.,  1604,  with  a  light  exceeding  that  of  Jupiter, 
though  the  night  before  it  was  not  to  be  seen;  and  from  that  time  it  decreased 
by  little  and  little,  and  in  15  or  16  months  entirely  disappeared.  Such  a  new 
star  appearing  with  an  unusual  splendor  is  said  to  have  moved  Hipparchus  to 
observe,  and  make  a  catalogue  of,  the  fixed  stars.  As  to  those  fixed  stars  that 
appear  and  disappear  by  turns,  and  increase  slowly  and  by  degrees,  and  scarce¬ 
ly  ever  exceed  the  stars  of  the  third  magnitude,  they  seem  to  be  of  another 
kind,  which  revolve  about  their  axes,  and,  having  a  light  and  a  dark  side,  show 
those  two  different  sides  by  turns.  The  vapors  which  arise  from  the  sun,  the 
fixed  stars,  and  the  tails  of  the  comets,  may  meet  at  last  with,  and  fall  into, 
the  atmospheres  of  the  planets  by  their  gravity,  and  there  be  condensed  and 
turned  into  water  and  humid  spirits;  and  from  thence,  by  a  slow  heat,  pass 
gradually  into  the  form  of  salts,  and  sulphurs,  and  tinctures,  and  mud,  and 
clay,  and  sand,  and  stones,  and  coral,  and  other  terrestrial  substances. 


GENERAL  SCHOLIUM 


The  hypothesis  of  vortices  is  pressed  with  many  difficulties.  That  every  planet 
by  a  radius  drawn  to  the  sun  may  describe  areas  proportional  to  the  times  of 
description,  the  periodic  times  of  the  several  parts  of  the  vortices  should  ob¬ 
serve  the  square  of  their  distances  from  the  sun;  but  that  the  periodic  times  of 
the  planets  may  obtain  the  ^th  power  of  their  distances  from  the  sun,  the 
periodic  times  of  the  parts  of  the  vortex  ought  to  be  as  the  ^th  power  of  their 
distances.  That  the  smaller  vortices  may  maintain  their  lesser  revolutions 
about  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  other  planets,  and  swim  quietly  and  undisturbed 
in  the  greater  vortex  of  the  sun,  the  periodic  times  of  the  parts  of  the  sun’s 
vortex  should  be  equal;  but  the  rotation  of  the  sun  and  planets  about  their 
axes,  which  ought  to  correspond  mth  the  motions  of  their  vortices,  recede  far 
from  all  these  proportions.  The  motions  of  the  comets  are  exceedingly  regular, 
are  governed  by  the  same  laws  mth  the  motions  of  the  planets,  and  can  by  no 
means  be  accounted  for  by  the  hypothesis  of  vortices;  for  comets  are  carried 
with  very  eccentric  motions  through  all  parts  of  the  heavens  indifferently,  with 
a  freedom  that  is  incompatible  with  the  notion  of  a  vortex. 

Bodies  projected  in  our  air  suffer  no  resistance  but  from  the  air.  Withdraw 
the  air,  as  is  done  in  Mr.  Boyle’s  vacuum,  and  the  resistance  ceases;  for  in  this 
void  a  bit  of  fine  down  and  a  piece  of  solid  gold  descend  wdth  equal  velocity. 
And  the  same  argument  must  apply  to  the  celestial  spaces  above  the  earth’s 
atmosphere;  in  these  spaces,  where  there  is  no  air  to  resist  their  motions,  all 
bodies  wall  move  wdth  the  greatest  freedom;  and  the  planets  and  comets  will 
constantly  pursue  their  revolutions  in  orbits  given  in  kind  and  position,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  laws  above  explained;  but  though  these  bodies  may,  indeed, 
continue  in  their  orbits  by  the  mere  laws  of  gravity,  yet  they  could  by  no 
means  have  at  first  derived  the  regular  position  of  the  orbits  themselves  from 
those  laws. 

The  six  primary  planets  are  revolved  about  the  sun  in  circles  concentric 
with  the  sun,  and  mth  motions  directed  towards  the  same  parts,  and  almost 
in  the  same  plane.  Ten  moons  are  revolved  about  the  earth,  Jupiter,  and  Sat¬ 
urn,  in  circles  concentric  mth  them,  with  the  same  direction  of  motion,  and 
nearly  in  the  planes  of  the  orbits  of  those  planets;  but  it  is  not  to  be  conceived 
that  mere  mechanical  causes  could  give  birth  to  so  many  regular  motions, 
since  the  comets  range  over  all  parts  of  the  heavens  in  very  eccentric  orbits; 
for  by  that  kind  of  motion  they  pass  easily  through  the  orbs  of  the  planets, 
and  with  great  rapidity;  and  in  their  aphelions,  where  they  move  the  slowest, 
and  are  detained  the  longest,  they  recede  to  the  greatest  distances  from  each 
other,  and  hence  suffer  the  least  disturbance  from  their  mutual  attractions. 
This  most  beautiful  system  of  the  sun,  planets,  and  comets,  could  only  proceed 
from  the  counsel  and  dominion  of  an  intelligent  and  powerful  Being.  And  if  the 
fixed  stars  are  the  centres  of  other  like  systems,  these,  being  formed  by  the  like 
wise  counsel,  must  be  all  subject  to  the  dominion  of  One;  especially  since  the 

369 


370  Mathematical  Principles 

light  of  the  fixed  stars  is  of  the  same  nature  with  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  from 
every  system  light  passes  into  all  the  other  systems :  and  lest  the  systems  of  the 
fixed  stars  should,  by  their  gravity,  fall  on  each  other,  he  hath  placed  those 
systems  at  immense  distances  from  one  another. 

This  Being  governs  all  things,  not  as  the  soul  of  the  world,  but  as  Lord  over 
all;  and  on  account  of  his  dominion  he  is  wont  to  be  called  Lord  God  Tro.vTOKpa- 
Tiop,  or  Universal  Ruler;  for  God  is  a  relative  word,  and  has  a  respect  to  serv¬ 
ants;  and  Deity  is  the  dominion  of  God  not  over  his  own  body,  as  those  imagine 
who  fancy  God  to  be  the  soul  of  the  w'orld,  but  over  servants.  The  Supreme 
God  is  a  Being  eternal,  infinite,  absolutely  perfect;  but  a  being,  however  per¬ 
fect,  without  dominion,  cannot  be  said  to  be  Lord  God;  for  we  say,  my  God, 
your  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  the  God  of  Gods,  and  Lord  of  Lords;  but  we  do 
not  say,  my  Eternal,  your  Eternal,  the  Eternal  of  Israel,  the  Eternal  of  Gods; 
we  do  not  say,  my  Infinite,  or  my  Perfect:  these  are  titles  which  have  no 
respect  to  servants.  The  word  God^  usually  signifies  Lord;  but  every  lord  is  not 
a  God.  It  is  the  dominion  of  a  spiritual  being  which  constitutes  a  God:  a  true, 
supreme,  or  imaginary  dominion  makes  a  true,  supreme,  or  imaginary  God. 
And  from  his  true  dominion  it  follows  that  the  true  God  is  a  living,  intelligent, 
and  powerful  Being;  and,  from  his  other  perfections,  that  he  is  supreme,  or 
most  perfect.  He  is  eternal  and  infinite,  omnipotent  and  omniscient;  that  is, 
his  duration  reaches  from  eternity  to  eternity;  his  presence  from  infinity  to 
infinity;  he  governs  all  things,  and  knows  all  things  that  are  or  can  be  done.  He 
is  not  eternity  and  infinity,  but  eternal  and  infinite ;  he  is  not  duration  or  space, 
but  he  endures  and  is  present.  He  endures  forever,  and  is  everywhere  present; 
and,  by  existing  always  and  everywhere,  he  constitutes  duration  and  space. 
Since  every  particle  of  space  is  always,  and  every  indivisible  moment  of  dura¬ 
tion  is  everywhere,  certainly  the  Maker  and  Lord  of  all  things  cannot  be  never 
and  nowhere.  Every  soul  that  has  perception  is,  though  in  different  times  and 
in  different  organs  of  sense  and  motion,  still  the  same  indivisible  person.  There 
are  given  successive  parts  in  duration,  coexistent  parts  in  space,  but  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  in  the  person  of  a  man,  or  his  thinking  principle;  and 
much  less  can  they  be  found  in  the  thinking  substance  of  God.  Every  man,  so 
far  as  he  is  a  thing  that  has  perception,  is  one  and  the  same  man  during  his 
whole  life,  in  all  and  each  of  his  organs  of  sense.  God  is  the  same  God,  always 
and  everywhere.  He  is  omnipresent  not  virtually  only,  but  also  substantially ; 
for  virtue  cannot  subsist  without  substance.  In  him^  are  all  things  contained 
and  moved;  yet  neither  affects  the  other:  God  suffers  nothing  from  the  motion 
of  bodies;  bodies  find  no  resistance  from  the  omnipresence  of  God.  It  is  allowed 
by  all  that  the  Supreme  God  exists  necessarily;  and  by  the  same  necessity  he 

^Dr.  Pocock  derives  the  Latin  word  Deus  from  the  Arabic  du  (in  the  oblique  case  di),  which 
signifies  Lord.  And  in  this  sense  princes  are  called  gods,  Psalms,  82.6;  and  John,  10.35.  And 
Moses  is  called  a  god  to  his  brother  Aaron,  and  a  god  to  Pharaoh,  Exodus,  4.16;  and  7.1.  And 
in  the  same  sense  the  souls  of  dead  princes  were  formerly,  by  the  heathens,  called  gods,  but 
falsely,  because  of  their  want  of  dominion. 

^This  was  the  opinion  of  the  ancients.  So  Pythagoras,  in  Cicero  De  natura  deorum  i.  Thales, 
Anaxagoras,  Virgil,  in  Georgies  iv.  220;  and  Aeneid  vi.  721.  Philo,  Allegories,  at  the  beginning 
of  Book  I.  Aratus,  in  his  Pheenomena,  at  the  beginning.  So  also  the  sacred  writers;  as  St.  Paul, 
in  Acts,  17.27,  28.  St.  John’s  Gospel,  14.2.  Moses,  in  Deuteronomy,  4.39;  and  10.14.  David, 
in  Psalms,  139.7,8,9.  Solomon,  in  I  Kings,  8.27.  Job,  22.12,13,14.  Jeremiah,  23.23,24.  The 
idolaters  supposed  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the  souls  of  men,  and  other  parts  of  the  w'orld, 
to  be  parts  of  the  Supreme  God,  and  therefore  to  be  worshipped;  but  erroneously. 


Book  III:  The  System  of  the  World  371 

exists  always  and  everywhere.  Whence  also  he  is  all  similar,  all  eye,  all  ear,  all 
brain,  all  arm,  all  power  to  perceive,  to  understand,  and  to  act;  but  in  a  man¬ 
ner  not  at  all  human,  in  a  manner  not  at  all  corporeal,  in  a  manner  utterly 
unknown  to  us.  As  a  blind  man  has  no  idea  of  colors,  so  have  we  no  idea  of  the 
manner  by  which  the  all-vise  God  perceives  and  understands  all  things.  He  is 
utterly  void  of  all  body  and  bodily  figure,  and  can  therefore  neither  be  seen, 
nor  heard,  nor  touched ;  nor  ought  he  to  be  worshiped  under  the  representation 
of  any  corporeal  thing.  We  have  ideas  of  his  attributes,  but  what  the  real 
substance  of  anything  is  we  know  not.  In  bodies,  we  see  only  their  figures  and 
colors,  we  hear  only  the  sounds,  we  touch  only  their  outward  surfaces,  we 
smell  only  the  smells,  and  taste  the  savors;  but  their  inward  substances  are 
not  to  be  known  either  by  our  senses,  or  by  any  reflex  act  of  our  minds :  much 
less,  than,  have  we  any  idea  of  the  substance  of  God.  We  know  him  only  by 
his  most  vise  and  excellent  contrivances  of  things,  and  final  causes;  we  admire 
him  for  his  perfections;  but  we  reverence  and  adore  him  on  account  of  his 
dominion:  for  we  adore  him  as  his  servants;  and  a  god  vithout  dominion, 
providence,  and  final  causes,  is  nothing  else  but  Fate  and  Nature.  Blind  meta¬ 
physical  necessity,  which  is  certainly  the  same  always  and  everyv'here,  could 
produce  no  variety  of  things.  All  that  diversity  of  natural  things  which  we 
find  suited  to  different  times  and  places  could  arise  from  nothing  but  the  ideas 
and  will  of  a  Being  necessarily  existing.  But,  by  v^ay  of  allegory,  God  is  said 
to  see,  to  speak,  to  laugh,  to  love,  to  hate,  to  desire,  to  give,  to  receive,  to 
rejoice,  to  be  angry,  to  fight,  to  frame,  to  work,  to  build;  for  all  our  notions  of 
God  are  taken  from  the  ways  of  mankind  by  a  certain  similitude,  v'hich,  though 
not  perfect,  has  some  likeness,  however.  And  thus  much  concerning  God;  to 
discourse  of  v’hom  from  the  appearances  of  things,  does  certainly  belong  to 
natural  philosophy. 

Hitherto  we  have  explained  the  phenomena  of  the  heavens  and  of  our  sea 
by  the  pov^er  of  gravity,  but  have  not  yet  assigned  the  cause  of  this  power. 
This  is  certain,  that  it  must  proceed  from  a  cause  that  penetrates  to  the  very 
centres  of  the  sun  and  planets,  vithout  suffering  the  least  diminution  of  its 
force;  that  operates  not  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  surfaces  of  the  par¬ 
ticles  upon  which  it  acts  (as  mechanical  causes  used  to  do),  but  according  to 
the  quantity  of  the  solid  matter  which  they  contain,  and  propagates  its  virtue 
on  all  sides  to  immense  distances,  decreasing  always  as  the  inverse  square  of 
the  distances.  Gravitation  towards  the  sun  is  made  up  out  of  the  gravitations 
towards  the  several  particles  of  which  the  body  of  the  sun  is  composed;  and  in 
receding  from  the  sun  decreases  accuratelj^  as  the  inverse  square  of  the  dis¬ 
tances  as  far  as  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  as  evidently  appears  from  the  quiescence 
of  the  aphelion  of  the  planets;  nay,  and  even  to  the  remotest  aphelion  of  the 
comets,  if  those  aphelions  are  also  quiescent.  But  hitherto  I  have  not  been  able 
to  discover  the  cause  of  those  properties  of  gravity  from  phenomena,  and  I 
frame  no  hypotheses;  for  whatever  is  not  deduced  from  the  phenomena  is  to 
be  called  an  hypothesis;  and  hypotheses,  vFether  metaphysical  or  physical, 
v'hether  of  occult  qualities  or  mechanical,  have  no  place  in  experimental  philos¬ 
ophy.  In  this  philosophy  particular  propositions  are  inferred  from  the  phenom¬ 
ena,  and  afterv'ards  rendered  general  by  induction.  Thus  it  was  that  the  im¬ 
penetrability,  the  mobility,  and  the  impulsive  force  of  bodies,  and  the  laws  of 
motion  and  of  gravitation,  v'ere  discovered.  And  to  us  it  is  enough  that  gravity 


372  Mathematical  Principles 

does  really  exist,  and  act  according  to  the  laws  which  we  have  explained,  and 
abundantly  serves  to  account  for  all  the  motions  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and 
of  our  sea. 

And  now  we  might  add  something  concerning  a  certain  most  subtle  spirit 
which  pervades  and  lies  hid  in  all  gross  bodies;  by  the  force  and  action  of  which 
spirit  the  particles  of  bodies  attract  one  another  at  near  distances,  and  cohere, 
if  contiguous;  and  electric  bodies  operate  to  greater  distances,  as  well  repelling 
as  attracting  the  neighboring  corpuscles;  and  light  is  emitted,  reflected,  re¬ 
fracted,  inflected,  and  heats  bodies;  and  all  sensation  is  excited,  and  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  animal  bodies  move  at  the  command  of  the  mil,  namely,  by  the  vibra¬ 
tions  of  this  spirit,  mutually  propagated  along  the  solid  filaments  of  the  nerves, 
from  the  outward  organs  of  sense  to  the  brain,  and  from  the  brain  into  the 
muscles.  But  these  are  things  that  cannot  be  explained  in  few  words,  nor  are 
we  furnished  mth  that  sufficiency  of  experiments  which  is  required  to  an  accu¬ 
rate  determination  and  demonstration  of  the  laws  by  which  this  electric  and 
elastic  spirit  operates. 


OPTICS 


n,  i 


m ' 


ii!^«icc»itJjt?*4  v*jbkb,>^?»  htJVif'^wcp^AWki,  »n<l« 

*0  ^i'lO^iOwa  U  l)><M}t*UflSttJiI.WiiW»*rtlvl 

^  -  *'0*4'  nuijtlil  ^  ' '  ftrjtpthnia  incai>»)bf>lo 

A  •iiurit  ib'  f  ftiwJ 

if c.»' ' ’H('/,>»'i^)  ,.nd  i'Jcbt^c Tu^  t'j  woU-»wiViU 

fev.  ng  thfe  jun8bk»f^?i|f  Wt  ift  imuiiNj,  niflc‘<jt<KjMre- 

■  u’^twi  boKib’*i>nfii>»bd  ftod  tha  »)t*ta- 

a.'  th^»  \riiU;iawije)y,  by  tbts  -.iiirnr 
iKjJW  AJ$fvi0r|«bf 

4'.  W  ■^rnxitj,.n<>f  ,.ttr«>. 


'■■  i 

'i 


,.#':4frV‘s  ^'r v;f;<.,il„-:',,;„,,;,v  * 


»(  ,  i\  'fj 


.'■''i  ■  !L::l'1w  ,  :•■  ■'  •',  ‘j*  .'Hi:,-  '<'  ,  ,.,■/<  '  .,  ■  „,  ^':  .j,  ..T 

',:'  f  ^ 


\  V,  _ 

It '  f  - 


...  .f.,»t'  .'.:  •jV«'»|'4:» 


'.l.rt 


‘K  t'  •'  *  '  ' 


■n^'mf 


*h 


2^-.  .•■y^’''^.f 


l•^i^^li)|.  jl'bid  '  ‘  ’■■*' 


'**  , "  i4!;si;!!5'Avv<' .fliiil ,  v;;:K-#lliliipl^ 

. ■  V  'r.  '  '  ..  .i'V4„..ii!  <  ii'}  kIiJiW.  h  '  !  ',.11  n-.  ■ 


CONTENTS 


Advertisements  to  First  and  Second  Editions  377 

BOOK  ONE 

PART 

I.  Definitions  I-VIII  379 

Axioms  I-VIII  380 

Propositions  I-VIII  386 

11.  Propositions  I-XI  424 

BOOK  TWO 

1.  Observations  concerning  the  reflexions,  refractions,  and  colours  of  thin, 
transparent  bodies  457 

II.  Remarks  upon  the  foregoing  observations  470 

III.  Of  the  per^nanent  colours  of  natural  bodies,  and  the  analogy  between 

them  and  the  colours  of  thin,  transparent  plates  (Propositions  I-XX)  478 

IV.  Observations  concerning  the  reflexions  and  colours  of  thick  transparent 

polished  plates  496 

BOOK  THREE 

I.  Observations  concerning  the  inflexions  of  the  rays  of  light,  and  the 
colours  made  thereby  507 

Queries  1-31  516 


375 


arviarHoo 


m 


CT8 

m 

m 


^'vrviTtaC^  CKoouS  cWa  twh'*!  vt9mak$miec9a.k 

m  ■ 


CHIHO  JiO(3a 

■  tff  . 


TltA‘1 

IIIY-I  evtorrwnaa  .1 
^  lnV-I«MOixA 
inV-X  eKornwyiOH^ 
pC^f  «norri80*ioa?J  .n 


OWT  HOOa 


(St'iA)  V  biw  sAji  ftno't^xyrmAO  .1 

^  ^  «.>ibo4 

\iQokMtD  )A)  bm)  \o  ttuoloo  Vn^mtiirt^q  ^  \0  .III 

81if  (XX-1  8floiii«o<|a*^)  wink;  «iuAI  \9  moko  ^  Wt»  mt»AJ 

A.'iiAi  V  bmv  »(U  ui^ito'rmdO  .VI 

&*»’%  .  -r _  ’  wVoiq  b9A»W«^ 


e^i 


aanirr  Mooa 

'ir?ii' 

dA)  bit*)  .XAyi  \o  8\ii>t  >A4  ^^rainyaitco  smsHirrmAO  ^1 

fS>l  tsimsixiQ 


ADVERTISEMENT  TO  FIRST  EDITION 


Part  of  the  ensuing  discourse  about  light  was  written  at  the  desire  of  some 
gentlemen  of  the  Royal  Society,  in  the  year  1675,  and  then  sent  to  their  Secre¬ 
tary,  and  read  at  their  meetings,  and  the  rest  was  added  about  twelve  years 
after  to  complete  the  theory;  except  the  third  book,  and  the  last  proposition  of 
the  second,  which  were  since  put  together  out  of  scattered  papers.  To  avoid 
being  engaged  in  disputes  about  these  matters,  I  have  hitherto  delayed  the 
printing,  and  should  still  have  delayed  it,  had  not  the  importunity  of  friends 
prevailed  upon  me.  If  any  other  papers  writ  on  this  subject  are  got  out  of  my 
hands  they  are  imperfect,  and  were  perhaps  written  before  I  had  tried  all  the 
experiments  here  set  down,  and  fully  satisfied  myself  about  the  laws  of  refrac¬ 
tions  and  composition  of  colours.  I  have  here  published  what  I  think  proper  to 
come  abroad,  mshing  that  it  may  not  be  translated  into  another  language 
Avithout  my  consent. 

The  crowns  of  colours,  Avhich  sometimes  appear  about  the  Sun  and  Moon,  I 
have  endeavoured  to  give  an  account  of;  but  for  want  of  sufficient  observations 
leave  that  matter  to  be  further  examined.  The  subject  of  the  third  book  I  have 
also  left  imperfect,  not  having  tried  all  the  experiments  which  I  intended  when 
I  was  about  these  matters,  nor  repeated  some  of  those  which  I  did  try,  until  I 
had  satisfied  myself  about  all  their  circumstances.  To  communicate  what  I 
have  tried,  and  leave  the  rest  to  others  for  further  enquiry,  is  all  my  design  in 
publishing  these  papers. 

In  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Leibnitz  in  the  year  1679,  and  published  by  Dr. 
Wallis,  I  mentioned  a  method  by  which  I  had  found  some  general  theorems 
about  squaring  curvilinear  figures,  or  comparing  them  with  the  conic  sections, 
or  other  the  simplest  figures  Avith  Avhich  they  may  be  compared.  And  some 
years  ago  I  lent  out  a  manuscript  containing  such  theorems,  and  having  since 
met  AA'ith  some  things  copied  out  of  it,  I  have  on  this  occasion  made  it  public, 
prefixing  to  it  an  Introduction,  and  subjoining  a  Scholium  concerning  that 
method.  And  I  have  joined  Avith  it  another  small  tract  concerning  the  curvi¬ 
linear  figures  of  the  second  kind,  AAffiich  AA^as  also  AAT-itten  many  years  ago,  and 
made  knoAvn  to  some  friends,  Avho  have  solicited  the  making  it  public. 

I.  N. 


April  1,  1704. 


377 


ADVERTISEMENT  TO  SECOND  EDITION 


In  this  Second  Edition  of  these  Optics  I  have  omitted  the  mathematical  tracts 
published  at  the  end  of  the  former  edition,  as  not  belonging  to  the  subject.  And 
at  the  end  of  the  third  book  I  have  added  some  questions.  And  to  shew  that  I 
do  not  take  gravity  for  an  essential  property  of  bodies,  I  have  added  one  ques¬ 
tion  concerning  its  cause,  choosing  to  propose  it  by  way  of  a  question,  because 
I  am  not  yet  satisfied  about  it  for  want  of  experiments. 

I.  N. 


July  16,  1717. 


378 


BOOK  ONE 


Part  I 

My  design  in  this  book  is  not  to  explain  the  properties  of  light  by  hypotheses, 
but  to  propose  and  prove  them  by  reason  and  experiments :  in  order  to  which  I 
shall  premise  the  following  definitions  and  axioms. 

DEFINITIONS 

DEFINITION  I 

By  the  rays  of  light  I  understand  its  least  parts,  and  those  as  well  successive  in  the 
same  lines,  as  contemporary  in  several  lines. 

For  it  is  manifest  that  light  consists  of  parts,  both  successive  and  contem¬ 
porary  ;  because  in  the  same  place  you  may  stop  that  which  comes  one  moment, 
and  let  pass  that  which  comes  presently  after;  and  in  the  same  time  you  may 
stop  it  in  any  one  place,  and  let  it  pass  in  any  other.  For  that  part  of  light  which 
is  stopped  cannot  be  the  same  mth  that  which  is  let  pass.  The  least  light  or 
part  of  light,  which  may  be  stopped  alone  without  the  rest  of  the  light,  or 
propagated  alone,  or  do  or  suffer  any  thing  alone,  which  the  rest  of  the  light 
doth  not  or  suffers  not,  I  call  a  ray  of  light. 

DEFINITION  II 

Refrangibility  of  the  rays  of  light,  is  their  disposition  to  be  refracted  or  turned  out  of 
their  way  in  passing  out  of  one  transparent  body  or  medium  into  another.  And  a 
greater  or  less  refrangibility  of  rays  is  their  disposition  to  be  turned  more  or  less  out 
of  their  way  in  like  incidences  on  the  same  medium. 

Mathematicians  usually  consider  the  rays  of  light  to  be  lines  reaching  from 
the  luminous  body  to  the  body  illuminated,  and  the  refraction  of  those  rays  to 
be  the  bending  or  breaking  of  those  lines  in  their  passing  out  of  one  medium 
into  another.  And  thus  may  rays  and  refractions  be  considered,  if  light  be 
propagated  in  an  instant.  But  by  an  argument  taken  from  the  equations  of  the 
times  of  the  eclipses  of  Jupiter’s  satellites,  it  seems  that  light  is  propagated  in 
time,  spending  in  its  passage  from  the  Sun  to  us  about  seven  minutes  of  time: 
and,  therefore,  I  have  chosen  to  define  rays  and  refractions  in  such  general 
terms  as  may  agree  to  light  in  both  cases. 

DEFINITION  III 

Reflexibility  of  rays  is  their  disposition  to  be  reflected  or  turned  back  into  the  same 
medium  from  any  other  medium  upon  whose  surface  they  fall.  And  rays  are  more 
or  less  reflexible  which  are  turned  back  more  or  less  easily. 

As  if  light  pass  out  of  a  glass  into  air,  and  by  being  inclined  more  and  more  to 
the  common  surface  of  the  glass  and  air,  begins  at  length  to  be  totally  reflected 

379 


380  Optics 

by  that  surface;  those  sorts  of  rays  which  at  like  incidences  are  reflected  most 
copiously,  or  by  inclining  the  rays  begin  soonest  to  be  totally  reflected,  are 
most  reflexible. 


DEFINITION  IV 

The  angle  of  incidence  is  that  angle  which  the  line  described  by  the  incident  ray 
contains  with  the  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting  or  refracting  surface  at  the  point  of 
incidence. 


DEFINITION  V 

The  angle  of  reflexion  or  refraction  is  the  angle  which  the  line  described  by  the 
reflected  or  refracted  ray  containeth  with  the  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting  or 
refracting  surface  at  the  point  of  incidence. 

DEFINITION  VI 

The  sines  of  incidence,  reflexion,  and  refraction  are  the  sines  of  the  angles  of 
incidence,  reflexion,  and  refraction. 

DEFINITION  VII 

The  light  whose  rays  are  all  alike  refrangible  I  call  Simple,  Homogeneal  and  Sim¬ 
ilar;  and  that  whose  rays  are  some  more  refrangible  than  others  I  call  compound, 
heterogeneal  and  dissimilar. 

The  former  light  I  call  homogeneal,  not  because  I  would  affirm  it  so  in  all 
respects,  but  because  the  rays  which  agree  in  refrangibility  agree  at  least  in  all 
those  their  other  properties  which  I  consider  in  the  following  discourse. 

DEFINITION  VIII 

The  colours  of  homogeneal  lights  I  call  primary,  homogeneal  and  simple;  and 
those  of  heterogeneal  lights,  heterogeneal  and  compound. 

For  these  are  always  compounded  of  the  colours  of  homogeneal  lights;  as  mil 
appear  in  the  following  discourse. 


AXIOMS 


AXIOM  I 

The  angles  of  reflexion  and  refraction  lie  in  one  and  the  same  plane  with  the  angle 
of  incidence. 

AXIOM  II 

The  angle  of  reflexion  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence. 


AXIOM  III 

If  the  refracted  ray  be  returned  directly  back  to  the  point  of  incidence,  it  shall  be 
refracted  into  the  line  before  described  by  the  incident  ray. 

AXIOM  IV 

Refraction  out  of  the  rarer  medium  into  the  denser  is  made  towards  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar;  that  is,  so  that  the  angle  of  refraction  be  less  than  the  angle  of  incidence. 


Book  I :  Part  1 


381 


AXIOM  V 

The  sine  of  incidence  is  either  accurately  or  very  nearly  in  a  given  ratio  to  the  sine 
of  refraction. 

Whence  if  that  proportion  be  known  in  any  one  inclination  of  the  incident 
ray,  ’tis  known  in  all  the  inclinations,  and  thereby  the  refraction  in  all  cases  of 
incidence  on  the  same  refracting  body  may  be  determined.  Thus,  if  the  refrac¬ 
tion  be  made  out  of  air  into  water,  the  sine  of  incidence  of  the  red  light  is  to  the 
sine  of  its  refraction  as  4  to  3.  If  out  of  air  into  glass,  the  sines  are  as  17  to  11. 
In  light  of  other  colours  the  sines  have  other  proportions:  but  the  difference  is 
so  little  that  it  need  seldom  be  considered. 

Suppose,  therefore,  that  RS  [Fig.  1]  represents  the  surface  of  stagnating 
water,  and  that  C  is  the  point  of  incidence  in  which  any  ray  coming  in  the  air 

from  A  in  the  line  AC  is  reflected 
or  refracted,  and  I  would  knoAV 
whither  this  ray  shall  go  after  re¬ 
flexion  or  refraction ;  I  erect  upon 
the  surface  of  the  Avater  from  the 
point  of  incidence  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  CP  and  produce  it  doAAuiAvards 
to  Q,  and  conclude  by  the  first 
Axiom  that  the  ray  after  reflexion 
and  refraction  shall  be  found  some- 
AARere  in  the  plane  of  the  angle  of 
incidence  ACP  produced.  I  let  fall, 
therefore,  upon  the  perpendicular 
CP  the  sine  of  incidence  AD;  and 
if  the  reflected  ray  be  desired,  I 
produce  AD  to  B  so  that  DB  be 
equal  to  AD,  and  draAv  CB.  For 
this  line  CB  shall  be  the  reflected  ray;  the  angle  of  reflexion  BCP  and  its  sine 
BD  being  equal  to  the  angle  and  sine  of  incidence,  as  they  ought  to  be  by  the 
second  Axiom.  But  if  the  refracted  ray  be  desired,  I  produce  AD  to  H,  so  that 
DH  may  be  to  AD  as  the  sine  of  refraction  to  the  sine  of  incidence,  that  is  (if 
the  light  be  red)  as  3  to  4;  and  about  the  centre  C  and  in  the  plane  ACP,  AAuth 
the  radius  CA  describing  a  circle  ABE,  I  draAv  a  parallel  to  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  CPQ,  the  line  HE  cutting  the  circumference  in  E  and  joining  CE;  this  line 
CE  shall  be  the  line  of  the  refracted  ray.  For  if  EF  be  let  fall  perpendicularly 
on  the  line  PQ,  this  line  EF  shall  be  the  sine  of  refraction  of  the  ray  CE,  the 
angle  of  refraction  being  ECQ;  and  this  sine  EF  is  equal  to  DH,  and  conse¬ 
quently  in  proportion  to  the  sine 
of  incidence  AD  as  3  to  4. 

In  like  manner,  if  there  be  a  prism 
of  glass  (that  is,  a  glass  bounded 
AATth  tAvo  equal  and  parallel  trian¬ 
gular  ends,  and  three  plain  and 
AA'ell  polished  sides,  AA’hich  meet  in 
three  parallel  lines  running  from 
the  three  angles  of  one  end  to  the 


382  Optics 

three  angles  of  the  other  end)  and  if  the  refraction  of  the  light  in  passing 
cross  this  prism  be  desired :  let  ACB  [Fig.  2]  represent  a  plane  cutting  this  prism 
transversely  to  its  three  parallel  lines  or  edges  there  where  the  light  passeth 
through  it,  and  let  DE  be  the  ray  incident  upon  the  first  side  of  the  prism  AC 
where  the  light  goes  into  the  glass;  and  by  putting  the  proportion  of  the  sine  of 
incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction  as  17  to  11  find  EF  the  first  refracted  ray. 
Then,  taking  this  ray  for  the  incident  ray  upon  the  second  side  of  the  glass  BC 
where  the  light  goes  out,  find  the  next  refracted  ray  FG  by  putting  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction  as  11  to  17.  For  if  the  sine 
of  incidence  out  of  air  into  glass  be  to  the  sine  of  refraction  as  17  to  11,  the  sine 
of  incidence  out  of  glass  into  air  must  on  the  contrary  be  to  the  sine  of  refrac¬ 
tion  as  11  to  17,  by  the  third  Axiom. 

Much  after  the  same  manner,  if  ACBD  [Fig.  3]  represent  a  glass  spherically 
convex  on  both  sides  (usually  called  a  lens,  such  as  is  a  burning-glass,  or 
spectacle-glass,  or  an  object-glass  of  a  telescope)  and  it  be  required  to  know 


how  light  falling  upon  it  from  any  lucid  point  Q  shall  be  refracted,  let  QM  re¬ 
present  a  ray  falling  upon  any  point  M  of  its  first  spherical  surface  ACB,  and 
by  erecting  a  perpendicular  to  the  glass  at  the  point  M,  find  the  first  refracted 
ray  MN  by  the  proportion  of  the  sines  17  to  11.  Let  that  ray  in  going  out  of  the 
glass  be  incident  upon  N,  and  then  find  the  second  refracted  ray  Ng  by  the 
proportion  of  the  sines  11  to  17.  And  after  the  same  manner  may  the  refraction 
be  found  when  the  lens  is  convex  on  one  side  and  plane  or  concave  on  the  other, 
or  concave  on  both  sides. 

AXIOM  VI 

Homogenecil  rays  which  flow  from  several  points  of  any  object,  and  fall  perpen¬ 
dicularly  or  almost  perpendicularly  on  any  reflecting  or  refracting  plane  or  spheri¬ 
cal  surface,  shall  afterwards  diverge  from  so  many  other  points,  or  he  parallel  to  so 
many  other  lines,  or  converge  to  so  many  other  points,  either  accurately  or  without 
any  sensible  error.  And  the  same  thing  will  happen  if  the  rays  be  reflected  or  re¬ 
fracted  successively  by  two  or  three  or  more  plane  or  spherical  surfaces. 

The  point  from  which  rays  diverge  or  to  which  they  converge  may  be  called 
their /ocws.  And  the  focus  of  the  incident  rays  being  given,  that  of  the  reflected 
or  refracted  ones  may  be  found  by  finding  the  refraction  of  any  two  rays,  as 
above;  or  more  readily  thus: 

Case  1.  Let  ACB  [Fig.  4]  be  a  reflecting  or  refracting  plane,  and  Q  the  focus 


Book  I :  Part  1 


383 


of  the  incident  rays,  and  QgC  a  perpendicular  to  that  plane.  And  if  this  per¬ 
pendicular  be  produced  to  q,  so  that  qC  be  equal  to  QC,  the  point  q  shall  be  the 
focus  of  the  reflected  rays;  or  if  gC  be  taken  on  the  same  side  of  the  plane  with 


A 

C 

^  Q  ^ 

Fig.  4 

B 

A 


B 

Fig.  5 


QC,  and  in  proportion  to  QC  as  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction, 
the  point  q  shall  be  the  focus  of  the  refracted  rays. 

Case  2.  Let  ACB  [Fig.  5]  be  the  reflecting  surface  of  any  sphere  whose  centre 
is  E.  Bisect  any  radius  thereof,  (suppose  EC)  in  T,  and  if  in  that  radius  on  the 
same  side  the  point  T  you  take  the  points  Q  and  q,  so  that  TQ,  TE,  and  Tg  be 
continual  proportionals,  and  the  point  Q  be  the  focus  of  the  incident  rays,  the 
point  q  shall  be  the  focus  of  the  reflected  ones. 

Case  3.  Let  ACB  [Fig.  6]  be  the  refracting  surface  of  any  sphere  whose  centre 
is  E.  In  any  radius  thereof  EC  produced  both  ways  take  ET  and  C^  equal  to 
one  another  and  severally  in  such  proportion  to  that  radius  as  the  lesser  of  the 

A 


Fig.  6 

sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  hath  to  the  difference  of  those  sines.  And  then 
if  in  the  same  line  you  find  any  two  points  Q  and  q,  so  that  TQ  be  to  ET  as  E^ 
to  tq,  taking  tq  the  contrary  way  from  t  which  TQ  lieth  from  T,  and  if  the  point 
Q  be  the  focus  of  any  incident  rays,  the  point  q  shall  be  the  focus  of  the  refracted 
ones. 

And  by  the  same  means  the  focus  of  the  rays  after  two  or  more  reflexions  or 
refractions  may  be  found. 

Case  4.  Let  ACBD  [Fig.  7]  be  any  refracting  lens,  spherically  convex  or 
concave  or  plane  on  either  side,  and  let  CD  be  its  axis  (that  is,  the  line  which 


cuts  both  its  surfaces  perpendicularly,  and  passes  through  the  centres  of  the 
spheres),  and  in  this  axis  produced  let  F  and /be  the  foci  of  the  refracted  rays 
found  as  above,  when  the  incident  rays  on  both  sides  the  lens  are  parallel  to  the 
same  axis;  and  upon  the  diameter  F/ bisected  in  E,  describe  a  circle.  Suppose 
now  that  any  point  Q  be  the  focus  of  any  incident  rays.  Draw  QE  cutting  the 


384  Optics 

said  circle  in  T  and  and  therein  take  tq  in  such  proportion  to  as  or  TE 
hath  to  TQ.  Let  tq  lie  the  contrary  way  from  t  which  TQ  doth  from  T,  and  q 
shall  be  the  focus  of  the  refracted  rays  without  any  sensible  error,  provided  the 
point  Q  be  not  so  remote  from  the  axis,  nor  the  lens  so  broad  as  to  make  any  of 
the  rays  fall  too  obliquely  on  the  refracting  surfaces. 

And  by  the  like  operations  may  the  reflecting  or  refracting  surfaces  be  found 
when  the  two  foci  are  given,  and  thereby  a  lens  be  formed,  which  shall  make 
the  rays  flow  towards  or  from  what  place  you  please. 

So  then  the  meaning  of  this  Axiom  is  that  if  rays  fall  upon  any  plane  or 
spherical  surface  or  lens,  and  before  their  incidence  flow  from  or  towards  any 
point  Q,  they  shall,  after  reflexion  or  refraction,  flow  from  or  towards  the  point 
q  found  by  the  foregoing  rules.  And  if  the  incident  rays  flow  from  or  towards 
several  points  Q,  the  reflected  or  refracted  rays  shall  flow  from  or  towards  so 
many  other  points  q  found  by  the  same  rules.  Whether  the  reflected  and  re¬ 
fracted  rays  flow  from  or  towards  the  point  q  is  easily  known  by  the  situation 
of  that  point.  For  if  that  point  be  on  the  same  side  of  the  reflecting  or  refracting 
surface  or  lens  with  the  point  Q,  and  the  incident  rays  flow  from  the  point  Q, 
the  reflected  flow  towards  the  point  q  and  the  refracted  from  it;  and  if  the 
incident  rays  flow  towards  Q,  the  reflected  flow  from  g,  and  the  refracted  to¬ 
wards  it.  And  the  contrary  happens  when  q  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  surface. 

AXIOM  VII 

Wherever  the  rays  which  come  from  all  the  'points  of  any  object  meet  again  in  so 
many  points  after  they  have  been  made  to  converge  by  reflection  or  refraction,  there 
they  will  make  a  picture  of  the  object  upon  any  white  body  on  which  they  fall. 

So  if  PR  [Fig.  3]  represent  any  object  ^vithout  doors,  and  AB  be  a  lens  placed 
at  a  hole  in  the  mndow-shut  of  a  dark  chamber,  whereby  the  rays  that  come 
from  any  point  Q  of  that  object  are  made  to  converge  and  meet  again  in  the 
point  q;  and  if  a  sheet  of  white  paper  be  held  at  q  for  the  light  there  to  fall  upon 
it,  the  picture  of  that  object  PR  will  appear  upon  the  paper  in  its  proper  shape 
and  colours.  For  as  the  light  which  comes  from  the  point  Q  goes  to  the  point  q, 
so  the  light  which  comes  from  other  points  P  and  R  of  the  object  Mil  go  to  so 
many  other  correspondent  points  p  and  r  (as  is  manifest  by  the  sixth  Axiom) ;  so 
that  every  point  of  the  object  shall  illuminate  a  correspondent  point  of  the 
picture,  and  thereby  make  a  picture  like  the  object  in  shape  and  colour,  this 
only  excepted,  that  the  picture  shall  be  inverted.  And  this  is  the  reason  of  that 
vulgar  experiment  of  casting  the  species  of  objects  from  abroad  upon  a  wall  or 
sheet  of  white  paper  in  a  dark  room. 

In  like  manner,  when  a  man  views  any  object  PQR,  [Fig.  8]  the  light  which 
comes  from  the  several  points  of  the  object  is  so  refracted  by  the  transparent 
skins  and  humours  of  the  eye  (that  is,  by  the  outward  coat  EFG,  called  the 
tunica  cornea,  and  by  the  crystalline  humour  AB  which  is  beyond  the  pupil  mk) 
as  to  converge  and  meet  again  in  so  many  points  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye,  and 
there  to  paint  the  picture  of  the  object  upon  that  skin  (called  the  tunica  retina) 
Mth  which  the  bottom  of  the  eye  is  covered.  For  anatomists,  when  they  have 
taken  off  from  the  bottom  of  the  eye  that  outward  and  most  thick  coat  called 
the  dura  mater,  can  then  see  through  the  thinner  coats  the  pictures  of  objects 
lively  painted  thereon.  And  these  pictures,  propagated  by  motion  along  the 
fibres  of  the  optic  nerves  into  the  brain,  are  the  cause  of  vision.  For  accordingly 


Book  I:  Part  1 


385 


A 


P 


Q 


as  these  pictures  are  perfect  or  imperfect,  the  object  is  seen  perfectly  or  im¬ 
perfectly.  If  the  eye  be  tinged  with  any  colour  (as  in  the  disease  of  the  jaundice) 
so  as  to  tinge  the  pictures  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  mth  that  colour,  then  all 
objects  appear  tinged  mth  the  same  colour.  If  the  humours  of  the  eye  by  old 
age  decay,  so  as  by  shrinking  to  make  the  cornea  and  coat  of  the  crystalline 
humour  grow  flatter  than  before,  the  light  mil  not  be  refracted  enough,  and  for 
want  of  a  sufficient  refraction  will  not  converge  to  the  bottom  of  the  eye  but  to 
some  place  beyond  it,  and  by  consequence  paint  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  a 
confused  picture,  and  according  to  the  indistinctness  of  this  picture  the  object 
will  appear  confused.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  decay  of  sight  in  old  men,  and 
shews  why  their  sight  is  mended  by  spectacles.  For  those  convex  glasses  supply 
the  defect  of  plumpness  in  the  eye,  and  by  increasing  the  refraction  make  the 
rays  converge  sooner,  so  as  to  convene  distinctly  at  the  bottom  of  the  eye  if  the 
glass  have  a  due  degree  of  convexity.  And  the  contrary  happens  in  short-sighted 
men  whose  eyes  are  too  plump.  For  the  refraction  being  now  too  great,  the  rays 
converge  and  convene  in  the  eyes  before  they  come  at  the  bottom;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  picture  made  in  the  bottom  and  the  vision  caused  thereby  mil  not  be 
distinct,  unless  the  object  be  brought  so  near  the  eye  as  that  the  place  where  the 
converging  rays  convene  may  be  removed  to  the  bottom,  or  that  the  plumpness 
of  the  eye  be  taken  off  and  the  refractions  diminished  by  a  concave-glass  of  a 
due  degree  of  concavity,  or  lastly  that  by  age  the  eye  grow  flatter  till  it  come  to 
a  due  figure:  For  short-sighted  men  see  remote  objects  best  in  old  age,  and 
therefore  they  are  accounted  to  have  the  most  lasting  eyes. 


AXIOM  VIII 

An  object  seen  by  reflexion  or  refraction  appears  in  that  place  from  whence  the  rays 
after  their  last  .reflexion  or  refraction  diverge  in  falling  on  the  spectator's  eye. 


If  the  object  A  [Fig.  9]  be  seen 
by  reflexion  of  a  looking-glass  mn, 
it  shall  appear,  not  in  its  proper  place 
A,  but  behind  the  glass  at  a,  from 
whence  any  rays  AB,  AC,  AD,  which 
flow  from  one  and  the  same  point  of 
the  object,  do,  after  their  reflexion 
made  in  the  points  B,  C,  D,  diverge 
in  going  from  the  glass  to  E,  F,  G, 
where  they  are  incident  on  the  spec¬ 
tator’s  eyes.  For  these  rays  do  make 
the  same  picture  in  the  bottom  of 


386  Optics 

the  eyes  as  if  they  had  come  from  the  object  really  placed  at  a  without  the  in¬ 
terposition  of  the  looking-glass;  and  all  vision  is  made  according  to  the  place 
and  shape  of  that  picture. 

In  like  manner,  the  object  D  [Fig.  2],  seen  through  a  prism,  appears  not  in 
its  proper  place  D,  but  is  thence  translated  to  some  other  place  d  situated  in 
the  last  refracted  ray  FG  drawn  backward  from  F  to  d. 

And  so  the  object  Q  [Fig.  10]  seen  through  the  lens  AB,  appears  at  the  place 
q  from  whence  the  rays  diverge  in  passing  from  the  lens  to  the  eye.  Now  it  is  to 
be  noted  that  the  image  of  the  ob¬ 
ject  at  q  is  so  much  bigger  or  lesser 
than  the  object  itself  at  Q,  as  the 
distance  of  the  image  at  q  from  the 
lens  AB  is  bigger  or  less  than  the 
distance  of  the  object  at  Q  from  the 
same  lens.  And  if  the  object  be  seen 
through  two  or  more  such  convex 
or  concave  glasses,  every  glass  shall 
make  a  new  image,  and  the  object  shall  appear  in  the  place  of  the  bigness  of  the 
last  image.  Which  consideration  unfolds  the  theory  of  microscopes  and  tele¬ 
scopes.  For  that  theory  consists  in  almost  nothing  else  than  the  describing  such 
glasses  as  shall  make  the  last  image  of  any  object  as  distinct  and  large  and 
luminous  as  it  can  conveniently  be  made. 

I  have  now  given  in  Axioms  and  their  explications  the  sum  of  what  hath 
hitherto  been  treated  of  in  Optics.  For  what  hath  been  generally  agreed  on  I 
content  myself  to  assume  under  the  notion  of  Principles,  in  order  to  what  I 
have  further  to  write.  And  this  may  suffice  for  an  Introduction  to  readers  of 
quick  wit  and  good  understanding  not  yet  versed  in  Optics:  although  those 
who  are  already  acquainted  mth  this  science,  and  have  handled  glasses,  will 
more  readily  apprehend  what  followeth. 


PROPOSITIONS 

Proposition  1.  Theorem  1 

Lights  which  differ  in  colour,  differ  also  in  degrees  of  refrangihility. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments 

Experiment  1.  I  took  a  black  oblong  stiff  paper  terminated  by  parallel  sides, 
and,  with  a  perpendicular  right  line  drawn  cross  from  one  side  to  the  other, 
distinguished  it  into  two  equal  parts.  One  of  these  parts  I  painted  with  a  red 
colour  and  the  other  with  a  blue.  The  paper  was  very  black,  and  the  colours 
intense  and  thickly  laid  on,  that  the  phenomenon  might  be  more  conspicuous. 
This  paper  I  viewed  through  a  prism  of  solid  glass,  whose  two  sides  through 
which  the  light  passed  to  the  eye  were  plane  and  well  polished,  and  contained 
an  angle  of  about  sixty  degrees;  which  angle  I  call  the  refracting  angle  of  the 
prism.  And  whilst  I  viewed  it,  I  held  it  and  the  prism  before  a  window  in  such 
manner  that  the  sides  of  the  paper  were  parallel  to  the  prism,  and  both  those 
sides  and  the  prism  were  parallel  to  the  horizon,  and  the  cross  line  was  also 
parallel  to  it:  and  that  the  light  which  fell  from  the  window  upon  the  paper 


Book  I:  Part  1  387 

made  an  angle  with  the  paper  equal  to  that  angle  which  was  made  with  the 
same  paper  by  the  light  reflected  from  it  to  the  eye.  Beyond  the  prism  was  the 
wall  of  the  chamber  under  the  window  covered  over  with  black  cloth,  and  the 
cloth  was  involved  in  darkness  that  no  light  might  be  reflected  from  thence, 
which  in  passing  by  the  edges  of  the  paper  to  the  eye,  might  mingle  itself  wflth 
the  light  of  the  paper,  and  obscure  the  phenomenon  thereof.  These  things  being 
thus  ordered,  I  found  that  if  the  refracting  angle  of  the  prism  be  turned  up¬ 
wards,  so  that  the  paper  may  seem  to  be  lifted  upwards  by  the  refraction,  its 
blue  half  will  be  lifted  higher  by  the  refraction  than  its  red  half.  But  if  the 
refracting  angle  of  the  prism  be  turned  downward,  so  that  the  paper  may  seem 
to  be  carried  lower  by  the  refraction,  its  blue  half  will  be  carried  something 
lower  thereby  than  its  red  half.  Wherefore  in  both  cases  the  light  which  comes 
from  the  blue  half  of  the  paper  through  the  prism  to  the  eye  does  in  like  circum¬ 
stances  suffer  a  greater  refraction  than  the  light  which  comes  from  the  red  half, 
and  by  consequence  is  more  refrangible. 

Illustration.  In  the  eleventh  Figure,  MN  represents  the  window,  and  DE 
the  paper  terminated  mth  parallel  sides  DJ  and  HE,  and  by  the  transverse  line 

FG  distinguished  into  two  halves, 
the  one  DG  of  an  intensely  blue 
colour,  the  other  FE  of  an  intense¬ 
ly  red.  And  BACcab  represents 
the  prism  "whose  refracting  planes 
ABha  and  ACca  meet  in  the  edge 
of  the  refracting  angle  Aa.  This 
edge  Aa,  being  upward,  is  parallel 
both  to  the  horizon  and  to  the 
parallel  edges  of  the  paper  DJ  and 
HE,  and  the  transverse  line  FG 
is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of 
the  window.  And  de  represents 
the  image  of  the  paper  seen  by 
refraction  upwards  in  such  man¬ 
ner  that  the  blue  half  DG  is  car¬ 
ried  higher  to  dg  than  the  red  half 
FE  is  to/e,  and  therefore  suffers  a 
greater  refraction.  If  the  edge  of 
the  refracting  angle  be  turned 
dow’nw’ard,  the  image  of  the  paper 


f^J 


-^e 


Fig.  11 


will  be  refracted  downward ;  suppose  to  Se,  and  the  blue  half  will  be  refracted 
low'er  to  5y  than  the  red  half  is  to  (fe. 

Exper.  2.  About  the  aforesaid  paper,  whose  two  halves  were  painted  over 
with  red  and  blue,  and  which  was  stiff  like  thin  pasteboard,  I  lapped  several 
times  a  slender  thread  of  very  black  silk,  in  such  manner  that  the  several  parts 
of  the  thread  might  appear  upon  the  colours  like  so  many  black  lines  drawn 
over  them,  or  like  long  and  slender  dark  shadow's  cast  upon  them.  I  might  have 
drawn  black  lines  with  a  pen,  but  the  threads  w'ere  smaller  and  better  defined. 
This  paper  thus  coloured  and  lined  I  set  against  a  wall  perpendicularly  to  the 
horizon,  so  that  one  of  the  colours  might  stand  to  the  right  hand,  and  the  other 
to  the  left.  Close  before  the  paper,  at  the  confine  of  the  colours  below,  I  placed 


388  Optics 

a  candle  to  illuminate  the  paper  strongly:  for  the  experiment  was  tried  in  the 
night.  The  flame  of  the  candle  reached  up  to  the  lower  edge  of  the  paper,  or  a 
very  little  higher.  Then  at  the  distance  of  six  feet,  and  one  or  two  inches  from 
the  paper  upon  the  floor  I  erected  a  glass  lens  four  inches  and  a  quarter  broad, 
which  might  collect  the  rays  coming  from  the  several  points  of  the  paper,  and 
make  them  converge  towards  so  many  other  points  at  the  same  distance  of  six 
feet,  and  one  or  two  inches  on  the  other  side  of  the  lens,  and  so  form  the  image 
of  the  coloured  paper  upon  a  white  paper  placed  there,  after  the  same  manner 
that  a  lens  at  a  hole  in  a  window  casts  the  images  of  objects  abroad  upon  a 
sheet  of  white  paper  in  a  dark  room.  The  aforesaid  white  paper,  erected  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  horizon  and  to  the  rays  which  fell  upon  it  from  the  lens,  I 
moved  sometimes  towards  the  lens,  sometimes  from  it,  to  find  the  places  where 
the  images  of  the  blue  and  red  parts  of  the  coloured  paper  appeared  most  dis¬ 
tinct.  Those  places  I  easily  kneAV  by  the  images  of  the  black  lines  which  I  had 
made  by  winding  the  silk  about  the  paper.  For  the  images  of  those  fine  and 
slender  lines  (which  by  reason  of  their  blackness  Avere  like  shadoAvs  on  the 
colours)  AA'cre  confused  and  scarce  visible,  unless  AA'hen  the  colours  on  either 
side  of  each  line  Avere  terminated  most  distinctly.  Noting,  therefore,  as  dili¬ 
gently  as  I  could,  the  places  Avhere  the  images  of  the  red  and  blue  halves  of 
the  coloured  paper  appeared  most  distinct,  I  found  that  Avhere  the  red  half  of 
the  paper  appeared  distinct,  the  blue  half  appeared  confused,  so  that  the  black 
lines  draAvn  upon  it  could  scarce  be  seen;  and  on  the  contrary,  Avhere  the  blue 
half  appeared  most  distinct,  the  red  half  appeared  confused,  so  that  the  black 
lines  upon  it  Avere  scarce  visible.  And  betAveen  the  tAvo  places  Avhere  these 
images  appeared  distinct  there  Avas  the  distance  of  an  inch  and  a  half;  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  Avhite  paper  from  the  lens,  Avhen  the  image  of  the  red  half  of  the 
coloured  paper  appeared  most  distinct,  being  greater  by  an  inch  and  a  half 
than  the  distance  of  the  same  AA^hite  paper  from  the  lens,  AvTen  the  image  of  the 
blue  half  appeared  most  distinct.  In  like  incidences,  therefore,  of  the  blue  and 
red  upon  the  lens,  the  blue  Avas  refracted  more  by  the  lens  than  the  red,  so  as  to 
converge  sooner  by  an  inch  and  a  half,  and  therefore  is  more  refrangible. 

Illustration.  In  the  tAA^elfth  Figure,  DE  signifies  the  coloured  paper,  DG 
the  blue  half,  FE  the  red  half,  MN  the  lens,  tIJ  the  Avhite  paper  in  that  place 


AAEere  the  red  half  Avith  its  black  lines  appeared  distinct,  and  hj  the  same  paper 
in  that  place  Avhere  the  blue  half  appeared  distinct.  The  place  hj  Avas  nearer  to 
the  lens  MN  than  the  place  HJ  by  an  inch  and  a  half. 

Scholium.  The  same  things  succeed,  notAAuth standing  that  some  of  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  be  varied;  as  in  the  first  experiment  Avhen  the  prism  and  paper  are 
any  Avays  inclined  to  the  horizon,  and  in  both  Avhen  coloured  lines  are  draAvn 
upon  very  black  paper.  But  in  the  description  of  these  experiments,  I  have  set 
doAvn  such  circumstances,  by  AA^hich  either  the  phenomenon  might  be  rendered 


Book  I :  Part  1  389 

more  conspicuous,  or  a  novice  might  more  easily  try  them,  or  by  which  I  did 
try  them  only.  The  same  thing  I  have  often  done  in  the  following  experiments; 
concerning  all  ^vhich,  this  one  admonition  may  suffice:  now,  from  these  ex¬ 
periments  it  follow^s  not  that  all  the  light  of  the  blue  is  more  refrangible  than  all 
the  light  of  the  red;  for  both  lights  are  mixed  of  rays  differently  refrangible,  so 
that  in  the  red  there  are  some  rays  not  less  refrangible  than  those  of  the  blue, 
and  in  the  blue  there  are  some  rays  not  more  refrangible  than  those  of  the  red; 
but  these  rays,  in  proportion  to  the  -whole  light,  are  but  few,  and  serve  to 
diminish  the  event  of  the  experiment,  but  are  not  able  to  destroy  it.  For,  if  the 
red  and  blue  colours  "were  more  dilute  and  -weak,  the  distance  of  the  images 
would  be  less  than  an  inch  and  a  half;  and  if  they  were  more  intense  and  full, 
that  distance  would  be  greater,  as  -vwll  appear  hereafter.  These  experiments 
may  suffice  for  the  colours  of  natural  bodies.  For  in  the  colours  made  by  the 
refraction  of  prisms,  this  Proposition  will  appear  by  the  experiments  which  are 
now  to  follow  in  the  next  Proposition. 

Proposition  2.  Theorem  2 

The  light  of  the  Sun  consists  of  rays  differently  refrangible. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments 

Exper.  3.  In  a  very  dark  chamber,  at  a  round  hole,  about  one-third  part  of  an 
inch  broad,  made  in  the  shut  of  a  '\^^ndow,  I  placed  a  glass  prism,  whereby  the 
beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  wffiich  came  in  at  that  hole,  might  be  refracted  upwards 
toward  the  opposite  wall  of  the  chamber,  and  there  form  a  coloured  image  of 
the  Sun.  The  axis  of  the  prism  (that  is,  the  line  passing  through  the  middle  of 
the  prism  from  one  end  of  it  to  the  other  end  parallel  to  the  edge  of  the  refract¬ 
ing  angle)  w^as  in  this  and  the  followdng  experiments  perpendicular  to  the  inci¬ 
dent  rays.  About  this  axis  I  turned  the  prism  slowly,  and  saAv  the  refracted 
light  on  the  wall,  or  coloured  image  of  the  Sun,  first  to  descend,  and  then  to 
ascend.  Bet-ween  the  descent  and  ascent,  -when  the  image  seemed  stationary,  I 
stopped  the  prism,  and  fixed  it  in  that  posture,  that  it  should  be  moved  no 
more.  For  in  that  posture  the  refractions  of  the  light  at  the  two  sides  of  the 
refracting  angle,  that  is,  at  the  entrance  of  the  rays  into  the  prism,  and  at  their 
going  out  of  it,  ivere  equal  to  one  another.  So  also  in  other  experiments,  as  often 
as  I  would  have  the  refractions  on  both  sides  the  prism  to  be  equal  to  one 
another,  I  noted  the  place  where  the  image  of  the  Sun  formed  by  the  refracted 
light  stood  still  betw'een  its  tivo  contrary  motions,  in  the  common  period  of  its 
progress  and  regress;  and  -when  the  image  fell  upon  that  place,  I  made  fast  the 
prism.  And  in  this  posture,  as  the  most  convenient,  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
all  the  prisms  are  placed  in  the  following  experiments,  unless  where  some  other 
posture  is  described.  The  prism,  therefore,  being  placed  in  this  posture,  I  let 
the  refracted  light  fall  perpendicularly  upon  a  sheet  of  white  paper  at  the  op¬ 
posite  wall  of  the  chamber,  and  observed  the  figure  and  dimensions  of  the  solar 
image  formed  on  the  paper  by  that  light.  This  image  was  oblong  and  not  oval, 
but  terminated  with  two  rectilinear  and  parallel  sides,  and  twm  semicircular 
ends.  On  its  sides  it  w'as  bounded  prett}^  distinctly,  but  on  its  ends  very  con¬ 
fusedly  and  indistinctly,  the  light  there  decaying  and  vanishing  by  degrees. 
The  breadth  of  this  image  answ’ered  to  the  Sun’s  diameter,  and  w^as  about  two 
inches  and  the  eighth  part  of  an  inch,  including  the  penumbra.  For  the  image 


390  Optics 

was  eighteen  feet  and  a  half  distant  from  the  prism,  and  at  this  distance  that 
breadth,  if  diminished  by  the  diameter  of  the  hole  in  the  ^^Tndow-shut  (that  is, 
by  a  quarter  of  an  inch),  subtended  an  angle  at  the  prism  of  about  half  a  degree, 
which  is  the  Sun’s  apparent  diameter.  But  the  length  of  the  image  was  about 
ten  inches  and  a  quarter,  and  the  length  of  the  rectilinear  sides  about  eight 
inches;  and  the  refracting  angle  of  the  prism,  whereby  so  great  a  length  was 
made,  was  64  degrees.  With  a  less  angle  the  length  of  the  image  was  less,  the 
breadth  remaining  the  same.  If  the  prism  was  turned  about  its  axis  that  way 
which  made  the  rays  emerge  more  obliquely  out  of  the  second  refracting  surface 
of  the  prism,  the  image  soon  became  an  inch  or  two  longer,  or  more;  and  if  the 
prism  was  turned  about  the  contrary  way,  so  as  to  make  the  rays  fall  more 
obliquely  on  the  first  refracting  surface,  the  image  soon  became  an  inch  or  two 
shorter.  And,  therefore,  in  trjdng  this  experiment,  I  was  as  curious  as  I  could  be 
in  placing  the  prism,  by  the  above-mentioned  rule,  exactly  in  such  a  posture 
that  the  refractions  of  the  rays  at  their  emergence  out  of  the  prism  might  be 
equal  to  that  at  their  incidence  on  it.  This  prism  had  some  veins  running  along 
within  the  glass  from  one  end  to  the  other,  which  scattered  some  of  the  sun’s 
light  irregularly,  but  had  no  sensible  effect  in  increasing  the  length  of  the 
coloured  spectrum.  For  I  tried  the  same  experiment  with  other  prisms  with  the 
same  success.  And  particularly  with  a  prism  which  seemed  free  from  such  veins, 
and  whose  refracting  angle  was  62}^  degrees,  I  found  the  length  of  the  image 
9M  or  10  inches  at  the  distance  of  18}/^  feet  from  the  prism,  the  breadth  of  the 
hole  in  the  window-shut  being  one-quarter  of  an  inch,  as  before.  And  because  it 
is  easy  to  commit  a  mistake  in  placing  the  prism  in  its  due  posture,  I  repeated 
the  experiment  four  or  five  times,  and  always  found  the  length  of  the  image  that 
which  is  set  down  above.  With  another  prism  of  clearer  glass  and  better  polish, 
which  seemed  free  from  veins,  and  whose  refracting  angle  was  63)/^  degrees, 
the  length  of  this  image  at  the  same  distance  of  183^  feet  was  also  about  10 
inches,  or  10^8-  Beyond  these  measures  for  about  34  or  3^  of  an  inch  at  either 
end  of  the  spectrum  the  light  of  the  clouds  seemed  to  be  a  little  tinged  with  red 
and  violet,  but  so  very  faintly,  that  I  suspected  that  tincture  might  either 
wholly,  or  in  great  measure,  arise  from  some  rays  of  the  spectrum  scattered 
irregularly  by  some  inequalities  in  the  substance  and  polish  of  the  glass,  and, 
therefore,  I  did  not  include  it  in  these  measures.  Now,  the  different  magnitude 
of  the  hole  in  the  vindow-shut,  and  different  thickness  of  the  prism  where  the 
rays  passed  through  it,  and  different  inclinations  of  the  prism  to  the  horizon, 
made  no  sensible  changes  in  the  length  of  the  image.  Neither  did  the  different 
matter  of  the  prisms  make  any:  for  in  a  vessel  made  of  polished  plates  of  glass 
cemented  together  in  the  shape  of  a  prism  and  filled  vith  water,  there  is  the 
like  success  of  the  experiment  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  refraction.  It  is 
further  to  be  observed,  that  the  rays  went  on  in  right  lines  from  the  prism  to 
the  image,  and,  therefore,  at  their  very  going  out  of  the  prism,  had  all  that 
inclination  to  one  another  from  which  the  length  of  the  image  proceeded,  that 
is,  the  inclination  of  more  than  two  degrees  and  a  half.  And  yet,  according  to 
the  laws  of  Optics  vulgarly  received,  they  could  not  possibly  be  so  much  in¬ 
clined  to  one  another.  For  let  EG  [Fig.  13]  represent  the  vdndow-shut,  F  the 
hole  made  therein  through  which  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light  was  transmitted 
into  the  darkened  chamber,  and  ABC  a  triangular  imaginary  plane  whereby 
the  prism  is  feigned  to  be  cut  transversely  through  the  middle  of  the  light.  Or  if 


Book  I:  Part  1  391 

you  please,  let  ABC  represent  the  prism  itself,  looking  directly  towards  the 
spectator’s  eye  ^\ith  its  nearer  end:  and  let  XY  be  the  Sun,  MN  the  paper  upon 
which  the  solar  image  or  spectrum  is  cast,  and  PT  the  image  itself  whose  sides 
towards  v  and  w  are  rectilinear  and  parallel,  and  ends  towards  P  and  T  semi¬ 
circular.  YKHP  and  XLJT  are  two  rays,  the  first  of  which  comes  from  the 
lower  part  of  the  Sun  to  the  higher  part  of  the  image,  and  is  refracted  in  the 
prism  at  K  and  H,  and  the  latter  comes  from  the  higher  part  of  the  Sun  to  the 
lower  part  of  the  image,  and  is  refracted  at  L  and  J.  Since  the  refractions  on 


both  sides  the  prism  are  equal  to  one  another,  that  is,  the  refraction  at  K  equal 
to  the  refraction  at  J,  and  the  refraction  at  L  equal  to  the  refraction  at  H,  so 
that  the  refractions  of  the  incident  rays  at  K  and  L,  taken  together,  are  equal 
to  the  refractions  of  the  emergent  rays  at  H  and  J  taken  together:  it  follows, 
by  adding  equal  things  to  equal  things,  that  the  refractions  at  K  and  H  taken 
together  are  equal  to  the  refractions  at  J  and  L  taken  together,  and,  therefore, 
the  two  rays  being  equally  refracted,  have  the  same  inclination  to  one  another 
after  refraction  which  they  had  before;  that  is,  the  inclination  of  half  a  degree 
answering  to  the  Sun’s  diameter.  For  so  great  was  the  inclination  of  the  rays  to 
one  another  before  refraction.  So  then,  the  length  of  the  image  PT  would  by 
the  rules  of  vulgar  Optics  subtend  an  angle  of  half  a  degree  at  the  prism,  and  by 
consequence  be  equal  to  the  breadth  vw,  and,  therefore,  the  image  would  be 
round.  Thus  it  would  be  were  the  tw’o  rays  XLJT  and  YKHP,  and  all  the  rest 
which  form  the  image  PrcTy,  alike  refrangible.  And,  therefore,  seeing  by  ex¬ 
perience  it  is  found  that  the  image  is  not  round,  but  about  five  times  longer 
than  broad,  the  rays  which,  going  to  the  upper  end  P  of  the  image,  suffer  the 
greatest  refraction  must  be  more  refrangible  than  those  which  go  to  the  lower 
end  T,  unless  the  inequality  of  refraction  be  casual. 

This  image  or  spectrum  PT  was  coloured,  being  red  at  its  least  refracted  end 
T,  and  violet  at  its  most  refracted  end  P,  and  yellow,  green  and  blue  in  the 
intermediate  spaces.  Which  agrees  with  the  first  Proposition,  that  lights  which 
differ  in  colour  do  also  differ  in  refrangibility.  The  length  of  the  image  in  the 
foregoing  experiments  I  measured  from  the  faintest  and  outmost  red  at  one 
end,  to  the  faintest  and  outmost  blue  at  the  other  end,  excepting  only  a  little 
penumbra,  whose  breadth  scarce  exceeded  a  quarter  of  an  inch,  as  was  said 
above. 

Exper.  4.  In  the  Sun’s  beam  wLich  was  propagated  into  the  room  through  the 
hole  in  the  window-shut,  at  the  distance  of  some  feet  from  the  hole,  I  held  the 
prism  in  such  a  posture,  that  its  axis  might  be  perpendicular  to  that  beam. 
Then  I  looked  through  the  prism  upon  the  hole,  and  turning  the  prism  to  and 


392  Optics 

fro  about  its  axis  to  make  the  image  of  the  hole  ascend  and  descend,  when 
between  its  two  contrary  motions  it  seemed  stationary,  I  stopped  the  prism, 
that  the  refractions  of  both  sides  of  the  refracting  angle  might  be  equal  to  each 
other,  as  in  the  former  experiment.  In  this  situation  of  the  prism,  viewing 
through  it  the  said  hole,  I  observed  the  length  of  its  refracted  image  to  be 
many  times  greater  than  its  breadth,  and  that  the  most  refracted  part  thereof 
appeared  violet,  the  least  refracted  red,  the  middle  parts  blue,  green  and  yellow 
in  order.  The  same  thing  happened  when  I  removed  the  prism  out  of  the  Sun’s 
light,  and  looked  through  it  upon  the  hole  shining  by  the  light  of  the  clouds 
beyond  it.  And  yet,  if  the  refraction  were  done  regularly  according  to  one  cer¬ 
tain  proportion  of  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction,  as  is  vulgarly  sup¬ 
posed,  the  refracted  image  ought  to  have  appeared  round. 

So  then,  by  these  two  experiments  it  appears  that  in  equal  incidences  there 
is  a  considerable  inequality  of  refractions.  But  whence  this  inequality  arises, 
whether  it  be  that  some  of  the  incident  rays  are  refracted  more,  and  others 
less,  constantly,  or  by  chance,  or  that  one  and  the  same  ray  is  by  refraction 
disturbed,  shattered,  dilated,  and  as  it  were  split  and  spread  into  many  diverg¬ 
ing  rays,  as  Grimaldi  supposes,  does  not  yet  appear  by  these  experiments,  but 
will  appear  by  those  that  follow^. 

Exper.  5.  Considering,  therefore,  that  if  in  the  third  experiment  the  image 
of  the  Sun  should  be  drawm  out  into  an  oblong  form,  either  by  a  dilatation  of 
every  ray,  or  by  any  other  casual  inequality  of  the  refractions,  the  same  oblong 
image  w'ould  by  a  second  refraction  made  sideways  be  drawn  out  as  much  in 
breadth  by  the  like  dilatation  of  the  rays,  or  other  casual  inequality  of  the 
refractions  sideways,  I  tried  w'hat  would  be  the  effects  of  such  a  second  refrac¬ 
tion.  For  this  end  I  ordered  all  things  as  in  the  third  experiment,  and  then 
placed  a  second  prism  immediately  after  the  first  in  a  cross  position  to  it,  that 
it  might  again  refract  the  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light  w^hich  came  to  it  through  the 
first  prism.  In  the  first  prism  this  beam  w^as  refracted  upwards,  a'nd  in  the 
second  sidew^ays.  And  I  found  that  by  the  refraction  of  the  second  prism,  the 
breadth  of  the  image  w'as  not  increased,  but  its  superior  part,  which  in  the 
first  prism  suffered  the  greater  refraction,  and  appeared  violet  and  blue,  did 
again  in  the  second  prism  suffer  a  greater  refraction  than  its  inferior  part, 
w'^hich  appeared  red  and  yellow,  and  this  without  any  dilatation  of  the  image 
in  breadth. 

Illustration.  Let  S  [Figs.  14, 15]  represent  the  Sun,  F  the  hole  in  the  window, 
ABC  the  first  prism,  DH  the  second  prism,  Y  the  round  image  of  the  Sun  made 
by  a  direct  beam  of  light  when  the  prisms  are  taken  away,  PT  the  oblong 
image  of  the  Sun  made  by  that  beam  passing  through  the  first  prism  alone, 
wLen  the  second  prism  is  taken  away,  and  pt  the  image  made  by  the  cross 
refractions  of  both  prisms  together.  Now',  if  the  rays  w'hich  tend  tow'ards  the 
several  points  of  the  round  image  Y  were  dilated  and  spread  by  the  refraction 
of  the  first  prism,  so  that  they  should  not  any  longer  go  in  single  lines  to  single 
points,  but  that  every  ray  being  split,  shattered,  and  changed  from  a  linear  ray 
to  a  superficies  of  rays  diverging  from  the  point  of  refraction,  and  lying  in  the 
plane  of  the  angles  of  incidence  and  refraction,  they  should  go  in  those  planes 
to  so  many  lines  reaching  almost  from  one  end  of  the  image  PT  to  the  other, 
and  if  that  image  should  thence  become  oblong,  those  rays  and  their  several 
parts  tending  towards  the  several  points  of  the  image  PT  ought  to  be  again 


Book  I:  Part  1 


393 


dilated  and  spread  sideways  by  the  transverse  refraction  of  the  second  prism, 
so  as  to  compose  a  four  square  image,  such  as  is  represented  at  ttt.  For  the 
better  understanding  of  which,  let  the  image  PT  be  distinguished  into  five 
equal  parts  PQK,  KQRL,  LRSiM,  MSVX,  XVT.  And  by  the  same  irregularity 
that  the  orbicular  light  Y  is  by  the  refraction  of  the  first  prism  dilated  and 
drawn  out  into  a  long  image  PT,  the  light  PQK  which  takes  up  a  space  of  the 
same  length  and  breadth  with  the  light  Y  ought  to  be  by  the  refraction  of  the 
second  prism  dilated  and  draA^^l  out  into  the  long  image  Trqkp,  and  the  light 
KQRL  into  the  long  image  kqrl,  and  the  lights  LRS]\'I,  MSVX,  XVT,  into  so 
many  other  long  images  Irsm,  msvn,  nvtr)  and  all  these  long  images  would  com¬ 
pose  the  four  square  images  ttt.  Thus  it  ought  to  be  were  every  ra}^  dilated  by 
refraction,  and  spread  into  a  triangular  superficies  of  rays  diverging  from  the 
point  of  refraction.  For  the  second  refraction  would  spread  the  rays  one  way 
as  much  as  the  first  doth  another,  and  so  dilate  the  image  in  breadth  as  much 
as  the  first  doth  in  length.  And  the  same  thing  ought  to  happen  Avere  some  rays 
casually  refracted  more  than  others.  But  the  event  is  otherwise.  The  image  PT 
was  not  made  broader  by  the  refraction  of  the  second  prism,  but  only  became 
oblique,  as  ’tis  represented  at  pt,  its  upper  end  P  being  by  the  refraction  trans¬ 
lated  to  a  greater  distance  than  its  lower  end  T.  So  then  the  light  which  went 
towards  the  upper  end  P  of  the  image  w^as  (at  equal  incidences)  more  refracted 
in  the  second  prism  than  the  light  which  tended  towards  the  lower  end  T, 
that  is,  the  blue  and  violet,  than  the  red  and  yellow;  and  therefore  was  more 
refrangible.  The  same  light  was  by  the  refraction  of  the  first  prism  translated 
farther  from  the  place  Y  to  which  it  tended  before  refraction;  and,  therefore, 
suffered  as  well  in  the  first  prism  as  in  the  second  a  greater  refraction  than  the 
rest  of  the  light,  and  by  consequence  was  more  refrangible  than  the  rest,  even 
before  its  incidence  on  the  first  prism. 

Sometimes  I  placed  a  third  prism  after  the  second,  and  sometimes  also  a 
fourth  after  the  third,  by  all  which  the  image  might  be  often  refracted  side¬ 
ways  :  but  the  rays  which  were  more  refracted  than  the  rest  in  the  first  prism 
were  also  more  refracted  in  all  the  rest,  and  that  ndthout  any  dilatation  of  the 
image  sideways:  and,  therefore,  those  rays  for  their  constancy  of  a  greater 
refraction  are  deservedly  reputed  more  refrangible. 

But  that  the  meaning  of  this  experiment  may  more  clearly  appear,  it  is  to  be 
considered  that  the  rays  which  are  equally  refrangible  do  fall  upon  a  circle 
answering  to  the  Sun’s  disk.  For  this  was  proved  in  the  third  experiment.  By  a 
circle  I  understand  not  here  a  perfect  geometrical  circle,  but  any  orbicular 
figure  whose  length  is  equal  to  its  breadth,  and  which,  as  to  sense,  may  seem 


394  Optics 

circular.  Let,  therefore,  AG  [Fig.  15]  represent  the  circle  which  all  the  most 
refrangible  rays  propagated  from  the  whole  disk  of  the  Sun  would  illuminate 
and  paint  upon  the  opposite  wall,  if  they  were  alone;  EL  the  circle  which  all 
the  least  refrangible  rays  would  in  like  manner  illuminate  and  paint  if  they 
were  alone;  BH,  CJ,  DK.  the  circles  which  so  many  intermediate  sorts  of  rays 
would  successively  paint  upon  the  wall,  if  they  were  singly  propagated  from 
the  Sun  in  successii^e  order,  the  rest  being  always  intercepted;  and  conceive 
that  there  are  other  intermediate  circles  vathout  number,  which  innumerable 
other  intermediate  sorts  of  rays  would  successively  paint  upon  the  wall  if  the 


Sun  should  successively  emit  every  sort  apart.  And  seeing  the  Sun  emits  all 
these  sorts  at  once,  they  must  all  together  illuminate  and  paint  innumerable 
equal  circles,  of  all  which,  being  according  to  their  degrees  of  refrangibility 
placed  in  order  in  a  continual  series,  that  oblong  spectrum  PT  is  composed 
which  I  described  in  the  third  experiment.  Now,  if  the  Sun’s  circular  image  Y 
[Fig.  15]  which  is  made  by  an  unrefracted  beam  of  light  was  by  any  dilation  of 
the  single  rays,  or  by  any  other  irregularity  in  the  refraction  of  the  first  prism, 
converted  into  the  oblong  spectrum,  PT:  then  ought  every  circle  AG,  BH,  CJ, 
&c.  in  that  spectrum,  by  the  cross  refraction  of  the  second  prism  again  dilating 
or  otherwise  scattering  the  rays  as  before,  to  be  in  like  manner  drawn  out  and 
transformed  into  an  oblong  figure,  and  thereby  the  breadth  of  the  image  PT 
would  be  now  as  much  augmented  as  the  length  of  the  image  Y  was  before  by 
the  refraction  of  the  first  prism;  and  thus  by  the  refractions  of  both  prisms 
together  would  be  formed  a  four  square  figure  p^rtr,  as  I  described  above. 
Wherefore,  since  the  breadth  of  the  spectrmn  PT  is  not  increased  by  the  re¬ 
fraction  sideways,  it  is  certain  that  the  rays  are  not  split  or  dilated,  or  other- 
ways  irregularly  scattered  by  that  refraction,  but  that  every  circle  is  by  a 
regular  and  uniform  refraction  translated  entire  into  another  place,  as  the 
circle  AG  by  the  greatest  refraction  into  the  place  ag,  the  circle  BH  by  a  less 
refraction  into  the  place  bh,  the  circle  CJ  by  a  refraction  still  less  into  the  place 
cj,  and  so  of  the  rest;  by  which  means  a  new  spectrum  pt  inclined  to  the  former 
PT  is  in  like  manner  composed  of  circles  lying  in  a  right  line;  and  these  circles 
must  be  of  the  same  bigness  vith  the  former,  because  the  breadths  of  all  the 
spectrums  Y,  PT,  and  pt  at  equal  distances  from  the  prisms  are  equal. 

I  considered,  further,  that  by  the  breadth  of  the  hole  F  through  which  the 
light  enters  into  the  dark  chamber,  there  is  a  penumbra  made  in  the  circuit  of 
the  spectrum  Y,  and  that  penumbra  remains  in  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the 


Book  I:  Part  1  395 

spectriims  PT  and  yt.  I  placed,  therefore,  at  that  hole  a  lens  or  object-glass  of 
a  telescope  which  might  cast  the  image  of  the  Sun  distinctly  on  Y  without  any 
penumbra  at  all,  and  found  that  the  penumbra  of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the 
oblong  spectrums  PT  and  pt  was  also  thereby  taken  away,  so  that  those  sides 
appeared  as  distinctly  defined  as  did  the  circiunference  of  the  first  image  Y. 
Thus  it  happens  if  the  glass  of  the  prisms  be  free  from  veins,  and  their  sides  be 
accurately  plane  and  well  polished  without  those  numberless  waves  or  curls 
which  usually  arise  from  sand-holes  a  little  smoothed  in  polishing  with  putty. 
If  the  glass  be  only  well  polished  and  free  from  veins,  and  the  sides  not  accu¬ 
rately  plane,  but  a  little  convex  or  concave,  as  it  frequently  happens;  yet  may 
the  three  spectrums  Y,  PT,  and  pt  want  penumbras,  but  not  in  equal  distances 
from  the  prisms.  Now,  from  this  want  of  penumbras  I  knew  more  certainly 
that  every  one  of  the  circles  was  refracted  according  to  some  most  regular, 
uniform,  and  constant  law.  For  if  there  were  any  irregularity  in  the  refraction, 
the  right  lines  AE  and  GL,  which  all  the  circles  in  the  spectrum  PT  do  touch, 
could  not  by  that  refraction  be  translated  into  the  lines  ae  and  gl  as  distinct  and 
straight  as  they  were  before,  but  there  would  arise  in  those  translated  lines 
some  peniunbra  or  crookedness  or  undulation,  or  other  sensible  perturbation 
contrary  to  what  is  found  by  experience.  Whatsoever  penumbra  or  perturba¬ 
tion  should  be  made  in  the  circles  by  the  cross  refraction  of  the  second  prism, 
all  that  penumbra  or  perturbation  would  be  conspicuous  in  the  right  lines  ae 
and  gl  which  touch  those  circles.  And,  therefore,  since  there  is  no  such  penum¬ 
bra  or  perturbation  in  those  right  lines,  there  must  be  none  in  the  circles.  Since 
the  distance  between  those  tangents  or  breadth  of  the  spectrum  is  not  increased 
by  the  refractions,  the  diameters  of  the  circles  are  not  increased  thereby.  Since 
those  tangents  continue  to  be  right  lines,  every  circle  which  in  the  first  prism 
is  more  or  less  refracted  is  exactly  in  the  same  proportion  more  or  less  refracted 
in  the  second.  And  seeing  all  these  things  continue  to  succeed  after  the  same 
manner  when  the  rays  are  again  in  a  third  prism,  and  again  in  a  fourth  re¬ 
fracted  sideways,  it  is  evident  that  the  rays  of  one  and  the  same  circle,  as  to 
their  degree  of  refrangibility,  continue  always  uniform  and  homogeneal  to  one 
another,  and  that  those  of  several  circles  do  differ  in  degree  of  refrangibility, 
and  that  in  some  certain  and  constant  proportion.  Which  is  the  thing  I  was  to 
prove. 

There  is  yet  another  circumstance  or  two  of  this  experiment  by  which  it 
becomes  still  more  plain  and  con\dncing.  Let  the  second  prism  DH  [Fig.  16] 
be  placed  not  immediately  after  the  first,  but  at  some  distance  from  it;  suppose 


Y 


Optics 


396 

in  the  mid-way  between  it  and  the  wall  on  ^\•hich  the  oblong  spectrum  PT  is 
cast,  so  that  the  light  from  the  first  prism  may  fall  upon  it  in  the  form  of  an 
oblong  spectrum  ttt  parallel  to  this  second  prism,  and  be  refracted  sideways 
to  form  the  oblong  spectrum  p/  upon  the  ^^■all.  And  you  will  find,  as  before, 
that  this  spectrum  'pt  is  inclined  to  that  spectrum  PT,  which  the  first  prism 
forms  alone  wnthout  the  second;  the  blue  ends  P  and  p  being  farther  distant 
from  one  another  than  the  red  ones  T  and  t,  and  by  consequence  that  the  rays 
which  go  to  the  blue  end  tt  of  the  image  ttt,  and  which  therefore  suffer  the  great¬ 
est  refraction  in  the  first  prism,  are  again  in  the  second  prism  more  refracted 
than  the  rest. 

The  same  thing  I  tried  also  by  letting  the  Sun’s  light  into  a  dark  room 
through  two  little  round  holes  F  and  [Fig.  17]  made  in  the  window,  and  with 
two  parallel  prisms  ABC  and  ajSy  placed  at  those  holes  (one  at  each)  refracting 


those  two  beams  of  light  to  the  opposite  wall  of  the  chamber,  in  such  manner 
that  the  two  coloured  images  PT  and  MN  which  they  there  painted  were  joined 
end  to  end  and  lay  in  one  straight  line,  the  red  end  T  of  the  one  touching  the 
blue  end  M  of  the  other.  For  if  these  two  refracted  beams  were  again  by  a  third 
prism  DH  placed  cross  to  the  two  first,  refracted  sideways,  and  the  spectrums 
thereby  translated  to  some  other  part  of  the  wall  of  the  chamber,  suppose  the 
spectrum  PT  to  pt  and  the  spectrum  MN  to  mn,  these  translated  spectrums 
pt  and  mn  would  not  lie  in  one  straight  line  mth  their  ends  contiguous  as 
before,  but  be  broken  off  from  one  another  and  become  parallel,  the  blue  end 
m  of  the  image  mn  being  by  a  greater  refraction  translated  farther  from  its 
former  place  MT,  than  the  red  end  t  of  the  other  image  pt  from  the  same  place 
MT;  which  puts  the  Proposition  past  dispute.  And  this  happens  whether  the 
third  prism  DH  be  placed  immediately  after  the  two  first,  or  at  a  great  distance 
from  them,  so  that  the  light  refracted  in  the  two  first  prisms  be  either  white  and 
circular,  or  coloured  and  oblong  when  it  falls  on  the  third. 

Exper.  6.  In  the  middle  of  two  thin  boards  I  made  round  holes  a  third  part 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  in  the  window-shut  a  much  broader  hole  being 
made  to  let  into  my  darkened  chamber  a  large  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  I  placed 
a  prism  behind  the  shut  in  that  beam  to  refract  it  towards  the  opposite  wall, 
and  close  behind  the  prism  I  fixed  one  of  the  boards,  in  such  manner  that  the 
middle  of  the  refracted  light  might  pass  through  the  hole  made  in  it,  and  the 
rest  be  intercepted  by  the  board.  Then  at  the  distance  of  about  twelve  feet 
from  the  first  board  I  fixed  the  other  board  in  such  manner  that  the  middle  of 
the  refracted  light  which  came  through  the  hole  in  the  first  board,  and  fell 


Book  I;  Part  1  397 

upon  the  opposite  wall,  might  pass  through  the  hole  in  this  other  board,  and 
the  rest  being  intercepted  by  the  board  might  paint  upon  it  the  coloured  spec¬ 
trum  of  the  Sun.  And  close  behind  this  board  I  fixed  another  prism  to  refract 
the  light  which  came  through  the  hole.  Then  I  returned  speedily  to  the  first 
prism,  and  by  turning  it  slowly  to  and  fro  about  its  axis,  I  caused  the  image 
which  fell  upon  the  second  board  to  move  up  and  down  upon  that  board,  that 
all  its  parts  might  successively  pass  through  the  hole  in  that  board  and  fall 
upon  the  prism  behind  it.  And  in  the  meantime  I  noted  the  places  on  the  op¬ 
posite  wall  to  which  that  light  after  its  refraction  in  the  second  prism  did  pass; 
and  by  the  difference  of  the  places  I  found  that  the  light  which  being  most 
refracted  in  the  first  prism  did  go  the  the  blue  end  of  the  image,  was  again 
more  refracted  in  the  second  prism  than  the  light  which  went  to  the  red  end 
of  that  image,  which  proves  as  well  the  first  Proposition  as  the  second.  And 
this  happened  whether  the  axis  of  the  two  prisms  were  parallel,  or  inclined  to 
one  another,  and  to  the  horizon  in  any  given  angles. 

Illustration.  Let  F  [Fig.  18]  be  the  wide  hole  in  the  mndow-shut,  through 
which  the  Sun  shines  upon  the  first  prism  ABC,  and  let  the  refracted  light  fall 


upon  the  middle  of  the  board  DE,  and  the  middle  part  of  that  light  upon  the 
hole  G  made  in  the  middle  part  of  that  board.  Let  this  trajected  part  of  that 
light  fall  again  upon  the  middle  of  the  second  board  de,  and  there  paint  such 
an  oblong  coloured  image  of  the  Sun  as  was  described  in  the  third  experiment. 
By  turning  the  prism  ABC  slowly  to  and  fro  about  its  axis,  this  image  ndll  be 
made  to  move  up  and  down  the  board  de,  and  by  this  means  all  its  parts  from 
one  end  to  the  other  may  be  made  to  pass  successively  through  the  hole  g 
which  is  made  in  the  middle  of  that  board.  In  the  meanwhile,  another  prism 
abc  is  to  be  fixed  next  after  that  hole  g,  to  refract  the  trajected  light  a  second 
time.  And  these  things  being  thus  ordered,  I  marked  the  places  M  and  N  of  the 
opposite  wall  upon  which  the  refracted  light  fell,  and  found  that  whilst  the 
two  boards  and  second  prism  remained  unmoved,  those  places,  by  turning  the 
first  prism  about  its  axis,  were  changed  perpetually.  For  when  the  lower  part 
of  the  light  which  fell  upon  the  second  board  de  was  cast  through  the  hole  g, 
it  went  to  a  lower  place  M  on  the  wall,  and  when  the  higher  part  of  that  light 
was  cast  through  the  same  hole  g,  it  went  to  a  higher  place  N  on  the  wall,  and 
when  any  intermediate  part  of  the  light  was  cast  through  that  hole,  it  went  to 
some  place  on  the  wall  between  M  and  jSl.  The  unchanged  position  of  the  holes 
in  the  boards  made  the  incidence  of  the  rays  upon  the  second  prism  to  be  the 
same  in  all  cases.  And  yet  in  that  common  incidence  some  of  the  rays  were  more 
refracted,  and  others  less.  And  those  were  more  refracted  in  this  prism,  which 


398  Optics 

by  a  greater  refraction  in  the  first  prism  were  more  turned  out  of  the  way,  and, 
therefore,  for  their  constancy  of  being  more  refracted  are  deservedly  called 
more  refrangible. 

Exper.  7.  At  two  holes  made  near  one  another  in  my  ^\’indow-shut  I  placed 
two  prisms,  one  at  each,  which  might  cast  upon  the  opposite  wall  (after  the 
manner  of  the  third  experiment)  two  oblong  coloured  images  of  the  Sun.  And 
at  a  little  distance  from  the  wall  I  placed  a  long  slender 
paper  with  straight  and  parallel  edges,  and  ordered 
the  prisms  and  paper  so  that  the  red  colour  of  one 
image  might  fall  directly  upon  one  half  of  the  paper, 
and  the  violet  colour  of  the  other  image  upon  the  p- 
other  half  of  the  same  paper;  so  that  the  paper  ap¬ 
peared  of  two  colours,  red  and  violet,  much  after  the 
manner  of  the  painted  paper  in  the  first  and  second  q 
experiments.  Then  with  a  black  cloth  I  covered  the 
wall  behind  the  paper,  that  no  light  might  be  re¬ 
flected  from  it  to  disturb  the  experiment,  and  viewing  the  paper  through  a 
third  prism  held  parallel  to  it,  I  saw  that  half  of  it  which  was  illuminated  by 
the  violet  light  to  be  divided  from  the  other  half  by  a  greater  refraction,  espe¬ 
cially  when  I  went  a  good  way  off  from  the  paper.  For  when  I  viewed  it  too 
near  at  hand,  the  two  halves  of  the  paper  did  not  appear  fully  divided  from 
one  another,  but  seemed  contiguous  at  one  of  their  angles  like  the  painted 
paper  in  the  first  experiment.  Which  also  happened  when  the  paper  was  too  broad. 

Sometimes  instead  of  the  paper  I  used  a  white  thread,  and  this  appeared 
through  the  prism  divided  into  two  parallel  threads  as  is  represented  inthe  nine¬ 
teenth  Figure,  where  DG  denotes  the  thread  illuminated  with  violet  light  from 
D  to  E  and  with  red  light  from  F  to  G,  and  defg  are  the  parts  of  the  thread  seen 
by  refraction.  If  one  half  of  the  thread  be  constantly  illuminated  ■with  red,  and 
the  other  half  be  illuminated  -with  all  the  colours  successively  (which  may  be 
done  by  causing  one  of  the  prisms  to  be  turned  about  its  axis  whilst  the  other 
remains  unmoved),  this  other  half,  in  viemng  the  thread  through  the  prism, 
mil  appear  in  a  continual  right  line  mth  the  first  half  when  illuminated  with 
red,  and  begin  to  be  a  little  divided  from  it  when  illuminated  ■with  orange,  and 
remove  farther  from  it  when  illuminated  with  yellow,  and  still  farther  when 
with  green,  and  farther  wTen  ■with  blue,  and  go  yet  farther  off  wTen  illuminated 
with  indigo,  and  farthest  when  ■with  deep  violet.  Which  plainly  shew's  that  the 
lights  of  several  colours  are  more  and  more  refrangible  one  than  another,  in 
this  order  of  their  colours:  red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  deep  violet; 
and  so  proves  as  well  the  first  Proposition  as  the  second. 

I  caused  also  the  coloured  spectrums  PT  [Fig.  17]  and  MN  made  in  a  dark 
chamber  by  the  refractions  of  two  prisms  to  lie  in  a  right  line  end  to  end,  as 
was  described  above  in  the  fifth  experiment,  and  viewing  them  through  a 
third  prism  held  parallel  to  their  length,  they  appeared  no  longer  in  a  right 
line,  but  became  broken  from  one  another,  as  they  are  represented  at  pt  and 
mn,  the  violet  end  m  of  the  spectrum  mn  being  by  a  greater  refraction  trans¬ 
lated  farther  from  its  former  place  MT  than  the  red  end  t  of  the  other  spectrum  pt. 

I  further  caused  those  two  spectrums  PT  [Fig.  20]  and  MN  to  become  co¬ 
incident  in  an  inverted  order  of  their  colours,  the  red  end  of  each  falling  on  the 
violet  end  of  the  other,  as  they  are  represented  in  the  oblong  figure  PTMN ; 


Book  I :  Part  1 


399 


and  then  viewing  them  through  a  prism  DH  held  parallel  to  their  length,  they 
appeared  not  co-incident,  as  when  viewed  with  the  naked  eye,  but  in  the  form 


X  , 

<  K 


m 


/ 

/ 


of  two  distinct  spectrums  pt  and  mn  crossing  one  another  in  the  middle  after 
the  manner  of  the  letter  X.  Which  shews  that  the  red  of  the  one  spectrum  and 
violet  of  the  other,  which  were  co-incident  at  PN  and  MT,  being  parted  from 
one  another  by  a  greater  refraction  of  the  violet  to  p  and  m  than  of  the  red  to 
n  and  t,  do  differ  in  degrees  of  refrangibility. 

I  illuminated  also  a  little  circular  piece  of  white  paper  all  over  \nth  the 
lights  of  both  prisms  intermixed,  and  when  it  was  illuminated  with  the  red  of 
one  spectrum,  and  deep  violet  of  the  other,  so  as  by  the  mixture  of  those 
colours  to  appear  all  over  purple,  I  viewed  the  paper,  first  at  a  less  distance, 
and  then  at  a  greater,  through  a  third  prism;  and  as  I  went  from  the  paper,  the 
refracted  image  thereof  became  more  and  more  divided  by  the  unequal  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  two  mixed  colours,  and  at  length  parted  into  two  distinct  images, 
a  red  one  and  a  violet  one,  whereof  the  violet  was  farthest  from  the  paper,  and 
therefore  suffered  the  greatest  refraction.  And  when  that  prism  at  the  window, 
which  cast  the  violet  on  the  paper,  was  taken  away,  the  violet  image  disap¬ 
peared;  but  when  the  other  prism  was  taken  away  the  red  vanished;  which 
shews  that  these  two  images  were  nothing  else  than  the  lights  of  the  two  prisms, 
which  had  been  intermixed  on  the  purple  paper,  but  were  parted  again  by  their 
unequal  refractions  made  in  the  third  prism,  through  which  the  paper  was 
viewed.  This  also  was  observable,  that  if  one  of  the  prisms  at  the  window 
(suppose  that  which  cast  the  violet  on  the  paper)  was  turned  about  its  axis  to 
make  all  the  colours,  in  this  order:  violet,  indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange, 
red,  fall  successively  on  the  paper  from  that  prism,  the  violet  image  changed 
colour  accordingly,  turning  successively  to  indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow  and  red, 
and  in  changing  colour  came  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  red  image  made  by  the 
other  prism,  until  when  it  was  also  red  both  images  became  fully  co-incident. 

I  placed  also  two  paper  circles  very  near  one  another,  the  one  in  the  red  light 
of  one  prism,  and  the  other  in  the  violet  light  of  the  other.  The  circles  were 
each  of  them  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  behind  them  the  wall  was  dark,  that  the 
experiment  might  not  be  disturbed  by  any  light  coming  from  thence.  These 
circles  thus  illuminated,  I  viewed  through  a  prism  so  held  that  the  refraction 
might  be  made  towards  the  red  circle,  and  as  I  went  from  them  they  came 
nearer  and  nearer  together,  and  at  length  became  co-incident ;  and  afterwards 
when  I  went  still  farther  off,  they  parted  again  in  a  contrary  order,  the  violet 
by  a  greater  refraction  being  carried  beyond  the  red. 

Exper.  8.  In  summer,  when  the  Sun’s  light  uses  to  be  strongest,  I  placed  a 
prism  at  the  hole  of  the  window-shut,  as  in  the  third  experiment,  yet  so  that 


400  Optics 

its  axis  might  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  world,  and  at  the  opposite  wall  in 
the  Sun’s  refracted  light,  I  placed  an  open  book.  Then  going  six  feet  and  two 
inches  from  the  book,  I  placed  there  the  above-mentioned  lens,  by  which  the 
light  reflected  from  the  book  might  be  made  to  converge  and  meet  again  at  the 
distance  of  six  feet  and  two  inches  behind  the  lens,  and  there  paint  the  species 
of  the  book  upon  a  sheet  of  white  paper  much  after  the  manner  of  the  second 
experiment.  The  book  and  lens  being  made  fast,  I  noted  the  place  where  the 
paper  was  when  the  letters  of  the  book,  illuminated  by  the  fullest  red  light  of 
the  solar  image  falling  upon  it,  did  cast  their  species  on  that  paper  most  dis¬ 
tinctly.  And  then  I  stayed  till,  by  the  motion  of  the  Sun,  and  consequent 
motion  of  his  image  on  the  book,  all  the  colours  from  that  red  to  the  middle  of 
the  blue  passed  over  those  letters;  and  when  those  letters  were  illuminated  by 
that  blue,  I  noted  again  the  place  of  the  paper  when  they  cast  their  species 
most  distinctly  upon  it:  And  I  found  that  this  last  place  of  the  paper  was 
nearer  to  the  lens  than  its  former  place  by  about  two  inches  and  a  half,  or  two 
and  three  quarters.  So  much  sooner,  therefore,  did  the  light  in  the  violet  end 
of  the  image  by  a  greater  refraction  converge  and  meet,  than  the  light  in  the 
red  end.  But  in  trying  this,  the  chamber  was  as  dark  as  I  could  make  it.  For, 
if  these  colours  be  diluted  and  weakened  by  the  mixture  of  any  adventitious 
light,  the  distance  between  the  places  of  the  paper  will  not  be  so  great.  This 
distance  in  the  second  experiment,  where  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  were 
made  use  of,  was  but  an  inch  and  a  half,  by  reason  of  the  imperfection  of  those 
colours.  Here  in  the  colours  of  the  prism,  which  are  manifestly  more  full,  in¬ 
tense,  and  lively  than  those  of  natural  bodies,  the  distance  is  two  inches  and 
three  quarters.  And  were  the  colours  still  more  full,  I  question  not  but  that 
the  distance  would  be  considerably  greater.  For  the  coloured  light  of  the  prism, 
by  the  interfering  of  the  circles  described  in  the  second  figure  of  the  fifth  ex¬ 
periment  [Fig.  15],  and  also  by  the  light  of  the  very  bright  clouds  next  the 
Sun’s  body  intermixing  with  these  colours,  and  by  the  light  scattered  by  the 
inequalities  in  the  polish  of  the  prism,  was  so  very  much  compounded,  that 
the  species  which  those  faint  and  dark  colours,  the  indigo  and  violet,  cast  upon 
the  paper  were  not  distinct  enough  to  be  well  observed. 

Exper.  9.  A  prism,  whose  two  angles  at  its  base  were  equal  to  one  another, 
and  half  right  ones,  and  the  third  a  right  one,  I  placed  in  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s 
light  let  into  a  dark  chamber  through  a  hole  in  the  Avindow-shut,  as  in  the 
third  experiment.  And  turning  the  prism  sloAvly  about  its  axis,  until  all  the 
light  which  went  through  one  of  its  angles,  and  was  refracted  by  it  began  to  be 
reflected  by  its  base,  at  which  till  then  it  went  out  of  the  glass,  I  observed  that 
those  rays  which  had  suffered  the  greatest  refraction  Avere  sooner  reflected  than 
the  rest.  I  conceived,  therefore,  that  those  rays  of  the  reflected  light,  Avhich 
AA’ere  most  refrangible,  did  first  of  all  by  a  total  reflexion  become  more  copious 
in  that  light  than  the  rest,  and  that  afterAvards  the  rest  also,  by  a  total  re¬ 
flexion,  became  as  copious  as  these.  To  try  this,  I  made  the  reflected  light  pass 
through  another  prism,  and  being  refracted  by  it  to  fall  afterAA'ards  upon  a 
sheet  of  AA'hite  paper  placed  at  some  distance  behind  it,  and  there  by  that 
refraction  to  paint  the  usual  colours  of  the  prism.  And  then  causing  the  first 
prism  to  be  turned  about  its  axis  as  above,  I  observed  that  Avhen  those  rays, 
Avhich  in  this  prism  had  suffered  the  greatest  refraction,  and  appeared  of  a  blue 
and  violet  colour,  began  to  be  totally  reflected,  the  blue  and  violet  light  on  the 


Book  I:  Part  1  401 

paper,  which  was  most  refracted  in  the  second  prism,  received  a  sensible  in¬ 
crease  above  that  of  the  red  and  yellow,  which  was  least  refracted;  and  after¬ 
wards,  when  the  rest  of  the  light  which  was  green,  yellow,  and  red,  began  to  be 
totally  reflected  in  the  first  prism,  the  light  of  those  colours  on  the  paper  re¬ 
ceived  as  great  an  increase  as  the  violet  and  blue  had  done  before.  "N^Tience  ’tis 
manifest  that  the  beam  of  light  reflected  by  the  base  of  the  prism,  being  aug¬ 
mented  first  by  the  more  refrangible  rays,  and  afterwards  by  the  less  refrang¬ 
ible  ones,  is  compounded  of  rays  differently  refrangible.  And  that  all  such 
refiected  light  is  of  the  same  nature  with  the  Sun’s  light  before  its  incidence  on 
the  base  of  the  prism,  no  man  ever  doubted;  it  being  generally  allowed  that 
light  by  such  reflexions  suffers  no  alteration  in  its  modifications  and  proper¬ 
ties.  I  do  not  here  take  notice  of  any  refractions  made  in  the  sides  of  the  first 
prism,  because  the  light  enters  it  perpendicularly  at  the  first  side,  and  goes  out 
perpendicularly  at  the  second  side,  and  therefore  suffers  none.  So  then,  the 
Sun’s  incident  light  being  of  the  same  temper  and  constitution  mth  his  emer¬ 
gent  light,  and  the  last  being  compounded  of  rays  differently  refrangible,  the 
first  must  be  in  hke  manner  compounded. 

Illustration.  In  the  twenty-first  Figure,  ABC  is  the  first  prism,  BCits  base, 
B  and  C  its  equal  angles  at  the  base,  each  of  45  degrees,  A  its  rectangular 

vertex,  FM  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s 
light  let  into  a  dark  room  through 
a  hole  F  one  third  part  of  an  inch 
broad,  M  its  incidence  on  the  base 
of  the  prism,  MG  a  less  refracted 
ray,  MH  a  more  refracted  ray, 
MN  the  beam  of  light  reflected 
from  the  base,  VXY  the  second 
prism  by  which  this  beam  in  pass¬ 
ing  through  it  is  refracted,  Ni  the 
less  refracted  light  of  this  beam, 
and  Np  the  more  refracted  part 
thereof.  YTien  the  first  prism  ABC 
is  turned  about  its  axis  according 
to  the  order  of  the  letters  ABC, 
the  rays  MH  emerge  more  and  more  obliquely  out  of  that  prism,  and  at  length 
after  their  most  oblique  emergence  are  reflected  towards  N,  and  going  on  to 
p  do  increase  the  number  of  the  rays  Np.  Afterwards,  by  continuing  the  motion 
of  the  first  prism,  the  rays  MG  are  also  reflected  to  N  and  increase  the  number 
of  the  rays  'St.  And,  therefore,  the  light  MN  admits  into  its  composition,  first 
the  more  refrangible  rays,  and  then  the  less  refrangible  rays,  and  yet  after  this 
composition  is  of  the  same  nature  ^^Tth  the  Sun’s  immediate  light  FM,  the  re¬ 
flexion  of  the  specular  base  BC  causing  no  alteration  therein. 

Exper.  10.  Two  prisms,  which  were  alike  in  shape,  I  tied  so  together  that, 
their  axis  and  opposite  sides  being  parallel,  they  composed  a  parallelepiped. 
And,  the  Sun  shining  into  my  dark  chamber  through  a  little  hole  in  the  window- 
shut,  I  placed  that  parallelepiped  in  his  beam  at  some  distance  from  the  hole, 
in  such  a  posture  that  the  axes  of  the  prisms  might  be  perpendicular  to  the 
incident  rays,  and  that  those  rays,  being  incident  upon  the  first  side  of  one 
prism,  might  go  on  through  the  two  contiguous  sides  of  both  prisms,  and 


402  Optics 

emerge  out  of  the  last  side  of  the  second  prism.  This  side,  being  parallel  to  the 
first  side  of  the  first  prism,  caused  the  emerging  light  to  be  parallel  to  the  in¬ 
cident.  Then,  beyond  these  two  prisms  I  placed  a  third,  which  might  refract 
that  emergent  light,  and  by  that  refraction  cast  the  usual  colours  of  the  prism 
upon  the  opposite  wall,  or  upon  a  sheet  of  white  paper  held  at  a  convenient 
distance  behind  the  prism  for  that  refracted  light  to  fall  upon  it.  After  this  I 
turned  the  parallelepiped  about  its  axis,  and  found  that  when  the  contiguous 
sides  of  the  two  prisms  became  so  oblique  to  the  incident  rays  that  those  rays 
began  all  of  them  to  be  reflected,  those  rays  which  in  the  third  prism  had 
suffered  the  greatest  refraction,  and  painted  the  paper  with  violet  and  blue, 
were  first  of  all  by  a  total  reflexion  taken  out  of  the  transmitted  light,  the  rest 
remaining  and  on  the  paper  painting  their  colours  of  green,  yellow,  orange  and 
red,  as  before;  and  afterwards  by  continuing  the  motion  of  the  two  prisms,  the 
rest  of  the  rays  also  by  a  total  reflexion  vanished  in  order,  according  to  their 
degrees  of  refrangibility.  The  light,  therefore,  which  emerged  out  of  the  two 
prisms  is  compounded  of  rays  differently  refrangible,  seeing  the  more  refrang¬ 
ible  rays  may  be  taken  out  of  it,  while  the  less  refrangible  remain.  But  this 
light  being  trajected  only  through  the  parallel  superficies  of  the  two  prisms,  if 
it  suffered  any  change  by  the  refraction  of  one  superficies  it  lost  that  impres¬ 
sion  by  the  contrary  refraction  of  the  other  superficies,  and  so  being  restored 
to  its  pristine  constitution,  became  of  the  same  nature  and  condition  as  at  first 
before  its  incidence  on  those  prisms;  and,  therefore,  before  its  incidence  was  as 
much  compounded  of  rays  differently  refrangible,  as  afterwards. 

Illustration.  In  the  twenty-second  Figure  ABC  and  BCD  are  the  two 
prisms  tied  together  in  the  form  of  a  parallelepiped,  their  sides  BC  and  CB 
being  contiguous,  and  their  sides  AB 
and  CD  parallel.  And  HJK  is  the 
third  prism,  by  which  the  Sun’s 
light  propagated  through  the  hole 
F  into  the  dark  chamber,  and  there 
passing  through  those  sides  of  the 
prisms  AB,  BC,  CB  and  CD,  is  re¬ 
fracted  at  O  to  the  white  paper  PT, 
falling  there  partly  upon  P  by  a 
greater  refraction,  partly  upon  T 
by  a  less  refraction,  and  partly  up¬ 
on  R  and  other  intermediate  places 
by  intermediate  refractions.  By 
turning  the  parallelepiped  ACBD 
about  its  axis,  according  to  the  order 
of  the  letters  A,  C,  D,  B,  at  length 
when  the  contiguous  planes  BC 
and  CB  become  sufficiently  oblique 
to  the  rays  FM,  which  are  incident  upon  them  at  M,  there  will  vanish  totally 
out  of  the  refracted  light  OPT,  first  of  all  the  most  refracted  rays  OP  (the 
rest  OR  and  OT  remaining  as  before),  then  the  rays  OR  and  other  intermedi¬ 
ate  ones,  and,  lastly,  the  least  refracted  rays  OT.  For  when  the  plane  BC  be¬ 
comes  sufficiently  oblique  to  the  rays  incident  upon  it,  those  rays  will  begin 
to  be  totally  reflected  by  it  towards  N ;  and  first  the  most  refrangible  rays  mil 


Book  I:  Part  1  403 

be  totally  reflected  (as  was  explained  in  the  preceding  experiment)  and  by  con¬ 
sequence  must  first  disappear  at  P,  and  afterAvards  the  rest  as  they  are  in  order 
totally  reflected  to  N,  they  must  disappear  in  the  same  order  at  R  and  T.  So 
then  the  rays,  which  at  0  suffer  the  greatest  refraction,  may  be  taken  out  of 
the  light  MO  whilst  the  rest  of  the  rays  remain  in  it,  and  therefore  that  light 
MO  is  compounded  of  rays  differently  refrangible.  And  because  the  planes  AB 
and  CD  are  parallel,  and,  therefore,  by  equal  and  contrary  refractions  destroy 
one  another’s  effects,  the  incident  light  FM  must  be  of  the  same  kind  and 
nature  with  the  emergent  light  MO,  and  therefore  doth  also  consist  of  rays 
differently  refrangible.  These  two  lights  FM  and  MO,  before  the  most  refrang¬ 
ible  rays  are  separated  out  of  the  emergent  light  MO,  agree  in  colour  and  in  all 
other  properties  so  far  as  my  observation  reaches,  and,  therefore,  are  deserv¬ 
edly  reputed  of  the  same  nature  and  constitution,  and  by  consequence  the  one 
is  compounded  as  well  as  the  other.  But  after  the  most  refrangible  rays  begin 
to  be  totally  reflected,  and  thereby  separated  out  of  the  emergent  light  MO, 
that  light  changes  its  colour  from  white  to  a  dilute  and  faint  yellow,  a  pretty 
good  orange,  a  very  full  red  successively,  and  then  totally  vanishes.  For  after 
the  most  refrangible  rays,  which  paint  the  paper  at  P  AAdth  a  purple  colour,  are 
by  a  total  reflexion  taken  out  of  the  beam  of  light  MO,  the  rest  of  the  colours 
which  appear  on  the  paper  at  R  and  T  being  mixed  in  the  light  MO  compound 
there  a  faint  yellow,  and  after  the  blue  and  part  of  the  green  which  appear  on 
the  paper  between  P  and  R  are  taken  aAvay,  the  rest  Avhich  appear  between  R 
and  T  (that  is,  the  yelloAv,  orange,  red  and  a  little  green)  being  mixed  in  the 
beam  MO  compound  there  an  orange;  and  when  all  the  rays  are  by  reflexion 
taken  out  of  the  beam  MO,  except  the  least  refrangible,  which  at  T  appear  of 
a  full  red,  their  colour  is  the  same  in  that  beam  MO  as  afterAvards  at  T,  the 
refraction  of  the  prism  HJK  serving  only  to  separate  the  differently  refrang¬ 
ible  rays,  Avithout  making  any  alteration  in  their  colours,  as  shall  be  more  fully 
proved  hereafter.  All  Avhich  confirms  as  Avell  the  first  Proposition  as  the  second. 

Scholium.  If  this  experiment  and  the  former  be  conjoined  and  made  one  by 
applying  a  fourth  prism  VXY  [Fig.  22]  to  refract  the  reflected  beam  MN  to- 
Avards  tp,  the  conclusion  Avill  be  clearer.  For  then  the  light  Np,  Avhich  in  the 
fourth  prism  is  more  refracted,  Avill  become  fuller  and  stronger  Avhen  the  light 
OP,  Avhich  in  the  third  prism  HJK  is  more  refracted,  vanishes  at  P;  and  after- 
Avards  Avhen  the  less  refracted  light  OT  vanishes  at  T,  the  less  refracted  light 
Nf  Avill  become  increased  Avhilst  the  more  refracted  light  at  p  receives  no  fur¬ 
ther  increase.  And  as  the  trajected  beam  MO  in  vanishing  is  ahvays  of  such  a 
colour  as  ought  to  result  from  the  mixture  of  the  colours  Avhich  fall  upon  the 
paper  PT,  so  is  the  reflected  beam  MN  ahvays  of  such  a  colour  as  ought  to 
result  from  the  mixture  of  the  colours  Avhich  fall  upon  the  paper  pt.  For  Avhen 
the  most  refrangible  rays  are  by  a  total  reflexion  taken  out  of  the  beam  MO. 
and  leave  that  beam  of  an  orange  colour,  the  excess  of  those  rays  in  the  re¬ 
flected  light  does  not  only  make  the  violet,  indigo  and  blue  at  p  more  full,  but 
also  makes  the  beam  MN  change  from  the  yelloAvish  colour  of  the  Sun’s  light 
to  a  pale  Avhite  inclining  to  blue,  and  afterAvard  recover  its  yelloAvish  colour 
again,  so  soon  as  all  the  rest  of  the  transmitted  light  MOT  is  reflected. 

Noav,  seeing  that  in  all  this  variety  of  experiments,  Avhether  the  trial  be 
made  in  light  reflected,  and  that  either  from  natural  bodies,  as  in  the  first  and 
second  experiment,  or  specular,  as  in  the  ninth;  or  in  light  refracted,  and  that 


404  Optics 

either  before  the  unequally  refracted  rays  are  by  diverging  separated  from  one 
another,  and  losing  their  whiteness  which  they  have  altogether,  appear  sev¬ 
erally  of  several  colours,  as  in  the  fifth  experiment;  or  after  they  are  separated 
from  one  another,  and  appear  coloured  as  in  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth 
experiments;  or  in  light  trajected  through  parallel  superficies,  destroying  each 
other’s  effects,  as  in  the  tenth  experiment;  there  are  always  found  rays,  which 
at  equal  incidences  on  the  same  medium  suffer  unequal  refractions,  and  that 
without  any  splitting  or  dilating  of  single  rays,  or  contingence  in  the  inequality 
of  the  refractions,  as  is  proved  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  experiments.  And  seeing 
the  rays  which  differ  in  refrangibility  may  be  parted  and  sorted  from  one  an¬ 
other,  and  that  either  by  refraction  as  in  the  third  experiment,  or  by  reflexion 
as  in  the  tenth,  and  then  the  several  sorts  apart  at  equal  incidences  suffer  un¬ 
equal  refractions,  and  those  sorts  are  more  refracted  than  others  after  separa¬ 
tion,  which  were  more  refracted  before  it,  as  in  the  sixth  and  following  experi¬ 
ments,  and  if  the  Sun’s  light  be  trajected  through  three  or  more  cross  prisms 
successively,  those  rays  which  in  the  first  prism  are  refracted  more  than  others 
are  in  all  the  following  prisms  refracted  more  than  others  in  the  same  rate  and 
proportion,  as  appears  by  the  fifth  experiment;  it’s  manifest  that  the  Sun’s 
light  is  an  heterogeneous  mixture  of  rays,  some  of  which  are  constantly  more 
refrangible  than  others,  as  was  proposed. 

Proposition  3.  Theorem  3 

The  Sun’s  light  consists  of  rays  differing  in  reflexibility,  and  those  rays  are  more 
reflexible  than  others  which  are  more  refrangible. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  ninth  and  tenth  experiments:  for  in  the  ninth  ex¬ 
periment,  by  turning  the  prism  about  its  axis  until  the  rays  within  it,  which  in 
going  out  into  the  air  were  refracted  by  its  base,  became  so  oblique  to  that  base 
as  to  begin  to  be  totally  reflected  thereby;  those  rays  became  first  of  all  totally 
reflected,  which  before  at  equal  incidences  with  the  rest  had  suffered  the  great¬ 
est  refraction.  And  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  reflexion  made  by  the  com¬ 
mon  base  of  the  two  prisms  in  the  tenth  experiment. 

Proposition  4.  Problem  1 

To  separate  from  one  another  the  heterogeneous  rays  of  compound  light. 

The  heterogeneous  rays  are  in  some  measure  separated  from  one  another  by 
the  refraction  of  the  prism  in  the  third  experiment,  and  in  the  fifth  experiment, 
by  taking  away  the  penumbra  from  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  coloured  image, 
that  separation  in  those  very  rectilinear  sides  or  straight  edges  of  the  image 
becomes  perfect.  But  in  all  places  between  those  rectilinear  edges,  those  in¬ 
numerable  circles  there  described,  which  are  severally  illuminated  by  homoge- 
neal  rays,  by  interfering  with  one  another,  and  being  everywhere  commixed, 
do  render  the  light  sufficiently  compound.  But  if  these  circles,  whilst  their 
centres  keep  their  distances  and  positions,  could  be  made  less  in  diameter, 
their  interfering  one  with  another,  and  by  consequence  the  mixture  of  the 
heterogeneous  rays  would  be  proportionally  diminished.  In  the  twenty-third 
Figure  let  AG,  BH,  CJ,  DK,  EL,  FM  be  the  circles  which  so  many  sorts  of 
rays,  flowing  from  the  same  disk  of  the  Sun,  do  in  the  third  experiment  illumi¬ 
nate  ;  of  all  which  and  innumerable  other  intermediate  ones  lying  in  a  continual 
series  between  the  two  rectilinear  and  parallel  edges  of  the  Sun’s  oblong  image 


405 


Book  I:  Part  1 

PT,  that  image  is  composed,  as  was  explained  in  the  fifth  experiment.  And  let 
ag,  bh,  cj,  dk,  el,  fm  be  so  many  less  circles  lying  in  a  like  continual  series  be¬ 
tween  two  parallel  right  lines  af  and  grn  with  the  same  distances  between  their 
centres,  and  illuminated  by  the  same  sorts  of  rays,  that  is,  the  circle  ag  with 
the  same  sort  by  which  the  corresponding  circle  AG  was  illuminated,  and  the 

circle  hh  with  the  same  sort  by 
which  the  corresponding  circle  BH 
was  illuminated,  and  the  rest  of 
the  circles  cj,  dk,  el,  fm  respective¬ 
ly,  with  the  same  sorts  of  rays  by 
which  the  several  corresponding 
circles  CJ,  DK,  EL,  FM  were  illu¬ 
minated.  In  the  figure  PT  com¬ 
posed  of  the  greater  circles,  three  of 
those  circles  AG,  BH,  CJ,  are  so 
expanded  into  one  another  that  the  three  sorts  of  rays  by  wLich  those  circles 
are  illuminated,  together  Mth  other  innumerable  sorts  of  intermediate  rays, 
are  mixed  at  QR  in  the  middle  of  the  circle  BH.  And  the  like  mixture  hap¬ 
pens  throughout  almost  the  whole  length  of  the  figure  PT.  But  in  the  figure 
pt  composed  of  the  less  circles,  the  three  less  circles  ag,  hh,  cj,  which  answer  to 
those  three  greater,  do  not  extend  into  one  another;  nor  are  there  anyw'here 
mingled  so  much  as  any  two  of  the  three  sorts  of  rays  by  wLich  those  circles  are 
illuminated,  and  which  in  the  figure  PT  are  all  of  them  intermingled  at  BH. 

Now,  he  that  shall  thus  consider  it  will  easily  understand  that  the  mixture  is 
diminished  in  the  same  proportion  with  the  diameters  of  the  circles.  If  the 
diameters  of  the  circles,  whilst  their  centres  remain  the  same,  be  made  three 
times  less  than  before,  the  mixture  will  be  also  three  times  less;  if  ten  times  less, 
the  mixture  will  be  ten  times  less,  and  so  of  other  proportions.  That  is,  the 
mixture  of  the  rays  in  the  greater  figure  PT  wall  be  to  their  mixture  in  the  less 
pt  as  the  latitude  of  the  greater  figure  is  to  the  latitude  of  the  less.  For  the 
latitudes  of  these  figures  are  equal  to  the  diameters  of  their  circles.  And  hence 
it  easily  follows  that  the  mixture  of  the  rays  in  the  refracted  spectrum  pt  is  to 
the  mixture  of  the  rays  in  the  direct  and  immediate  fight  of  the  Sun  as  the 
breadth  of  that  spectrum  is  to  the  difference  between  the  length  and  breadth  of 
the  same  spectrum. 

So,  then,  if  we  would  diminish  the  mixture  of  the  rays,  we  are  to  diminish  the 
diameters  of  the  circles.  Now,  these  would  be  diminished  if  the  Sun’s  diameter 
to  which  they  answer  could  be  made  less  than  it  is,  or  (which  comes  to  the  same 
purpose)  if  without  doors,  at  a  great  distance  from  the  prism  towards  the  sun, 
some  opaque  body  were  placed,  with  a  round  hole  in  the  middle  of  it,  to  inter¬ 
cept  all  the  Sun’s  fight,  excepting  so  much  as  coming  from  the  middle  of  his 
body  could  pass  through  that  hole  to  the  prism.  For  so  the  circles  AG,  BH,  and 
the  rest  would  not  any  longer  answer  to  the  whole  disk  of  the  Sun,  but  only  to 
that  part  of  it  which  could  be  seen  from  the  prism  through  that  hole,  that  it  is 
to  the  apparent  magnitude  of  that  hole  viewed  from  the  prism.  But  that  these 
circles  may  answer  more  distinctly  to  that  hole,  a  lens  is  to  be  placed  by  the 
prism  to  cast  the  image  of  the  hole  (that  is,  every  one  of  the  circles  AG,  BH, 
&c.)  distinctly  upon  the  paper  at  PT,  after  such  a  manner,  as  by  a  lens  placed 
at  a  window,  the  species  of  objects  abroad  are  cast  distinctly  upon  a  paper 


Fig.  23 


406  Optics 

within  the  room,  and  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  oblong  solar  image  in  the  fifth 
experiment  became  distinct  without  any  penumbra.  If  this  be  done,  it  will  not 
be  necessary  to  place  that  hole  very  far  off;  no,  not  beyond  the  window.  And, 
therefore,  instead  of  that  hole,  I  used  the  hole  in  the  window-shut,  as  follows: 

Exper.  11.  In  the  Sun’s  light  let  into  my  darkened  chamber  through  a  small 
round  hole  in  my  window-shut,  at  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  from  the  window,  I 
placed  a  lens,  by  which  the  image  of  the  hole  might  be  distinctly  cast  upon  a 
sheet  of  white  paper,  placed  at  the  distance  of  six,  eight,  ten  or  twelve  feet  from 
the  lens.  For,  according  to  the  difference  of  the  lenses,  I  used  various  distances, 
which  I  think  not  worth  the  while  to  describe.  Then  immediately  after  the  lens 
I  placed  a  prism,  by  which  the  trajected  light  might  be  refracted  either  up¬ 
wards  or  sideways,  and  thereby  the  round  image,  which  the  lens  alone  did  cast 
upon  the  paper  might  be  drawn  out  into  a  long  one  with  parallel  sides,  as  in  the 
third  experiment.  This  oblong  image  I  let  fall  upon  another  paper  at  about  the 
same  distance  from  the  prism  as  before,  moving  the  paper  either  towards  the 
prism  or  from  it,  until  I  found  the  just  distance  where  the  rectilinear  sides  of 
the  image  became  most  distinct.  For  in  this  case,  the  circular  images  of  the 
hole,  which  compose  that  image  after  the  same  manner  that  the  circles  ag,  hh, 
cj,  &c.  do  the  figure  pt  [Fig.  23]  were  terminated  most  distinctly  without  any 
penumbra,  and  therefore  extended  into  one  another  the  least  that  they  could, 
and  by  consequence  the  mixture  of  the  heterogeneous  rays  was  now  the  least  of 
all.  By  this  means  I  used  to  form  an  oblong  image  (such  as  is  pt)  [Fig.  23  and 
24]  of  circular  images  of  the  hole  (such  as  are  ag,  hh,  cj,  &c.),  and  by  using  a 
greater  or  less  hole  in  the  mndow-shut  I  made  the  circular  images  ag,  hh,  cj,  &c. 
of  which  it  was  formed  to  become  greater  or  less  at  pleasure,  and  thereby  the 
mixture  of  the  rays  in  the  image  pt  to  be  as  much,  or  as  little,  as  I  desired. 

Illustration.  In  the  twenty-fourth  Figure,  F  represents  the  circular  hole  in 
the  window-shut,  MN  the  lens,  whereby  the  image  or  species  of  that  hole  is 


cast  distinctly  upon  a  paper  at  J,  ABC  the  prism,  whereby  the  rays  are  at  their 
emerging  out  of  the  lens  refracted  from  J  towards  another  paper  at  pt,  and  the 
round  image  at  J  is  turned  into  an  oblong  image  pt  falling  on  that  other  paper. 
This  image  pt  consists  of  circles  placed  one  after  another  in  a  rectilinear  order, 
as  was  sufficiently  explained  in  the  fifth  experiment;  and  these  circles  are  equal 
to  the  circle  J,  and  consequently  answer  in  magnitude  to  the  hole  F ;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  by  diminishing  that  hole  they  may  be  at  pleasure  diminished,  whilst  their 
centres  remain  in  their  places.  By  this  means  I  made  the  breadth  of  the  image 
pt  to  be  forty  times,  and  sometimes  sixty  or  seventy  times,  less  than  its  length. 
As,  for  instance,  if  the  breadth  of  the  hole  F  be  one  tenth  of  an  inch,  and  MF 


407 


Book  I :  Part  1 

the  distance  of  the  lens  from  the  hole  be  12  feet;  and  if  pB  or  pM  the  distance 
of  the  image  pt  from  the  prism  or  lens  be  10  feet,  and  the  refracting  angle  of  the 
prism  be  62  degrees,  the  breadth  of  the  image  pt  will  be  one-twelfth  of  an  inch, 
and  the  length  about  six  inches,  and  therefore  the  length  to  the  bi-eadth  as  72 
to  1,  and  by  consequence  the  light  of  this  image  71  times  less  compound  than 
the  Sun’s  direct  light.  And  light  thus  far  simple  and  homogeneal  is  sufficient  for 
trying  all  the  experiments  in  this  book  about  simple  light.  For  the  composition 
of  heterogeneal  rays  is  in  this  light  so  little  that  it  is  scarce  to  be  discovered  and 
perceived  by  sense,  except  perhaps  in  the  indigo  and  violet.  For  these  being 
dark  colours  do  easily  suffer  a  sensible  allay  by  that  little  scattering  light  which 
uses  to  be  refracted  irregularly  by  the  inequalities  of  the  prism. 

Yet  instead  of  the  circular  hole  F,  ’tis  better  to  substitute  an  oblong  hole 
shaped  like  a  long  parallelogram  with  its  length  parallel  to  the  prism  ABC.  For 
if  this  hole  be  an  inch  or  two  long,  and  but  a  tenth  or  twentieth  part  of  an  inch 
broad,  or  narrower,  the  light  of  the  image  pt  will  be  as  simple  as  before,  or 
simpler,  and  the  image  will  become  much  broader,  and  therefore  more  fit  to 
have  experiments  tried  in  its  light  than  before. 

Instead  of  this  parallelogram  hole  may  be  substituted  a  triangular  one  of 
equal  sides,  whose  base,  for  instance,  is  about  the  tenth  part  of  an  inch,  and  its 
height  an  inch  or  more.  For  by  this  means,  if  the  axis  of  the  prism  be  parallel  to 
the  perpendicular  of  the  triangle,  the  image  pt  [Fig.  25]  will  now  be  formed  of 
equicrural  triangles  ag,  hh,  cj,  dk,  el,  fin,  &c.  and  innumerable  other  inter¬ 
mediate  ones  answering  to  the  triangular  hole  in  shape  and  bigness,  and  lying 
one  after  another  in  a  continual  series  between  tw^o  parallel  lines  af  and  gm. 

These  triangles  are  a  little  intermin¬ 
gled  at  their  bases,  but  not  at  their 
vertices;  and,  therefore,  the  light  on 
the  brighter  side  aj  of  the  image, 
wffiere  the  bases  of  the  triangles  are, 
is  a  little  compounded,  but  on  the 
darker  side  gm  is  altogether  uncom¬ 
pounded,  and  in  all  places  betAveen 
the  sides  the  composition  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  distances  of  the  places  from  that  obscurer  side  gm.  And  having 
a  spectrum  pt  of  such  a  composition,  we  may  try  experiments  either  in  its 
stronger  and  less  simple  light  near  the  side  af,  or  in  its  weaker  and  simpler  light 
near  the  other  side  gm,  as  it  shall  seem  most  convenient. 

But  in  making  experiments  of  this  kind  the  chamber  ought  to  be  made  as 
dark  as  can  be,  lest  any  foreign  light  mingle  itself  with  the  light  of  the  spectrum 
pt,  and  render  it  compound;  especially  if  we  would  try  experiments  in  the  more 
simple  light  next  the  side  gm  of  the  spectrum;  which  being  fainter,  will  have  a 
less  proportion  to  the  foreign  light;  and  so  by  the  mixture  of  that  light  be  more 
troubled,  and  made  more  compound.  The  lens  also  ought  to  be  good,  such  as 
may  serve  for  optical  uses,  and  the  prism  ought  to  have  a  large  angle,  suppose 
of  65  or  70  degrees,  and  to  be  well  wrought,  being  made  of  glass  free  from 
bubbles  and  veins,  with  its  sides  not  a  little  convex  or  concave,  as  usually 
happens,  but  truly  plane,  and  its  polish  elaborate,  as  in  working  optic-glasses, 
and  not  such  as  is  usually  wrought  with  putty,  wffiereby  the  edges  of  the  sand- 
holes  being  worn  away,  there  are  left  all  over  the  glass  a  numberless  company 


408  Optics 

of  very  little  convex  polite  risings  like  waves.  The  edges  also  of  the  prism  and 
lens,  so  far  as  they  may  make  any  irregular  refraction,  must  be  covered  with  a 
black  paper  glued  on.  And  all  the  light  of  the  Sun’s  beam  let  into  the  chamber, 
which  is  useless  and  unprofitable  to  the  experiment,  ought  to  be  intercepted 
with  black  paper,  or  other  black  obstacles.  For  otherwise  the  useless  light,  being 
reflected  every  way  in  the  chamber,  will  mix  with  the  oblong  spectrum,  and 
help  to  disturb  it.  In  trying  these  things,  so  much  diligence  is  not  altogether 
necessary,  but  it  will  promote  the  success  of  the  experiments,  and  by  a  very 
scrupulous  examiner  of  things  deserves  to  be  applied.  It’s  difficult  to  get  glass 
prisms  fit  for  this  purpose,  and,  therefore,  I  used  sometimes  prismatic  vessels 
made  with  pieces  of  broken  looking-glasses,  and  filled  with  rain  water.  And  to 
increase  the  refraction,  I  sometimes  impregnated  the  water  strongly  with 
saccharum  saturni. 


Proposition  5.  Theorem  4 

Homogeneal  light  is  refracted  regidarly  without  any  dilatation  splitting  or  shatter¬ 
ing  of  the  rays,  and  the  confused  vision  of  objects  seen  through  refracting  bodies  by 
heterogeneal  light  arises  from  the  different  refrangibility  of  several  sorts  of  rays. 

The  first  part  of  this  Proposition  has  been  already  sufficiently  proved  in  the 
fifth  experiment,  and  will  further  appear  by  the  experiments  which  follow. 

Exper.  12.  In  the  middle  of  a  black  paper  I  made  a  round  hole  about  a  fifth 
or  sixth  part  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  Upon  this  paper  I  caused  the  spectrum  of 
homogeneal  light,  described  in  the  former  Proposition,  so  to  fall  that  some  part 
of  the  light  might  pass  through  the  hole  of  the  paper.  This  transmitted  part  of 
the  light  I  refracted  wdth  a  prism  placed  behind  the  paper,  and  letting  this 
refracted  light  fall  perpendicularly  upon  a  wUite  paper  two  or  three  feet  distant 
from  the  prism,  I  found  that  the  spectrum  formed  on  the  paper  by  this  light 
w^as  not  oblong,  as  w'hen  ’tis  made  (in  the  third  experiment)  by  refracting  the 
Sun’s  compound  light,  but  w-as  (so  far  as  I  could  judge  by  my  eye)  perfectly 
circular,  the  length  being  no  greater  than  the  breadth.  Which  shews  that  this 
light  is  refracted  regularly  without  any  dilatation  of  the  rays. 

Exper.  13.  In  the  homogeneal  light  I  placed  a  paper  circle  of  a  quarter  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  and  in  the  Sun’s  unrefracted  heterogeneal  wTite  light  I  placed 
another  paper  circle  of  the  same  bigness.  And  going  from  the  papers  to  the 
distance  of  some  feet,  I  view^ed  both  circles  through  a  prism.  The  circle  illu¬ 
minated  by  the  Sun’s  heterogeneal  light  appeared  very  oblong,  as  in  the  fourth 
experiment,  the  length  being  many  times  greater  than  the  breadth;  but  the 
other  circle,  illuminated  wdth  homogeneal  light,  appeared  circular  and  dis¬ 
tinctly  defined,  as  when  ’tis  viewed  with  the  naked  eye.  Which  proves  the 
vhole  Proposition. 

Exper.  14.  In  the  homogeneal  light  I  placed  flies,  and  such-like  minute 
objects,  and  viewing  them  through  a  prism,  I  saw  their  parts  as  distinctly 
defined  as  if  I  had  view'ed  them  with  the  naked  eye.  The  same  objects  placed  in 
the  Sun’s  unrefracted  heterogeneal  light,  which  w^as  wUite,  I  viewed  also 
through  a  prism,  and  saw  them  most  confusedly  defined,  so  that  I  could  not 
distinguish  their  smaller  parts  from  one  another.  I  placed  also  the  letters  of  a 
small  print,  one  wTile  in  the  homogeneal  light,  and  then  in  the  heterogeneal, 
and  viewing  them  through  a  prism,  they  appeared  in  the  latter  case  so  confused 
and  indistinct  that  I  could  not  read  them;  but,  in  the  former,  they  appeared  so 


Book  I :  Part  1  409 

distinct  that  I  could  read  readily,  and  thought  I  saw  them  as  distinct,  as  when 
I  viewed  them  with  my  naked  eye.  In  both  cases  I  viewed  the  same  objects 
through  the  same  prism  at  the  same  distance  from  me,  and  in  the  same  situ¬ 
ation.  There  was  no  difference  but  in  the  light  by  which  the  objects  were  illu¬ 
minated,  and  which  in  one  case  was  simple,  and  in  the  other  compound;  and, 
therefore,  the  distinct  vision  in  the  former  case,  and  confused  in  the  latter, 
could  arise  from  nothing  else  than  from  that  difference  of  the  lights.  Which 
proves  the  whole  Proposition. 

And  in  these  three  experiments  it  is  further  very  remarkable  that  the  colour 
of  homogeneal  light  was  never  changed  by  the  refraction. 

Proposition  6.  Theorem  5 

The  sine  of  incidence  of  every  ray  considered  apart,  is  to  its  sine  of  refraction  in  a 
given  ratio. 

That  every  ray,  considered  apart,  is  constant  to  itself  in  some  degree  of 
refrangibility  is  sufficiently  manifest  out  of  what  has  been  said.  Those  rays, 
which  in  the  first  refraction  are  at  equal  incidences  most  refracted,  are  also  in 
the  following  refractions  at  equal  incidences  most  refracted;  and  so  of  the  least 
refrangible,  and  the  rest  which  have  any  mean  degree  of  refrangibility,  as  is 
manifest  by  the  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  experiments.  And  those 
which  the  first  time  at  like  incidences  are  equally  refracted,  are  again  at ‘like 
incidences  equally  and  uniformly  refracted,  and  that  whether  they  be  refracted 
before  they  be  separated  from  one  another,  as  in  the  fifth  experiment,  or 
whether  they  be  refracted  apart,  as  in  the  twelfth,  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
experiments.  The  refraction,  therefore,  of  every  ray  apart  is  regular,  and  what 
rule  that  refraction  observes  we  are  now  to  shew. 

The  late  writers  in  Optics  teach  that  the  sines  of  incidence  are  in  a  given 
proportion  to  the  sines  of  refraction,  as  was  explained  in  the  fifth  Axiom;  and 
some  by  instruments  fitted  for  measuring  of  refractions,  or  otherwise  experi¬ 
mentally  examining  this  proportion,  do  acquaint  us  that  they  have  found  it 
accurate.  But  whilst  they,  not  understanding  the  different  refrangibility  of 
several  rays,  conceived  them  all  to  be  refracted  according  to  one  and  the  same 
proportion,  ’tis  to  be  presumed  that  they  adapted  their  measures  only  to  the 
middle  of  the  refracted  light;  so  that  from  their  measures  we  may  conclude 
only  that  the  rays  which  have  a  mean  degree  of  refrangibility  (that  is,  those 
which  when  separated  from  the  rest  appear  green)  are  refracted  according  to  a 
given  proportion  of  their  sines.  And,  therefore,  we  are  now  to  shew  that  the  like 
given  proportions  obtain  in  all  the  rest.  That  it  should  be  so  is  very  reasonable, 
Nature  being  ever  conformable  to  herself;  but  an  experimental  proof  is  desired. 
And  such  a  proof  vdll  be  had  if  we  can  shew  that  the  sines  of  refraction  of  rays 
differently  refrangible  are  one  to  another  in  a  given  proportion  when  their  sines 
of  incidence  are  equal.  For,  if  the  sines  of  refraction  of  all  the  rays  are  in  given 
proportions  to  the  sine  of  refractions  of  a  ray  which  has  a  mean  degree  of 
refrangibility,  and  this  sine  is  in  a  given  proportion  to  the  equal  sines  of  in¬ 
cidence,  those  other  sines  of  refraction  will  also  be  in  given  proportions  to  the 
equal  sines  of  incidence.  Now,  when  the  sines  of  incidence  are  equal,  it  will 
appear  by  the  following  experiment  that  the  sines  of  refraction  are  in  a  given 
proportion  to  one  another. 

Exper.  15.  The  Sun  shining  into  a  dark  chamber  through  a  little  round  hole 


410  Optics 

in  the  window-shut;  let  S  [Fig.  26]  represent  his  round  white  image  painted  on 
the  opposite  wall  by  his  direct  light,  FT  his  oblong  coloured  image  made  by 
refracting  that  light  with  a  prism  placed  at  the  wndow;  and  pt,  or  2p  2t,  2>p  2>t, 
his  oblong  coloured  image  made  by  refracting  again  the  same  light  sideways 
with  a  second  prism  placed  immediately  after  the  first  in  a  cross  position  to  it, 
as  was  explained  in  the  fifth  experiment;  that  is  to  say,  pt  when  the  refraction 
of  the  second  prism  is  small,  2p  2t  when  its  refraction  is  greater,  and  3p  3^  when 
it  is  greatest.  For  such  will  be  the  diversity  of  the  refractions,  if  the  refracting 
angle  of  the  second  prism  be  of  various  magnitudes;  suppose  of  fifteen  or 
twenty  degrees  to  make  the  image  pt,  of  thirty  or  forty  to  make  the  image  2p  2t, 
and  of  sixty  to  make  the  image  2>p  ?>t.  But,  for  want  of  solid  glass  prisms  with 
angles  of  convenient  bignesses,  there  may  be  vessels  made  of  polished  plates  of 
glass  cemented  together  in  the  form  of  prisms  and  filled  with  water.  These 
things  being  thus  ordered,  I  observed  that  all  the  solar  images  or  coloured 
spectrums  PT,  pt,  2p  2t,  3p  3t  did  very  nearly  converge  to  the  place  S  on  w'hich 
the  direct  light  of  the  Sun  fell  and  ^ 
painted  his  \vhite  round  image  f 
when  the  prisms  were  taken  away. 

The  axis  of  the  spectrum  PT  (that 
is,  the  line  drawn  through  the 
middle  of  it  parallel  to  its  recti¬ 
linear  sides)  did,  when  produced, 
pass  exactly  through  the  middle 
of  that  white  round  image  S.  And 
when  the  refraction  of  the  second 
prism  was  equal  to  the  refraction 
of  the  first,  the  refracting  angles 
of  them  both  being  about  60  de¬ 
grees,  the  axis  of  the  spectrum  3p 
3t  made  by  that  refraction,  did 
when  produced  pass  also  through 
the  middle  of  the  same  white  round 
image  S.  But  when  the  refraction 
of  the  second  prism  was  less  than 
that  of  the  first,  the  produced 
axes  of  the  spectrums  tp  or  2t  2p 
made  by  that  refraction  did  cut  the  produced  axis  of  the  spectrum  TP  in  the 
points  m  and  n,  a  little  beyond  the  centre  of  that  white  round  image  S.  Whence 
the  proportion  of  the  line  3iT  to  the  line  3pP  was  a  little  greater  than  the 
proportion  of  2^T  or  2pP,  and  this  proportion  a  little  greater  than  that  of  ^T  to 
pP.  Now,  when  the  light  of  the  spectrum  PT  falls  perpendicularly  upon  the 
wall,  those  lines  3iT,  3pP,  and  2iT,  2pP,  and  ^T,  pP,  are  the  tangents  of  the 
refractions,  and,  therefore,  by  this  experiment  the  proportions  of  the  tangents 
of  the  refractions  are  obtained,  from  whence  the  proportions  of  the  sines  being 
derived,  they  come  out  equal,  so  far  as  by  viewing  the  spectrums,  and  using 
some  mathematical  reasoning,  I  could  estimate.  For  I  did  not  make  an  accurate 
computation.  So  then  the  proposition  holds  true  in  every  ray  apart,  so  far  as 
appears  by  experiment.  And  that  it  is  accurately  true  may  be  demonstrated 
upon  this  supposition:  That  bodies  refract  light  by  acting  upon  its  rays  in  lines 


Fig.  26 


Book  I:  Part  1 


411 


'perpendicular  to  their  surfaces.  But  in  order  to  this  demonstration,  I  must  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  motion  of  every  ray  into  two  motions,  the  one  perpendicular  to 
the  refracting  surface,  the  other  parallel  to  it,  and  concerning  the  perpendicular 
motion  lay  down  the  following  Proposition: 

If  any  motion  or  moving  thing  whatsoever  be  incident  vdth  any  velocity  on 
any  broad  and  thin  space  terminated  on  both  sides  by  two  parallel  planes,  and 
in  its  passage  through  that  space  be  urged  perpendicularly  towards  the  farther 
plane  by  any  force  which  at  given  distances  from  the  plane  is  of  given  quan¬ 
tities,  the  perpendicular  velocity  of  that  motion  or  thing,  at  its  emerging  out  of 
that  space,  shall  be  always  equal  to  the  square  root  of  the  sum  of  the  square  of 
the  perpendicular  velocity  of  that  motion  or  thing  at  its  incidence  on  that 
space;  and  of  the  square  of  the  perpendicular  velocity  which  that  motion  or 
thing  would  have  at  its  emergence,  if  at  its  incidence  its  perpendicular  velocity 
was  infinitely  little. 

And  the  same  proposition  holds  true  of  any  motion  or  thing  perpendicularly 
retarded  in  its  passage  through  that  space,  if  instead  of  the  sum  of  the  two 
squares  you  take  their  difference.  The  demonstration  mathematicians  wll 
easily  find  out,  and  therefore  I  shall  not  trouble  the  reader  with  it. 

Suppose  now  that  a  ray  coming  most  obliquely  in  the  line  MC  [Fig.  1]  be 
refracted  at  C  by  the  plane  RS  into  the  line  CN,  and  if  it  be  required  to  find 
the  line  CE,  into  which  any  other  ray  AC  shall  be  refracted;  let  MC,  AD,  be 
the  sines  of  incidence  of  the  two  rays,  and  NG,  EF,  their  sines  of  refraction,  and 
let  the  equal  motions  of  the  incident  rays  be  represented  by  the  equal  lines  MC 
and  AC,  and  the  motion  MC  being  considered  as  parallel  to  the  refracting 
plane,  let  the  other  motion  AC  be  distinguished  into  two  motions  AD  and  DC, 
one  of  which  AD  is  parallel,  and  the  other  DC  perpendicular  to  the  refracting 
surface.  In  like  manner,  let  the  motions  of  the  emerging  rays  be  distinguished 

MC  AD 

into  two,  whereof  the  perpendicular  ones  are  CG  and  CF.  And  if  the 

iVCr  hr 


force  of  the  refracting  plane  begins  to  act  upon  the  rays  either  in  that  plane  or 
at  a  certain  distance  from  it  on  the  one  side,  and  ends  at  a  certain  distance  from 
it  on  the  other  side,  and  in  all  places  between  those  two  limits  acts  upon  the 
rays  in  lines  perpendicular  to  that  refracting  plane,  and  the  actions  upon  the 
rays  at  equal  distances  from  the  refracting  plane  be  equal,  and  at  unequal  ones 
either  equal  or  unequal  according  to  any  rate  whatever;  that  motion  of  the  ray 
which  is  parallel  to  the  refracting  plane,  mil  suffer  no  alteration  by  that  force; 
and  that  motion  which  is  perpendicular  to  it  mil  be  altered  according  to  the 
rule  of  the  foregoing  proposition.  If,  therefore,  for  the  perpendicular  velocity  of 

the  emerging  ray  CN  you  write  CG  as  above,  then  the  perpendicular 


AD 

velocity  of  any  other  emerging  ray  CE  which  was  CF,  will  be  equal  to  the 

hr 

square  root  of  CGg.  And  by  squaring  these  equals,  and  adding  to 

them  the  equals  ADg  and  MCg— CDg,  and  dividing  the  sums  by  the  equals 

CFg-|-EFg  and  CGgd-NGg,  you  mil  have  equal  to  Whence  AD, 

the  sine  of  incidence,  is  to  EF  the  sine  of  refraction,  as  MC  to  NG,  that  is,  in  a 
given  ratio.  And  this  demonstration  being  general,  without  determining  what 


412  Optics 

light  is,  or  by  what  kind  of  force  it  is  refracted,  or  assuming  any  thing  further 
than  that  the  refracting  body  acts  upon  the  rays  in  lines  perpendicular  to  its 
surface;  I  take  it  to  be  a  very  convincing  argument  of  the  full  truth  of  this 
Proposition. 

So  then,  if  the  ratio  of  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  of  any  sort  of  rays 
be  found  in  any  one  case,  ’tis  given  in  all  cases;  and  this  may  be  readily  found 
by  the  method  in  the  following  Proposition. 

Proposition  7.  Theorem  6 

The  'perfection  of  telescopes  is  impeded  by  the  different  refrangihility  of  the  rays  of 
light. 

The  imperfection  of  telescopes  is  vulgarly  attributed  to  the  spherical  figures 
of  the  glasses,  and,  therefore,  mathematicians  have  propounded  to  figure  them 
by  the  conical  sections.  To  shew  that  they  are  mistaken,  I  have  inserted  this 
proposition;  the  truth  of  which  vdll  appear  by  the  measure  of  the  refractions  of 
the  several  sorts  of  rays;  and  these  measures  I  thus  determine. 

In  the  third  experiment  of  this  first  part,  where  the  refracting  angle  of  the 
prism  was  623^  degrees,  the  half  of  that  angle  31  degrees  15  minutes  is  the 
angle  of  incidence  of  the  rays  at  their  going  out  of  the  glass  into  the  air;  and  the 
sine  of  this  angle  is  5,188,  the  radius  being  10,000.  When  the  axis  of  this  prism 
was  parallel  to  the  horizon,  and  the  refraction  of  the  rays  at  their  incidence  on 
this  prism  equal  to  that  at  their  emergence  out  of  it,  I  observed  mth  a  quadrant 
the  angle  which  the  mean  refrangible  rays,  (that  is,  those  which  went  to  the 
middle  of  the  Sun’s  coloured  image)  made  mth  the  horizon,  and  by  this  angle 
and  the  Sun’s  altitude  observed  at  the  same  time,  I  found  the  angle  which  the 
emergent  rays  contained  ivith  the  incident  to  be  44  degrees  and  40  minutes  and 
the  half  of  this  angle  added  to  the  angle  of  incidence  31  degrees  15  minutes 
makes  the  angle  of  refraction,  which  is,  therefore,  53  degrees  35  minutes  and  its 
sine  8,047.  These  are  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  of  the  mean  refrangi¬ 
ble  rays,  and  their  proportion  in  round  numbers  is  20  to  31.  This  glass  was  of  a 
colour  inclining  to  green.  The  last  of  the  prisms  mentioned  in  the  third  experi¬ 
ment  was  of  clear  white  glass;  its  refracting  angle  633^  degrees;  the  angle  which 
the  emergent  rays  contained,  mth  the  incident  45  degrees  50  minutes;  the  sine 
of  half  the  first  angle  5,262;  the  sine  of  half  the  sum  of  the  angles  8,157;  and 
their  proportion  in  round  numbers  20  to  31,  as  before. 

From  the  length  of  the  image,  which  was  about  934  or  10  inches,  subduct  its 
breadth,  which  was  234  inches,  and  the  remainder  734  inches  would  be  the 
length  of  the  image  were  the  Sun  but  a  point,  and  therefore  subtends  the  angle 
which  the  most  and  least  refrangible  rays,  when  incident  on  the  prism  in  the 
same  lines,  do  contain  mth  one  another  after  their  emergence.  Whence  this 
angle  is  2  degrees  0'  7".  For  the  distance  between  the  image  and  the  prism 
where  this  angle  is  made  was  18)4  ioof;  S'lid  at  that  distance  the  chord  734 
inches  subtends  an  angle  of  2  degrees  0'  7".  Now,  half  this  angle  is  the  angle 
which  these  emergent  rays  contain  mth  the  emergent  mean  refrangible  rays, 
and  a  quarter  thereof  (that  is,  30'  2")  may  be  accounted  the  angle  which  they 
would  contain  mth  the  same  emergent  mean  refrangible  rays,  were  they  co¬ 
incident  to  them  mthin  the  glass,  and  suffered  no  other  refraction  than  that  at 
their  emergence.  For,  if  two  equal  refractions,  the  one  at  the  incidence  of  the 
rays  on  the  prism,  the  other  at  their  emergence,  make  half  the  angle  2  degrees 


Book  I:  Part  1  413 

0'  7",  then  one  of  those  refractions  will  make  about  a  quarter  of  that  angle,  and 
this  quarter  added  to  and  subducted  from  the  angle  of  refraction  of  the  mean 
refrangible  rays,  which  was  53  degrees  35',  gives  the  angles  of  refraction  of  the 
most  and  least  refrangible  rays  54  degrees  5'  2",  and  53  degrees  4'  58",  whose 
sines  are  8,099  and  7,995,  the  common  angle  of  incidence  being  31  degrees  15', 
and  its  sine  5,188;  and  these  sines  in  the  least  round  numbers  are  in  proportion 
to  one  another,  as  78  and  77  to  50. 

Now,  if  you  subduct  the  common  sine  of  incidence  50  from  the  sines  of 
refraction  77  and  78,  the  remainders  27  and  28  shew  that  in  small  refractions 
the  refraction  of  the  least  refrangible  rays  is  to  the  refraction  of  the  most  re¬ 
frangible  ones  as  27  to  28  very  nearly,  and  that  the  difference  of  the  refractions 
of  the  least  refrangible  and  most  refrangible  rays  is  about  the  273/2fh  part  of 
the  whole  refraction  of  the  mean  refrangible  rays. 

Whence  they  that  are  skilled  in  Optics  will  easily  understand,  that  the 
breadth  of  the  least  circular  space  into  which  object-glasses  of  telescopes  can 
collect  all  sorts  of  parallel  rays,  is  about  the  273^th  part  of  half  the  aperture  of 
the  glass,  or  55th  part  of  the  whole  aperture;  and  that  the  focus  of  the  most 
refrangible  rays  is  nearer  to  the  object-glass  than  the  focus  of  the  least  re¬ 
frangible  ones,  by  about  the  27^th  part  of  the  distance  between  the  object- 
glass  and  the  focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  ones. 

And  if  rays  of  all  sorts,  flowing  from  any  one  lucid  point  in  the  axis  of  any 
convex  lens,  be  made  by  the  refraction  of  the  lens  to  converge  to  points  not  too 
remote  from  the  lens,  the  focus  of  the  most  refrangible  rays  shall  be  nearer  to 
the  lens  than  the  focus  of  the  least  refrangible  ones,  by  a  distance  w^hich  is  to 
the  273/^th  part  of  the  distance  of  the  focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  rays  from 
the  lens,  as  the  distance  between  that  focus  and  the  lucid  point,  from  whence 
the  rays  flow,  is  to  the  distance  betw^een  that  lucid  point  and  the  lens  very 
nearly. 

Now,  to  examine  whether  the  difference  betw'een  the  refractions,  w^hich  the 
most  refrangible  and  the  least  refrangible  rays  flowing  from  the  same  point 
suffer  in  the  object-glasses  of  telescopes  and  suchlike  glasses,  be  so  great  as  is 
here  described,  I  contrived  the  following  experiment: 

Exper.  16.  The  lens  wEich  I  used  in  the  second  and  eighth  Experiments, 
being  placed  six  feet  and  an  inch  distant  from  any  object,  collected  the  species 
of  that  object  by  the  mean  refrangible  rays  at  the  distance  of  six  feet  and  an 
inch  from  the  lens  on  the  other  side.  And,  therefore,  by  the  foregoing  rule,  it 
ought  to  collect  the  species  of  that  object  by  the  least  refrangible  rays  at  the 
distance  of  six  feet  and  inches  from  the  lens,  and  by  the  most  refrangible 
ones  at  the  distance  of  five  feet  and  103^  inches  from  it:  So  that  betw^een  the 
two  places,  wEere  these  least  and  most  refrangible  rays  collect  the  species, 
there  may  be  the  distance  of  about  53^  inches.  For  by  that  rule,  as  six  feet  and 
an  inch  (the  distance  of  the  lens  from  the  lucid  object)  is  to  twelve  feet  and  two 
inches  (the  distance  of  the  lucid  object  from  the  focus  of  the  mean  refrangible 
rays)  that  is,  as  one  is  to  tw'o;  so  is  the  273^th  part  of  six  feet  and  an  inch  (the 
distance  between  the  lens  and  the  same  focus)  to  the  distance  between  the 
focus  of  the  most  refrangible  rays  and  the  focus  of  the  least  refrangible  ones, 
wEich  is,  therefore,  5H  inches;  that  is,  very  nearly  53^  inches.  Now",  to  know' 
w'hether  this  measure  w'as  true,  I  repeated  the  second  and  eighth  experiment 
w'ith  coloured  light,  w'hich  was  less  compounded  than  that  I  there  made  use  of. 


414  Optics 

For  I  now  separated  the  heterogeneous  rays  from  one  another  by  the  method  I 
described  in  the  eleventh  experiment,  so  as  to  make  a  coloured  spectrum  about 
twelve  or  fifteen  times  longer  than  broad.  This  spectrum  I  cast  on  a  printed 
book,  and  placing  the  above-mentioned  lens  at  the  distance  of  six  feet  and  an 
inch  from  this  spectrum  to  collect  the  species  of  the  illuminated  letters  at  the 
same  distance  on  the  other  side,  I  found  that  the  species  of  the  letters  illumi¬ 
nated  vith  blue  were  nearer  to  the  lens  than  those  illuminated  -with  deep  red  by 
about  three  inches,  or  three  and  a  quarter;  but  the  species  of  the  letters  illu¬ 
minated  with  indigo  and  violet  appeared  so  confused  and  indistinct  that  I 
could  not  read  them;  whereupon,  viemng  the  prism,  I  found  it  was  full  of  veins 
running  from  one  end  of  the  glass  to  the  other;  so  that  the  refraction  could 
not  be  regular.  I  took  another  prism,  therefore,  which  was  free  from  veins,  and 
instead  of  the  letters  I  used  two  or  three  parallel  black  lines  a  little  broader  than 
the  strokes  of  the  letters,  and  casting  the  colours  upon  these  lines  in  such  man¬ 
ner  that  the  lines  ran  along  the  colours  from  one  end  of  the  spectrum  to  the 
other,  I  found  that  the  focus  where  the  indigo,  or  confine  of  this  colour  and 
violet,  cast  the  species  of  the  black  lines  most  distinctly,  to  be  about  four 
inches,  or  434  nearer  to  the  lens  than  the  focus,  where  the  deepest  red  cast  the 
species  of  the  same  black  lines  most  distinctly.  The  violet  was  so  faint  and  dark 
that  I  could  not  discern  the  species  of  the  lines  distinctly  by  that  colour;  and, 
therefore,  considering  that  the  prism  was  made  of  a  dark-coloured  glass  inclin¬ 
ing  to  green,  I  took  another  prism  of  clear  white  glass;  but  the  spectrum  of 
colours  which  this  prism  made  had  long  white  streams  of  faint  light  shooting 
out  from  both  ends  of  the  colours,  which  made  me  conclude  that  something  was 
amiss;  and  viewing  the  prism,  I  found  two  or  three  little  bubbles  in  the  glass, 
which  refracted  the  light  irregularly.  Wherefore  I  covered  that  part  of  the 
glass  vith  black  paper,  and  letting  the  light  pass  through  another  part  of  it 
which  was  free  from  such  bubbles,  the  spectrum  of  colours  became  free  from 
those  irregular  streams  of  light,  and  was  now  such  as  I  desired.  But  still  I  found 
the  violet  so  dark  and  faint  that  I  could  scarce  see  the  species  of  the  lines  by  the 
violet,  and  not  at  all  by  the  deepest  part  of  it,  which  was  next  the  end  of  the 
spectrum.  I  suspected,  therefore,  that  this  faint  and  dark  colour  might  be  al¬ 
layed  by  that  scattering  light  which  was  refracted,  and  reflected  irregularly, 
partly  by  some  very  small  bubbles  in  the  glasses,  and  partly  by  the  inequalities 
of  their  polish ;  which  light,  tho’  it  was  but  little,  yet  it  being  of  a  white  colour, 
might  suffice  to  affect  the  sense  so  strongly  as  to  disturb  the  phenomena  of  that 
weak  and  dark  colour,  the  violet;  and,  therefore,  I  tried  (as  in  the  12th,  13th, 
and  14th  experiments)  whether  the  light  of  this  colour  did  not  consist  of  a 
sensible  mixture  of  heterogeneous  rays,  but  found  it  did  not.  Nor  did  the  re¬ 
fractions  cause  any  other  sensible  colour  than  violet  to  emerge  out  of  this  light, 
as  they  would  have  done  out  of  white  light,  and  by  consequence  out  of  this 
violet  light  had  it  been  sensibly  compounded  ^^^th  white  light.  And,  therefore, 
I  concluded  that  the  reason  why  I  could  not  see  the  species  of  the  lines  distinct¬ 
ly  by  this  colour  was  only  the  darkness  of  this  colour  and  thinness  of  its  light, 
and  its  distance  from  the  axis  of  the  lens;  I  divided,  therefore,  those  parallel 
black  lines  into  equal  parts,  by  which  I  might  readily  know  the  distances  of  the 
colours  in  the  spectrum  from  one  another,  and  noted  the  distances  of  the  lens 
from  the  foci  of  such  colours,  as  cast  the  species  of  the  lines  distinctly,  and  then 
considered  whether  the  difference  of  those  distances  bear  such  proportion  to 


Book  I:  Part  1  415 

53^  inches,  the  greatest  difference  of  the  distances,  which  the  foci  of  the  deepest 
red  and  violet  ought  to  have  from  the  lens,  as  the  distance  of  the  observed 
colours  from  one  another  in  the  spectrum  bear  to  the  greatest  distance  of  the 
deepest  red  and  violet  measured  in  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  spectrum,  (that 
is,  to  the  length  of  those  sides)  or  excess  of  the  length  of  the  spectrum  above  its 
breadth.  And  my  observations  were  as  follows: 

^\^len  I  observed  and  compared  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  the  colour  in 
the  confine  of  green  and  blue,  which  at  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  spectrum  was 
distant  from  it  half  the  length  of  those  sides,  the  focus  where  the  confine  of 
green  and  blue  cast  the  species  of  the  lines  distinctly  on  the  paper  was  nearer  to 
the  lens  than  the  focus,  where  the  red  cast  those  lines  distinctly  on  it  by  about 
2Y2  or  2^  inches.  For  sometimes  the  measures  were  a  little  greater,  sometimes 
a  little  less,  but  seldom  varied  from  one  another  above  one-third  of  an  inch.  For 
it  was  very  difficult  to  define  the  places  of  the  foci,  vdthout  some  little  errors. 
Now,  if  the  colours  distant  half  the  length  of  the  image  (measured  at  its  recti¬ 
linear  sides)  give  2)4.  or  2^  difference  of  the  distances  of  their  foci  from  the 
lens,  then  the  colours  distant  the  whole  length  ought  to  give  5  or  bY  inches 
difference  of  those  distances. 

But  here  it’s  to  be  noted  that  I  could  not  see  the  red  to  the  full  end  of  the 
spectrum,  but  only  to  the  centre  of  the  semicircle  which  bounded  that  end,  or 
a  little  farther;  and,  therefore,  I  compared  this  red,  not  vdth  that  colour  which 
was  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  spectrum,  or  confine  of  green  and  blue,  but 
vdth  that  which  verged  a  little  more  to  the  blue  than  to  the  green.  And  as  I 
reckoned  the  whole  length  of  the  colours  not  to  be  the  whole  length  of  the 
spectrum,  but  the  length  of  its  rectilinear  sides,  so  completing  the  semicircular 
ends  into  circles,  when  either  of  the  observed  colours  fell  vdthin  those  circles,  I 
measured  the  distance  of  that  colour  from  the  semicircular  end  of  the  spectrum, 
and  subducting  half  this  distance  from  the  measured  distance  of  the  two  col¬ 
ours  I  took  the  remainder  for  their  corrected  distance;  and  in  these  observa¬ 
tions  set  dovm  this  corrected  distance  for  the  difference  of  the  distances  of 
their  foci  from  the  lens.  For,  as  the  length  of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  spec¬ 
trum  would  be  the  Avhole  length  of  all  the  colours,  were  the  circles  of  which  (as 
we  shewed)  that  spectrum  consists  contracted  and  reduced  to  physical  points, 
so  in  that  case  this  corrected  distance  would  be  the  real  distance  of  the  two 
observed  colours. 

When,  therefore,  I  further  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  that  blue 
whose  corrected  distance  from  it  was  Yn  pai’ts  of  the  length  of  the  rectilinear 
sides  of  the  spectrum,  the  difference  of  the  distances  of  their  foci  from  the  lens 
was  about  3^  inches;  and  as  7  to  12,  so  is  V/i  to  hYi- 

When  I  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  that  indigo  Avhose  corrected 
distance  was  Yvi  or  Yz  of  the  length  of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  spectrum,  the 
difference  of  the  distances  of  their  foci  from  the  lens  was  about  33^  inches;  and 
as  2  to  3,  so  is  3%  to  5)^. 

When  I  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  that  deep  indigo  Avhose  cor¬ 
rected  distance  from  one  another  Avas  Yvi  or  Y  of  the  length  of  the  rectilinear 
sides  of  the  spectrum,  the  difference  of  the  distances  of  their  foci  from  the  lens 
AA'as  about  4  inches;  and  as  3  to  4,  so  is  4  to  5)^. 

When  I  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  that  part  of  the  violet  next 
the  indigo,  AA’hose  corrected  distance  from  the  red  AA'as  or  %  of  the  length 


416  Optics 

of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  spectrum,  the  difference  of  the  distances  of  their 
foci  from  the  lens  was  about  43^  inches;  and  as  5  to  6,  so  is  43^  to  For 
sometimes,  when  the  lens  was  advantageously  placed,  so  that  its  axis  respected 
the  blue,  and  all  things  else  were  well  ordered,  and  the  Sun  shone  clear,  and  I 
held  my  eye  very  near  to  the  paper  on  which  the  lens  cast  the  species  of  the 
lines,  I  could  see  pretty  distinctly  the  species  of  those  lines  by  that  part  of  the 
violet  which  was  next  the  indigo;  and  sometimes  I  could  see  them  by  above 
half  the  violet.  For  in  making  these  experiments  I  had  observed  that  the  species 
of  those  colours  only  appear  distinct  which  were  in  or  near  the  axis  of  the  lens; 
so  that  if  the  blue  or  indigo  were  in  the  axis,  I  could  see  their  species  distinctly ; 
and  then  the  red  appeared  much  less  distinct  than  before.  Wherefore  I  con¬ 
trived  to  make  the  spectrum  of  colours  shorter  than  before,  so  that  both  its 
ends  might  be  nearer  to  the  axis  of  the  lens.  And  now  its  length  was  about  23/^ 
inches,  and  breadth  about  3/5  or  3/6  of  an  inch.  Also,  instead  of  the  black  lines  on 
which  the  spectrum  was  cast,  I  made  one  black  line  broader  than  those,  that  I 
might  see  its  species  more  easily;  and  this  line  I  divided  by  short  cross  lines 
into  equal  parts,  for  measuring  the  distances  of  the  observed  colours.  And  now 
I  could  sometimes  see  the  species  of  this  line  with  its  divisions  almost  as  far  as 
the  centre  of  the  semicircular  violet  end  of  the  spectrum,  and  made  these 
farther  observations : 

When  I  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  that  part  of  the  violet,  whose 
corrected  distance  from  it  was  about  ^  parts  of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the 
spectrum,  the  difference  of  the  distances  of  the  foci  of  those  colours  from  the 
lens  was  one  time  4%,  another  time  4^,  another  time  4j^  inches;  and  as  8  to  9, 
so  are  4%,  4^,  4%,  to  534,  5%,  5^3^4,  respectively. 

When  I  observed  the  deepest  sensible  red,  and  deepest  sensible  violet,  (the 
corrected  distance  of  which  colours,  when  all  things  were  ordered  to  the  best 
advantage,  and  the  Sun  shone  very  clear,  was  about  ^3^2  or  parts  of  the 
length  of  the  rectilinear  sides  of  the  coloured  spectrum)  I  found  the  difference 
of  the  distances  of  their  foci  from  the  lens  sometimes  4%  sometimes  534,  and 
for  the  most  part  5  inches  or  thereabouts;  and  as  11  to  12,  or  15  to  16,  so  is  five 
inches  to  5^i  or  534  inches. 

And  by  this  progression  of  experiments  I  satisfied  myself  that,  had  the  light 
at  the  very  ends  of  the  spectrum  been  strong  enough  to  make  the  species  of  the 
black  lines  appear  plainly  on  the  paper,  the  focus  of  the  deepest  violet  would 
have  been  found  nearer  to  the  lens,  than  the  focus  of  the  deepest  red,  by  about 
534  inches  at  least.  And  this  is  a  further  evidence  that  the  sines  of  incidence  and 
refraction  of  the  several  sorts  of  rays  hold  the  same  proportion  to  one 
another  in  the  smallest  refractions  which  they  do  in  the  greatest. 

My  progress  in  making  this  nice  and  troublesome  experiment  I  have  set 
down  more  at  large,  that  they  that  shall  try  it  after  me  may  be  aware  of  the 
circumspection  requisite  to  make  it  succeed  well.  And  if  they  cannot  make  it 
succeed  so  well  as  I  did,  they  may  notwithstanding  collect  by  the  proportion 
of  the  distance  of  the  colours  of  the  spectrum,  to  the  difference  of  the  distances 
of  their  foci  from  the  lens,  what  would  be  the  success  in  the  more  distant  colours 
by  a  better  trial.  And  yet,  if  they  use  a  broader  lens  than  I  did,  and  fix  it  to  a 
long  strait  staff,  by  means  of  which  it  may  be  readily  and  truly  directed  to  the 
colour  whose  focus  is  desired,  I  question  not  but  the  experiment  will  succeed 


Book  I:  Part  1 


417 


better  with  them  than  it  did  with  me.  For  I  directed  the  axis  as  nearly  as  I  could 
to  the  middle  of  the  colours,  and  then  the  faint  ends  of  the  spectrum  being  re¬ 
mote  from  the  axis,  cast  their  species  less  distinctly  on  the  paper  than  they 
would  have  done  had  the  axis  been  successively  directed  to  them. 

Now,  by  what  has  been  said,  it’s  certain  that  the  rays  which  differ  in  re- 
frangibility  do  not  converge  to  the  same  focus;  but  if  they  flow  from  a  lucid 
point,  as  far  from  the  lens  on  one  side  as  their  foci  are  on  the  other,  the  focus  of 
the  most  refrangible  rays  shall  be  nearer  to  the  lens  than  that  of  the  least 
refrangible,  by  above  the  fourteenth  part  of  the  whole  distance;  and  if  they 
flow  from  a  lucid  point,  so  very  remote  from  the  lens  that  before  their  incidence 
they  may  be  accounted  parallel,  the  focus  of  the  most  refrangible  rays  shall  be 
nearer  to  the  lens  than  the  focus  of  the  least  refrangible  by  about  the  27th  or 
28th  part  of  their  whole  distance  from  it.  And  the  diameter  of  the  circle  in  the 
middle  space  between  those  two  foci  which  they  illuminate,  when  they  fall 
there  on  any  plane,  perpendicular  to  the  axis  (which  circle  is  the  least  into 
which  they  can  all  be  gathered)  is  about  the  55th  part  of  the  diameter  of  the 
aperture  of  the  glass.  So  that  ’tis  a  wonder  that  telescopes  represent  objects  so 
distinct  as  they  do.  But  were  all  the  rays  of  light  equally  refrangible,  the  error 
arising  only  from  the  sphericalness  of  the  figures  of  glasses  would  be  many 
hundred  times  less.  For,  if  the  object-glass  of  a  telescope  be  plano-convex,  and 
the  plane  side  be  turned  towards  the  object,  and  the  diameter  of  the  sphere, 
whereof  this  glass  is  a  segment,  be  called  D,  and  the  semidiameter  of  the  aper¬ 
ture  of  the  glass  be  called  S,  and  the  sine  of  incidence  out  of  glass  into  air  be  to 
the  sine  of  refraction  as  I  to  R;  the  rays  which  come  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the 
glass,  shall  in  the  place  where  the  image  of  the  object  is  most  distinctly  made 

be  scattered  all  over  a  little  circle,  whose  diameter  is  cub. 

IqXD  quad. 

nearly,  as  I  gather  by  computing  the  errors  of  the  rays  by  the  method  of  in¬ 
finite  series,  and  rejecting  the  terms  whose  quantities  are  inconsiderable.  As  for 
instance,  if  the  sine  of  incidence  I  be  to  the  sine  of  refraction  R  as  20  to  31,  and 
if  D  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  to  which  the  convex-side  of  the  glass  is  ground, 
be  100  feet  of  1200  inches,  and  S  the  semidiameter  of  the  aperture  be  two 

inches,  the  diameter  of  the  little  circle,  ("that  is  will  be 

\  IqXD  quad./ 

31X31x8 

^^OX 1200 X 1200^^^  ~2:o^^.o~o o)  parts  of  an  inch.  But  the  diameter  of  the 


little  circle,  through  which  these  rays  are  scattered  by  unequal  refrangibility, 
will  be  about  the  55th  part  of  the  aperture  of  the  object-glass,  which  here  is 
four  inches.  And,  therefore,  the  error  arising  from  the  spherical  figure  of  the 
glass  is  to  the  error  arising  from  the  different  refrangibility  of  the  Rays  as 
7  2.oVo^.ooo  that  is,  as  Ito  5449;  and,  therefore,  being  in  comparison  so  very 

little,  deserves  not  to  be  considered. 

But  you  mil  say,  if  the  errors  caused  by  the  different  refrangibility  be  so 
very  great,  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  objects  appear  through  telescopes  so 
distinct  as  they  do?  I  answer,  ’tis  because  the  erring  rays  are  not  scattered 
uniformly  over  all  that  circular  space,  but  collected  infinitely  more  densely  in 
the  centre  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  circle,  and  in  the  way  from  the  centre 
to  the  circumference,  grow  continually  rarer  and  rarer,  so  as  at  the  circum¬ 
ference  to  become  infinitely  rare;  and  by  reason  of  their  rarity  are  not  strong 


418  Optics 

enough  to  be  visible  unless  in  the  centre  and  very  near  it.  Let  ADE  [Fig.  27] 
represent  one  of  those  circles  described  with  the  centre  C,  and  semidiameter 
AC,  and  let  BFG  be  a  smaller  circle  concentric  to  the  former,  cutting  with  its 
circumference  the  diameter  AC  in  B,  and  bisect  AC  in 
N;  and  by  my  reckoning  the  density  of  the  light  in 
any  place  B  will  be  to  its  density  in  N  as  AB  to  BC; 
and  the  whole  light  within  the  lesser  circle  BFG 
will  be  to  the  whole  light  within  the  greater  AED  as 
the  excess  of  the  square  of  AC  above  the  square  of 
AB  is  to  the  square  of  AC.  As  if  BC  be  the  fifth  part 
of  AC,  the  light  will  be  four  times  denser  in  B  than 
in  X,  and  the  whole  light  within  the  less  circle  will  be 
to  the  whole  light  within  the  greater  as  nine  to 
twenty-five.  Whence  it’s  evident  that  the  light  with¬ 
in  the  less  circle  must  strike  the  sense  much  more 
strongly  than  that  faint  and  dilated  light  round  about  between  it  and  the 
circumference  of  the  greater. 

But  it’s  further  to  be  noted  that  the  most  luminous  of  the  prismatic  colours 
are  the  yellow  and  orange.  These  affect  the  senses  more  strongly  than  all  the 
rest  together,  and  next  to  these  in  strength  are  the  red  and  green.  The  blue 
compared  with  these  is  a  faint  and  dark  colour,  and  the  indigo  and  violet  are 
much  darker  and  fainter,  so  that  these  compared  with  the  stronger  colours  are 
little  to  be  regarded.  The  images  of  objects  are  therefore  to  be  placed,  not  in 
the  focus  of  the  mean  refrangible  rays,  which  are  in  the  confine  of  green  and 
blue,  but  in  the  focus  of  those  rays  which  are  in  the  middle  of  the  orange  and 
yellow;  there  where  the  colour  is  most  luminous  and  fulgent  (that  is,  in  the 
brightest  yellow,  that  yellow  which  inclines  more  to  orange  than  to  green).  And 
by  the  refraction  of  these  rays  (whose  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  in  glass 
areas  17  and  11)  the  refraction  of  glass  and  crystal  for  optical  uses  is  to  be 
measured.  Let  us,  therefore,  place  the  image  of  the  object  in  the  focus  of  these 
rays,  and  all  the  yellow  and  orange  will  fall  within  a  circle  whose  diameter  is 
about  the  250th  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  aperture  of  the  glass.  x4nd  if  you 
add  the  brighter  half  of  the  red  (that  half  which  is  next  the  orange)  and  the 
brighter  half  of  the  green  (that  half  which  is  next  the  yellow),  about  three  fifth 
parts  of  the  light  of  these  two  colours  will  fall  within  the  same  circle,  and  two- 
fifth  parts  will  fall  without  it  round  about;  and  that  which  falls  without  mil  be 
spread  through  almost  as  much  more  space  as  that  which  falls  within,  and  so  in 
the  gross  be  almost  three  times  rarer.  Of  the  other  half  of  the  red  and  green, 
(that  is,  of  the  deep  dark  red  and  willow'  green),  about  one-quarter  will  fall 
within  this  circle,  and  three-quarters  without,  and  that  w'hich  falls  without  will 
be  spread  through  about  four  or  five  times  more  space  than  that  which  falls 
within ;  and  so  in  the  gross  be  rarer,  and  if  compared  with  the  whole  light  within 
it,  Avill  be  about  25  times  rarer  than  all  that  taken  in  the  gross;  or  rather  more 
than  30  or  40  times  rarer,  because  the  deep  red  in  the  end  of  the  spectrum  of 
colours  made  by  a  prism  is  very  thin  and  rare,  and  the  willow'  green  is  something 
rarer  than  the  orange  and  yellow’.  The  light  of  these  colours,  therefore,  being  so 
very  much  rarer  than  that  within  the  circle,  will  scarce  affect  the  sense,  es¬ 
pecially  since  the  deep  red  and  willow  green  of  this  light  are  much  darker 
colours  than  the  rest.  And  for  the  same  reason  the  blue  and  violet  being  much 


Book  I :  Part  I  419 

darker  colours  than  these,  and  much  more  rarefied,  may  be  neglected.  For  the 
dense  and  bright  light  of  the  circle  ^'idll  obscure  the  rare  and  weak  light  of  these 
dark  colours  round  about  it,  and  render  them  almost  insensible.  The  sensible 
image  of  a  lucid  point  is,  therefore,  scarce  broader  than  a  circle,  whose  diameter 
is  the  250th  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  aperture  of  the  object-glass  of  a  good 
telescope,  or  not  much  broader,  if  you  except  a  faint  and  dark  misty  light 
round  about  it,  which  a  spectator  ^\'ill  scarce  regard.  And,  therefore,  in  a 
telescope  whose  aperture  is  four  inches,  and  length  an  hundred  feet,  it  exceeds 
not  2”  45'",  or  3".  And  in  a  telescope  whose  aperture  is  two  inches,  and  length  20 
or  30  feet,  it  may  be  5"  or  6",  and  scarce  above.  And  this  answers  well  to 
experience :  for  some  astronomers  have  found  the  diameters  of  the  fixed  stars, 
in  telescopes  of  between  20  and  60  feet  in  length,  to  be  about  5"  or  6",  or 
at  most  8  or  10  seconds.  But  if  the  eye-glass  be  tinted  faintly  vdth  the 
smoke  of  a  lamp  or  torch,  to  obscure  the  light  of  the  star,  the  fainter 
light  in  the  circumference  of  the  star  ceases  to  be  visible,  and  the  star  (if 
the  glass  be  sufficiently  soiled  vdth  smoke)  appears  something  more  like  a 
mathematical  point.  And,  for  the  same  reason,  the  enormous  part  of  the  light 
in  the  circumference  of  every  lucid  point  ought  to  be  less  discernible  in 
shorter  telescopes  than  in  longer,  because  the  shorter  transmit  less  light  to 
the  eye. 

Now,  that  the  fixed  stars,  by  reason  of  their  immense  distance,  appear  like 
points,  unless  so  far  as  their  light  is  dilated  by  refraction,  may  appear  from 
hence;  that  when  the  moon  passes  over  them  and  eclipses  them,  their  light 
vanishes,  not  gradually  like  that  of  the  planets,  but  all  at  once;  and  in  the  end 
of  the  eclipse  it  returns  into  sight  all  at  once,  or  certainly  in  less  time  than  the 
second  of  a  minute;  the  refraction  of  the  moon’s  atmosphere  a  little  protracting 
the  time  in  which  the  light  of  the  star  first  vanishes,  and  afterwards  returns 
into  sight. 

Now,  if  we  suppose  the  sensible  image  of  a  lucid  point  to  be  even  250  times 
narrower  than  the  aperture  of  the  glass,  yet  this  image  would  be  still  much 
greater  than  if  it  were  only  from  the  spherical  figure  of  the  glass.  For  were  it 
not  for  the  different  refrangibility  of  the  rays,  its  breadth  in  a  100-foot  tele¬ 
scope,  whose  aperture  is  4  inches,  would  be  but  parts  of  an  inch,  as  is 

manifest  by  the  foregoing  computation.  And,  therefore,  in  this  case,  the  great¬ 
est  errors  arising  from  the  spherical  figure  of  the  glass  would  be  to  the  greatest 
sensible  errors  arising  from  the  different  refrangibility  of  the  rays  as  V  2.oVo^ooo 
to  at  most;  that  is,  only  as  1  to  1200.  And  this  sufficiently  shews  that 
it  is  not  the  spherical  figures  of  glasses,  but  the  different  refrangibility  of  the 
rays,  which  hinders  the  perfection  of  telescopes. 

There  is  another  argument  by  which  it  may  appear  that  the  different  re¬ 
frangibility  of  rays  is  the  true  cause  of  the  imperfection  of  telescopes.  For  the 
errors  of  the  rays,  arising  from  the  spherical  figures  of  object-glasses  are  as 
the  cubes  of  the  apertures  of  the  object-glasses;  and  thence  to  make  tele¬ 
scopes  of  various  lengths  magnify  with  equal  distinctness,  the  apertures  of 
the  object-glasses,  and  the  charges  or  magnifying  powers,  ought  to  be  as 
the  cubes  of  the  square  roots  of  their  lengths;  which  doth  not  answer  to  experi¬ 
ence.  But  the  errors  of  the  rays,  arising  from  the  different  refrangibility,  are 
as  the  apertures  of  the  object-glasses;  and  thence  to  make  telescopes  of  vari¬ 
ous  lengths  magnify  with  equal  distinctness,  their  apertures  and  charges  ought 


420  Optics 

to  be  as  the  square  roots  of  their  lengths;  and  this  answers  to  experience,  as  is 
well  known.  For  instance,  a  telescope  of  64  feet  in  length,  with  an  aperture  of 
2%  inches,  magnifies  about  120  times,  "with  as  much  distinctness  as  one  of  a 
foot  in  length,  >nth  }/^  of  an  inch  aperture,  magnifies  15  times. 

Now,  were  it  not  for  this  different  refrangibility  of  rays,  telescopes  might  be 
brought  to  a  greater  perfection  than  we  have  yet  described,  by  composing  the 
object-glass  of  two  glasses  wdth  water  between  them.  Let  ADFC  [Fig.  28] 
represent  the  object-glass  composed  of  two  glasses  ABED  and  BEFC,  alike 
convex  on  the  outsides  AGD  and  CHF,  and  alike  concave  on  the 
insides  BME,  BNE,  mth  water  in  the  concavity  BMEN.  Let 
the  sine  of  incidence  out  of  glass  into  air  be  as  I  to  R,  and  out 
of  water  into  air,  as  K  to  R,  and  by  consequence  out  of  glass  in¬ 
to  water,  as  I  to  K:  and  let  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  to  which 
the  convex  sides  AGD  and  CHF  are  ground  be  D,  and  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  sphere  to  which  the  concave  sides  BME  and  BNE 
are  ground  be  to  D  as  the  cube  root  of  KK — KI  to  the  cube 
root  of  RK — RI ;  and  the  refractions  on  the  concave  sides  of  the 
glasses  will  very  much  correct  the  errors  of  the  refractions  on 
the  convex  sides,  so  far  as  they  arise  from  the  sphericalness  of 
the  figure.  And  by  this  means  might  telescopes  be  brought  to 
sufficient  perfection,  were  it  not  for  the  different  refrangibility  of 
several  sorts  of  rays.  But  by  reason  of  this  different  refrangibility,  I  do  not  yet 
see  any  other  means  of  improving  telescopes  by  refractions  alone,  than  that 
of  increasing  their  lengths,  for  which  end  the  late  contrivance  of  Huygens 
seems  well  accommodated.  For  very  long  tubes  are  cumbersome,  and  scarce 
to  be  readily  managed,  and  by  reason  of  their  length  are  very  apt  to  bend, 
and  shake  by  bending,  so  as  to  cause  a  continual  trembling  in  the  objects, 
whereby  it  becomes  difficult  to  see  them  distinctly;  whereas  by  his  contri¬ 
vance  the  glasses  are  readily  manageable,  and  the  object-glass  being  fixed  up¬ 
on  a  strong  upright  pole  becomes  more  steady. 

Seeing,  therefore,  the  improvement  of  telescopes  of  given  lengths  by  re¬ 
fractions  is  desperate,  I  contrived  heretofore  a  perspective  by  reflexion,  using 
instead  of  an  object-glass  a  concave  metal.  The  diameter  of  the  sphere  to  which 
the  metal  was  ground  concave  was  about  25  English  inches,  and  by  conse¬ 
quence  the  length  of  the  instrument  about  six  inches  and  a  quarter.  The  eye¬ 
glass  was  plano-convex,  and  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  to  which  the  convex 
side  was  ground  was  about  i  of  an  inch,  or  a  little  less,  and  by  consequence  it 
magnified  between  30  and  40  times.  By  another  way  of  measuring  I  found  that 
it  magnified  about  35  times.  The  concave  metal  bore  an  aperture  of  an  inch  and 
a  third  part;  but  the  aperture  was  limited,  not  by  an  opaque  circle  covering  the 
limb  of  the  metal  round  about,  but  by  an  opaque  circle  placed  betAveen  the 
eye-glass  and  the  eye,  and  perforated  in  the  middle  with  a  little  round  hole  for 
the  rays  to  pass  through  to  the  eye.  For  this  circle  by  being  placed  here,  stopped 
much  of  the  erroneous  light  which  otherAvise  A\-ould  have  disturbed  the  vision. 
By  comparing  it  AAdth  a  pretty  good  perspective  of  four  feet  in  length,  made 
AAuth  a  concave  eye-glass,  I  could  read  at  a  greater  distance  Avith  my  OAvm 
instrument  than  AAdth  the  glass.  Yet  objects  appeared  much  darker  in  it  than  in 
the  glass,  and  that  partly  because  more  light  Avas  lost  by  reflexion  in  the  metal, 
than  by  refraction  in  the  glass,  and  partly  because  my  instrument  Avas  over- 


Fig.  28 


Book  I:  Part  1  421 

charged.  Had  it  magnified  but  30  or  25  times,  it  would  have  made  the  object 
appear  more  brisk  and  pleasant.  Two  of  these  I  made  about  16  years  ago,  and 
have  one  of  them  still  by  me,  by  which  I  can  prove  the  truth  of  what  I  write. 
Yet  it  is  not  so  good  as  at  the  first.  For  the  concave  has  been  divers  times 
tarnished  and  cleared  again,  by  rubbing  it  Avith  very  soft  leather.  When  I  made 
these  an  artist  in  London  undertook  to  imitate  it;  but  using  another  way  of 
polishing  them  than  I  did,  he  fell  much  short  of  Avhat  I  had  attained  to,  as  I 
afterAvards  understood  by  discoursing  the  under-Avorkman  he  had  employed. 
The  polish  I  used  Avas  in  this  manner;  I  had  tAvo  round  copper  plates,  each  six 
inches  in  diameter,  the  one  convex,  the  other  concave,  ground  very  true  to  one 
another.  On  the  convex  I  ground  the  object-metal  or  concave  AALich  Avas  to  be 
polished,  till  it  had  taken  the  figure  of  the  convex  and  Avas  ready  for  a  polish. 
Then  I  pitched  over  the  convex  very  thinly,  by  dropping  melted  pitch  upon  it, 
and  Avarming  it  to  keep  the  pitch  soft,  AA'hilst  I  ground  it  Avith  the  concave 
copper  AA'etted  to  make  it  spread  evenly  all  oA^er  the  convex.  Thus  by  Avorking 
it  AA'ell  I  made  it  as  thin  as  a  groat,  and  after  the  convex  Avas  cold  I  ground  it 
again  to  give  it  as  true  a  figure  as  I  could.  Then  I  took  putty  Avhich  I  had  made 
very  fine  by  Avashing  it  from  all  its  grosser  particles,  and  laying  a  little  of  this 
upon  the  pitch,  I  ground  it  upon  the  pitch  AAuth  the  concave  copper,  till  it  had 
done  making  a  noise;  and  then  upon  the  pitch  I  ground  the  object-metal  AAith 
a  brisk  motion  for  about  tAvo  or  three  minutes  of  time,  leaning  hard  upon  it. 
Then  I  put  fresh  putty  upon  the  pitch,  and  ground  it  again  till  it  had  done 
making  a  noise,  and  afterAA’ards  ground  the  object-metal  upon  it  as  before.  And 
this  Avork  I  repeated  till  the  metal  AA’-as  polished,  grinding  it  the  last  time  AAuth 
all  my  strength  for  a  good  Avhile  together,  and  frequently  breathing  upon  the 
pitch,  to  keep  it  moist  AATth out  laying  on  any  more  fresh  putty.  The  object-metal 
Avas  tAvo  inches  broad,  and  about  one-third  part  of  an  inch  thick,  to  keep  it  from 
bending.  I  had  tAVO  of  these  metals,  and  AA'hen  I  had  polished  them  both  I  tried 
AA’hich  Avas  best,  and  ground  the  other  again,  to  see  if  I  could  make  it  better 
than  that  AA’hich  I  kept.  And  thus  by  many  trials  I  learned  the  AA’ay  of  polishing, 
till  I  made  those  tAvo  reflecting  perspectives  I  spake  of  above.  For  this  art  of 
polishing  AA-ill  be  better  learned  by  repeated  practice  than  by  my  description. 
Before  I  ground  the  object-metal  on  the  pitch,  I  ahvays  ground  the  putty  on  it 
AA’ith  the  concave  copper,  till  it  had  done  making  a  noise,  because  if  the  particles 
of  the  putty  AA’ere  not  by  this  means  made  to  stick  fast  in  the  pitch,  they  Avould 
by  rolling  up  and  doAA’n  grate  and  fret  the  object-metal  and  fill  it  full  of  little 
holes. 

But  because  metal  is  more  difficult  to  polish  than  glass,  and  is  after Avards 
very  apt  to  be  spoiled  by  tarnishing,  and  reflects  not  so  much  light  as  glass 
quick-silvered  over  does,  I  Avould  propound  to  use  instead  of  the  metal  a  glass 
ground  concave  on  the  foreside,  and  as  much  convex  on  the  backside,  and 
quick-silvered  over  on  the  convex  side.  The  glass  must  be  everywhere  of  the 
same  thickness  exactly.  OtherAA’ise  it  aatII  make  objects  look  coloured  and  in¬ 
distinct.  By  such  a  glass  I  tried  about  five  or  six  years  ago  to  make  a  reflecting 
telescope  of  four  feet  in  length  to  magnify  about  150  times,  and  I  satisfled 
myself  that  there  Avants  nothing  but  a  good  artist  to  bring  the  design  to  per¬ 
fection.  For  the  glass  being  Avrought  by  one  of  our  London  artists  after  such  a 
manner  as  they  gi’ind  glasses  for  telescopes,  though  it  seemed  as  AA'ell  AA’rought 
as  the  object-glasses  use  to  be,  yet  AA’hen  it  Avas  quick-silvered,  the  reflexion 


422 


Optics 


discovered  innumerable  inequalities  all  over  the  glass.  And  by  reason  of  these 
inequalities,  objects  appeared  indistinct  in  this  instrument.  For  the  errors  of 
reflected  rays  caused  by  any  inequality  of  the  glass  are  about  six  times  greater 
than  the  errors  of  refracted  rays  caused  by  the  like  inequalities.  Yet  by  this 
experiment  I  satisfied  myself  that  the  reflexion  on  the  concave  side  of  the  glass, 
which  I  feared  would  disturb  the  vision,  did  no  sensible  prejudice  to  it,  and  by 
consequence  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  perfect  these  telescopes,  but  good 
workmen  who  can  grind  and  polish  glasses  truly  spherical.  An  object-glass  of  a 
fourteen  foot  telescope,  made  by  an  artificer  at  London,  I  once  mended  con¬ 
siderably  by  grinding  it  on  pitch  with  putty,  and  leaning  very  easily  on  it  in  the 
grinding,  lest  the  putty  should  scratch  it.  Whether  this  way  may  not  do  well 
enough  for  polishing  these  reflecting  glasses,  I  have  not  yet  tried.  But  he  that 
shall  try  either  this  or  any  other  way  of  polishing  which  he  may  think  better, 
may  do  well  to  make  his  glasses  ready  for  polishing  by  grinding  them  without 
that  violence,  wherewith  our  London  workmen  press  their  glasses  in  grinding. 
For  by  such  violent  pressure,  glasses  are  apt  to  bend  a  little  in  the  grinding, 
and  such  bending  will  certainly  spoil  their  figure.  To  recommend,  therefore,  the 
consideration  of  these  reflecting  glasses  to  such  artists  as  are  curious  in  figuring 
glasses,  I  shall  describe  this  optical  instrument 
in  the  following  Proposition. 


Proposition  8.  Problem  2 
To  shorten  telescopes. 

Let  ABCD  [Fig.  29]  represent  a  glass  spheri¬ 
cally  concave  on  the  foreside  AB,  and  as  much 
convex  on  the  backside  CD,  so  that  it  be  every¬ 
where  of  an  equal  thickness.  Let  it  not  be  thicker 
on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  lest  it  make  ob¬ 
jects  appear  coloured  and  indistinct,  and  let  it 
be  very  truly  WTOUght  and  quick-silvered  over 
on  the  backside,  and  set  in  the  tube  VXYZ 
which  must  be  very  black  within.  Let  EFG  rep¬ 
resent  a  prism  of  glass  or  crystal  placed  near 
the  other  end  of  the  tube,  in  the  middle  of  it, 
by  means  of  a  handle  of  brass  or  iron  FGK,  to 
the  end  of  which  made  fiat  it  is  cemented.  Let 
this  prism  be  rectangular  at  E,  and  let  the  other 
two  angles  at  F  and  G  be  accurately  equal  to 
each  other,  and  by  consequence  equal  to  half 
right  ones,  and  let  the  plane  sides  FE  and  GE 
be  square,  and  by  consequence  the  third  side  FG 
a  rectangular  parallelogram,  whose  length  is  to 
its  breadth  in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  two 
to  one.  Let  it  be  so  placed  in  the  tube  that  the 
axis  of  the  speculum  may  pass  through  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  square  side  EF  perpendicularly,  and 
by  consequence  through  the  middle  of  the  side 
FGatan  angle  of  45  degrees,  and  let  the  side  EF 
be  turned  tow^ards  the  speculum,  and  the  dis- 


V 


K 


I  E 


R! 


H 


Fig.  29 


Book  I:  Part  1  423 

tance  of  this  prism  from  the  speculum  be  such  that  the  rays  of  the  light  PQ, 
RS,  &c.  which  are  incident  upon  the  speculum  in  lines  parallel  to  the  axis  there¬ 
of,  may  enter  the  prism  at  the  side  EF,  and  be  reflected  by  the  side  FG,  and 
thence  go  out  of  it  through  the  side  GE,  to  the  point  T,  which  must  be  the 
common  focus  of  the  speculum  ABDC,  and  of  a  plano-convex  eye-glass  H, 
through  which  those  rays  must  pass  to  the  eye.  And  let  the  rays  at  their  com¬ 
ing  out  of  the  glass  pass  through  a  small  round  hole,  or  aperture  made  in  a 
little  plate  of  lead,  brass,  or  silver,  wherewith  the  glass  is  to  be  covered,  which 
hole  must  be  no  bigger  than  is  necessary  for  light  enough  to  pass  through. 
For  so  it  will  render  the  object  distinct,  the  plate  in  which  ’tis  made  intercept¬ 
ing  all  the  erroneous  part  of  the  light  which  comes  from  the  verges  of  the 
speculum  AB.  Such  an  instrument  well  made,  if  it  be  six  feet  long  (reckoning 
the  length  from  the  speculum  to  the  prism,  and  thence  to  the  focus  T),  will 
bear  an  aperture  of  six  inches  at  the  speculum,  and  magnify  between  two  and 
three  hundred  times.  But  the  hole  H  here  limits  the  aperture  with  more  advan¬ 
tage  than  if  the  aperture  was  placed  at  the  speculum.  If  the  instrument  be  made 
longer  or  shorter,  the  aperture  must  be  in  proportion  as  the  cube  of  the  square- 
square  root  of  the  length,  and  the  magnifying  as  the  aperture.  But  it’s  con¬ 
venient  that  the  speculum  be  an  inch  or  two  broader  than  the  aperture  at  the 
least,  and  that  the  glass  of  the  speculum  be  thick,  that  it  bend  not  in  the 
working.  The  prism  EFG  must  be  no  bigger  than  is  necessary,  and  its  back¬ 
side  FG  must  not  be  quick-silvered  over.  For,  without  quick-silver  it  wall  re¬ 
flect  all  the  light  incident  on  it  from  the  speculum. 

In  this  instrument  the  object  mil  be  inverted,  but  may  be  erected  by  making 
the  square  sides  FF  and  EG  of  the  prism  EFG  not  plane  but  spherically  con¬ 
vex,  that  the  rays  may  cross  as  well  before  they  come  at  it  as  afterwards  be¬ 
tween  it  and  the  eye-glass.  If  it  be  desired  that  the  instrument  bear  a  larger 
aperture,  that  may  be  also  done  by  composing  the  speculum  of  two  glasses  with 
water  between  them. 

If  the  theory  of  making  telescopes  could  at  length  be  fully  brought  into 
practice,  yet  there  would  be  certain  bounds  beyond  which  telescopes  could  not 
perform.  For  the  air  through  which  we  look  upon  the  stars  is  in  a  perpetual 
tremor;  as  may  be  seen  by  the  tremulous  motion  of  shadows  cast  from  high 
towers,  and  by  the  twinkling  of  the  fixed  stars.  But  these  stars  do  not  twinkle 
when  viewed  through  telescopes  which  have  large  apertures.  For  the  rays  of 
light,  which  pass  through  divers  parts  of  the  aperture,  tremble  each  of  them 
apart,  and  by  means  of  their  various  and  sometimes  contrary  tremors  fall  at 
one  and  the  same  time  upon  different  points  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye,  and  their 
trembling  motions  are  too  quick  and  confused  to  be  perceived  severally.  And 
all  these  illuminated  points  constitute  one  broad  lucid  point,  composed  of  those 
many  trembling  points  confusedly  and  insensibly  mixed  with  one  another  by 
very  short  and  swift  tremors,  and  thereby  cause  the  star  to  appear  broader 
than  it  is  and  without  any  trembling  of  the  whole.  Long  telescopes  may  cause 
objects  to  appear  brighter  and  larger  than  short  ones  can  do,  but  they  cannot 
be  so  formed  as  to  take  aw'ay  the  confusion  of  the  rays  which  arises  from  the 
tremors  of  the  atmosphere.  The  only  remedy  is  a  most  serene  and  quiet  air, 
such  as  may  perhaps  be  found  on  the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains  above  the 
grosser  clouds. 


424 


Optics 


Part  II 

Proposition  1.  Theorem  1 

The  phenomena  of  colours  in  refracted  or  reflected  light  are  not 

CAUSED  BY  NEW  MODIFICATIONS  OF  THE  LIGHT  VARIOUSLY  IMPRESSED,  AC¬ 
CORDING  TO  THE  VARIOUS  TERMINATIONS  OF  THE  LIGHT  AND  SHADOW. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments 

Experiment  1 .  For  if  the  Sun  shine  into  a  very  dark  chamber  through  an  oblong 
hole  F,  [Fig.  1]  whose  breadth  is  the  sixth  or  eighth  part  of  an  inch,  or  some¬ 
thing  less;  and  his  beam  FH  do  afterwards  pass  first  through  a  very  large  prism 
ABC,  distant  about  20  feet  from  the  hole,  and  parallel  to  it,  and  then  (with  its 
white  part)  through  an  oblong  hole  H,  whose  breadth  is  about  the  fortieth  or 
sixtieth  part  of  an  inch,  and  which  is  made  in  a  black  opaque  body  GI,  and 
placed  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  feet  from  the  prism,  in  a  parallel  situation 
both  to  the  prism  and  to  the  former  hole;  and  if  this  white  light  thus  trans¬ 
mitted  through  the  hole  H  fall  afterwards  upon  a  white  paper  pt,  placed  after 
that  hole  H  at  the  distance  of  three  or  four  feet  from  it,  and  there  paint  the 


usual  colours  of  the  prism,  (suppose  red  at  t,  yellow  at  s,  green  at  r,  blue  at  q, 
and  violet  at  p)  you  may  with  an  iron  wire,  or  any  such  like  slender  opaque 
body,  whose  breadth  is  about  the  tenth  part  of  an  inch,  by  intercepting  the 
rays  at  k,  I,  m,  n  or  o,  take  away  any  one  of  the  colours  at  t,  s,  r,  q  or  p,  whilst 
the  other  colours  remain  upon  the  paper  as  before;  or  with  an  obstacle  some¬ 
thing  bigger  you  may  take  away  any  two,  or  three,  or  four  colours  together,  the 
rest  remaining :  So  that  any  one  of  the  colours  as  well  as  violet  may  become  out¬ 
most  in  the  confine  of  the  shadow  towards  p,  and  any  one  of  them  as  well  as  red 
may  become  outmost  in  the  confine  of  the  shadow  towards  t,  and  any  one  of 
them  may  also  border  upon  the  shadow  made  within  the  colours  by  the  obstacle 
R  intercepting  some  intermediate  part  of  the  light;  and,  lastly,  any  one  of 
them  by  being  left  alone  may  border  upon  the  shadow  on  either  hand.  All  the 
colours  have  themselves  indifferently  to  any  confines  of  shadow,  and  therefore 
the  differences  of  these  colours  from  one  another  do  not  arise  from  the  different 
confines  of  shadow,  whereby  light  is  variously  modified,  as  has  hitherto  been 
the  opinion  of  philosophers.  In  trying  these  things  ’tis  to  be  observed  that  by 
how  much  the  holes  F  and  H  are  narrower,  and  the  intervals  between  them  and 
the  prism  greater,  and  the  chamber  darker,  by  so  much  the  better  doth  the 


Book  I :  Part  2 


425 


experiment  succeed;  provided  the  light  be  not  so  far  diminished  but  that  the 
colours  at  pt  be  sufficiently  visible.  To  procure  a  prism  of  solid  glass  large 
enough  for  this  experiment  vill  be  difficult,  and  therefore  a  prismatic  vessel 
must  be  made  of  polished  glass  plates  cemented  together,  and  filled  with  salt 
water  or  clear  oil. 

Exper.  2.  The  Sun’s  light  let  into  a  dark  chamber  through  the  round  hole  F, 
[Fig.  2]  half  an  inch  wide,  passed  first  through  the  prism  ABC  placed  at  the 
hole,  and  then  through  a  lens  PT  something  more  than  four  inches  broad,  and 
about  eight  feet  distant  from  the  prism,  and  thence  converged  to  0  the  focus 
of  the  lens  distant  from  it  about  three  feet,  and  there  fell  upon  a  white  paper 
DE.  If  that  paper  was  perpendicular  to  that  light  incident  upon  it,  as  ’tis 


represented  in  the  posture  DE,  all  the  colours  upon  it  at  0  appeared  white. 
But  if  the  paper  being  turned  about  an  axis  parallel  to  the  prism,  became  very 
much  inclined  to  the  light,  as  ’tis  represented  in  the  positions  de  and  5e,  the 
same  light  in  the  one  case  appeared  yellow  and  red,  in  the  other  blue.  Here  one 
and  the  same  part  of  the  light  in  one  and  the  same  place,  according  to  the  vari¬ 
ous  inclinations  of  the  paper,  appeared  in  one  case  white,  in  another  yellow  or 
red,  in  a  third  blue,  whilst  the  confine  of  light  and  shadow,  and  the  refractions 
of  the  prism  in  all  these  cases  remained  the  same. 

Exper.  3.  Such  another  experiment  may  be  more  easily  tried  as  follows:  Let 
a  broad  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light  coming  into  a  dark  chamber  through  a  hole  in 
the  \vindow-shut  be  refracted  by  a  large  prism  ABC,  [Fig.  3]  whose  refracting 
angle  C  is  more  than  60  degrees,  and  so  soon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  prism,  let  it 
fall  upon  the  white  paper  DE  glued  upon  a  stiff  plane;  and  this  light,  when  the 
paper  is  perpendicular  to  it,  as  ’tis  represented  in  DE,  will  appear  perfectly 
white  upon  the  paper;  but  when  the  paper  is  very  much  inclined  to  it  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  keep  always  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  prism,  the  whiteness  of  the 

whole  light  upon  the  paper  will,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  inclination  of  the 
paper  this  way  or  that  way,  change 
either  into  yellow  and  red,  as  in  the 
posture  de,  or  into  blue  and  violet, 
as  in  the  posture  Se.  And  if  the  light 
before  it  fall  upon  the  paper  be 
tvice  refracted  the  same  way  by 
two  parallel  prisms,  these  colours 
^vill  become  the  more  conspicuous.  Here  all  the  middle  parts  of  the  broad  beam 
of  white  light  which  fell  upon  the  paper  did,  ^\’ithout  any  confine  of  shadow  to 
modify  it,  become  coloured  all  over  vdth  one  uniform  colour,  the  colour  being 
always  the  same  in  the  middle  of  the  paper  as  at  the  edges,  and  this  colour 


Fig.  3 


426  Optics 

changed  according  to  the  various  obliquity  of  the  reflecting  paper,  without  any 
change  in  the  refractions  or  shadow,  or  in  the  light  which  fell  upon  the  paper. 
And,  therefore,  these  colours  are  to  be  derived  from  some  other  cause  than  the 
new  modifications  of  light  by  refractions  and  shadows. 

If  it  be  asked.  What  then  is  their  cause?  I  answer.  That  the  paper  in  the  pos¬ 
ture  de,  being  more  oblique  to  the  more  refrangible  rays  than  to  the  less  refran¬ 
gible  ones,  is  more  strongly  illuminated  by  the  latter  than  by  the  former,  and, 
therefore,  the  less  refrangible  rays  are  predominant  in  the  reflected  light.  And 
wherever  they  are  predominant  in  any  light,  they  tinge  it  with  red  or  yellow,  as 
may  in  some  measure  appear  by  the  first  Proposition  of  the  first  part  of  this 
book,  and  will  more  fully  appear  hereafter.  And  the  contrary  happens  in  the 
posture  of  the  paper  be,  the  more  refrangible  rays  being  then  predominant 
which  always  tinge  light  with  blues  and  violets. 

Exper.  4.  The  colours  of  bubbles  with  which  children  play  are  various,  and 
change  their  situation  variously,  without  any  respect  to  any  confine  or  shadow. 
If  such  a  bubble  be  covered  vdth  a  concave  glass  to  keep  it  from  being  agitated 
by  any  wind  or  motion  of  the  air,  the  colours  will  slowly  and  regularly  change 
their  situation,  even  whilst  the  eye  and  the  bubble,  and  all  bodies  which  emit 
any  light,  or  cast  any  shadow,  remain  unmoved.  And,  therefore,  their  colours 
arise  from  some  regular  cause  which  depends  not  on  any  confine  of  shadow. 
What  this  cause  is  will  be  shewed  in  the  next  book. 

To  these  experiments  may  be  added  the  tenth  experiment  of  the  first  part  of 
this  first  book,  where  the  Sun’s  light  in  a  dark  room  being  trajected  through 
the  parallel  superficies  of  two  prisms  tied  together  in  the  form  of  a  parallel¬ 
epiped,  became  totally  of  one  uniform  yellow  or  red  colour,  at  its  emerging  out 
of  the  prisms.  Here,  in  the  production  of  these  colours,  the  confine  of  shadow 
can  have  nothing  to  do.  For  the  light  changes  from  white  to  yellow,  orange  and 
red  successively,  without  any  alteration  of  the  confine  of  shadow.  And  at  both 
edges  of  the  emerging  light  where  the  contrary  confines  of  shadow  ought  to 
produce  different  effects,  the  colour  is  one  and  the  same,  whether  it  be  white, 
yellow,  orange  or  red.  And  in  the  middle  of  the  emerging  light,  where  there  is 
no  confine  of  shadow  at  all,  the  colour  is  the  very  same  as  at  the  edges,  the 
whole  light  at  its  very  first  emergence  being  of  one  uniform  colour,  whether 
white,  yellow,  orange  or  red,  and  going  on  thence  perpetually  without  any 
change  of  colour,  such  as  the  confine  of  shadow  is  vulgarly  supposed  to  work  in 
refracted  light  after  its  emergence.  Neither  can  these  colours  arise  from  any 
new  modifications  of  the  light  by  refractions,  because  they  change  successively 
from  white  to  yellow,  orange  and  red,  while  the  refractions  remain  the  same, 
and  also  because  the  refractions  are  made  contrary  ways  by  parallel  superficies 
which  destroy  one  another’s  effects.  They  arise  not,  therefore,  from  any  modi¬ 
fications  of  light  made  by  refractions  and  shadows,  but  have  some  other  cause. 
What  that  cause  is  we  shewed  above  in  this  tenth  experiment,  and  need  not 
here  repeat  it. 

There  is  yet  another  material  circumstance  of  this  experiment.  For  this 
emerging  light  being  by  a  third  prism  HIK  [Fig.  22  Part  L]  refracted  towards 
the  paper  PT,  and  there  painting  the  usual  colours  of  the  prism,  red,  yellow, 
green,  blue,  violet:  If  these  colours  arose  from  the  refractions  of  that  prism 
modifying  the  light,  they  would  not  be  in  the  light  before  its  incidence  on  that 
prism.  And  yet  in  that  experiment  we  found  that  when,  by  turning  the  two  first 


Book  I :  Part  2  427 

prisms  about  their  common  axis  all  the  colours  were  made  to  vanish  but  the 
red,  the  light,  which  makes  that  red  being  left  alone,  appeared  of  the  very 
same  red  colour  before  its  incidence  on  the  third  prism.  And,  in  general,  we  find 
by  other  experiments  that  when  the  rays  which  differ  in  refrangibility  are 
separated  from  one  another,  and  any  one  sort  of  them  is  considered  apart,  the 
colour  of  the  light  which  they  compose  cannot  be  changed  by  any  refraction  or 
reflexion  whatever,  as  it  ought  to  be  were  colours  nothing  else  than  modifica¬ 
tions  of  light  caused  by  refractions,  and  reflexions,  and  shadows.  This  un¬ 
changeableness  of  colour  I  am  now  to  describe  in  the  following  Proposition. 

Proposition  2.  Theorem  2 

All  homogeneal  light  has  its  'proper  colour  answering  to  its  degree  of  refrangibility , 
and  that  colour  cannot  he  changed  by  reflexions  and  refractions. 

In  the  experiments  of  the  fourth  Proposition  of  the  first  part  of  this  first 
book,  when  I  had  separated  the  heterogeneous  rays  from  one  another,  the 
spectrum  pt  formed  by  the  separated  rays  did  in  the  progress  from  its  end  p, 
on  which  the  most  refrangible  rays  fell,  unto  its  other  end  t,  on  which  the  least 
refrangible  rays  fell,  appear  tinged  Avith  this  series  of  colours:  violet,  indigo, 
blue,  green,  yelloAV,  orange,  red,  together  vdth  all  their  intermediate  degrees  in 
a  continual  succession  perpetually  varying.  So  that  there  appeared  as  many 
degrees  of  colours,  as  there  were  sorts  of  rays  differing  in  refrangibility. 

Exper.  5.  Now,  that  these  colours  could  not  be  changed  by  refraction  I 
knew  by  refracting  with  a  prism  sometimes  one  very  little  part  of  this  light, 
sometimes  another  very  little  part,  as  is  described  in  the  tAvelfth  experiment  of 
the  first  part  of  this  book.  For  by  this  refraction  the  colour  of  the  light  Avas 
never  changed  in  the  least.  If  any  part  of  the  red  light  Avas  refracted,  it  re¬ 
mained  totally  of  the  same  red  colour  as  before.  No  orange,  no  yelloAv,  no  green 
or  blue,  no  other  neAv  colour  Avas  produced  by  that  refraction.  Neither  did  the 
colour  any  AA^ay  change  by  repeated  refractions,  but  continued  alAA'ays  the  same 
red  entirely  as  at  first.  The  like  constancy  and  immutability  I  found  also  in  the 
blue,  green,  and  other  colours.  So  also,  if  I  looked  through  a  prism  upon  any 
body  illuminated  AAUth  any  part  of  this  homogeneal  light,  as  in  the  fourteenth 
experiment  of  the  first  part  of  this  book  is  described ;  I  could  not  perceive  any 
neAv  colour  generated  this  AA^ay.  All  bodies  illuminated  AAuth  compound  light 
appear  through  prisms  confused  (as  Avas  said  above)  and  tinged  Avith  various 
neAv  colours,  but  those  illuminated  AAuth  homogeneal  light  appeared  through 
prisms  neither  less  distinct,  nor  otherAAUse  coloured,  than  Avhen  vieAA^ed  AAuth  the 
naked  eyes.  Their  colours  AA^ere  not  in  the  least  changed  by  the  refraction  of  the 
interposed  prism.  I  speak  here  of  a  sensible  change  of  colour:  for  the  light  AA'hich 
I  here  call  homogeneal,  being  not  absolutely  homogeneal,  there  ought  to  arise 
some  little  change  of  colour  from  its  heterogeneity.  But,  if  that  heterogeneity 
Avas  so  little  as  it  might  be  made  by  the  said  experiments  of  the  fourth  Prop¬ 
osition,  that  change  AA'as  not  sensible,  and  therefore  in  experiments,  where 
sense  is  judge,  ought  to  be  accounted  none  at  all. 

Exper.  6.  And  as  these  colours  Avere  not  changeable  by  refractions,  so  neither 
AA’ere  they  by  reflexions.  For  all  AA'hite,  grey,  red,  yelloAv,  green,  blue,  violet 
bodies,  as  paper,  ashes,  red  lead,  orpiment,  indigo  bice,  gold,  silver,  copper, 
grass,  blue  floAA'ers,  Adolets,  bubbles  of  AA^ater  tinged  AA'ith  various  colours,  pea¬ 
cock's  feathers,  the  tincture  of  lignum  nephriticum,  and  such-like,  in  red 


428  Optics 

homogeneal  light  appeared  totally  red,  in  blue  light  totally  blue,  in  green  light 
totally  green,  and  so  of  other  colours.  In  the  homogeneal  light  of  any  colour 
they  all  appeared  totally  of  that  same  colour,  with  this  only  difference:  that 
some  of  them  reflected  that  light  more  strongly,  others  more  faintly.  I  never 
yet  found  any  body,  which  by  reflecting  homogeneal  light  could  sensibly 
change  its  colour. 

From  all  which  it  is  manifest  that  if  the  Sun’s  light  consisted  of  but  one  sort 
of  rays,  there  would  be  but  one  colour  in  the  whole  world,  nor  would  it  be 
possible  to  produce  any  new  colour  by  reflexions  and  refractions,  and,  by 
consequence,  that  the  variety  of  colours  depends  upon  the  composition  of  light. 

DEFINITION 

The  homogeneal  light  and  rays  which  appear  red,  or  rather  make  objects 
appear  so,  I  call  rub  rifle  or  red-making;  those  which  make  objects  appear 
yellow,  green,  blue,  and  violet,  I  call  yellow-making,  green-making,  blue¬ 
making,  violet-making,  and  so  of  the  rest.  And  if  at  any  time  I  speak  of  light 
and  rays  as  coloured  or  endued  with  colours,  I  would  be  understood  to  speak 
not  philosophically  and  properly,  but  grossly,  and  accordingly  to  such  con¬ 
ceptions  as  vulgar  people  in  seeing  all  these  experiments  would  be  apt  to  frame. 
For  the  rays,  to  speak  properly,  are  not  coloured.  In  them  there  is  nothing  else 
than  a  certain  power  and  disposition  to  stir  up  a  sensation  of  this  or  that  colour. 
For  as  sound  in  a  bell  or  musical  string,  or  other  sounding  body,  is  nothing  but 
a  trembling  motion,  and  in  the  air  nothing  but  that  motion  propagated  from 
the  object,  and  in  the  sensorium  ’tis  a  sense  of  that  motion  under  the  form  of 
sound;  so  colours  in  the  object  are  nothing  but  a  disposition  to  reflect  this  or 
that  sort  of  rays  more  copiously  than  the  rest ;  in  the  rays  they  are  nothing  but 
their  dispositions  to  propagate  this  or  that  motion  into  the  sensorium,  and  in 
the  sensorium  they  are  sensations  of  those  motions  under  the  forms  of  colours. 

Proposition  3.  Problem  1 

To  define  the  ref  Tangibility  of  the  several  sorts  of  homogeneal  light  answering  to  the 
several  colours. 

For  determining  this  Problem  I  made  the  following  experiment. 

Exper.  7.  When  I  had  caused  the  rectilinear  sides  AF,  GM,  [Fig.  4]  of  the 
spectrum  of  colours  made  by  the  prism  to  be  distinctly  defined,  as  in  the  fifth 
experiment  of  the  first  part  of  this  book  is  described,  there  were  found  in  it  all 


A._ - i ^ 


Fig.  4 


X 

0 


the  homogeneal  colours  in  the  same  order  and  situation  one  among  another  as 
in  the  spectrum  of  simple  light,  described  in  the  fourth  Proposition  of  that 
part.  For  the  circles  of  which  the  spectrum  of  compound  light  PT  is  composed, 
and  which  in  the  middle  parts  of  the  spectrum  interfere,  and  are  intermixed 
with  one  another,  are  not  intermixed  in  their  outmost  parts  where  they  touch 


Book  I :  Part  2  429 

those  rectilinear  sides  AF  and  GM.  And,  therefore,  in  those  rectilinear  sides 
when  distinctly  defined,  there  is  no  new  colour  generated  by  refraction.  I 
observed,  also,  that  if  anywhere  between  the  two  outmost  circles  TMF  and 
PGA  a  right  line,  as  y8,  was  cross  to  the  spectrum,  so  as  both  ends  to  fall 
perpendicularly  upon  its  rectilinear  sides,  there  appeared  one  and  the  same 
colour,  and  degree  of  colour  from  one  end  of  this  line  to  the  other.  I  delineated, 
therefore,  in  a  paper  the  perimeter  of  the  spectrum  FAP  GMT,  and,  in  trying 
the  third  experiment  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  I  held  the  paper  so  that  the 
spectrum  might  fall  upon  this  delineated  figure,  and  agree  with  it  exactly, 
whilst  an  assistant,  whose  eyes  for  distinguishing  colours  were  more  critical 
than  mine,  did  by  right  lines  a/3,  76,  ef ,  &c.  drawn  cross  the  spectrum,  note  the 
confines  of  the  colours  (that  is,  of  the  red  Ma/3F,  of  the  orange  ayd^,  of  the 
yellow  yef  5,  of  the  green  erjd^,  of  the  blue  rjLKd,  of  the  indigo  and  of  the 
violet  XGA/i) .  And  this  operation  being  divers  times  repeated  both  in  the  same 
and  in  several  papers,  I  found  that  the  observations  agreed  well  enough  with 
one  another,  and  that  the  rectilinear  sides  MG  and  FA  were  by  the  said  cross 
lines  divided  after  the  manner  of  a  musical  chord.  Let  GM  be  produced  to  X, 
that  MX  may  be  equal  to  GM,  and  conceive  GX,  XX,  iX,  r/X,  eX,  yX,  aX, 
MX ,  to  be  in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  numbers,  1 ,  Me, 

]/2,  and  so  to  represent  the  chords  of  the  key,  and  of  a  tone,  a  third  minor,  a  fourth, 
a  fifth,  a  sixth  major,  a  seventh  and  an  eighth  above  that  key.  And  the  inter¬ 
vals  Ma,  ay,  ye,  er?,  rji,  iX,  and  XG,  will  be  the  spaces  which  the  several  colours 
(red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  violet)  take  up. 

Now,  these  intervals  or  spaces  subtending  the  differences  of  the  refractions 
of  the  rays  going  to  the  limits  of  those  colours  (that  is,  to  the  Points  M,  a,  y,  e, 
7],  L,  X,  G)  may  mthout  any  sensible  error  be  accounted  proportional  to  the 
differences  of  the  sines  of  refraction  of  those  rays  having  one  common  sine  of 
incidence;  and,  therefore,  since  the  common  sine  of  incidence  of  the  most  and 
least  refrangible  rays  out  of  glass  into  air  was  (by  a  method  described  above) 
found  in  proportion  to  their  sines  of  refraction  as  50  to  77  and  78,  divide  the 
difference  between  the  sines  of  refraction  77  and  78,  as  the  line  GM  is  divided 
by  those  intervals,  and  you  will  have  77, 77M,  77M»  77M,  77^,  77%,  77M,  78, 
the  sines  of  refraction  of  those  rays  out  of  glass  into  air,  their  common  sine  of  in¬ 
cidence  being  50.  So,  then,  the  sines  of  the  incidences  of  all  the  red-making  rays 
out  of  glass  into  air  were  to  the  sines  of  their  refractions  not  greater  than  50  to 
77,  nor  less  than  50  to  77%,  but  they  varied  from  one  another  according  to  all 
intermediate  proportions.  And  the  sines  of  the  incidences  of  the  green-making 
rays  were  to  the  sines  of  their  refractions  in  all  proportions  from  that  of  50  to 
77%,  unto  that  of  50  to  77%.  And  by  the  like  limits  above-mentioned  were  the 
refractions  of  the  rays  belonging  to  the  rest  of  the  colours  defined,  the  sines  of 
the  red-making  rays  extending  from  77  to  77%,  those  of  the  orange-making 
from  77%  to  77%,  those  of  the  yellow-making  from  77%  to  77%,  those  of  the 
green-making  from77 %  to77 %,  those  of  the  blue-making  from77%  to77%,  those 
of  the  indigo-making  from  67%  to  77%,  and  those  of  the  violet  from  77%  to  78. 

These  are  the  laws  of  the  refractions  made  out  of  glass  into  air,  and  thence, 
by  the  third  Axiom  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  the  laws  of  the  refractions 
made  out  of  air  into  glass  are  easily  derived. 

Exper.  8. 1  found,  moreover,  that  when  light  goes  out  of  air  through  several 
contiguous  refracting  mediums  as  through  water  and  glass,  and  thence  goes  out 


430  Optics 

again  into  air,  whether  the  refracting  superficies  be  parallel  or  inclined  to  one 
another,  that  light  as  often  as  by  contrary  refractions  ’tis  so  corrected,  that  it 
emergeth  in  lines  parallel  to  those  in  which  it  was  incident,  continues  ever  after 
to  be  white.  But  if  the  emergent  rays  be  inclined  to  the  incident,  the  whiteness 
of  the  emerging  light  will  by  degrees  in  passing  on  from  the  place  of  emergence, 
become  tinged  in  its  edges  with  colours.  This  I  tried  by  refracting  light  with 
prisms  of  glass  placed  within  a  prismatic  vessel  of  water.  Now,  those  colours 
argue  a  diverging  and  separation  of  the  heterogeneous  rays  from  one  another 
by  means  of  their  unequal  refractions,  as  in  what  follows  will  more  fully  appear. 
And,  on  the  contrary,  the  permanent  whiteness  argues  that  in  like  incidences  of 
the  rays  there  is  no  such  separation  of  the  emerging  rays,  and  by  consequence 
no  inequality  of  their  whole  refractions.  Whence  I  seem  to  gather  the  two 
following  theorems: 

1 .  The  excesses  of  the  sines  of  refraction  of  several  sorts  of  rays  above  their 
common  sine  of  incidence  when  the  refractions  are  made  out  of  divers  denser 
mediums  immediately  into  one  and  the  same  rarer  medium  (suppose  of  air)  are 
to  one  another  in  a  given  proportion. 

2.  The  proportion  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction  of  one  and 
the  same  sort  of  rays  out  of  one  medium  into  another,  is  composed  of  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction  out  of  the  first  medium 
into  any  third  medium,  and  of  the  proportion  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the 
sine  of  refraction  out  of  that  third  medium  into  the  second  medium. 

By  the  first  theorem,  the  refractions  of  the  rays  of  every  sort  made  out  of  any 
medium  into  air  are  known  by  having  the  refraction  of  the  rays  of  any  one  sort. 
As,  for  instance,  if  the  refractions  of  the  rays  of  every  sort  out  of  rain-water 
into  air  be  desired,  let  the  common  sine  of  incidence  out  of  glass  into  air  be 
subducted  from  the  sines  of  refraction,  and  the  excesses  Avill  be  27,  273/8,  273/5. 
2734,  27}/^,  27%,  273/9,  28.  Suppose,  now,  that  the  sine  of  incidence  of  the  least 
refrangible  rays  be  to  their  sine  of  refraction  out  of  rain-water  into  air  as  3  to  4, 
and  say  as  1  the  difference  of  those  sines  is  to  3  the  sine  of  incidence,  so  is  27 
the  least  of  the  excesses  above-mentioned  to  a  fourth  number  81 ;  and  81  will  be 
the  common  sine  of  incidence  out  of  rain-water  into  air,  to  which  sine  (if  you 
add  all  the  above-mentioned  excesses)  you  will  have  the  desired  sines  of  the 
refractions  108,  108%,  IO83/5,  108%,  108%,  108%,  1083/^,  109. 

By  the  latter  theorem,  the  refraction  out  of  one  medium  into  another  is 
gathered  as  often  as  you  have  the  refractions  out  of  them  both  into  any  third 
medium.  As  if  the  sine  of  incidence  of  any  ray  out  of  glass  into  air  be  to  its  sine 
of  refraction  as  20  to  31,  and  the  sine  of  incidence  of  the  same  ray  out  of  air  into 
water  be  to  its  sine  of  refraction  as  4  to  3 ;  the  sine  of  incidence  of  that  ray  out 
of  glass  into  water  will  be  to  its  sine  of  refraction  as  20  to  31  and  4  to  3  jointly; 
that  is,  as  the  factum  of  20  and  4  to  the  factum  of  31  and  3,  or  as  80  to  93. 

And  these  theorems  being  admitted  into  Optics,  there  would  be  scope  enough 
of  handling  that  science  voluminously  after  a  new  manner,  not  only  by  teach¬ 
ing  those  things  which  tend  to  the  perfection  of  vision,  but  also  by  determining 
mathematically  all  kinds  of  phenomena  of  colours  which  could  be  produced  by 
refractions.  For  to  do  this,  there  is  nothing  else  requisite  than  to  find  out  the 
separations  of  heterogeneous  rays,  and  their  various  mixtures  and  proportions 
in  every  mixture.  By  this  way  of  arguing  I  invented  almost  all  the  phenomena 
described  in  these  books,  beside  some  others  less  necessary  to  the  argument; 


Book  I:  Part  2  431 

and  by  the  successes  I  met  with  in  the  trials,  I  dare  promise  that  to  him  who 
shall  argue  truly,  and  then  try  all  things  with  good  glasses  and  sufficient  cir¬ 
cumspection,  the  expected  event  vdll  not  be  wanting.  But  he  is  first  to  know 
what  colours  will  arise  from  any  others  mixed  in  any  assigned  proportion. 

Proposition  4.  Theorem  3 

Colours  may  he  'produced  by  composition  which  shall  be  like  to  the  colours  of 
homogeneal  light  as  to  the  appearance  of  colour,  but  not  as  to  the  immutability  of 
colour  and  constitution  of  light.  And  those  colours  by  how  much  they  are  more 
compounded  by  so  much  are  they  less  full  and  intense,  and  by  too  much  composition 
they  may  be  diluted  and  weakened  till  they  cease,  and  the  mixture  becomes  white  or 
grey.  There  may  be  also  colours  produced  by  composition,  which  are  not  fully  like 
any  of  the  colours  of  homogeneal  light. 

For  a  mixture  of  homogeneal  red  and  yellow  compounds  an  orange,  like  in 
appearance  of  colour  to  that  orange  which  in  the  series  of  unmixed  prismatic 
colours  lies  between  them;  but  the  light  of  one  orange  is  homogeneal  as  to 
refrangibility,  and  that  of  the  other  is  heterogeneal,  and  the  colour  of  the  one, 
if  viewed  through  a  prism,  remains  unchanged,  that  of  the  other  is  changed  and 
resolved  into  its  component  colours,  red  and  yellow.  And  after  the  same  man¬ 
ner  other  neighbouring  homogeneal  colours  may  compound  new  colours,  like 
the  intermediate  homogeneal  ones,  as  yellow  and  green,  the  colour  between 
them  both;  and  afterwards,  if  blue  be  added,  there  vdll  be  made  a  green  the 
middle  colour  of  the  three  which  enter  the  composition.  For  the  yellow  and 
blue  on  either  hand,  if  they  are  equal  in  quantity  they  draw  the  intermediate 
green  equally  towards  themselves  in  composition,  and  so  keep  it  as  it  were  in 
equilibrium,  that  it  verge  not  more  to  the  yellow  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the 
blue  on  the  other,  but  by  their  mixed  actions  remain  still  a  middle  colour.  To 
this  mixed  green  there  may  be  further  added  some  red  and  violet,  and  yet  the 
green  will  not  presently  cease,  but  only  grow  less  full  and  vivid,  and  by  in¬ 
creasing  the  red  and  violet,  it  will  grow  more  and  more  dilute  until,  by  the 
prevalence  of  the  added  colours,  it  be  overcome  and  turned  into  whiteness 
or  some  other  colour.  So  if  to  the  colour  of  any  homogeneal  light  the  Sun's 
white  light  composed  of  all  sorts  of  rays  be  added,  that  colour  vdll  not  vanish 
or  change  its  species,  but  be  diluted;  and  by  adding  more  and  more  white 
it  vdll  be  diluted  more  and  more,  perpetually.  Lastly,  if  red  and  violet  be 
mingled,  there  wall  be  generated  according  to  their  various  proportions  vari¬ 
ous  purples,  such  as  are  not  like  in  appearance  to  the  colour  of  any  homo¬ 
geneal  light,  and  of  these  purples  mixed  with  yellow  and  blue  may  be  made 
other  new  colours. 

Proposition  5.  Theorem  4 

Whiteness,  and  all  grey  colours  between  white  and  black,  may  be  compounded  of 
colours,  and  the  whiteness  of  the  Sun’s  light  is  compounded  of  all  the  primary 
colours  mixed  in  a  due  proportion. 

The  Proof  by  Experiments 

Experiment  9.  The  Sun  shining  into  a  dark  chamber  through  a  little  round 
hole  in  the  \vindow-shut,  and  his  light  being  there  refracted  by  a  prism  to  cast 
his  coloured  image  PT  [Fig.  5]  upon  the  opposite  wall,  I  held  a  white  paper  V  to 
that  image  in  such  manner  that  it  might  be  illuminated  by  the  coloured  light 


432  Optics 

reflected  from  thence,  and  yet  not  intercept  any  part  of  that  light  in  its  passage 
from  the  prism  to  the  spectrum.  And  I  found  that  when  the  paper  was  held 
nearer  to  any  colour  than  to  the  rest,  it  appeared  of  that  colour  to  which  it 
approached  nearest;  but  when  it  was  equally  or  almost  equally  distant  from  all 
the  colours,  so  that  it  might  be  equally  illuminated  by  them  all,  it  appeared 
white.  And  in  this  last  situation  of  the  paper,  if  some  colours  were  intercepted 
the  paper  lost  its  white  colour,  and  appeared  of  the  colour  of  the  rest  of  the 
light  which  was  not  intercepted.  So,  then,  the  paper  was  illuminated  with  lights 
of  various  colours  (namely,  red,  yellow,  green,  blue  and  violet)  and  every  part 


of  the  light  retained  its  proper  colour  until  it  was  incident  on  the  paper,  and 
became  reflected  thence  to  the  eye;  so  that  if  it  had  been  either  alone  (the  rest 
of  the  light  being  intercepted)  or  if  it  had  abounded  most,  and  been  predom¬ 
inant  in  the  light  reflected  from  the  paper,  it  would  have  tinged  the  paper  with 
its  own  colour;  and  yet,  being  mixed  with  the  rest  of  the  colours  in  a  due  pro¬ 
portion,  it  made  the  paper  look  white,  and  therefore  by  a  composition  \vith  the 
rest  produced  that  colour.  The  several  parts  of  the  coloured  light  reflected  from 
the  spectrum,  whilst  they  are  propagated  from  thence  through  the  air,  do 
perpetually  retain  their  proper  colours,  because  wherever  they  fall  upon  the 
eyes  of  any  spectator  they  make  the  several  parts  of  the  spectrum  to  appear 
under  their  proper  colours.  They  retain,  therefore,  their  proper  colours  when 
they  fall  upon  the  Paper  V,  and  so  by  the  confusion  and  perfect  mixture  of 
those  colours  compound  the  whiteness  of  the  light  reflected  from  thence. 

Exper.  10.  Let  that  spectrum  or  solar  image  PT  [Fig.  6]  fall  now  upon  the 
lens  MN  above  four  inches  broad,  and  about  six  feet  distant  from  the  prism 
ABC  and  so  figured  that  it  may  cause  the  coloured  light  which  divergeth  from 
the  prism  to  converge  and  meet  again  at  its  focus  G,  about  six  or  eight  feet 
distant  from  the  lens,  and  there  to  fall  perpendicularly  upon  a  white  paper  DE. 
And  if  you  move  this  paper  to  and  fro,  you  will  perceive  that  near  the  lens,  as 
at  de,  the  whole  solar  image  (suppose  at  yt)  will  appear  upon  it  intensely 


Book  I :  Part  2  433 

coloured  after  the  manner  above-explained;  and  that  by  receding  from  the  lens 
those  colours  will  perpetually  come  towards  one  another,  and,  by  mixing  more 
and  more,  dilute  one  another  continually  until  at  length  the  paper  come  to  the 
focus  G,  where  by  a  perfect  mixture  they  will  wholly  vanish  and  be  converted 
into  whiteness,  the  whole  light  appearing  now  upon  the  paper  like  a  little  white 
circle.  And  afterwards  by  receding  farther  from  the  lens,  the  rays  which  before 
converged  will  now  cross  one  another  in  the  focus  G,  and  diverge  from  thence, 
and  thereby  make  the  colours  to  appear  again,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  order; 
suppose  at  5e,  w^here  the  red  t  is  now  above  w^hich  before  was  below,  and  the 
violet  p  is  below  w'hich  before  was  above. 

Let  us  now  stop  the  paper  at  the  focus  G,  where  the  light  appears  totally 
w'hite  and  circular,  and  let  us  consider  its  whiteness.  I  say,  that  this  is  composed 
of  the  converging  colours.  For  if  any  of  those  colours  be  intercepted  at  the  lens, 
the  w'hiteness  will  cease  and  degenerate  into  that  colour  which  ariseth  from  the 
composition  of  the  other  colours  which  are  not  intercepted.  And  then  if  the 
intercepted  colours  be  let  pass  and  fall  upon  that  compound  colour,  they  mix 
with  it,  and  by  their  mixture  restore  the  wLiteness.  So  if  the  violet,  blue  and 
green  be  intercepted,  the  remaining  yellow,  orange  and  red  will  compound  upon 
the  paper  an  orange,  and  then  if  the  intercepted  colours  be  let  pass,  they  will 
fall  upon  this  compounded  orange,  and  together  with  it  decompound  a  white. 
So  also  if  the  red  and  violet  be  intercepted,  the  remaining  yellow,  green  and 
blue  will  compound  a  green  upon  the  paper,  and  then  the  red  and  violet  being 
let  pass  will  fall  upon  this  green,  and  together  with  it  decompound  a  white. 
And  that  in  this  composition  of  white  the  several  rays  do  not  suffer  any  change 
in  their  colorific  qualities  by  acting  upon  one  another,  but  are  only  mixed,  and 
by  a  mixture  of  their  colours  produce  white,  may  further  appear  by  these 
arguments. 

If  the  paper  be  placed  beyond  the  focus  G,  suppose  at  be,  and  then  the  red 
colour  at  the  lens  be  alternately  intercepted,  and  let  pass  again,  the  violet 
colour  on  the  paper  will  not  suffer  any  change  thereby,  as  it  ought  to  do  if  the 
several  sorts  of  rays  acted  upon  one  another  in  the  focus  G,  wLere  they  cross. 
Neither  will  the  red  upon  the  paper  be  changed  by  any  alternate  stopping,  and 
letting  pass  the  violet  which  crosseth  it. 

And  if  the  paper  be  placed  at  the  focus  G,  and  the  white  round  image  at  G  be 
view'ed  through  the  prism  HIK,  and  by  the  refraction  of  that  prism  be  trans¬ 
lated  to  the  place  rv,  and  there  appear  tinged  with  various  colours  (namely,  the 
violet  at  v  and  red  at  r,  and  others  between)  and  then  the  red  colours  at  the  lens 
be  often  stopped  and  let  pass  by  turns,  the  red  at  r  will  accordingly  disappear, 
and  return  as  often,  but  the  violet  at  v  will  not  thereby  suffer  any  change.  And 
so,  by  stopping  and  letting  pass  alternately  the  blue  at  the  lens,  the  blue  at  v 
\vill  accordingly  disappear  and  return,  without  any  change  made  in  the  red  at  r. 
The  red,  therefore,  depends  on  one  sort  of  rays,  and  the  blue  on  another  sort, 
wLich  in  the  focus  G,  wLere  they  are  commixed,  do  not  act  on  one  another.  And 
there  is  the  same  reason  of  the  other  colours. 

I  considered,  further,  that  wLen  the  most  refrangible  rays  Pp,  and  the  least 
refrangible  ones  T^,  are  by  converging  inclined  to  one  another,  the  paper,  if 
held  very  oblique  to  those  rays  in  the  focus  G,  might  reflect  one  sort  of  them 
more  copiously  than  the  other  sort,  and  by  that  means  the  reflected  light  would 
be  tinged  in  that  focus  with  the  colour  of  the  predominant  rays,  provided  those 


434  Optics 

rays  severally  retained  their  colours,  or  colorific  qualities  in  the  composition  of 
white  made  by  them  in  that  focus.  But  if  they  did  not  retain  them  in  that 
white,  but  became  all  of  them  severally  endued  there  with  a  disposition  to 
strike  the  sense  with  the  perception  of  white,  then  they  could  never  lose  their 
whiteness  by  such  reflexions.  I  inclined,  therefore,  the  paper  to  the  rays  very 
obliquely,  as  in  the  second  experiment  of  this  second  part  of  the  flrst  book,  that 
the  most  refrangible  rays  might  be  more  copiously  reflected  than  the  rest,  and 
the  whiteness  at  length  changed  successively  into  blue,  indigo,  and  violet.  Then 
I  inclined  it  the  contrary  way,  that  the  least  refrangible  rays  might  be  more 
copious  in  the  reflected  light  than  the  rest,  and  the  whiteness  turned  succes¬ 
sively  to  yellow,  orange,  and  red. 

Lastly,  I  made  an  instrument  XY  in  fashion  of  a  comb  whose  teeth,  being  in 
number  sixteen,  were  about  an  inch  and  a  half  broad,  and  the  intervals  of  the 
teeth  about  two  inches  wide.  Then  by  interposing  successively  the  teeth  of  this 
instrument  near  the  lens,  I  intercepted  part  of  the  colours  by  the  interposed 
tooth,  whilst  the  rest  of  them  went  on  through  the  interval  of  the  teeth  to  the 
paper  DE,  and  there  painted  a  round  solar  image.  But  the  paper  I  had  first 
placed  so  that  the  image  might  appear  white  as  often  as  the  comb  was  taken 
away;  and  then  the  Comb  being  as  was  said  interposed,  the  whiteness  by  rea¬ 
son  of  the  intercepted  part  of  the  colours  at  the  lens  did  always  change  into  the 
colour  compounded  of  those  colours  which  were  not  intercepted,  and  that 
colour  was  by  the  motion  of  the  comb  perpetually  varied  so  that  in  the  passing 
of  every  tooth  over  the  lens  all  these  colours  (red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  and 
purple)  did  always  succeed  one  another.  I  caused,  therefore,  all  the  teeth  to 
pass  successively  over  the  lens,  and  when  the  motion  was  slow  there  appeared 
a  perpetual  succession  of  the  colours  upon  the  paper;  but  if  I  so  much  acceler¬ 
ated  the  motion  that  the  colours  by  reason  of  their  quick  succession  could  not 
be  distinguished  from  one  another,  the  appearance  of  the  single  colours  ceased. 
There  was  no  red,  no  yellow,  no  green,  no  blue,  nor  purple  to  be  seen  any  longer, 
but  from  a  confusion  of  them  all  there  arose  one  uniform  white  colour.  Of  the 
light  which  now  by  the  mixture  of  all  the  colours  appeared  white,  there  was  no 
part  really  white.  One  part  was  red,  another  yellow,  a  third  green,  a  fourth 
blue,  a  fifth  purple,  and  every  part  retains  its  proper  colour  till  it  strikes  the 
sensorium.  If  the  impressions  follow  one  another  slowly,  so  that  they  may  be 
severally  perceived,  there  is  made  a  distinct  sensation  of  all  the  colours  one 
after  another  in  a  continual  succession.  But  if  the  impressions  follow  one  an¬ 
other  so  quickly  that  they  cannot  be  severally  perceived,  there  ariseth  out  of 
them  all  one  common  sensation,  which  is  neither  of  this  colour  alone  nor  of  that 
alone,  but  hath  itself  indifferently  to  them  all,  and  this  is  a  sensation  of  white¬ 
ness.  By  the  quickness  of  the  successions,  the  impressions  of  the  several  colours 
are  confounded  in  the  sensorium,  and  out  of  that  confusion  ariseth  a  mixed 
sensation.  If  a  burning  coal  be  nimbly  moved  round  in  a  circle  mth  gyrations 
continually  repeated,  the  whole  circle  will  apear  like  fire;  the  reason  of  which  is 
that  the  sensation  of  the  coal  in  the  several  places  of  that  circle  remains  im¬ 
pressed  on  the  sensorium  until  the  coal  return  again  to  the  same  place.  And  so 
in  a  quick  consecution  of  the  colours  the  impression  of  every  colour  remains  in 
the  sensorium,  until  a  revolution  of  all  the  colours  be  completed,  and  that  first 
colour  return  again.  The  impressions,  therefore,  of  all  the  successive  colours  are 
at  once  in  the  sensorium,  and  jointly  stir  up  a  sensation  of  them  all;  and  so  it  is 


Book  I :  Part  2  435 

manifest  by  this  experiment  that  the  commixed  impressions  of  all  the  colours 
do  stir  up  and  beget  a  sensation  of  white,  that  is,  that  whiteness  is  compounded 
of  all  the  colours. 

And  if  the  comb  be  now  taken  away,  that  all  the  colours  may  at  once  pass 
from  the  lens  to  the  paper,  and  be  there  intermixed,  and  together  reflected 
thence  to  the  spectator’s  eyes,  their  impressions  on  the  sensorium  being  now 
more  subtly  and  perfectly  commixed  there,  ought  much  more  to  stir  up  a 
sensation  of  whiteness. 

You  may  instead  of  the  lens  use  two  prisms  HIK  and  LMN  which,  by  re¬ 
fracting  the  coloured  light  the  contrary  way  to  that  of  the  first  refraction,  may 
make  the  diverging  rays  converge  and  meet  again  in  G,  as  you  see  represented 
in  the  seventh  Figure.  For  where  they  meet  and  mix,  they  will  compose  a  white 
light,  as  when  a  lens  is  used. 

Exper.  11.  Let  the  Sun’s  coloured  image  PT  [Fig.  8]  fall  upon  the  wall  of  a 
dark  chamber,  as  in  the  third  experiment  of  the  first  book,  and  let  the  same  be 
viewed  through  a  prism  abc,  held  parallel  to  the  prism  ABC,  by  whose  refrac¬ 
tion  that  image  was  made,  and  let  it  now  appear  lower  than  before,  suppose  in 
the  place  S  over  against  the  red  colour  T.  And  if  you  go  near  to  the  image  PT, 


the  spectrum  S  will  appear  oblong  and  coloured  like  the  image  PT ;  but  if  you 
recede  from  it  the  colours  of  the  spectrum  S  will  be  contracted  more  and  more, 
and  at  length  vanish,  that  spectrum  S  becoming  perfectly  round  and  white;  and 
if  you  recede  yet  farther,  the  colours  will  emerge  again,  but  in  a  contrary  order. 
Now  that  spectrum  S  appears  white  in  that  case,  when  the  rays  of  several 
sorts  which  converge  from  the  several  parts  of  the  image  PT,  to  the  prism  abc, 


436  Optics 

are  so  refracted  unequally  by  it  that  in  their  passage  from  the  prism  to  the  eye 
they  may  diverge  from  one  and  the  same  point  of  the  spectrum  S,  and  so  fall 
afterwards  upon  one  and  the  same  point  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye,  and  there  be 
mingled. 

And,  further,  if  the  comb  be  here  made  use  of,  by  whose  teeth  the  colours  at 
the  image  PT  may  be  successively  intercepted,  the  spectrum  S,  when  the  comb 
is  moved  slowly,  will  be  perpetually  tinged  with  successive  colours.  But  when, 
by  accelerating  the  motion  of  the  comb,  the  succession  of  the  colours  is  so  quick 
that  they  cannot  be  severally  seen,  that  spectrum  S,  by  a  confused  and  mixed 
sensation  of  them  all,  will  appear  white. 

Exper.  12.  The  Sun  shining  through  a  large  prism  ABC  [Fig.  9]  upon  a  comb 
XY,  placed  immediately  behind  the  prism,  his  light  which  passed  through  the 
interstices  of  the  teeth  fell  upon  a  white  paper  DE.  The  breadths  of  the  teeth 
were  equal  to  their  interstices,  and  seven  teeth  together  with  their  interstices 
took  up  an  inch  in  breadth.  Now,  when  the  paper  was  about  two  or  three  inches 


Fig.  9 


distant  from  the  comb,  the  light  which  passed  through  its  several  interstices 
painted  so  many  ranges  of  colours,  hi,  mn,  op,  qr,  &c.  which  were  parallel  to  one 
another,  and  contiguous,  and  without  any  mixture  of  white.  And  these  ranges 
of  colours,  if  the  comb  was  moved  continually  up  and  down  with  a  reciprocal 
motion,  ascended  and  descended  in  the  paper,  and  when  the  motion  of  the 
comb  was  so  quick  that  the  colours  could  not  be  distinguished  from  one  an¬ 
other,  the  whole  paper  by  their  confusion  and  mixture  in  the  sensorium  ap¬ 
peared  white. 

Let  the  comb  now  rest,  and  let  the  paper  be  removed  farther  from  the  prism, 
and  the  several  ranges  of  colours  will  be  dilated  and  expanded  into  one  another 
more  and  more,  and  by  mixing  their  colours  ^vill  dilute  one  another,  and  at 
length,  when  the  distance  of  the  paper  from  the  comb  is  about  a  foot,  or  a  little 
more  (suppose  in  the  place  2D  2E)  they  will  so  far  dilute  one  another  as  to 
become  white. 

With  any  obstacle,  let  all  the  light  be  now  stopped  which  passes  through  any 
one  interval  of  the  teeth,  so  that  the  range  of  colours  which  comes  from  thence 
may  be  taken  away,  and  you  will  see  the  light  of  the  rest  of  the  ranges  to  be 


Book  I :  Part  2  437 

expanded  into  the  place  of  the  range  taken  away,  and  there  to  be  coloured.  Let 
the  intercepted  range  pass  on  as  before,  and  its  colours  falling  upon  the  colours 
of  the  other  ranges,  and  mixing  with  them,  will  restore  the  whiteness. 

Let  the  paper  2D  2E  be  now  very  much  inclined  to  the  rays,  so  that  the  most 
refrangible  rays  may  be  more  copiously  reflected  than  the  rest,  and  the  white 
colour  of  the  paper  through  the  excess  of  those  rays  will  be  changed  into  blue 
and  \dolet.  Let  the  paper  be  as  much  inclined  the  contrary  way,  that  the  least 
refrangible  rays  may  be  now  more  copiously  reflected  than  the  rest,  and  by 
their  excess  the  whiteness  will  be  changed  into  yellow  and  red.  The  several  rays, 
therefore,  in  that  white  light  do  retain  their  colorific  qualities,  by  which  those 
of  any  sort,  whenever  they  become  more  copious  than  the  rest,  do  by  their 
excess  and  predominance  cause  their  proper  colour  to  appear. 

And  by  the  same  way  of  arguing,  applied  to  the  third  experiment  of  this 
second  part  of  the  first  book,  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  white  colour  of  all 
refracted  light  at  its  very  first  emergence,  where  it  appears  as  white  as  before 
its  incidence,  is  compounded  of  various  colours. 

Exper.  13.  In  the  foregoing  experiment  the  several  intervals  of  the  teeth  of 
the  comb  do  the  office  of  so  many  prisms,  every  interval  producing  the  phe¬ 
nomenon  of  one  prism.  Whence  instead  of  those  intervals  using  several  prisms, 
I  tried  to  compound  whiteness  by  mixing  their  colours,  and  did  it  by  using  only 
three  prisms,  as  also  by  using  only  two  as  follows:  Let  two  prisms  ABC  and  ahc, 
[Fig.  10]  whose  refracting  angles  B  and  h  are  equal,  be  so  placed  parallel  to  one 


another  that  the  refracting  angle  B  of  the  one  may  touch  the  angle  c  at  the  base 
of  the  other,  and  their  planes  CB  and  cb,  at  which  the  rays  emerge,  may  lie  in 
directum.  Then  let  the  light  trajected  through  them  fall  upon  the  paper  MN, 
distant  about  8  or  12  inches  from  the  prisms.  And  the  colours  generated  by  the 
interior  limits  B  and  c  of  the  two  prisms  \vill  be  mingled  at  PT,  and  there 
compound  white.  For  if  either  prism  be  taken  away,  the  colours  made  by  the 
other  will  appear  in  that  place  PT,  and  when  the  prism  is  restored  to  its  place 
again,  so  that  its  colours  may  there  fall  upon  the  colours  of  the  other,  the  mix¬ 
ture  of  them  both  will  restore  the  whiteness. 

This  experiment  succeeds  also,  as  I  have  tried,  when  the  angle  b  of  the  lower 
prism  is  a  little  greater  than  the  angle  B  of  the  upper,  and  between  the  interior 


438  Optics 

angles  B  and  c  there  intercedes  some  space  Be,  as  is  represented  in  the  figure, 
and  the  refracting  planes  BC  and  be  are  neither  in  directum  nor  parallel  to  one 
another.  For  there  is  nothing  more  requisite  to  the  success  of  this  experiment 
than  that  the  rays  of  all  sorts  may  be  uniformly  mixed  upon  the  paper  in  the 
place  PT.  If  the  most  refrangible  rays  coming  from  the  superior  prism  take  up 
all  the  space  from  M  to  P,  the  rays  of  the  same  sort  which  come  from  the  in¬ 
ferior  prism  ought  to  begin  at  P,  and  take  up  all  the  rest  of  the  space  from 
thence  towards  N.  If  the  least  refrangible  rays  coming  from  the  superior  prism 
take  up  the  space  MT,  the  rays  of  the  same  kind  which  come  from  the  other 
prism  ought  to  begin  at  T,  and  take  up  the  remaining  space  TN.  If  one  sort  of 
the  rays,  which  have  intermediate  degrees  of  refrangibility  and  come  from  the 
superior  prism,  be  extended  through  the  space  MQ,  and  another  sort  of  those 
rays  through  the  space  MR,  and  a  third  sort  of  them  through  the  space  MS, 
the  same  sorts  of  rays  coming  from  the  lower  prism  ought  to  illuminate  the 
remaining  spaces  QN,  RN,  SN,  respectively.  And  the  same  is  to  be  understood 
of  all  the  other  sorts  of  rays.  For  thus  the  rays  of  every  sort  will  be  scattered 
uniformly  and  evenly  through  the  whole  space  MN,  and  so,  being  everywhere 
mixed  in  the  same  proportion,  they  must  everywhere  produce  the  same  colour. 
And,  therefore,  since  by  this  mixture  they  produce  white  in  the  exterior  spaces 
MP  and  TN,  they  must  also  produce  white  in  the  interior  space  PT.  This  is  the 
reason  of  the  composition  by  which  whiteness  w^as  produced  in  this  experiment, 
and  by  what  other  w^ay  soever  I  made  the  like  composition,  the  result  was 
whiteness. 

Lastly,  if  wdth  the  teeth  of  a  comb  of  a  due  size  the  coloured  lights  of  the  two 
prisms  which  fall  upon  the  space  PT  be  alternately  intercepted,  that  space  PT, 
when  the  motion  of  the  comb  is  slow%  wall  ahvays  appear  coloured,  but  by 
accelerating  the  motion  of  the  comb  so  much  that  the  successive  colours  cannot 
be  distinguished  from  one  another,  it  wall  apear  white. 

Exper.  14.  Hitherto  I  have  produced  whiteness  by  mixing  the  colours  of 
prisms.  If,  now^,  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  are  to  be  mingled,  let  w^ater  a 
little  thickened  with  soap  be  agitated  to  raise  a  froth,  and  after  that  froth  has 
stood  a  little  there  wall  appear  to  one  that  shall  view  it  intently  various  colours 
everywhere  in  the  surfaces  of  the  several  bubbles;  but  to  one  that  shall  go  so 
far  off  that  he  cannot  distinguish  the  colours  from  one  another,  the  whole  froth 
will  grow^  white  wath  a  perfect  whiteness. 

Exper.  15.  Lastly,  in  attempting  to  compound  a  white,  by  mixing  the 
coloured  powhers  which  painters  use,  I  considered  that  all  coloured  powders  do 
suppress  and  stop  in  them  a  very  considerable  part  of  the  light  by  which  they 
are  illuminated.  For  they  become  coloured  by  reflecting  the  light  of  their  own 
colours  more  copiously,  and  that  of  all  other  colours  more  sparingly,  and  yet 
they  do  not  reflect  the  light  of  their  own  colours  so  copiously  as  white  bodies  do. 
If  red  lead,  for  instance,  and  a  white  paper  be  placed  in  the  red  light  of  the 
coloured  spectrum  made  in  a  dark  chamber  by  the  refraction  of  a  prism,  as  is 
described  in  the  third  experiment  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  the  paper  will 
appear  more  lucid  than  the  red  lead,  and  therefore  reflects  the  red-making  rays 
more  copiously  than  red  lead  doth.  And  if  they  be  held  in  the  light  of  any  other 
colour,  the  light  reflected  by  the  paper  wdll  exceed  the  light  reflected  by  the  red 
lead  in  a  much  greater  proportion.  And  the  like  happens  in  powders  of  other 
colours.  And,  therefore,  by  mixing  such  pow^ders  w'e  are  not  to  expect  a  strong 


Book  I :  Part  2  439 

and  full  white,  such  as  is  that  of  paper,  but  some  dusky  obscure  one,  such  as 
might  arise  from  a  mixture  of  light  and  darkness,  or  from  white  and  black;  that 
is,  a  grey,  or  dun,  or  russet  brown,  such  as  are  the  colours  of  a  man’s  nail,  of  a 
mouse,  of  ashes,  of  ordinary  stones,  of  mortar,  of  dust  and  dirt  in  highways, 
and  the  like.  And  such  a  dark  white  I  have  often  produced  by  mixing  coloured 
powders.  For  thus  one  part  of  red  lead,  and  five  parts  of  viride  ceris  composed 
a  dun  colour  like  that  of  a  mouse.  For  these  two  colours  were  severally  so  com¬ 
pounded  of  others  that  in  both  together  were  a  mixture  of  all  colours;  and  there 
was  less  red  lead  used  than  viride  ceris,  because  of  the  fulness  of  its  colour. 
Again,  one  part  of  red  lead  and  four  parts  of  blue  bice  composed  a  dun  colour 
verging  a  little  to  purple,  and  by  adding  to  this  a  certain  mixture  of  orpiment 
and  viride  ceris  in  a  due  proportion,  the  mixture  lost  its  purple  tincture  and 
became  perfectly  dun.  But  the  experiment  succeeded  best  without  minium 
thus;  To  orpiment  I  added  by  little  and  little  a  certain  full  bright  purple,  which 
painters  use,  until  the  orpiment  ceased  to  be  yelloAv,  and  became  of  a  pale  red. 
Then  I  diluted  that  red  by  adding  a  little  viride  ceris,  and  a  little  more  blue 
bice  than  viride  ceris,  until  it  became  of  such  a  grey  or  pale  white  as  verged  to 
no  one  of  the  colours  more  than  to  another.  For  thus  it  became  of  a  colour  equal 
in  whiteness  to  that  of  ashes,  or  of  wood  newly  cut,  or  of  a  man’s  skin.  The 
orpiment  reflected  more  light  than  did  any  other  of  the  powders,  and  therefore 
conduced  more  to  the  whiteness  of  the  compounded  colour  than  they.  To  assign 
the  proportions  accurately  may  be  difficult,  by  reason  of  the  different  goodness 
of  powders  of  the  same  kind.  Accordingly,  as  the  colour  of  any  powder  is  more 
or  less  full  and  luminous,  it  ought  to  be  used  in  a  less  or  greater  proportion. 

Now,  considering  that  these  grey  and  dun  colours  may  be  also  produced  by 
mixing  whites  and  blacks,  and  by  consequence  differ  from  perfect  whites,  not 
in  species  of  colours  but  only  in  degree  of  luminousness,  it  is  manifest  that  there 
is  nothing  more  requisite  to  make  them  perfectly  white  than  to  increase  their 
light  sufficiently;  and,  on  the  contrary,  if  by  increasing  their  light  they  can  be 
brought  to  perfect  whiteness,  it  vfill  thence  also  follow  that  they  are  of  the  same 
species  of  colour  ^vith  the  best  whites,  and  differ  from  them  only  in  the  quantity 
of  light.  And  this  I  tried  as  follows:  I  took  the  third  of  the  above-mentioned 
grey  mixtures,  (that  which  was  compounded  of  orpiment,  purple,  bice,  and 
viride  ceris)  and  rubbed  it  thickly  upon  the  floor  of  my  chamber  where  the  Sun 
shone  upon  it  through  the  opened  casement;  and  by  it,  in  the  shadow,  I  laid  a 
piece  of  white  paper  of  the  same  bigness.  Then,  going  from  them  to  the  distance 
of  12  or  18  feet,  so  that  I  could  not  discern  the  unevenness  of  the  surface  of  the 
powder,  nor  the  little  shadows  let  fall  from  the  gritty  particles  thereof,  the 
powder  appeared  intensely  white,  so  as  to  transcend  even  the  paper  itself  in 
whiteness,  especially  if  the  paper  were  a  little  shaded  from  the  light  of  the 
clouds,  and  then  the  paper  compared  with  the  powder  appeared  of  such  a  grey 
colour  as  the  powder  had  done  before.  But  by  laying  the  paper  where  the  Sun 
shines  through  the  glass  of  the  window,  or  by  shutting  the  window  that  the 
Sun  might  shine  through  the  glass  upon  the  powder,  and  by  such  other  fit 
means  of  increasing  or  decreasing  the  lights  wherewith  the  powder  and  paper 
were  illuminated,  the  light  wherewith  the  powder  is  illuminated  may  be  made 
stronger  in  such  a  due  proportion  than  the  light  wherevdth  the  paper  is  illu¬ 
minated  that  they  shall  both  appear  exactly  alike  in  whiteness.  For  when  I  was 
trying  this,  a  friend  coming  to  visit  me,  I  stopped  him  at  the  door,  and  before  I 


440  Optics 

told  him  what  the  colours  were,  or  what  I  was  doing,  I  asked  him  which  of  the 
two  whites  was  the  best,  and  wherein  they  differed.  And  after  he  had  at  that 
distance  viewed  them  well,  he  answered  that  they  were  both  good  whites,  and 
that  he  could  not  say  which  was  best,  nor  wherein  their  colours  differed.  Now, 
if  you  consider  that  this  white  of  the  powder  in  the  sunshine  was  compounded 
of  the  colours  which  the  component  powders  (orpiment,  purple,  bice,  and  viride 
ceris)  have  in  the  same  sunshine,  you  must  acknowledge  by  this  experiment,  as 
well  as  by  the  former,  that  perfect  whiteness  may  be  compounded  of  colours. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  also  evident  that  the  whiteness  of  the  Sun’s 
light  is  compounded  of  all  the  colours  wherewith  the  several  sorts  of  rays  where¬ 
of  that  light  consists,  when  by  their  several  refrangibilities  they  are  separated 
from  one  another,  do  tinge  paper  or  any  other  white  body  whereon  they  fall. 
For  those  colours  (by  Prop.  II.  Part  2.)  are  unchangeable,  and  whenever  all 
those  rays  uith  those  their  colours  are  mixed  again,  they  reproduce  the  same 
white  light  as  before. 

Proposition  6.  Problem  2 

In  a  mixture  of  primary  colours,  the  quantity  and  quality  of  each  being  given,  to 
know  the  colour  of  the  compound. 

With  the  centre  0  [Fig.  11]  and  radius  OD  describe  a  circle  ADF,  and 
distinguish  its  circumference  into  seven  parts  DE,  EF,  FG,  GA,  AB,  BC,  CD, 
proportional  to  the  seven  musical  tones  or  intervals  of  the  eight  sounds,  Sol,  la, 
fa,  sol,  la,  mi,  fa,  sol,  contained  in  an  eight;  that  is,  proportional  to  the  number 
14,  Me,  Mo,  M,  Me,  Me,  M-  Let  the  first  part  DE  represent  a  red  colour,  the 
second  EF  orange,  the  third  FG  yellow,  the  fourth  CA  green,  the  fifth  AB 
blue,  the  sixth  BC  indigo,  and  the  seventh  CD  violet.  And  conceive  that  these 
are  all  the  colours  of  uncompounded  light  gradually  passing  into  one  another, 
as  they  do  when  made  by  prisms;  the  circumference  DEFGABCD,  represent¬ 
ing  the  whole  series  of  colours  from  one  end  of  the  Sun’s  coloured  image  to  the 
other,  so  that  from  D  to  E  be  all  degrees  of  red,  at  E  the  mean  colour  betw’een 
red  and  orange,  from  E  to  F  all  degrees  of  orange,  at  F  the  mean  between 
orange  and  yellow,  from  F  to  G  all  degrees  of  yellow,  and  so  on.  Let  p  be  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  arch  DE,  and  q,  r,  s,  t,  u,  x,  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the 

arches  EF,  FG,  GA,  AB,  BC,  and  CD, 
respectively,  and  about  those  centres  of 
gravity  let  circles  proportional  to  the 
number  of  rays  of  each  colour  in  the  given 
mixture  be  described:  that  is,  the  circle 
p  proportional  to  the  number  of  the 
red-making  rays  in  the  mixture,  the  circle 
q  proportional  to  the  number  of  the 
orange-making  rays  in  the  mixture,  and 
so  of  the  rest.  Find  the  common  centre 
of  gravity  of  all  those  circles,  p,  q,  r,  s,  t, 
u,  X.  Let  that  centre  be  Z;  and  from  the 
centre  of  the  circle  ADF,  through  Z  to 
the  circumference,  drawing  the  right  line 
OY,  the  place  of  the  point  Y  in  the  cir¬ 
cumference  shall  shew  the  colour  aris- 


Book  I :  Part  2  441 

ing  from  the  composition  of  all  the  colours  in  the  given  mixture,  and  the  line 
OZ  shall  be  proportional  to  the  fulness  or  intenseness  of  the  colour;  that  is,  to 
its  distance  from  whiteness.  As  if  Y  fall  in  the  middle  between  F  and  G,  the 
compounded  colour  shall  be  the  best  yellow;  if  Y  verge  from  the  middle  to¬ 
wards  F  or  G,  the  compound  colour  shall  accordingly  be  a  yellow,  verging  to¬ 
wards  orange  or  green.  If  Z  fall  upon  the  circumference,  the  colour  shall  be 
intense  and  florid  in  the  highest  degree;  if  it  fall  in  the  midway  between  the 
circumference  and  centre,  it  shall  be  but  half  so  intense;  that  is,  it  shall  be  such 
a  colour  as  would  be  made  by  diluting  the  intensest  yellow  with  an  equal  quan¬ 
tity  of  whiteness;  and  if  it  fall  upon  the  centre  O,  the  colour  shall  have  lost  all 
its  intenseness,  and  become  a  white.  But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  if  the  point  Z  fall 
in  or  near  the  line  OD,  the  main  ingredients  being  the  red  and  violet,  the  colour 
compounded  shall  not  be  any  of  the  prismatic  colours,  but  a  purple,  inclining  to 
red  or  violet,  accordingly  as  the  point  Z  lieth  on  the  side  of  the  line  DO  towards 
E  or  towards  C,  and  in  general  the  compounded  violet  is  more  bright  and  more 
fiery  than  the  uncompounded.  Also,  if  only  two  of  the  primary  colours  which 
in  the  circle  are  opposite  to  one  another  be  mixed  in  an  equal  proportion, 
the  point  Z  shall  fall  upon  the  centre  0,  and  yet  the  colour  compounded  of 
those  two  shall  not  be  perfectly  white,  but  some  faint  anonymous  colour.  For 
I  could  never  yet  by  mixing  only  two  primary  colours  produce  a  perfect  white. 
Whether  it  may  be  compounded  of  a  mixture  of  three  taken  at  equal  dis¬ 
tances  in  the  circumference  I  do  not  know,  but  of  four  or  five  I  do  not  much 
question  but  it  may.  But  these  are  curiosities  of  little  or  no  moment  to  the  un¬ 
derstanding  the  phenomena  of  Nature.  For  in  all  whites  produced  by  Nature, 
there  uses  to  be  a  mixture  of  all  sorts  of  rays,  and  by  consequence  a  composi¬ 
tion  of  all  colours. 

To  give  an  instance  of  this  rule,  suppose  a  colour  is  compounded  of  these 
homogeneal  colours :  of  violet  one  part,  of  indigo  one  part,  of  blue  two  parts, 
of  green  three  parts,  of  yellow  five  parts,  of  orange  six  parts,  and  of  red  ten 
parts.  Proportional  to  these  parts  describe  the  circles  x,  v,  t,  s,  r,  q,  p,  respec¬ 
tively,  that  is,  so  that  if  the  circle  x  be  one,  the  circle  v  may  be  one,  the  circle  t 
two,  the  circle  s  three,  and  the  circles  r,  q  and  p,  five,  six  and  ten.  Then  I  find  Z 
the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  these  circles,  and  through  Z  drawing  the  line 
OY,  the  point  Y  falls  upon  the  circumference  between  E  and  F,  something 
nearer  to  E  than  to  F ;  and  thence  I  conclude  that  the  colour  compounded  of 
these  ingredients  will  be  an  orange,  verging  a  little  more  to  red  than  to  yellow. 
Also  I  find  that  OZ  is  a  little  less  than  one  half  of  OY,  and  thence  I  conclude 
that  this  orange  hath  a  little  less  than  half  the  fulness  or  intenseness  of  an 
uncompounded  orange;  that  is  to  say,  that  it  is  such  an  orange  as  may  be  made 
by  mixing  an  homogeneal  orange  with  a  good  white  in  the  proportion  of  the 
Line  OZ  to  the  Line  ZY,  this  proportion  being  not  of  the  quantities  of  mixed 
orange  and  wLite  powders,  but  of  the  quantities  of  the  lights  reflected  from 
them. 

This  rule  I  conceive  accurate  enough  for  practice,  though  not  mathematically 
accurate;  and  the  truth  of  it  may  be  sufficiently  proved  to  sense  by  stopping 
any  of  the  colours  at  the  lens  in  the  tenth  experiment  of  this  book.  For  the  rest 
of  the  colours  which  are  not  stopped,  but  pass  on  to  the  focus  of  the  lens,  will 
there  compound  either  accurately  or  very  nearly  such  a  colour  as  by  this  rule 
ought  to  result  from  their  mixture. 


442 


Optics 


Proposition  7.  Theorem  5 

All  the  colours  in  the  universe  which  are  made  by  light,  and  depend  not  on  the 
power  of  miagination,  are  either  the  colours  of  homogeneal  lights,  or  compounded  of 
these,  and  that  either  accurately  or  very  nearly,  according  to  the  ride  of  the  foregoing 
problem. 

For  it  has  been  proved  (Prop.  1,  Part  2)  that  the  changes  of  colours  made  by 
refractions  do  not  arise  from  any  new  modifications  of  the  rays  impressed  by 
those  refractions,  and  by  the  various  terminations  of  light  and  shadow,  as  has 
been  the  constant  and  general  opinion  of  philosophers.  It  has  also  been  proved 
that  the  several  colours  of  the  homogeneal  rays  do  constantly  answer  to  their 
degrees  of  refrangibility  (Prop.  1,  Part  1  and  Prop.  2,  Part  2)  and  that  their 
degrees  of  refrangibility  cannot  be  changed  by  refractions  and  reflexions  (Prop. 
2,  Part  1)  and  by  consequence  that  those  their  colours  are  likewise  immutable. 
It  has  also  been  proved  directly  by  refracting  and  reflecting  homogeneal  lights 
apart,  that  their  colours  cannot  be  changed  (Prop.  2,  Part  2).  It  has  been 
proved,  also,  that  when  the  several  sorts  of  rays  are  mixed,  and  in  crossing  pass 
through  the  same  space,  they  do  not  act  on  one  another  so  as  to  change  each 
other’s  colorific  qualities  (Exper.  10,  Part  2)  but  by  mixing  their  actions  in  the 
sensorium  beget  a  sensation  differing  from  what  either  would  do  apart  (that  is, 
a  sensation  of  a  mean  colour  between  their  proper  colours) ;  and  particularly 
when  by  the  concourse  and  mixtures  of  all  sorts  of  rays  a  white  colour  is  pro¬ 
duced,  the  white  is  a  mixture  of  all  the  colours  which  the  rays  would  have  apart 
(Prop.  5,  Part  2).  The  rays  in  that  mixture  do  not  lose  or  alter  their  several 
colorific  qualities,  but  by  all  their  various  kinds  of  actions,  mixed  in  the  sen¬ 
sorium,  beget  a  sensation  of  a  middling  colour  between  all  their  colours,  which 
is  whiteness.  For  whiteness  is  a  mean  between  all  colours,  having  itself  in¬ 
differently  to  them  all,  so  as  with  equal  facility  to  be  tinged  with  any  of  them. 
A  red  powder  mixed  with  a  little  blue,  or  a  blue  with  a  little  red,  doth  not 
presently  lose  its  colour,  but  a  white  powder  mixed  with  any  colour  is  presently 
tinged  with  that  colour,  and  is  equally  capable  of  being  tinged  with  any  colour 
whatever.  It  has  been  shewed,  also,  that  as  the  Sun’s  light  is  mixed  of  all  sorts 
of  rays,  so  its  whiteness  is  a  mixture  of  the  colours  of  all  sorts  of  rays;  those 
rays  having  from  the  beginning  their  several  colorific  qualities  as  well  as  their 
several  refrangibilities,  and  retaining  them  perpetually  unchanged  notwith¬ 
standing  any  refractions  or  reflexions  they  may  at  any  time  suffer,  and  that 
whenever  any  sort  of  the  Sun’s  rays  is  by  any  means  (as  by  reflexion  in  Expers. 
9  and  10,  Part  1  or  by  refraction  as  happens  in  all  refractions)  separated  from 
the  rest,  they  then  manifest  their  proper  colours.  These  things  have  been 
proved,  and  the  sum  of  all  this  amounts  to  the  proposition  here  to  be  proved. 
For  if  the  Sun’s  light  is  mixed  of  several  sorts  of  rays,  each  of  which  have 
originally  their  several  refrangibilities  and  colorific  qualities,  and  notwithstand¬ 
ing  their  refractions  and  reflexions,  and  their  various  separations  or  mixtures, 
keep  those  their  original  properties  perpetually  the  same  without  alteration; 
then  all  the  colours  in  the  world  must  be  such  as  constantly  ought  to  arise  from 
the  original  colorific  qualities  of  the  rays  whereof  the  lights  consist  by  which 
those  colours  are  seen.  And,  therefore,  if  the  reason  of  any  colour  whatever  be 
required,  we  have  nothing  else  to  do  than  to  consider  how  the  rays  in  the  Sun’s 
light  have  by  reflexions  or  refractions,  or  other  causes,  been  parted  from  one 


Book  I :  Part  2  443 

another,  or  mixed  together;  or  otherwise  to  find  out  what  sorts  of  rays  are  in 
the  light  by  which  that  colour  is  made,  and  in  what  proportion;  and  then,  by 
the  last  problem,  to  learn  the  colour  which  ought  to  arise  by  mixing  those  rays 
(or  their  colours)  in  that  proportion.  I  speak  here  of  colours  so  far  as  they  arise 
from  light.  For  they  appear  sometimes  by  other  causes,  as  when  by  the  power 
of  phantasy  we  see  colours  in  a  dream,  or  a  madman  sees  things  before  him 
which  are  not  there;  or  when  we  see  fire  by  striking  the  eye,  or  see  colours  like 
the  eye  of  a  peacock’s  feather  by  pressing  our  eyes  in  either  corner  whilst  we 
look  the  other  way.  Where  these  and  such  like  causes  interpose  not,  the  colour 
always  answers  to  the  sort  or  sorts  of  the  rays  whereof  the  light  consists,  as  I 
have  constantly  found  in  whatever  phenomena  of  colours  I  have  hitherto  been 
able  to  examine.  I  shall  in  the  following  Propositions  give  instances  of  this  in 
the  phenomena  of  chiefest  note. 

Proposition  8.  Problem  3 

By  the  discovered  properties  of  light,  to  explain  the  colours  made  by  prisms. 

Let  ABC  [Fig.  12]  represent  a  prism  refracting  the  light  of  the  Sun,  which 
comes  into  a  dark  chamber  through  a  hole  F<^  almost  as  broad  as  the  prism, 
and  let  MN  represent  a  white  paper  on  which  the  refracted  light  is  cast,  and 
suppose  the  most  refrangible  or  deepest  violet-making  rays  fall  upon  the  space 
Ptt,  the  least  refrangible  or  deepest  red-making  rays  upon  the  space  Tt,  the 
middle  sort  between  the  indigo-making  and  blue-making  rays  upon  the  space 
Qx,  the  middle  sort  of  the  green-making  rays  upon  the  space  R,  the  middle  sort 
between  the  yellow-making  and  orange-making  rays  upon  the  space  Scr,  and 


other  intermediate  sorts  upon  intermediate  spaces.  For  so  the  spaces  upon 
which  the  several  sorts  adequately  fall  will,  by  reason  of  the  different  refrangi- 
bility  of  those  sorts,  be  one  lower  than  another.  Now,  if  the  paper  MN  be  so 
near  the  prism  that  the  spaces  PT  and  tt  do  not  interfere  with  one  another,  the 
distance  between  them  Ttt  will  be  illuminated  by  all  the  sorts  of  rays  in  that 
proportion  to  one  another  which  they  have  at  their  very  first  coming  out  of  the 
prism,  and  consequently  be  white.  But  the  spaces  PT  and  tt  on  either  hand 
will  not  be  illuminated  by  them  all,  and,  therefore,  will  appear  coloured.  And 
particularly  at  P,  where  the  outmost  violet-making  rays  fall  alone,  the  colour 
must  be  the  deepest  violet.  At  Q  where  the  violet-making  and  indigo-making 
rays  are  mixed,  it  must  be  a  violet  inclining  much  to  indigo.  At  R  where  the 


444  Optics 

violet-making,  indigo-making,  blue-making,  and  one  half  of  the  green-making 
rays  are  mixed,  their  colours  must  (by  the  construction  of  the  second  problem) 
compound  a  middle  colour  between  indigo  and  blue.  At  S  where  all  the  rays  are 
mixed,  except  the  red-making  and  orange-making,  their  colours  ought  by  the 
same  rule  to  compound  a  faint  blue,  verging  more  to  green  than  indigo.  And  in 
the  progress  from  S  to  T,  this  blue  will  grow  more  and  more  faint  and  dilute, 
till  at  T,  where  all  the  colours  begin  to  be  mixed,  it  ends  in  whiteness. 

So  again,  on  the  other  side  of  the  white  at  t,  where  the  least  refrangible  or 
utmost  red-making  rays  are  alone,  the  colour  must  be  the  deepest  red.  At  a  the 
mixture  of  red  and  orange  vdll  compound  a  red  inclining  to  orange.  At  p  the 
mixture  of  red,  orange,  yellow,  and  one  half  of  the  green  must  compound  a 
middle  colour  between  orange  and  yellow.  At  x  the  mixture  of  all  colours  but 
violet  and  indigo  will  compound  a  faint  yellow,  verging  more  to  green  than  to 
orange.  And  this  yellow  will  grow  more  faint  and  dilute  continually  in  its  pro¬ 
gress  from  X  to  TT,  where  by  a  mixture  of  all  sorts  of  rays  it  mil  become  white. 

These  colours  ought  to  appear  were  the  Sun’s  light  perfectly  white;  but 
because  it  inclines  to  yellow,  the  excess  of  the  yellow-making  rays  whereby  ’tis 
tinged  with  that  colour,  being  mixed  mth  the  faint  blue  between  S  and  T,  will 
draw  it  to  a  faint  green.  And  so  the  colours  in  order  from  P  to  t  ought  to  be 
violet,  indigo,  blue,  very  faint  green,  white,  faint  yellow,  orange,  red.  Thus  it  is 
by  the  computation ;  and  they  that  please  to  view  the  colours  made  by  a  prism 
will  find  it  so  in  Nature. 

These  are  the  colours  on  both  sides  the  white  when  the  paper  isheld  between  the 
prism  and  the  point  X  where  the  colours  meet,  and  the  interjacent  white  vanishes. 
For  if  the  paper  be  held  still  farther  off  from  the  prism,  the  most  refrangible 
and  least  refrangible  rays  mil  be  wanting  in  the  middle  of  the  light,  and  the  rest 
of  the  rays  which  are  found  there  mil  by  mixture  produce  a  fuller  green  than 
before.  Also,  the  yellow  and  blue  will  now  become  less  compounded,  and  by 
consequence  more  intense  then  before.  And  this  also  agrees  with  experience. 

And  if  one  look  through  a  prism  upon  a  white  object  encompassed  with 
blackness  or  darkness,  the  reason  of  the  colours  arising  on  the  edges  is  much 
the  same,  as  mil  appear  to  one  that  shall  a  little  consider  it.  If  a  black  object  be 
encompassed  with  a  white  one,  the  colours  which  appear  through  the  prism  are 
to  be  derived  from  the  light  of  the  white  one,  spreading  into  the  regions  of  the 
black,  and  therefore  they  appear  in  a  contrary  order  to  that,  when  a  white 
object  is  surrounded  with  black.  And  the  same  is  to  be  understood  when  an 
object  is  viewed,  whose  parts  are  some  of  them  less  luminous  than  others.  For, 
in  the  borders  of  the  more  and  less  luminous  parts,  colours  ought  always  by  the 
same  principles  to  arise  from  the  excess  of  the  light  of  the  more  luminous,  and 
to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  if  the  darker  parts  were  black,  but  yet  to  be  more 
faint  and  dilute. 

What  is  said  of  colours  made  by  prisms  may  be  easily  applied  to  colours 
made  by  the  glasses  of  telescopes  or  microscopes,  or  by  the  humours  of  the  eye. 
For  if  the  object-glass  of  a  telescope  be  thicker  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  or 
if  one-half  of  the  glass,  or  one-half  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye  be  covered  mth  any 
opaque  substance,  the  object-glass,  or  that  part  of  it  or  of  the  eye  which  is  not 
covered,  may  be  considered  as  a  wedge  with  crooked  sides,  and  every  wedge  of 
glass  or  other  pellucid  substance  has  the  effect  of  a  prism  in  refracting  the  light 
which  passes  through  it. 


Book  I :  Part  2  445 

How  the  colours  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  experiments  of  the  first  part  arise 
from  the  different  reflexibility  of  light,  is  evident  by  what  was  there  said.  But  it 
is  ob.servable  in  the  ninth  experiment  that  whilst  the  Sun’s  direct  light  is  yel¬ 
low,  the  excess  of  the  blue-making  rays  in  the  reflected  beam  of  light  ]\IN 
suffices  only  to  bring  that  yellow  to  a  pale  white  inclining  to  blue,  and  not  to 
tinge  it  with  a  manifestly  blue  colour.  To  obtain,  therefore,  a  better  blue,  I 
used  instead  of  the  yellow  light  of  the  Sun  the  white  light  of  the  clouds,  by 
varjdng  a  little  the  experiment,  as  follows: 

Exper.  16.  Let  HFG  [Fig.  13]  represent  a  prism  in  the  open  air,  and  S  the 
eye  of  the  spectator  viewing  the  clouds  by  their  light  coming  into  the  prism  at 
the  plane  side  FIGK,  and  reflected  in  it  by  its  base  HEIG,  and  thence  going 
out  through  its  plane  side  HEFK  to  the  eye.  And  when  the  prism  and  eye  are 
conveniently  placed,  so  that  the  angles  of  incidence  and  reflexion  at  the  base 
may  be  about  40  degrees,  the  spectator  will  see  a  bow  MN  of  a  blue  colour 
running  from  one  end  of  the  base  to  the  other,  with  the  concave  side  towards 
him,  and  the  part  of  the  base  IMNG  beyond  this  bow  vill  be  brighter  than  the 
other  part  EMXH  on  the  other  side  of  it.  This  blue  colour  MN,  being  made  by 
nothing  else  than  b}^  reflexion  of  a  specular  superficies,  seems  so  odd  a  phenom¬ 
enon,  and  so  difficult  to  be  explained  by  the  \n.ilgar  hypothesis  of  philosophers, 
that  I  could  not  but  think  it  deserved  to  be  taken  notice  of.  Now,  for  under¬ 
standing  the  reason  of  it,  suppose  the  plane  ABC  to  cut  the  plane  sides  and 
base  of  the  prism  perpendicularly.  From  the  eye  to  the  line  BC,  wherein  that 

plane  cuts  the  base,  draw  the  lines 
Sp  and  St,  in  the  angles  Spc  50  de¬ 
grees  ^/g,  and  Sic 49  degrees]/^,  and 
the  point  p  vill  be  the  limit  beyond 
which  none  of  the  most  refrangible 
rays  can  pass  through  the  base  of 
the  prism,  and  be  refracted,  whose 
incidence  is  such  that  they  may  be 
reflected  to  the  eye;  and  the  point 
t  vill  be  the  like  limit  for  the  least 
refrangible  rays  (that  is,  beyond 
which  none  of  them  can  pass 
through  the  base)  whose  incidence 
is  such  that  by  reflexion  they  may 
come  to  the  eye.  And  the  point  r, 
taken  in  the  middle  way  between  p  and  t,  will  be  the  like  limit  for  the  meanly 
refrangible  rays.  And,  therefore,  all  the  least  refrangible  rays  which  fall  upon 
the  base  beyond  t,  (that  is,  between  t  and  B)  and  can  come  from  thence  to  the 
eye,  will  be  reflected  thither;  but  on  this  side  t  (that  is,  between  t  and  c)  many 
of  these  rays  will  be  transmitted  through  the  base.  And  all  the  most  refrangible 
rays  which  fall  upon  the  base  beyond  p,  (that  is,  between  p  and  B)  and  can  by 
reflexion  come  from  thence  to  the  eye  vail  be  reflected  thither,  but  everywhere 
between  p  and  c  many  of  these  rays  will  get  through  the  base,  and  be  refracted; 
and  the  same  is  to  be  understood  of  the  meanly  refrangible  rays  on  either  side 
of  the  point  r.  AYhence  it  follows  that  the  base  of  the  prism  must  everywhere 
between  ^  and  B,  by  a  total  reflexion  of  all  sorts  of  rays  to  the  ej'^e,  look  white 
and  bright;  and  everywhere  between  p  and  C,  by  reason  of  the  transmission 


446  Optics 

of  many  rays  of  every  sort,  look  more  pale,  obscure,  and  dark.  But  at  r,  and 
in  other  places  between  p  and  i,  where  all  the  more  refrangible  rays  are  re¬ 
flected  to  the  eye,  and  many  of  the  less  refrangible  are  transmitted,  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  most  refrangible  in  the  reflected  light  will  tinge  that  light  with  their 
colour,  which  is  violet  and  blue.  And  this  happens  by  taking  the  line  C  prt  B 
anywhere  between  the  ends  of  the  prism  HG  and  EL 

Proposition  9.  Problem  4 

By  the  discovered  properties  of  light,  to  explain  the  colours  of  the  rainbow. 

This  bow  never  appears  but  where  it  rains  in  the  sunshine,  and  may  be  made 
artificially  by  spouting  up  water  which  may  break  aloft,  and  scatter  into  drops, 
and  fall  down  like  rain.  For  the  Sun  shining  upon  these  drops  certainly  causes 
the  bow  to  appear  to  a  spectator  standing  in  a  due  position  to  the  rain  and  Sun. 
And  hence  it  is  now  agreed  upon,  that  this  bow  is  made  by  refraction  of  the 
Sun’s  light  in  drops  of  falling  rain.  This  was  understood  by  some  of  the  ancients, 
and  of  late  more  fully  discovered  and  explained  by  the  famous  Antonius  de 
Dominis,  Archbishop  of  Spalato  in  his  book  De  Radiis  Visus  &  Lucis,  published 
by  his  friend  Bartolus  at  Venice,  in  the  year  1611,  and  written  above  20  years 
before.  For  he  teaches  there  how  the  interior  bow  is  made  in  round  drops  of 
rain  by  two  refractions  of  the  Sun’s  light,  and  one  reflexion  between  them,  and 
the  exterior  by  two  refractions,  and  two  sorts  of  reflexions  between  them  in 
each  drop  of  water,  and  proves  his  ex¬ 
plications  by  experiments  made  with 
a  phial  full  of  water,  and  with  globes 
of  glass  filled  \vith  water,  and  placed 
in  the  Sun  to  make  the  colours  of  the 
two  bows  appear  in  them.  The  same 
explication  Descartes  hath  pursued 
in  his  Meteors,  and  mended  that  of 
the  exterior  bow.  But  whilst  they  un¬ 
derstood  not  the  true  origin  of  col¬ 
ours,  it’s  necessary  to  pursue  it  here 
a  little  farther.  For  understanding, 
therefore,  how  the  bow  is  made,  let 
a  drop  of  rain,  or  any  other  spherical  transparent  body,  be  represented  by 
the  sphere  BNFG,  [Fig.  14]  described  with  the  centre  C,  and  semi-diameter 
CN.  And  let  AN  be  one  of  the  Sun’s  rays  incident  upon  it  at  N,  and  thence 
refracted  to  F,  where  let  it  either  go  out  of  the  sphere  by  refraction  towards 
V,  or  be  reflected  to  G ;  and  at  G  let  it  either  go  out  by  refraction  to  R,  or  be  re¬ 
flected  to  H ;  and  at  H  let  it  go  out  by  refraction  towards  S,  cutting  the  inci¬ 
dent  ray  in  Y.  Produce  AN  and  RG,  till  they  meet  in  X,  and  upon  AX  and 
NF,  let  fall  the  perpendiculars  CD  and  CE,  and  produce  CD  till  it  fall  upon  the 
circumference  at  L.  Parallel  to  the  incident  ray  AN  draw  the  diameter  BQ,  and 
let  the  sine  of  incidence  out  of  air  into  water  be  to  the  sine  of  refraction  as  I  to 
R.  Now,  if  you  suppose  the  point  of  incidence  N  to  move  from  the  point  B 
continually  till  it  come  to  L,  the  arch  QF  will  first  increase  and  then  decrease, 
and  so  will  the  angle  AXR  which  the  rays  AN  and  GR  contain;  and  the  arch 
QF  and  angle  AXR  will  be  biggest  when  ND  is  to  CN  as  VH  —  RR  to  \/3RR, 
in  which  case  NE  will  be  to  ND  as  2R  to  I.  Also  the  angle  AYS,  which  the  rays 


Book  I :  Part  2  447 

AN  and  HS  contain,  will  first  decrease  and  then  increase  and  grow  least  when 
ND  is  to  CN  as  VII  —  RR  to  VSRR,  in  which  case  NE  will  be  to  ND  as  3R 
to  1.  And  so  the  angle  which  the  next  emergent  ray  (that  is,  the  emergent  ray 
after  three  reflexions)  contains  with  the  incident  ray  AN  will  come  to  its  limit 
when  ND  is  to  CN  as  VII — RR  to  V15RR,  in  which  case  NE  will  be  to  ND  as 
4R  to  I.  And  the  angle  which  the  ray  next  after  that  emergent  (that  is,  the  ray 
emergent  after  four  reflexions)  contains  with  the  incident  will  come  to  its  limit 
when  ND  is  to  CN  as  VII  —  RR  to  V24RR,  in  which  case  NE  will  be  to  ND  as 
5R  to  I;  and  so  on  infinitely,  the  numbers  3,  8,  15,  24,  &c.  being  gathered  by 
continual  addition  of  the  terms  of  the  arithmetical  progression  3,  5,  7,  9,  &c. 
The  truth  of  all  this  mathematicians  will  easily  examine. 

Now,  it  is  to  be  observed  that,  as  when  the  sun  comes  to  his  tropics,  days 
increase  and  decrease  but  a  very  little  for  a  great  Avhile  together;  so  Avhen  by 
increasing  the  distance  CD,  these  angles  come  to  their  limits,  they  vary  their 
quantity  but  very  little  for  some  time  together;  and,  therefore,  a  far  greater 
number  of  the  rays  which  fall  upon  all  the  points  N  in  the  quadrant  BL  shall 
emerge  in  the  limits  of  these  angles  than  in  any  other  inclinations.  And  further 
it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  rays  Avhich  differ  in  refrangibility  will  have  differ¬ 
ent  limits  of  their  angles  of  emergence,  and  by  consequence  according  to  their 
different  degrees  of  refrangibility  emerge  most  copiously  in  different  angles, 
and  being  separated  from  one  another  appear  each  in  their  proper  colours.  And 
what  those  angles  are  may  be  easily  gathered  from  the  foregoing  theorem  by 
computation. 

For  in  the  least  refrangible  rays  the  sines  I  and  R  (as  was  found  above)  are 
108  and  81,  and  thence  by  computation  the  greatest  angle  AXR  will  be  found 
42  degrees  and  2  minutes,  and  the  least  angle  AYS,  50  degrees  and  57  minutes. 
And  in  the  most  refrangible  rays  the  sines  I  and  R  are  109  and  81,  and  thence 
by  computation  the  greatest  angle  AXR  will  be  found  40  degrees  and  17 
minutes,  and  the  least  angle  AYS  54  degrees  and  7  minutes. 

Suppose,  now,  that  0  [Fig.  15]  is  the  spectator’s  eye,  and  OP  a  line  drawn 
parallel  to  the  Sun’s  rays;  and  let  POE,  POF,  POG,  POH,  be  angles  of  40 
degrees  17  minutes,  42  degrees  2  minutes,  50  degrees  57  minutes,  and  54  degrees 
7  minutes,  respectively,  and  these  angles  turned  about  their  common  side  OP, 
shall  with  their  other  sides  OE,  OF,  OG,  OH,  describe  the  verges  of  two  rain- 


448  Optics 

bows  AF,  BE,  and  CHDG.  For  if  E,  F,  G,  H,  be  drops  placed  anywhere  in  the 
conical  superficies  described  by  OE,  OF,  OG,  OH,  and  be  illuminated  by  the 
Sun’s  rays  SE,  SF,  SG,  SH;  the  angle  SEO  being  equal  to  the  angle  POE,  or  40 
degrees  17  minutes,  shall  be  the  greatest  angle  in  which  the  most  refrangible 
rays  can  after  one  reflexion  be  refracted  to  the  eye;  and,  therefore,  all  the  drops 
in  the  line  OE  shall  send  the  most  refrangible  rays  most  copiously  to  the  eye, 
and  thereby  strike  the  senses  with  the  deepest  violet  colour  in  that  region. 
And  in  like  manner  the  angle  SFO  being  equal  to  the  angle  POF,  or  42  degrees 
2  minutes,  shall  be  the  greatest  in  which  the  least  refrangible  rays  after  one 
reflexion  can  emerge  out  of  the  drops;  and,  therefore,  those  rays  shall  come 
most  copiously  to  the  eye  from  the  drops  in  the  line  OF,  and  strike  the  senses 
with  the  deepest  red  colour  in  that  region.  And,  by  the  same  argument,  the 
rays  which  have  intermediate  degrees  of  refrangibility  shall  come  most  co¬ 
piously  from  drops  between  E  and  F,  and  strike  the  senses  -with  the  intermediate 
colours  in  the  order  which  their  degrees  of  refrangibility  require;  that  is,  in  the 
progress  from  E  to  F,  or  from  the  inside  of  the  bow  to  the  outside,  in  this  order: 
violet,  indigo,  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  red.  But  the  violet,  by  the  mixture  of 
the  white  light  of  the  clouds,  will  appear  faint  and  incline  to  purple. 

Again,  the  angle  SGO  being  equal  to  the  angle  POG,  or  50°  51',  shall  be  the 
least  angle  in  which  the  least  refrangible  rays  can  after  two  reflexions  emerge 
out  of  the  drops;  and,  therefore,  the  least  refrangible  rays  shall  come  most 
copiously  to  the  eye  from  the  drops  in  the  line  OG,  and  strike  the  sense  Avith 
the  deepest  red  in  that  region.  And  the  angle  SHO  being  equal  to  the  angle 
POH,  or  54  degrees  7  minutes,  shall  be  the  least  angle  in  which  the  most  re¬ 
frangible  rays  after  two  reflexions  can  emerge  out  of  the  drops;  and,  therefore, 
those  rays  shall  come  most  copiously  to  the  eye  from  the  drops  in  the  line  OH, 
and  strike  the  senses  with  the  deepest  violet  in  that  region.  And  by  the  same 
argument,  the  drops  in  the  regions  between  G  and  H  shall  strike  the  sense  with 
the  intermediate  colours  in  the  order  which  their  degrees  of  refrangibility  re¬ 
quire;  that  is,  in  the  progress  from  G  to  H,  or  from  the  inside  of  the  bow  to  the 
outside,  in  this  order:  red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  violet.  And  since 
these  four  lines  OE,  OF,  OG,  OH,  may  be  situated  anywhere  in  the  above- 
mentioned  conical  superficies,  what  is  said  of  the  drops  and  colours  in  these 
lines  is  to  be  understood  of  the  drops  and  colours  everywhere  in  those  superficies. 

Thus  shall  there  be  made  two  bows  of  colours,  an  interior  and  stronger,  by 
one  reflexion  in  the  drops,  and  an  exterior  and  fainter  by  two;  for  the  light  be¬ 
comes  fainter  by  every  reflexion.  And  their  colours  shall  lie  in  a  contrary  order 
to  one  another,  the  red  of  both  bow's  bordering  upon  the  space  GF,  which  is 
between  the  bows.  The  breadth  of  the  interior  bow  EOF  measured  across  the 
colours  shall  be  1  degree  45  minutes,  and  the  breadth  of  the  exterior  GOH 
shall  be  3  degrees  10  minutes,  and  the  distance  between  them  GOF  shall  be 
8  degrees  15  minutes,  the  greatest  semi-diameter  of  the  innermost;  that  is,  the 
angle  POF  being  42  degrees  2  minutes,  and  the  least  semi-diameter  of  the 
outermost  POG,  being  50  degrees  57  minutes.  These  are  the  measures  of  the 
bows  as  they  would  be  "were  the  Sun  but  a  point;  for  by  the  breadth  of  his  body 
the  breadth  of  the  bows  will  be  increased,  and  their  distance  decreased  by  half 
a  degree,  and  so  the  breadth  of  the  interior  iris  will  be  2  degrees  15  minutes, 
that  of  the  exterior  3  degrees  40  minutes,  their  distance  8  degrees  25  minutes, 
the  greatest  semi-diameter  of  the  interior  bow  42  degrees  17  minutes,  and  the 


Book  I:  Part  2  449 

least  of  the  exterior  50  degrees  42  minutes.  And  such  are  the  dimensions  of  the 
bows  in  the  heavens  found  to  be  very  nearly,  when  their  colours  appear  strong 
and  perfect.  For  once,  by  such  means  as  I  then  had,  I  measured  the  greatest 
semi-diameter  of  the  interior  iris  about  42  degrees,  and  the  breadth  of  the  red, 
yellow  and  green  in  that  iris  63  or  64  minutes,  besides  the  outmost  faint  red 
obscured  by  the  brightness  of  the  clouds,  for  which  we  may  allow  3  or  4  minutes 
more.  The  breadth  of  the  blue  was  about  40  minutes  more  besides  the  violet, 
which  was  so  much  obscured  by  the  brightness  of  the  clouds  that  I  could  not 
measure  its  breadth.  But  supposing  the  breadth  of  the  blue  and  violet  together 
to  equal  that  of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  together,  the  whole  breadth  of  this 
iris  will  be  about  234  degrees,  as  above.  The  least  distance  between  this  iris  and 
the  exterior  iris  was  about  8  degrees  and  30  minutes.  The  exterior  iris  was 
broader  than  the  interior,  but  so  faint,  especially  on  the  blue  side,  that  I  could 
not  measure  its  breadth  distinctly.  At  another  time  when  both  bows  appeared 
more  distinct,  I  measured  the  breadth  of  the  interior  iris  2  degrees  10  minutes, 
and  the  breadth  of  the  red,  yellow  and  green  in  the  exterior  iris  was  to  the 
breadth  of  the  same  colours  in  the  interior  as  3  to  2. 

This  explication  of  the  rainbow  is  yet  further  confirmed  by  the  known  ex¬ 
periment  (made  by  Antonius  de  Dominis  and  Descartes)  of  hanging  up  any¬ 
where  in  the  sunshine  a  glass  globe  filled  vdth  water,  and  viewing  it  in  such  a 
posture  that  the  rays  which  come  from  the  globe  to  the  eye  may  contain  with 
the  Sun’s  rays  an  angle  of  either  42  or  50  degrees.  For  if  the  angle  be  about  42 
or  43  degrees,  the  spectator  (suppose  at  0)  shall  see  a  full  red  colour  in  that 
side  of  the  globe  opposed  to  the  Sun  as  ’tis  represented  at  F,  and  if  that  angle 
become  less  (suppose  by  depressing  the  globe  to  E)  there  will  appear  other 
colours,  yellow,  green  and  blue  successive  in  the  same  side  of  the  globe.  But  if 
the  angle  be  made  about  50  degrees  (suppose  by  lifting  up  the  globe  to  G)  there 
will  appear  a  red  colour  in  that  side  of  the  globe  to’wards  the  Sun,  and  if  the 
angle  be  made  greater  (suppose  by  lifting  up  the  globe  to  H)  the  red  will  turn 
successively  to  the  other  colours,  yellow,  green  and  blue.  The  same  thing  I  have 
tried  by  letting  a  globe  rest,  and  raising  or  depressing  the  eye,  or  other’wise 
moving  it  to  make  the  angle  of  a  just  magnitude. 

I  have  heard  it  represented  that  if  the  light  of  a  candle  be  refracted  by  a 
prism  to  the  eye,  when  the  blue  colour  falls  upon  the  eye  the  spectator  shall  see 
red  in  the  prism,  and  w’hen  the  red  falls  upon  the  eye  he  shall  see  blue;  and  if 
this  were  certain  the  colours  of  the  globe  and  rainbow  ought  to  appear  in  a 
contrary  order  to  what  we  find.  But  the  colours  of  the  candle  being  very  faint, 
the  mistake  seems  to  arise  from  the  difficulty  of  discerning  what  colours  fall  on 
the  eye.  For,  on  the  contrary,  I  have  sometimes  had  occasion  to  observe,  in  the 
Sun’s  light  refracted  by  a  prism,  that  the  spectator  ahvays  sees  that  colour  in 
the  prism  which  falls  upon  his  eye.  And  the  same  I  have  found  true  also  in 
candle-light.  For  w’^hen  the  prism  is  moved  slowly  from  the  line  which  is  drawn 
directly  from  the  candle  to  the  eye,  the  red  appears  first  in  the  prism  and  then 
the  blue;  and,  therefore,  each  of  them  is  seen  when  it  falls  upon  the  eye.  For  the 
red  passes  over  the  eye  first,  and  then  the  blue. 

The  light  which  comes  through  drops  of  rain  by  two  refractions  without  any 
reflexion  ought  to  appear  strongest  at  the  distance  of  about  26  degrees  from  the 
Sun,  and  to  decay  gradually  both  ways  as  the  distance  from  him  increases  and 
decreases.  And  the  same  is  to  be  understood  of  light  transmitted  through 


450  Optics 

spherical  hailstones.  And  if  the  hail  be  a  little  flatted,  as  it  often  is,  the  light 
transmitted  may  grow  so  strong  at  a  little  less  distance  than  that  of  26  degrees, 
as  to  form  a  halo  about  the  Sun  or  Moon;  which  halo,  as  often  as  the  hailstones 
are  duly  figured,  may  be  coloured,  and  then  it  must  be  red  within  by  the  least 
refrangible  rays,  and  blue  without  by  the  most  refrangible  ones,  especially  if  the 
hailstones  have  opaque  globules  of  snow  in  their  centre  to  intercept  the  light 
within  the  halo  (as  Huygens  has  observed)  and  make  the  inside  thereof  more 
distinctly  defined  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  For  such  hailstones,  though 
spherical,  by  terminating  the  light  by  the  snow,  may  make  a  halo  red  within 
and  colourless  without,  and  darker  in  the  red  than  without,  as  halos  used  to  be. 
For  of  those  rays  which  pass  close  by  the  snow  the  rubriform  will  be  least 
refracted,  and  so  come  to  the  eye  in  the  directest  lines. 

The  light  which  passes  through  a  drop  of  rain  after  two  refractions,  and 
three  or  more  reflexions,  is  scarce  strong  enough  to  cause  a  sensible  bow;  but  in 
those  cylinders  of  ice  by  which  Huygens  explains  the  parhelia,  it  may  perhaps 
be  sensible. 


Propositiox  10.  Problem  5 

By  the  discovered  properties  of  light,  to  explain  the  permanent  colours  of  natural 
bodies. 

These  colours  arise  from  hence,  that  some  natural  bodies  reflect  some  sorts  of 
rays,  others  other  sorts  more  copiously  than  the  rest.  Minium  reflects  the  least 
refrangible  or  red-making  rays  most  copiously,  and  thence  appears  red.  Violets 
reflect  the  most  refrangible  most  copiously,  and  thence  have  their  colour,  and 
so  of  other  bodies.  Every  body  reflects  the  rays  of  its  own  colour  more  copiously 
than  the  rest,  and  from  their  excess  and  predominance  in  the  reflected  light  has 
its  colour. 

Exper.  17.  For  if,  in  the  homogeneal  lights  obtained  by  the  solution  of  the 
problem  proposed  in  the  fourth  Proposition  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  you 
place  bodies  of  several  colours,  you  will  find,  as  I  have  done,  that  every  body 
looks  most  splendid  and  luminous  in  the  light  of  its  own  colour.  Cinnabar  in 
the  homogeneal  red  light  is  most  resplendent,  in  the  green  light  it  is  manifestly 
less  resplendent,  and  in  the  blue  light  still  less.  Indigo  in  the  violet  blue  light  is 
most  resplendent,  and  its  splendour  is  gradually  diminished  as  it  is  removed 
thence  by  degrees  through  the  green  and  yellow  light  to  the  red.  By  a  leek  the 
green  light,  and  next  that  the  blue  and  yellow  which  compound  green,  are  more 
strongly  reflected  than  the  other  colours  red  and  violet,  and  so  of  the  rest.  But 
to  make  these  experiments  the  more  manifest,  such  bodies  ought  to  be  chosen 
as  have  the  fullest  and  most  vivid  colours,  and  two  of  those  bodies  are  to  be 
compared  together.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  cinnabar  and  ultra-marine  blue,  or 
some  other  full  blue  be  held  together  in  the  red  homogeneal  light,  they  will  both 
appear  red,  but  the  cinnabar  will  appear  of  a  strongly  luminous  and  resplendent 
red,  and  the  ultra-marine  blue  of  a  faint  obscure  and  dark  red;  and  if  they  be 
held  together  in  the  blue  homogeneal  light,  they  wdll  both  appear  blue,  but  the 
ultra-marine  vill  appear  of  a  strongly  luminous  and  resplendent  blue,  and  the 
cinnabar  of  a  faint  and  dark  blue.  Which  puts  it  out  of  dispute  that  the  cinna¬ 
bar  reflects  the  red  light  much  more  copiously  than  the  ultra-marine  doth,  and 
the  ultra-marine  reflects  the  blue  light  much  more  copiously  than  the  cinnabar 
doth.  The  same  experiment  may  be  tried  successfully  with  red  lead  and  indigo 


Book  I:  Part  2  451 

or  A\ith  any  other  two  coloured  bodies,  if  due  allowance  be  made  for  the  differ¬ 
ent  strength  or  weakness  of  their  colour  and  light. 

And  as  the  reason  of  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  is  evident  by  these  experi¬ 
ments,  so  it  is  further  confirmed  and  put  past  dispute  by  the  two  first  experi¬ 
ments  of  the  first  part,  whereby  ’twas  proved  in  such  bodies  that  the  reflected 
lights  which  differ  in  colours  do  differ  also  in  degrees  of  refrangibility.  For 
thence  it’s  certain  that  some  bodies  reflect  the  more  refrangible,  others  the  less 
refrangible  rays  more  copiously. 

And  that  this  is  not  only  a  true  reason  of  these  colours,  but  even  the  only 
reason,  may  appear  further  from  this  consideration  that  the  colour  of  homo- 
geneal  light  cannot  be  changed  by  the  reflexion  of  natural  bodies. 

For  if  bodies  by  reflexion  cannot  in  the  least  change  the  colour  of  any  one 
sort  of  rays,  they  cannot  appear  coloured  by  any  other  means  than  by  reflecting 
those  which  either  are  of  their  own  colour,  or  which  by  mixture  must  produce  it. 

But  in  trying  experiments  of  this  kind,  care  must  be  had  that  the  light  be 
sufficiently  homogeneal.  For  if  bodies  be  illuminated  by  the  ordinary  prismatic 
colours,  they  will  appear  neither  of  their  oAvn  daylight  colours,  nor  of  the  colour 
of  the  light  cast  on  them,  but  of  some  middle  colour  between  both,  as  I  have 
found  by  experience.  Thus,  red  lead  (for  instance)  illuminated  Avith  the  ordi¬ 
nary  prismatic  green,  wll  not  appear  either  red  or  green,  but  orange  or  yelloAv, 
or  between  yellow  and  green,  accordingly  as  the  green  light  by  which  ’tis 
illuminated  is  more  or  less  compounded.  For  because  red  lead  appears  red  when 
illuminated  with  white  light,  wherein  all  sorts  of  rays  are  equally  mixed,  and  in 
the  green  light  all  sorts  of  rays  are  not  equally  mixed,  the  excess  of  the  yellow¬ 
making,  green-making  and  blue-making  rays  in  the  incident  green  light  Avill 
cause  those  rays  to  abound  so  much  in  the  reflected  light  as  to  draw  the  colour 
from  red  towards  their  colour.  And  because  the  red  lead  reflects  the  red-making 
rays  most  copiously  in  proportion  to  their  number,  and  next  after  them  the 
orange-making  and  yellow-making  rays,  these  rays  in  the  reflected  light  will  be 
more  in  proportion  to  the  light  than  they  were  in  the  incident  green  light,  and 
thereby  vdll  draw  the  reflected  light  from  green  towards  their  colour.  And, 
therefore,  the  red  lead  vdll  appear  neither  red  nor  green,  but  of  a  colour  be¬ 
tween  both. 

In  transparently  coloured  liquors,  ’tis  observable  that  their  colour  uses  to 
vary  Avith  their  thickness.  Thus,  for  instance,  a  red  liquor  in  a  conical  glass, 
held  between  the  light  and  the  eye,  looks  of  a  pale  and  dilute  yellow  at  the 
bottom  where  ’tis  thin,  and  a  little  higher  where  ’tis  thicker  grows  orange,  and 
where  ’tis  still  thicker  becomes  red,  and  where  ’tis  thickest  the  red  is  deepest 
and  darkest.  For  it  is  to  be  conceived  that  such  a  liquor  stops  the  indigo¬ 
making  and  \’iolet-making  rays  most  easily,  the  blue-making  rays  more  diffi¬ 
cultly,  the  green-making  rays  still  more  difficultly,  and  the  red-making  most 
difficultly;  and  that  if  the  thickness  of  the  liquor  be  only  so  much  as  suffices  to 
stop  a  competent  number  of  the  violet-making  and  indigo-making  rays,  -with¬ 
out  diminishing  much  the  number  of  the  rest,  the  rest  must  (by  Prop.  6,  Part  2) 
compound  a  pale  yellow.  But  if  the  liquor  be  so  much  thicker  as  to  stop  also  a 
great  number  of  the  blue-making  rays,  and  some  of  the  green-making,  the  rest 
must  compound  an  orange;  and  where  it  is  so  thick  as  to  stop  also  a  great 
number  of  the  green-making  and  a  considerable  number  of  the  yellow-making, 
the  rest  must  begin  to  compound  a  red,  and  this  red  must  grow  deeper  and 


452  Optics 

darker  as  the  yellow-making  and  orange-making  rays  are  more  and  more 
stopped  by  increasing  the  thickness  of  the  liquor,  so  that  few  rays  besides  the 
red-making  can  get  through. 

Of  this  kind  is  an  experiment  lately  related  to  me  by  Mr.  Halley,  who,  in 
diving  deep  into  the  sea  in  a  diving  vessel,  found  in  a  clear  sunshine  day  that 
when  he  was  sunk  many  fathoms  deep  into  the  water  the  upper  part  of  his  hand 
on  which  the  Sun  shone  directly  through  the  water  and  through  a  small  glass 
window  in  the  vessel  appeared  of  a  red  colour,  like  that  of  a  damask  rose,  and 
the  water  below  and  the  under  part  of  his  hand  illuminated  by  light  reflected 
from  the  water  below  looked  green.  For  thence  it  may  be  gathered,  that  the 
sea  water  reflects  back  the  violet  and  blue-making  rays  most  easily,  and  lets 
the  red-making  rays  pass  most  freely  and  copiously  to  great  depths.  For  there¬ 
by  the  Sun’s  direct  light  at  all  great  depths,  by  reason  of  the  predominating 
red-making  rays,  must  appear  red;  and  the  greater  the  depth  is,  the  fuller  and 
intenser  must  that  red  be.  And  at  such  depths  as  the  violet-making  rays  scarce 
penetrate  unto,  the  blue-making,  green-making,  and  yellow-making  rays,  being 
reflected  from  below  more  copiously  than  the  red-making  ones,  must  compound 
a  green. 

Now,  if  there  be  two  liquors  of  full  colours,  (suppose  a  red  and  blue)  and 
both  of  them  so  thick  as  suffices  to  make  their  colours  sufficiently  full,  though 
either  liquor  be  sufficiently  transparent  apart,  yet  will  you  not  be  able  to  see 
through  both  together.  For,  if  only  the  red-making  rays  pass  through  one 
liquor,  and  only  the  blue-making  through  the  other,  no  rays  can  pass  through 
both.  This  Mr.  Hook  tried  casually  with  glass  wedges  filled  with  red  and  blue 
liquors,  and  was  surprised  at  the  unexpected  event,  the  reason  of  it  being  then 
unknown;  which  makes  me  trust  the  more  to  his  experiment,  though  I  have  not 
tried  it  myself.  But  he  that  would  repeat  it  must  take  care  the  liquors  be  of 
very  good  and  full  colours. 

Now,  whilst  bodies  become  coloured  by  reflecting  or  transmitting  this  or 
that  sort  of  rays  more  copiously  than  the  rest,  it  is  to  be  conceived  that  they 
stop  and  stifle  in  themselves  the  rays  which  they  do  not  reflect  or  transmit.  For, 
if  gold  be  foliated  and  held  between  your  eye  and  the  light,  the  light  looks  of  a 
greenish-blue,  and  therefore  massy  gold  lets  into  its  body  the  blue-making  rays 
to  be  reflected  to  and  fro  within  it  till  they  be  stopped  and  stifled,  whilst  it 
reflects  the  yellow-making  outwards,  and  thereby  looks  yellow,  and  much  after 
the  same  manner  that  leaf  gold  is  yellow  by  reflected,  and  blue  by  transmitted 
light,  and  massy  gold  is  yellow  in  all  positions  of  the  eye;  there  are  some  liquors, 
as  the  tincture  of  lignum  nephriticum,  and  some  sorts  of  glass,  w’hich  transmit 
one  sort  of  light  most  copiously,  and  reflect  another  sort,  and  thereby  look  of 
several  colours,  according  to  the  position  of  the  eye  to  the  light.  But,  if  these 
liquors  or  glasses  were  so  thick  and  massy  that  no  light  could  get  through  them, 
I  question  not  but  they  would,  like  all  other  opaque  bodies,  appear  of  one  and 
the  same  colour  in  all  positions  of  the  eye,  though  this  I  cannot  yet  affirm  by 
experience.  For  all  coloured  bodies,  so  far  as  my  observation  reaches,  may  be 
seen  through  if  made  sufficiently  thin,  and,  therefore,  are  in  some  measure 
transparent,  and  differ  only  in  degrees  of  transparency  from  tinged  transparent 
liquors,  these  liquors  as  w^ell  as  those  bodies  by  a  sufficient  thickness  becoming 
opaque.  A  transparent  body  wffiich  looks  of  any  colour  by  transmitted  light 
may  also  look  of  the  same  colour  by  reflected  light,  the  light  of  that  colour  being 


Book  I :  Part  2  453 

reflected  by  the  farther  surface  of  the  body,  or  by  the  air  beyond  it.  And  then 
the  reflected  colour  ^^nll  be  diminished,  and  perhaps  cease,  by  making  the  body 
very  thick,  and  pitching  it  on  the  backside  to  diminish  the  reflexion  of  its 
farther  surface,  so  that  the  light  reflected  from  the  tinging  particles  may  pre¬ 
dominate.  In  such  cases,  the  colour  of  the  reflected  light  vdll  be  apt  to  vary  from 
that  of  the  light  transmitted.  But  whence  it  is  that  tinged  bodies  and  liquors 
reflect  some  sort  of  rays,  and  intromit  or  transmit  other  sorts,  shall  be  said  in 
the  next  book.  In  this  Proposition  I  content  myself  to  have  put  it  past  dispute 
that  bodies  have  such  properties,  and  thence  appear  coloured. 

Proposition  11.  Problem  6 

By  mixing  coloured  lights,  to  compound  a  beam  of  light  of  the  same  colour  and 
nature  with  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  direct  light,  and  therein  to  experience  the  truth  of 
the  foregoing  Propositions. 

Let  ABC  abc  [Fig.  16]  represent  a  prism,  by  which  the  Sun’s  light  let  into  a 
dark  chamber  through  the  hole  F,  may  be  refracted  towards  the  lens  MN,  and 
paint  upon  it  at  p,  q,  r,  s,  and  t,  the  usual  colours  (\'iolet,  blue,  green,  yellow, 
and  red)  and  let  the  diverging  rays  by  the  refraction  of  this  lens  converge  again 
towards  X,  and  there,  by  the  mixture  of  all  those  their  colours,  compound  a 
white  according  to  what  was  shewn  above.  Then  let  another  prism  DEG  deg, 
parallel  to  the  former,  be  placed  at  X,  to  refract  that  white  light  upwards  to¬ 
wards  Y.  Let  the  refracting  angles  of  the  prisms  and  their  distances  from  the 
lens  be  equal  so  that  the  rays,  which  converged  from  the  lens  towards  X,  and 
without  refraction,  would  there  have  crossed  and  diverged  again,  may  by  the 
refraction  of  the  second  prism  be  reduced  into  parallelism  and  diverge  no  more. 
For  then  those  rays  will  recompose  a  beam  of  white  light  XY.  If  the  refracting 
angle  of  either  prism  be  the  bigger,  that  prism  must  be  so  much  the  nearer  to 
the  lens.  You  will  know  when  the  prisms  and  the  lens  are  well  set  together,  by 
observing  if  the  beam  of  light  XY,  which  comes  out  of  the  second  prism,  be 
perfectly  white  to  the  very  edges  of  the  light,  and  at  all  distances  from  the  prism 
continue  perfectly  and  totally  white  like  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light.  For  till  this 
happens,  the  position  of  the  prisms  and  lens  to  one  another  must  be  corrected; 
and  then  if  by  the  help  of  a  long  beam  of  w^ood,  as  is  represented  in  the  Figure, 
or  by  a  tube,  or  some  other  such  instrument,  made  for  that  purpose,  they  be 
made  fast  in  that  situation,  you  may  try  all  the  same  experiments  in  this 
compounded  beam  of  light  XY  wLich  have  been  made  in  the  Sun’s  direct  light. 


Fig.  16 


454  Optics 

For  this  compounded  beam  of  light  has  the  same  appearance,  and  is  endowed 
with  all  the  same  properties,  with  a  direct  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  so  far  as  my 
observation  reaches.  And  in  trying  experiments  in  this  beam  you  may  by  stop¬ 
ping  any  of  the  colours,  p,  q,  r,  s,  and  t,  at  the  lens,  see  how  the  colours  produced 
in  the  experiments  are  no  other  than  those  which  the  rays  had  at  the  lens  before 
they  entered  the  composition  of  this  beam;  and,  by  consequence,  that  they 
arise  not  from  any  new  modifications  of  the  light  by  refractions  and  reflexions, 
but  from  the  various  separations  and  mixtures  of  the  rays  originally  endowed 
with  their  colour-making  qualities. 

So,  for  instance,  having  with  a  lens  43^  inches  broad,  and  two  prisms  on 
either  hand  634^  feet  distant  from  the  lens,  made  such  a  beam  of  compounded 
light,  to  examine  the  reason  of  the  colours  made  by  prisms,  I  refracted  this 
compounded  beam  of  light  XY  with  another  prism  HIK  kh,  and  thereby  cast 
the  usual  prismatic  colours  PQRST  upon  the  paper  LV  placed  behind.  And 
then,  by  stopping  any  of  the  colours  p,  q,  r,  s,  i,  at  the  lens,  I  found  that  the 
same  colour  would  vanish  at  the  paper.  So  if  the  purple  p  was  stopped  at  the 
lens,  the  purple  P  upon  the  paper  would  vanish,  and  the  rest  of  the  colours 
would  remain  unaltered,  unless  perhaps  the  blue,  so  far  as  some  purple  latent 
in  it  at  the  lens  might  be  separated  from  it  by  the  following  refractions.  And  so 
by  intercepting  the  green  upon  the  lens,  the  green  R  upon  the  paper  would 
vanish,  and  so  of  the  rest;  which  plainly  shews  that  as  the  white  beam  of  light 
XY  was  compounded  of  several  lights  variously  coloured  at  the  lens,  so  the 
colours  which  afterwards  emerge  out  of  it  by  new  refractions  are  no  other  than 
those  of  which  its  whiteness  was  compounded.  The  refraction  of  the  prism 
HIK  kh  generates  the  colours  PQRST  upon  the  paper,  not  by  changing  the 
colorific  qualities  of  the  rays,  but  by  separating  the  rays  which  had  the  very 
same  colorific  qualities  before  they  entered  the  composition  of  the  refracted 
beam  of  white  light  XY.  For  otherwise  the  rays  which  were  of  one  colour  at  the 
lens  might  be  of  another  upon  the  paper,  contrary  to  what  we  find. 

So  again,  to  examine  the  reason  of  the  colours  of  natural  bodies,  I  placed 
such  bodies  in  the  beam  of  light  XY,  and  found  that  they  all  appeared  there  of 
those  their  own  colours  which  they  have  in  daylight,  and  that  those  colours 
depend  upon  the  rays  which  had  the  same  colours  at  the  lens  before  they 
entered  the  composition  of  that  beam.  Thus,  for  instance,  cinnabar  illuminated 
by  this  beam  appears  of  the  same  red  colour  as  in  daylight;  and  if  at  the  lens 
you  intercept  the  green-making  and  blue-making  rays,  its  redness  will  become 
more  full  and  lively;  but  if  you  there  intercept  the  red-making  rays,  it  Avill  not 
any  longer  appear  red,  but  become  yellow  or  green,  or  of  some  other  colour, 
according  to  the  sorts  of  rays  which  you  do  not  intercept.  So  gold  in  this  light 
XY  appears  of  the  same  yellow  colour  as  in  daylight,  but  by  intercepting  at  the 
lens  a  due  quantity  of  the  yellow-making  rays  it  ^vill  appear  white  like  silver 
(as  I  have  tried),  which  shews  that  its  yellowness  arises  from  the  excess  of  the 
intercepted  rays  tinging  that  whiteness  with  their  colour  when  they  are  let 
pass.  So  the  infusion  of  lignum  nephriiicum  (as  I  have  also  tried)  when  held  in 
this  beam  of  light  XY,  looks  blue  by  the  reflected  part  of  the  light,  and  red  by 
the  transmitted  part  of  it,  as  when  ’tis  viewed  in  daylight;  but  if  you  intercept 
the  blue  at  the  lens  the  infusion  will  lose  its  reflected  blue  colour,  whilst  its 
transmitted  red  remains  perfect,  and  by  the  loss  of  some  blue-making  rays, 
wherewith  it  was  allayed,  becomes  more  intense  and  full.  And,  on  the  con- 


Book  I :  Paet  2  455 

trary,  if  the  red  and  orange-making  rays  be  intercepted  at  the  lens,  the  infusion 
mil  lose  its  transmitted  red,  whilst  its  blue  mil  remain  and  become  more  full 
and  perfect.  Which  shews  that  the  infusion  does  not  tinge  the  rays  mth  blue 
and  red,  but  only  transmits  those  most  copiously  which  were  red-making 
before,  and  reflects  those  most  copiously  which  were  blue-making  before.  And 
after  the  same  manner  may  the  reasons  of  other  phenomena  be  examined,  by 
trjdng  them  in  this  artificial  beam  of  light  XY. 


Ur 


,. ,.  ,  ,,.^  .  <  >(>  -m»S.n5^.l^a£^^  i'taji,  tf  tefe4% 

■  '  .'  -r-:ii.  .  .  v^-:  <^p!imwocif  a^uiTAiWuw’-i  w  ixr  t".  i>.i^fti*^i.y  •a(f?>.'rt-T 

ifi  MM5,bf^«l^y  .%nd  tvro 

•  <  '  'ii»titrtH:  fwbi  i  lit*  tecis,  wirti  i#  beAiu  oi  coiiijhi^jntled 

/  ;•  ^  '  ''Ml  ttaik^  i>r  tfaii  by  pnmis.  I  fofrm-i-ed  tl^ 

'  f^:u>4ri’  \  r  .■•>«  «#  jiT»oth(if,.^  thereby  c^t ' 

■:.%  •  >Vv’-^'tv  '’.'‘t  ib«''«5qi<HJr^  Pi  s',  .t,  t  ax  tW )'.  u«.  'li’biJiKl'thmt  t*h^ 

p*iW  %if  iAi  jnirpk  f-  A«*ij4<4ii»jjiKi  tK« 


ll'<A  •' 


1/ 


r-  I 


i^H.tt  AiaJ  qf^,li«  fioloarn 


.5.  ru»  V'flC’l,'  tt«^  J  thi;‘ W\kv^  fn0,  w  BfMsfe  purjje  tattell 

bliiS;  th^i  B  bp«»i''tbr 

_  Ji>b!ijfl3y  ^wR’>hiil  va^  iWf  of  ]%hii 

i  «(  fcCVeiMl  Hglit»  varVi/iiriy  At-  ibe  fens  ^ 

'  ^  ^  #11^^  v-^it  r*f  it  by bfrW  rflff »#ion0’^  utb'titlier 

'coftjpcrtbitiftd.'  XW  «»|tw^'iiort.  #  tbe.pn-«m. 
ifti#  4^  PQIlST  ibt>  larot'^t))’ 

'  ;*V'  •  j-Ayi,  jSfc^'ftting-lhe' )Sayjk;%b^ti5v  vcj^’ 


'\f 


■  I  r  ''t 

^V.  P»;i)' crtbsrH'ileK  ihu  r.iy^wblcnii?ltrp  of.wo 


P5 


fJift  "of  iM  t)^<Ki7S''qf 

'M  ’  ^  «f  li^ii  ‘jtYi.«.nd  fouaa4l;thAt  Kiusy  aU  titoro'iiif 

*  whieb  tbiey  u&*yiji  to 

k-A  i  ■  •■  v,  ro^  M  /f-.vrUW^h ,  ha4*'tAie:';)iiiw^  ht  •  -'tef ore;  tf*'^ 

irv0. >^*^Uti3‘isf ©lU^te I'imtAiiibe,  ' ■  ;y 

'.;,  •-vi'^cy.v  .  qf  five  ftijtiiie-'w^t^Uoor  felnsna/ 

.  *  ^’il  #.■  n^nanddn^  tws*^  blue  tii$Jc^  'H»  ^Vill  boc^??' 

‘^t^tbPirraierwpt'theredinf^kiOij  r&y^,  . 

■' }W0^'t^  b»rt  bc^ifie'ytillmv  or  or  df  46woiOtbt^^ 

H,  '4  fiiyiirybicih  j'ou  do  not  iaicr^>t;  8u  gotii  tn  tbJis  Hghi ,  * 


'  ^  '^wVt'eikw>*mi)ilur^j  luysit  will  apyeur  WC-c  like  ailrer, 


its  y^ilotiriiiesis.ariyMJ^  exw*^**  of  the 

'■'  'ii^i^,,'..':.v|.' '  t.bfit  whitoftiwe  ,v;ltti''tiiiSb:i>olo</r''when  they  -arB  li«t 
■-OM*  ^*ifi^:  ,t>  »^hr<Vvt4r»^^$6  i  Imvf*  «Ub  trio4f%'beU  Held  it» 

if'i"  .. '  '  fey  the  l^rt  u^tbe  Hg^f  iuidred  by 

„■  . .  -.  .u  ■_  V. 

,1;'  b 


■■’  iJ;.^H'ii.  yirbei»';fl|s,y|0we<^^ 

Ni.iij  in'  'jitt#' il^'  rJ9fu«fon  'wlU'  !<^’''it4,t^ifler:te«  b^ie  obloUf  ,  'vhltofc  lie 
M  fwi  rs^r^tii  and  by  the  lo«  of  gupie  blutwmitidng  ray*^;  ^ 

moW mteii|SilB‘*ati£!  ^iU.  Audj^- 


^^’E-'^■  *; 


W;  '■ 


b  r 


'f- 

I  ,  'IT  "^1 V'"'  '  '  '  •«<■*■ 

^..;,.i.»^M  ',,1  ■■  '■!'•?>#•'= 

n'^  lifi  ■ . : I  Libr  ' ibmU’it  jlHM 


BOOK  TWO 

Part  I 


Observations  concerning  the  reflexions,  refractions,  and 
colours  of  thin  transparent  bodies. 

It  has  been  observed  by  others  that  transparent  substances  (as  glass,  water, 
air,  &c.)  when  made  very  thin  by  being  blown  into  bubbles,  or  otherwise 
formed  into  plates,  do  exhibit  various  colours  according  to  their  various  thin¬ 
ness,  altho’  at  a  greater  thickness  they  appear  very  clear  and  colourless.  In  the 
former  book  I  forbore  to  treat  of  these  colours,  because  they  seemed  of  a  more 
difficult  consideration,  and  were  not  necessary  for  establishing  the  properties  of 
light  there  discoursed  of.  But  because  they  may  conduce  to  further  discoveries 
for  completing  the  theory  of  light,  especially  as  to  the  constitution  of  the  parts 
of  natural  bodies,  on  which  their  colours  or  transparency  depend,  I  have  here 
set  do^^’n  an  account  of  them.  To  render  this  discourse  short  and  distinct,  I 
have  first  described  the  principal  of  my  Observations,  and  then  considered  and 
made  use  of  them.  The  Observations  are  these: 

Observation  1.  Compressing  two  prisms  hard  together  that  their  sides 
(which  by  chance  were  a  very  little  convex)  might  somewhere  touch  one  an¬ 
other,  I  found  the  place  in  which  they  touched  to  become  absolutely  trans¬ 
parent,  as  if  they  had  there  been  one  continued  piece  of  glass.  For  when  the 
light  fell  so  obliquely  on  the  air,  which  in  other  places  was  between  them,  as  to 
be  all  reflected,  it  seemed  in  that  place  of  contact  to  be  wholly  transmitted, 
insomuch  that  when  looked  upon  it  appeared  like  a  black  or  dark  spot,  by 
reason  that  little  or  no  sensible  light  was  reflected  from  thence,  as  from  other 
places;  and  when  looked  through  it  seemed  (as  it  were)  a  hole  in  that  air  which 
was  formed  into  a  thin  plate,  by  being  compressed  between  the  glasses.  And 
through  this  hole  objects  that  were  beyond  might  be  seen  distinctly,  which 
could  not  at  all  be  seen  through  other  parts  of  the  glasses  where  the  air  Avas 
interjacent.  Although  the  glasses  were  a  little  convex,  yet  this  transparent  spot 
was  of  a  considerable  breadth,  which  breadth  seemed  principally  to  proceed 
from  the  5delding  inwards  of  the  parts  of  the  glasses,  by  reason  of  their  mutual 
pressure.  For  by  pressing  them  very  hard  together  it  would  become  much 
broader  than  otherAvise. 

Obs.  2.  When  the  plate  of  air,  by 
turning  the  prisms  about  their  common 
axis,  became  so  little  inclined  to  the 
incident  rays  that  some  of  them  began 
to  be  transmitted,  there  arose  in  it 
many  slender  arcs  of  colours  AA'hich  at  ; 
first  Avere  shaped  almost  like  the  con-  I 
choid,  as  you  see  them  delineated  in  ||  \  \  \  \  \  \  ^ 

the  first  Figure.  And  by  continuing  the  Fig.  1 

457 


458  Optics 

motion  of  the  prisms,  these  arcs  increased  and  bended  more  and  more  about 
the  said  transparent  spot,  till  they  were  completed  into  circles  or  rings  encom¬ 
passing  it,  and  afterwards  continually  grew  more  and  more  contracted. 

These  arcs  at  their  first  appearance  were  of  a  violet  and  blue  colour,  and 
between  them  were  white  arcs  of  circles,  which  presently  by  continuing  the 
motion  of  the  prisms  became  a  little  tinged  in  their  inward  limbs  -with  red  and 
yellow,  and  to  their  outward  limbs  the  blue  was  adjacent.  So  that  the  order  of 
these  colours  from  the  central  dark  spot,  was  at  that  time  white,  blue,  violet; 
black,  red,  orange,  yellow,  white,  blue,  violet,  &c.  But  the  yellow  and  red  were 
much  fainter  than  the  blue  and  violet. 

The  motion  of  the  prisms  about  their  axis  being  continued,  these  colours 
contracted  more  and  more,  shrinking  towards  the  whiteness  on  either  side  of  it, 
until  they  totally  vanished  into  it.  And  then  the  circles  in  those  parts  appeared 
black  and  white,  without  any  other  colours  intermixed.  But  by  further  moving 
the  prisms  about,  the  colours  again  emerged  out  of  the  whiteness,  the  violet 
and  blue  at  its  inward  limb,  and  at  its  outward  limb  the  red  and  yellow.  So  that 
now  their  order  from  the  central  spot  w^as  white,  yellow,  red;  black;  violet, 
blue,  white,  yellow,  red,  &c.,  contrary  to  what  it  was  before. 

Obs.  3.  When  the  rings  or  some  parts  of  them  appeared  only  black  and  white, 
they  were  very  distinct  and  w'ell-defined,  and  the  blackness  seemed  as  intense 
as  that  of  the  central  spot.  Also  in  the  borders  of  the  rings,  w^here  the  colours 
began  to  emerge  out  of  the  whiteness,  they  were  pretty  distinct,  which  made 
them  visible  to  a  very  great  multitude.  I  have  sometimes  numbered  above 
thirty  successions  (reckoning  every  black  and  white  ring  for  one  succession) 
and  seen  more  of  them,  which  by  reason  of  their  smallness  I  could  not  number. 
But  in  other  positions  of  the  prisms,  at  which  the  rings  appeared  of  many 
colours,  I  could  not  distinguish  above  eight  or  nine  of  them,  and  the  exterior  of 
those  were  very  confused  and  dilute. 

In  these  t\vo  Observations  to  see  the  rings  distinct,  and  without  any  other 
colour  than  black  and  \vhite,  I  found  it  necessary  to  hold  my  eye  at  a  good 
distance  from  them.  For  by  approaching  nearer,  although  in  the  same  inclina¬ 
tion  of  my  eye  to  the  plane  of  the  rings,  there  emerged  a  bluish  colour  out  of 
the  white,  which  by  dilating  itself  more  and  more  into  the  black  rendered  the 
circles  less  distinct,  and  left  the  white  a  little  tinged  with  red  and  yellow.  I 
found  also  by  looking  through  a  slit  or  oblong  hole,  which  was  narrower  than 
the  pupil  of  my  eye,  and  held  close  to  it  parallel  to  the  prisms,  I  could  see  the 
circles  much  distincter  and  visible  to  a  far  greater  number  than  othenvise. 

Obs.  4.  To  observe  more  nicely  the  order  of  the  colours  which  arose  out  of 
the  white  circles  as  the  rays  became  less  and  less  inclined  to  the  plate  of  air,  I 
took  two  object-glasses  (the  one  a  plano-convex  for  a  fourteen-foot  telescope, 
and  the  other  a  large  double  convex  for  one  of  about  fifty-feet)  and  upon  this, 
laying  the  other  Avith  its  plane  side  downwards,  I  pressed  them  slowly  together, 
to  make  the  colours  successively  emerge  in  the  middle  of  the  circles,  and  then 
slowly  lifted  the  upper  glass  from  the  lower  to  make  them  successively  vanish 
again  in  the  same  place.  The  colour,  which  by  pressing  the  glasses  together, 
emerged  last  in  the  middle  of  the  other  colours,  would  upon  its  first  appearance 
look  like  a  circle  of  a  colour  almost  uniform  from  the  circumference  to  the 
centre  and  by  compressing  the  glasses  still  more,  grow  continually  broader 
until  a  new  colour  emerged  in  its  centre,  and  thereby  it  became  a  ring  en- 


Book  II:  Part  1  459 

compassing  that  new  colour.  And  by  compressing  the  glasses  still  more,  the 
diameter  of  this  ring  would  increase,  and  the  breadth  of  its  orbit  or  perimeter 
decrease  until  another  new  colour  emerged  in  the  centre  of  the  last.  And  so  on 
until  a  third,  a  fourth,  a  fifth,  and  other  following  new  colours  successively 
emerged  there,  and  became  rings  encompassing  the  innermost  colour,  the  last 
of  which  was  the  black  spot.  And,  on  the  contrary,  by  lifting  up  the  upper  glass 
from  the  lower,  the  diameter  of  the  rings  would  decrease,  and  the  breadth  of 
their  orbit  increase,  until  their  colours  reached  successively  to  the  centre;  and 
then,  they  being  of  a  considerable  breadth,  I  could  more  easily  discern  and 
distinguish  their  species  than  before.  And  by  this  means  I  observed  their 
succession  and  quantity  to  be  as  followeth : 

Next  to  the  pellucid  central  spot  made  by  the  contact  of  the  glasses  succeeded 
blue,  white,  yellow,  and  red.  The  blue  was  so  little  in  quantity  that  I  could  not 
discern  it  in  the  circles  made  by  the  prisms,  nor  could  I  well  distinguish  any 
violet  in  it,  but  the  yellow  and  red  were  pretty  copious,  and  seemed  about  as 
much  in  extent  as  the  white,  and  four  or  five  times  more  than  the  blue.  The 
next  circuit  in  order  of  colours  immediately  encompassing  these  were  violet, 
blue,  green,  yellow,  and  red;  and  these  were  all  of  them  copious  and  vivid, 
excepting  the  green,  which  was  very  little  in  quantity,  and  seemed  much  more 
faint  and  dilute  than  the  other  colours.  Of  the  other  four,  the  violet  was  the 
least  in  extent,  and  the  blue  less  than  the  yellow  or  red.  The  third  circuit  or 
order  was  purple,  blue,  green,  yellow,  and  red;  in  which  the  purple  seemed  more 
reddish  than  the  violet  in  the  former  circuit,  and  the  green  was  much  more 
conspicuous,  being  as  brisk  and  copious  as  any  of  the  other  colours,  except  the 
yellow,  but  the  red  began  to  be  a  little  faded,  inclining  very  much  to  purple. 
After  this  succeeded  the  fourth  circuit  of  green  and  red.  The  green  was  very 
copious  and  lively,  inclining  on  the  one  side  to  blue,  and  on  the  other  side  to 
yellow.  But  in  this  fourth  circuit  there  was  neither  violet,  blue,  nor  yellow,  and 
the  red  was  very  imperfect  and  dirty.  Also  the  succeeding  colours  became  more 
and  more  imperfect  and  dilute,  till  after  three  or  four  revolutions  they  ended 


zyxut  srqponmlkihgf  e  d  c  ^  ^  c  d  e  f  gh  iklmnopqr  s  t  uxyz 


Fig.  2 


460  Optics 

in  perfect  whiteness.  Their  form,  when  the  glasses  ivere  most  compressed  so 
as  to  make  the  black  spot  appear  in  the  centre,  is  delineated  in  the  second 
figure;  where  a,  b,  c,  d,  e:  f,  g,  h,  i,  k:  I,  m,  n,  o,  p:  q,  r:  s,  t:  v,  x:  y,  z,  denote 
the  colours  reckoned  in  order  from  the  center:  black,  blue,  \vhite,  yellow,  red; 
vdolet,  blue,  green,  yellowy  red;  purple,  blue,  green,  yellow,  red;  green,  red; 
greenish  blue,  red;  greenish  blue,  pale  red;  greenish  blue,  reddish  wTite. 

Obs.  5.  To  determine  the  interval  of  the  glasses,  or  thickness  of  the  inter¬ 
jacent  air,  by  which  each  colour  was  produced,  I  measured  the  diameters  of  the 
first  six  rings  at  the  most  lucid  part  of  their  orbits,  and,  squaring  them,  I  found 
their  squares  to  be  in  the  arithmetical  progression  of  the  odd  numbers,  1,  3,  5, 

7,  9,  11.  And  since  one  of  these  glasses  w^as  plane,  and  the  other  spherical,  their 
intervals  at  those  rings  must  be  in  the  same  progression.  I  measured  also  the 
diameters  of  the  dark  or  faint  rings  between  the  more  lucid  colours,  and  found 
their  squares  to  be  in  the  arithmetical  progression  of  the  even  numbers,  2,  4,  6, 

8,  10,  12.  And  it  being  very  nice  and  difficult  to  take  these  measures  exactly,  I 
repeated  them  divers  times  at  divers  parts  of  the  glasses,  that  by  their  agree¬ 
ment  I  might  be  confirmed  in  them.  And  the  same  method  I  used  in  determin¬ 
ing  some  others  of  the  following  observations. 

Obs.  6.  The  diameter  of  the  sixth  ring  at  the  most  lucid  part  of  its  orbit  was 
TTHi  parts  of  an  inch,  and  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  on  which  the  double  convex 
object-glass  ivas  ground  w'as  about  102  feet,  and  hence  I  gathered  the  thickness 
of  the  air  or  aereal  interval  of  the  glasses  at  that  ring.  But  some  time  after, 
suspecting  that  in  making  this  observation  I  had  not  determined  the  diameter 
of  the  sphere  vdth  sufficient  accurateness,  and  being  uncertain  whether  the 
plano-convex  glass  was  truly  plane,  and  not  something  concave  or  convex  on 
that  side  which  I  accounted  plane;  and  whether  I  had  not  pressed  the  glasses 
together,  as  I  often  did,  to  make  them  touch  (for  by  pressing  such  glasses 
together  their  parts  easily  yield  inwards,  and  the  rings  thereby  become  sensibly 
broader  than  they  would  be,  did  the  glasses  keep  their  figures),  I  repeated  the 
experiment,  and  found  the  diameter  of  the  sixth  lucid  ring  about  parts  of 
an  inch.  I  repeated  the  experiment  also  with  such  an  object-glass  of  another 
telescope  as  I  had  at  hand.  This  was  a  double  convex  ground  on  both  sides  to 
one  and  the  same  sphere,  and  its  focus  was  distant  from  it  83%  inches.  And 
thence,  if  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  of  the  bright  yellow  light  be 
assumed  in  proportion  as  11  to  17,  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  to  which  the 
glass  was  figured  vdll  by  computation  be  found  182  inches.  This  glass  I  laid 
upon  a  flat  one,  so  that  the  black  spot  appeared  in  the  middle  of  the  rings  of 
colours  without  any  other  pressure  than  that  of  the  w^eight  of  the  glass.  And 
now",  measuring  the  diameter  of  the  fifth  dark  circle  as  accurately  as  I  could,  I 
found  it  the  fifth  part  of  an  inch  precisely.  This  measure  w"as  taken  with  the 
points  of  a  pair  of  compasses  on  the  upper  surface  on  the  upper  glass,  and  my 
eye  w"as  about  eight  or  nine  inches  distance  from  the  glass,  almost  perpen¬ 
dicularly  over  it,  and  the  glass  w"as  %  of  an  inch  thick,  and  thence  it  is  easy  to 
collect  that  the  true  diameter  of  the  ring  betw^een  the  glasses  w'as  greater  than 
its  measured  diameter  above  the  glasses  in  the  proportion  of  80  to  79,  or  there¬ 
abouts,  and  by  consequence  equal  to  parts  of  an  inch,  and  its  true  semi¬ 
diameter  equal  to  %9  parts.  Now',  as  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  (182  inches)  is 
to  the  semidiameter  of  this  fifth  dark  ring  (%9  parts  of  an  inch),  so  is  this  semi¬ 
diameter  to  the  thickness  of  the  air  at  this  fifth  dark  ring;  w'hich  is,  therefore. 


Book  II:  Part  1 


461 


3  2 


or 


10  0 


567.931  1.774.784  of  Rii  inch ;  End  the  fifth  part  thereof  (viz,,  the 

ggj^sgth  part  of  an  inch)  is  the  thickness  of  the  air  at  the  first  of  these  dark 
rings. 

The  same  experiment  I  repeated  with  another  double  convex  object-glass 
ground  on  both  sides  to  one  and  the  same  sphere.  Its  focus  was  distant  from  it 
1683^  inches,  and,  therefore,  the  diameter  of  that  sphere  was  184  inches.  This 
glass  being  laid  upon  the  same  plain  glass,  the  diameter  of  the  fifth  of  the  dark 
rings,  when  the  black  spot  in  their  centre  appeared  plainly  ivithout  pressing  the 
glasses,  was  by  the  measure  of  the  compasses  upon  the  upper  glass  parts  of 
an  inch,  and  by  consequence  between  the  glasses  it  was  -I75-5-I;  for  the  upper  glass 
was  i  of  an  inch  thick,  and  my  eye  was  distant  from  it  8  inches.  And  a  third 
proportional  to  half  this  from  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  88.850  parts  of  an 
inch.  This  is,  therefore,  the  thickness  of  the  air  at  this  ring,  and  a  fifth  part 
thereof  (viz.,  the  8  8.8  5'o^^  Part  of  an  inch)  is  the  thickness  thereof  at  the  first 
of  the  rings,  as  above. 

I  tried  the  same  thing  by  laying  these  object-glasses  upon  flat  pieces  of  a 
broken  looking-glass,  and  found  the  same  measures  of  the  rings;  which  makes 
me  rely  upon  them  till  they  can  be  determined  more  accurately  by  glasses 
ground  to  larger  spheres,  though  in  such  glasses  greater  care  must  be  taken  of  a 
true  plane. 

These  dimensions  were  taken  when  my  eye  was  placed  almost  perpendicu¬ 
larly  over  the  glasses,  being  about  an  inch,  or  an  inch  and  a  quarter,  distant 
from  the  incident  rays,  and  eight  inches  distant  from  the  glass;  so  that  the  rays 
were  inclined  to  the  glass  in  an  angle  of  about  four  degrees.  Whence,  by  the 
following  Observation,  you  ^vill  understand  that  had  the  rays  been  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  glasses,  the  thickness  of  the  air  at  these  rings  would  have  been 
less  in  the  proportion  of  the  radius  to  the  secant  of  four  degrees  (that  is,  of 
10,000  to  10,024).  Let  the  thicknesses  found  be,  therefore,  diminished  in  this 
proportion,  and  they  will  become  88.952  sTToTs!  (to  use  the  nearest  round 
number)  the  99.000^^  P^rt  of  an  inch.  This  is  the  thickness  of  the  air  at  the  dark¬ 
est  part  of  the  first  dark  ring  made  by  perpendicular  rays;  and  half  this  thick¬ 
ness  multiplied  by  the  progression,  1,  3,  5,  7,  9,  11,  &c.  gives  the  thicknesses  of 
the  air  at  the  most  luminous  parts  of  all  the  brightest  rings,  viz.,  nsfooof 
17  8.000’  1  7  8,00  0’  1  7  8,000’  their  arithmetical  means  1 7 8,o o o’  1 7 8^ 0 0 o’ 
17  8!b  olT’  being  its  thicknesses  at  the  darkest  parts  of  all  the  dark  ones. 

Obs.  7.  The  rings  were  least  when  my  eye  was  placed  perpendicularly  over 
the  glasses  in  the  axis  of  the  rings;  and  when  I  viewed  them  obliquely  they 
became  bigger,  continually  swelling  as  I  removed  my  eye  farther  from  the  axis. 
And  partly  by  measuring  the  diameter  of  the  same  circle  at  several  obliquities 
of  my  eye,  partly  by  other  means,  as  also  by  making  use  of  the  two  prisms  for 
very  great  obliquities,  I  found  its  diameter,  and  consequently  the  thickness  of 
the  air,  at  its  perimeter  in  all  those  obliquities  to  be  very  nearly  in  the  pro¬ 
portions  expressed  in  the  following  Table: 


462  Optics 


Angle  of  incidence 
on  the  air 

Angle  of  refraction 
into  the  air 

Diameter 
of  the  ring 

Thickness 
of  the  air 

Deg. 

00 

Min. 

00 

00 

00 

10 

10 

06 

26 

10 

00 

loMs 

10M3 

12 

45 

20 

00 

10^ 

10% 

18 

49 

30 

00 

1134 

24 

30 

40 

00 

113/5 

13 

29 

37 

50 

00 

1234 

1534 

33 

58 

60 

00 

14 

20 

35 

47 

65 

00 

1534 

23% 

37 

19 

70 

00 

16% 

2834 

38 

33 

75 

00 

1934 

37 

39 

27 

80 

00 

22% 

5234 

40 

00 

85 

00 

29 

843^^2 

40 

11 

90 

00 

35 

122i4 

In  the  two  first  columns  are  expressed  the  obliquities  of  the  incident  and 
emergent  rays  to  the  plate  of  the  air;  that  is,  their  angles  of  incidence  and 
refraction.  In  the  third  column  the  diameter  of  any  coloured  ring  at  those 
obliquities  is  expressed  in  parts,  of  which  ten  constitute  that  diameter  when 
the  rays  are  perpendicular.  And  in  the  fourth  column  the  thickness  of  the  air  at 
the  circumference  of  that  ring  is  expressed  in  parts,  of  which  also  ten  constitute 
its  thickness  when  the  rays  are  perpendicular. 

And  from  these  measures  I  seem  to  gather  this  rule:  that  the  thickness  of  the 
air  is  proportional  to  the  secant  of  an  angle,  whose  sine  is  a  certain  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction.  And  that  mean  propor¬ 
tional,  so  far  as  by  these  measures  I  can  determine  it,  is  the  first  of  a  hundred 
and  six  arithmetical  mean  proportionals  between  those  sines  counted  from  the 
bigger  sine;  that  is,  from  the  sine  of  refraction  when  the  refraction  is  made  out 
of  the  glass  into  the  plate  of  air,  or  from  the  sine  of  incidence  when  the  refrac¬ 
tion  is  made  out  of  the  plate  of  air  into  the  glass. 

Obs.  8.  The  dark  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  rings  increased  also  by  the  ob- 
liquation  of  the  eye,  although  almost  insensibly.  But,  if  instead  of  the  object- 
glasses  the  prisms  were  made  use  of,  its  increase  was  more  manifest  when 
viewed  so  obliquely  that  no  colours  appeared  about  it.  It  was  least  when  the 
rays  were  incident  most  obliquely  on  the  interjacent  air,  and  as  the  obliquity 
decreased  it  increased  more  and  more  until  the  coloured  rings  appeared,  and 
then  decreased  again,  but  not  so  much  as  it  increased  before.  And  hence  it  is 
evident  that  the  transparency  was  not  only  at  the  absolute  contact  of  the 
glasses,  but  also  where  they  had  some  little  interval.  I  have  sometimes  observed 
the  diameter  of  that  spot  to  be  between  half  and  two  fifth  parts  of  the  diameter 
of  the  exterior  circumference  of  the  red  in  the  first  circuit  or  revolution  of 
colours  when  viewed  almost  perpendicularly;  whereas  when  viewed  obliquely 
it  hath  wholly  vanished  and  become  opaque  and  white  like  the  other  parts  of 
the  glass;  whence  it  may  be  collected  that  the  glasses  did  then  scarcely,  or  not 
at  all,  touch  one  another,  and  that  their  interval  at  the  perimeter  of  that  spot 
when  viewed  perpendicularly  was  about  a  fifth  or  sixth  part  of  their  interval  at 
the  circumference  of  the  said  red. 

Obs.  9.  By  looking  through  the  two  contiguous  object-glasses,  I  found  that 


Book  II :  Part  1  463 

the  interjacent  air  exhibited  rings  of  colours,  as  well  by  transmitting  light  as  by 
reflecting  it.  The  central  spot  was  now  white,  and  from  it  the  order  of  the 
colours  were  yello^^ish  red;  black,  \dolet,  blue,  white,  yellow,  red;  violet,  blue, 
green,  yellow,  red,  &c.  But  these  colours  were  very  faint  and  dilute,  unless 
when  the  light  was  trajected  very  obliquely  through  the  glasses;  for  by  that 
means  they  became  pretty  vivid.  Only  the  first  yellovish  red,  like  the  blue  in 
the  fourth  Observation,  was  so  little  and  faint  as  scarcely  to  be  discerned. 
Comparing  the  coloured  rings  made  by  reflexion,  with  these  made  by  trans¬ 
mission  of  the  light,  I  found  that  white  was  opposite  to  black,  red  to  blue, 
yellow  to  \’iolet,  and  green  to  a  compound  of  red  and  \dolet.  That  is,  those 
parts  of  the  glass  were  black  when  looked  through,  which  when  looked  upon 
appeared  white,  and  on  the  contrary.  And  so  those  which  in  one  case  exhibited 
blue,  did  in  the  other  case  exhibit  red.  And  the  like  of  the  other  colours.  The 
manner  you  have  represented  in  the  third  Figure,  where  AB,  CD,  are  the 
surfaces  of  the  glasses  contiguous  at  E,  and  the  black  lines  between  them  are 
their  distances  in  arithmetical  progression,  and  the  colours  written  above  are 
seen  by  reflected  light,  and  those  below  by  light  transmitted. 

Obs.  10.  Wetting  the  object-glasses  a  little  at  their  edges,  the  water  crept  in 
slowly  between  them,  and  the  circles  thereby  became  less  and  the  colours  more 
faint,  insomuch  that  as  the  water  crept  along,  one  half  of  them  at  which  it  first 
arrived  would  appear  broken  off  from  the  other  half,  and  contracted  into  a  less 
room.  By  measuring  them  I  found  the  proportions  of  their  diameters  to  the 
diameters  of  the  like  circles  made  by  air  to  be  about  seven  to  eight,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  intervals  of  the  glasses  at  like  circles,  caused  by  those  two  me¬ 
diums  (water  and  air)  arc  as  about  three  to  four.  Perhaps  it  may  be  a  general 
rule  that,  if  any  other  medium  more  or  less  dense  than  water  be  compressed 
between  the  glasses,  their  intervals  at  the  rings  caused  thereby  vdll  be  to  their 
intervals  caused  by  interjacent  air,  as  the  sines  are  which  measure  the  refraction 
made  out  of  that  medium  into  air. 

Obs.  11.  When  the  water  was  between  the  glasses,  if  I  pressed  the  upper 
glass  variously  at  its  edges  to  make  the  rings  move  nimbly  from  one  place  to  an¬ 
other,  a  little  white  spot  would  immediately  follow  the  centre  of  them,  which  up¬ 
on  creeping  in  of  the  ambient  water  into  that  place  would  presently  vanish.  Its 
appearance  was  such  as  interjacent  air  would  have  caused,  and  it  exhibited  the 
same  colours.  But  it  was  not  air,  for  where  any  bubbles  of  air  were  in  the  Avater 
they  would  not  vanish.  The  reflexion  must  have  rather  been  caused  by  a  subtler 
medium  which  could  recede  through  the  glasses  at  the  creeping  in  of  the  water. 

Obs.  12.  These  observations  were  made  in  the  open  air.  But  farther  to  ex¬ 
amine  the  effects  of  coloured  light  falling  on  the  glasses,  I  darkened  the  room, 
and  viewed  them  by  reflexion  of  the  colours  of  a  prism  cast  on  a  sheet  of  white 
paper,  my  eye  being  so  placed  that  I  could  see  the  coloured  paper  by  reflexion 
in  the  glasses,  as  in  a  looking-glass.  And  by  this  means  the  rings  became  dis- 
tincter  and  visible  to  a  far  greater  number  than  in  the  open  air.  I  have  some¬ 
times  seen  more  than  twenty  of  them,  whereas  in  the  open  air  I  could  not 
discern  above  eight  or  nine. 

Obs.  13.  Appointing  an  assistant  to  move  the  prism  to  and  fro  about  its  axis, 
that  all  the  colours  might  successively  fall  on  that  part  of  the  paper  Avhich  I 
saw  by  reflexion  from  that  part  of  the  glasses,  AA’here  the  circles  appeared,  so 
that  all  the  colours  might  be  successively  reflected  from  the  circles  to  my  eye, 


464 


Optics 


Red. 


Red 

Bluish  Creen 


Green 


Re^ 

J Bluish  Creen 

Red 
{Yellow 
iGreen 
JBlue 
iViolet 
Red 
I  Yellow 

\white 
JBlue 
1  Violet 


White  Black 


Blue  Yellowish  Red 


Black  £1  White 


Blue 

White 


whilst  I  held  it  immovable,  I  found  the  circles  which  the  red  light  made  to  be 
manifestly  bigger  than  those  which  were  made  by  the  blue  and  violet.  And  it 
was  very  pleasant  to  see  them  gradually  swell  or  contract  p  ^ 

accordingly  as  the  colour  of  the  light  was  changed.  The  paURed 
interval  of  the  glasses  at  any  of  the  rings,  when  they  were  Greenish  Red 
made  by  the  utmost  red  light,  was  to  their  interval  at  the 
same  ring  when  made  by  the  utmost  violet,  greater  than  creenhh  Blue 
as  3  to  2,  and  less  than  as  13  to  8.  By  the  most  of  my 
Observations  it  was  as  14  to  9.  And  this  proportion  seemed 
very  nearly  the  same  in  all  obliquities  of  my  eye,  unless 
when  two  prisms  were  made  use  of  instead  of  the  object- 
glasses.  For  then  at  a  certain  great  obliquity  of  my  eye, 
the  rings  made  by  the  several  colours  seemed  equal,  and 
at  a  greater  obliquity  those  made  by  the  violet  would  be 
greater  than  the  same  rings  made  by  the  red,  the  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  prism  in  this  case  causing  the  most  refrangible 
rays  to  fall  more  obliquely  on  that  plate  of  the  air  than 
the  least  refrangible  ones.  Thus  the  experiment  succeeded 
in  the  coloured  light,  which  was  sufficiently  strong  and 
copious  to  make  the  rings  sensible.  And  thence  it  may  be 
gathered  that,  if  the  most  refrangible  and  least  refrangible 
rays  had  been  copious  enough  to  make  the  rings  sensible 
without  the  mixture  of  other  rays,  the  proportion  which 
here  was  14  to  9  would  have  been  a  little  greater,  suppose 

1434  oi'  1434  lo  9- 

Obs.  14.  Whilst  the  prism  was  turned  about  its  axis 
with  a  uniform  motion,  to  make  all  the  several  colours 
fall  successively  upon  the  object-glasses,  and  thereby  to 
make  the  rings  contract  and  dilate,  the  contraction  or 
dilatation  of  each  ring  thus  made  by  the  variation  of  its 
colour  was  swiftest  in  the  red,  and  slowest  in  the  violet, 
and  in  the  intermediate  colours  it  had  intermediate  de¬ 
grees  of  celerity.  Comparing  the  quantity  of  contraction 
and  dilatation  made  by  all  the  degrees  of  each  colour,  I 
found  that  it  was  greatest  in  the  red,  less  in  the  yellow, 
still  less  in  the  blue,  and  least  in  the  violet.  And  to  make 
as  just  an  estimation  as  I  could  of  the  proportions  of  their 
contractions  or  dilatations,  I  observed  that  the  whole 
contraction  or  dilatation  of  the  diameter  of  any  ring  made  by  all  the  degrees 
of  red  was  to  that  of  the  diameter  of  the  same  ring  made  by  all  the  degrees 
of  violet,  as  about  four  to  three,  or  five  to  four,  and  that  when  the  light  was 
of  the  middle  colour,  between  yellow  and  green,  the  diameter  of  the  ring  was 
very  nearly  an  arithmetical  mean  between  the  greatest  diameter  of  the  same 
ring  made  by  the  outmost  red,  and  the  least  diameter  thereof  made  by  the 
outmost  violet — contrary  to  what  happens  in  the  colours  of  the  oblong  spectrum 
made  by  the  refraction  of  a  prism,  where  the  red  is  most  contracted,  the  violet 
most  expanded,  and  in  the  midst  of  all  the  colours  is  the  confine  of  green  and 
blue.  And  hence  I  seem  to  collect  that  the  thicknesses  of  the  air  between  the 
glasses  there,  where  the  ring  is  successively  made  by  the  limits  of  the  five 


Green 

Red 

Greenish  Blue 
Red 


Yellowish  Red 


Black 


\Violet 

[Blue 

\White 

\Yellow 

[Red 


\Violet 

\Blue 

\Green 

\Yellow 

\Red 

\Bluish  Green 
\Red 

\Bluisb  Green 
XRed 


Book  II:  Part  1  465 

principal  colours  (red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet)  in  order  (that  is,  by  the 
extreme  red,  by  the  limit  of  red  and  yellow  in  the  middle  of  the  orange,  by  the 
limit  of  yellow  and  green,  by  the  limit  of  green  and  blue,  by  the  limit  of  blue 
and  violet  in  the  middle  of  the  indigo,  and  by  the  extreme  violet)  are  to  one 
another  very  nearly  as  the  sixth  lengths  of  a  chord  which  sound  the  notes  in  a 
sixth  major,  sol,  la,  mi,  fa,  sol,  la.  But  it  agrees  something  better  with  the  Obser¬ 
vation  to  say  that  the  thicknesses  of  the  air  between  the  glasses  there,  where  the 
rings  are  successively  made  by  the  limits  of  the  seven  colours  (red,  orange, 
yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  violet  in  order)  are  to  one  another  as  the  cube 
roots  of  the  squares  of  the  eight  lengths  of  a  chord,  which  sound  the  notes  in  an 
eighth,  sol,  la,  fa,  sol,  la,  mi,  fa,  sol;  that  is,  as  the  cube  roots  of  the  squares  of  the 
numbers,  1,  %  %,  %,  34,  Me,  M- 

Obs.  15.  These  rings  were  not  of  various  colours  like  those  made  in  the  open 
air,  but  appeared  all  over  of  that  prismatic  colour  only  with  which  they  were 
illuminated.  And  by  projecting  the  prismatic  colours  immediately  upon  the 
glasses,  I  found  that  the  light  which  fell  on  the  dark  spaces  which  were  between 
the  coloured  rings  was  transmitted  through  the  glasses  without  any  variation 


of  colour.  For  on  a  wTite  paper  placed  behind,  it  w^ould  paint  rings  of  the  same 
colour  with  those  which  w’ere  reflected,  and  of  the  bigness  of  their  immediate 
spaces.  And  from  thence  the  origin  of  these  rings  is  manifest;  namely,  that  the 
air  between  the  glasses,  according  to  its  various  thickness,  is  disposed  in  some 
places  to  reflect,  and  in  others  to  transmit,  the  light  of  any  one  colour  (as  you 
may  see  represented  in  the  fourth  Figure)  and  in  the  same  place  to  reflect  that 
of  one  colour  where  it  transmits  that  of  another. 

Obs.  16.  The  squares  of  the  diameters  of  these  rings  made  by  any  prismatic 
colour  w'ere  in  arithmetical  progression,  as  in  the  fifth  Observation.  And  the 
diameter  of  the  sixth  circle,  when  made  by  the  citrine  yellow,  and  view^ed 
almost  perpendicularly,  was  about  parts  of  an  inch,  or  a  little  less,  agree¬ 
able  to  the  sixth  Observation. 

The  precedent  Observations  were  made  with  a  rarer  thin  medium,  termin¬ 
ated  by  a  denser,  such  as  w'as  air  or  w^ater  compressed  betw^een  tw-o  glasses.  In 
those  that  follow'  are  set  down  the  appearances  of  a  denser  medium  thinned 
within  a  rarer,  such  as  are  plates  of  Muscovy  glass,  bubbles  of  w'ater,  and  some 
other  thin  substances  terminated  on  all  sides  with  air. 

Obs.  17.  If  a  bubble  be  blowm  with  w'ater  first  made  tenacious  by  dissolving  a 
little  soap  in  it,  ’tis  a  common  observation  that  after  a  while  it  Avill  appear 


466  Optics 

tinged  with  a  great  variety  of  colours.  To  defend  these  bubbles  from  being 
agitated  by  the  external  air  (whereby  their  colours  are  irregularly  moved  one 
among  another,  so  that  no  accurate  observation  can  be  made  of  them),  as  soon 
as  I  had  blown  any  of  them  I  covered  it  with  a  clear  glass,  and  by  that  means 
its  colours  emerged  in  a  very  regular  order,  like  so  many  concentric  rings  en¬ 
compassing  the  top  of  the  bubble.  And  as  the  bubble  grew  thinner  by  the  con¬ 
tinual  subsiding  of  the  water,  these  rings  dilated  slowly  and  overspread  the 
whole  bubble,  descending  in  order  to  the  bottom  of  it,  where  they  vanished 
successively.  In  the  meanwhile,  after  all  the  colours  were  emerged  at  the  top, 
there  grew  in  the  centre  of  the  rings  a  small  round  black  spot,  like  that  in  the 
first  Observation,  which  continually  dilated  itself  till  it  became  sometimes  more 
than  Yi  or  M  of  an  inch  in  breadth  before  the  bubble  broke.  At  first  I  thought 
there  had  been  no  light  reflected  from  the  water  in  that  place,  but,  observing 
it  more  curiously,  I  saw  within  it  several  smaller  round  spots  which  appeared 
much  blacker  and  darker  than  the  rest,  whereby  I  knew  that  there  was  some 
reflexion  at  the  other  places  which  were  not  so  dark  as  those  spots.  And  by 
further  trial  I  found  that  I  could  see  the  images  of  some  things  (as  of  a  candle 
or  the  Sun)  very  faintly  reflected,  not  only  from  the  great  black  spot,  but  also 
from  the  little  darker  spots  which  were  within  it. 

Besides  the  aforesaid  coloured  rings  there  would  often  appear  small  spots  of 
colours,  ascending  and  descending  up  and  down  the  sides  of  the  bubble,  by 
reason  of  some  inequalities  in  the  subsiding  of  the  water.  And  sometimes  small 
black  spots  generated  at  the  sides  would  ascend  up  to  the  larger  black  spot  at 
the  top  of  the  bubble,  and  unite  with  it. 

Obs.  18.  Because  the  colours  of  these  bubbles  were  more  extended  and  lively 
than  those  of  the  air  thinned  between  two  glasses,  and  so  more  easy  to  be 
distinguished,  I  shall  here  give  you  a  further  description  of  their  order,  as  they 
were  observed  in  viewing  them  by  reflexion  of  the  skies  when  of  a  white  colour, 
whilst  a  black  substance  was  placed  behind  the  bubble.  And  they  were  these: 
red,  blue;  red,  blue;  red,  blue;  red,  green;  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  purple;  red, 
yellow,  green,  blue,  violet;  red,  yellow,  white,  blue,  black. 

The  three  first  successions  of  red  and  blue  w'ere  very  dilute  and  dirty,  es¬ 
pecially  the  first,  where  the  red  seemed  in  a  manner  to  be  white.  Among  these 
there  was  scarce  any  other  colour  sensible  besides  red  and  blue,  only  the  blues 
(and  principally  the  second  blue)  inclined  a  little  to  green. 

The  fourth  red  was  also  dilute  and  dirty,  but  not  so  much  as  the  former  three; 
after  that  succeeded  little  or  no  yellow,  but  a  copious  green,  which  at  first 
inclined  a  little  to  yellow,  and  then  became  a  pretty  brisk  and  good  willow 
green,  and  afterwards  changed  to  a  bluish  colour;  but  there  succeeded  neither 
blue  nor  violet. 

The  fifth  red  at  first  inclined  very  much  to  purple,  and  afterwards  became 
more  bright  and  brisk,  but  yet  not  very  pure.  This  was  succeeded  with  a  very 
bright  and  intense  yellow,  which  was  but  little  in  quantity,  and  soon  changed 
to  green;  but  that  green  was  copious  and  something  more  pure,  deep  and  lively, 
than  the  former  green.  After  that  followed  an  excellent  blue  of  a  bright  sky 
colour,  and  then  a  purple,  which  was  less  in  quantity  than  the  blue,  and  much 
inclined  to  red. 

The  sixth  red  was  at  first  of  a  very  fair  and  lively  scarlet,  and  soon  after  of  a 
brighter  colour,  being  very  pure  and  brisk,  and  the  best  of  all  the  reds.  Then 


467 


Book  II:  Part  1 

after  a  lively  orange  followed  an  intense  bright  and  copious  yellow,  which  was 
also  the  best  of  all  the  yellows,  and  this  changed  first  to  a  greenish  yellow,  and 
then  to  a  greenish  blue;  but  the  green  between  the  yellow  and  the  blue  was 
very  little  and  dilute,  seeming  rather  a  greenish  white  than  a  green.  The  blue 
which  succeeded  became  very  good,  and  of  a  very  bright  sky  colour,  but  yet 
something  inferior  to  the  former  blue ;  and  the  violet  was  intense  and  deep  with 
little  or  no  redness  in  it,  and  less  in  quantity  than  the  blue. 

In  the  last  red  appeared  a  tincture  of  scarlet  next  to  violet,  which  soon 
changed  to  a  brighter  colour,  inclining  to  an  orange;  and  the  yellow  which 
followed  was  at  first  pretty  good  and  lively,  but  afterwards  it  grew  more  dilute 
until  by  degrees  it  ended  in  perfect  whiteness.  And  this  whiteness,  if  the  water 
was  very  tenacious  and  well-tempered,  would  slowly  spread  and  dilate  itself 
over  the  greater  part  of  the  bubble;  continually  growing  paler  at  the  top,  where 
at  length  it  would  crack  in  many  places,  and  those  cracks,  as  they  dilated, 
would  appear  of  a  pretty  good,  but  yet  obscure  and  dark,  sky  colour;  the  white 
between  the  blue  spots  diminishing,  until  it  resembled  the  threads  of  an  irregu¬ 
lar  network,  and  soon  after  vanished,  and  left  all  the  upper  part  of  the  bubble 
of  the  said  dark  blue  colour.  And  this  colour,  after  the  aforesaid  manner, 
dilated  itself  downwards,  until  sometimes  it  hath  overspread  the  whole  bubble. 
In  the  mean  while  at  the  top,  which  was  of  a  darker  blue  than  the  bottom,  and 
appeared  also  full  of  many  round  blue  spots  (something  darker  than  the  rest) 
there  would  emerge  one  or  more  very  black  spots,  and  mthin  those,  other  spots 
of  an  intenser  blackness,  which  I  mentioned  in  the  former  Observation;  and 
these  continually  dilated  themselves  until  the  bubble  broke. 

If  the  water  was  not  very  tenacious,  the  black  spots  would  break  forth  in  the 
white,  without  any  sensible  intervention  of  the  blue.  And  sometimes  they 
would  break  forth  within  the  precedent  yellow,  or  red,  or  perhaps  within  the 
blue  of  the  second  order,  before  the  intermediate  colours  had  time  to  display 
themselves. 

By  this  description  you  may  perceive  how  great  an  affinity  these  colours 
have  vdth  those  of  air  described  in  the  fourth  Observation,  although  set  down 
in  a  contrary  order,  by  reason  that  they  begin  to  appear  when  the  bubble  is 
thickest,  and  are  most  conveniently  reckoned  from  the  lowest  and  thickest 
part  of  the  bubble  upwards. 

Obs.  19.  Viewing  in  several  oblique  positions  of  my  eye  the  rings  of  colours 
emerging  on  the  top  of  the  bubble,  I  found  that  they  were  sensibly  dilated  by 
increasing  the  obliquity,  but  yet  not  so  much  by  far  as  those  made  by  thinned 
air  in  the  seventh  Observation.  For  there  they  were  dilated  so  much  as,  when 
vieAved  most  obliquely,  to  arrive  at  a  part  of  the  plate  more  than  twelve  times 
thicker  than  that  w'here  they  appeared  when  viewed  perpendicularly;  w'hereas, 
in  this  case,  the  thickness  of  the  water  at  which  they  arrived  when  viewed  most 
obliquely  was,  to  that  thickness  which  exhibited  them  by  perpendicular  rays, 
something  less  than  as  8  to  5.  By  the  best  of  my  observations  it  w^as  between  15 
and  15}/2  to  10;  an  increase  about  24  times  less  than  in  the  other  case. 

Sometimes  the  bubble  would  become  of  an  uniform  thickness  all  over,  except 
at  the  top  of  it  near  the  black  spot,  as  I  knew",  because  it  would  exhibit  the 
same  appearance  of  colours  in  all  positions  of  the  eye.  And  then  the  colours 
w"hich  w"ere  seen  at  its  apparent  circumference  by  the  obliquest  rays  would  be 
different  from  those  that  w"ere  seen  in  other  places,  by  rays  less  oblique  to  it. 


468  Optics 

And  divers  spectators  might  see  the  same  part  of  it  of  differing  colours,  by- 
viewing  it  at  very  differing  obliquities.  Now,  observing  how  much  the  colours 
at  the  same  places  of  the  bubble,  or  at  divers  places  of  equal  thickness,  Avere 
varied  by  the  several  obliquities  of  the  rays,  by  the  assistance  of  the  4th,  14th, 
16th,  and  18th  Observations,  as  they  are  hereafter  explained,  I  collect  the 
thickness  of  the  water  requisite  to  exhibit  any  one  and  the  same  colour,  at 
several  obliquities,  to  be  very  nearly  in  the  proportion  expressed  in  this  Table. 


Incidence 
on  the  water 

Refraction 
into  the  water 

Thickness 
of  the  water 

Deg. 

Min. 

Deg. 

Min. 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

15 

00 

11 

11 

io!/4 

30 

00 

22 

1 

10% 

45 

00 

32 

2 

11% 

60 

00 

40 

30 

13 

75 

00 

46 

25 

14^ 

90 

00 

48 

35 

15/5 

In  the  two  first  columns  are  expressed  the  obliquities  of  the  rays  to  the 
superficies  of  the  water  (that  is,  their  angles  of  incidence  and  refraction),  where 
I  suppose  that  the  sines  Avhich  measure  them  are  in  round  numbers,  as  3  to  4, 
though  probably  the  dissolution  of  soap  in  the  water  may  a  little  alter  its 
refractive  virtue.  In  the  third  column,  the  thickness  of  the  bubble,  at  which 
any  one  colour  is  exhibited  in  those  several  obliquities,  is  expressed  in  parts,  of 
which  ten  constitute  its  thickness  Avhen  the  rays  are  perpendicular.  And  the 
rule  found  by  the  seventh  Observation  agrees  well  Avith  these  measures,  if  duly 
applied;  namely,  that  the  thickness  of  a  plate  of  Avater  requisite  to  exhibit  one 
and  the  same  colour  at  several  obliquities  of  the  eye  is  proportional  to  the 
secant  of  an  angle,  Avhose  sine  is  the  first  of  a  hundred  and  six  arithmetical 
mean  proportionals  betAA^een  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  counted  from 
the  lesser  sine;  that  is,  from  the  sine  of  refraction  Avhen  the  refraction  is  made 
out  of  air  into  AA^ater,  otherAAUse  from  the  sine  of  incidence. 

I  have  sometimes  observed  that  the  colours  Avhich  arise  on  polished  steel  by 
heating  it,  or  on  bell-metal,  and  some  other  metalline  substances,  Avhen  melted 
and  poured  on  the  ground,  AA^here  they  may  cool  in  the  open  air,  have,  like  the 
colours  of  Avater-bubbles,  been  a  little  changed  by  vieAAing  them  at  divers 
obliquities,  and  particularly  that  a  deep  blue,  or  violet,  Avhen  vieAved  very 
obliquely,  hath  been  changed  to  a  deep  red.  But  the  changes  of  these  colours 
are  not  so  great  and  sensible  as  of  those  made  by  AA'ater.  For  the  scoria,  or 
vitrified  part  of  the  metal,  Avhich  most  metals  Avhen  heated  or  melted  do  con¬ 
tinually  protrude  and  send  out  to  their  surface,  and  AA^hich  by  covering  the 
metals  in  form  of  a  thin  glassy  skin,  causes  these  colours,  is  much  denser  than 
Avater;  and  I  find  that  the  change  made  by  the  obliquation  of  the  eye  is  least  in 
colours  of  the  densest  thin  substances. 

Obs.  20.  As  in  the  ninth  Observation,  so  here,  the  bubble,  by  transmitted 
light,  appeared  of  a  contrary  colour  to  that  Avhich  it  exhibited  by  reflexion. 
Thus,  AA’hen  the  bubble  being  looked  on  by  the  light  of  the  clouds  reflected  from 
it,  seemed  red  at  its  apparent  circumference,  if  the  clouds  at  the  same  time,  or 
immediately  after,  AA’ere  vieAved  through  it,  the  colour  at  its  circumference 


Book  II:  Part  1  469 

would  be  blue.  And,  on  the  contrary,  when  by  reflected  light  it  appeared  blue, 
it  would  appear  red  by  transmitted  light. 

Obs.  21.  By  wetting  very  thin  plates  of  Muscovy  glass,  whose  thinness  made 
the  like  colours  appear,  the  colours  became  more  faint  and  languid,  especially 
by  wetting  the  plates  on  that  side  opposite  to  the  eye ;  but  I  could  not  perceive 
any  variation  of  their  species.  So,  then,  the  thickness  of  a  plate  requisite  to 
produce  any  colour  depends  only  on  the  density  of  the  plate,  and  not  on  that  of 
the  ambient  medium.  And  hence,  by  the  10th  and  16th  Observations,  may  be 
known  the  thickness  which  bubbles  of  water,  or  plates  of  Muscovy  glass,  or 
other  substances,  have  at  any  colour  produced  by  them. 

Obs.  22.  A  thin  transparent  body,  which  is  denser  than  its  ambient  medium, 
exhibits  more  brisk  and  vivid  colours  than  that  which  is  so  much  rarer;  as  I 
have  particularly  observed  in  the  air  and  glass.  For  blowing  glass  very  thin  at  a 
lamp  furnace,  those  plates  encompassed  with  air  did  exhibit  colours  much  more 
vivid  than  those  of  air  made  thin  betw'een  two  glasses. 

Obs.  23.  Comparing  the  quantity  of  light  reflected  from  the  several  rings,  I 
found  that  it  was  most  copious  from  the  first  or  inmost,  and  in  the  exterior  rings 
became  gradually  less  and  less.  Also  the  whiteness  of  the  first  ring  was  stronger 
than  that  reflected  from  those  parts  of  the  thin  medium  or  plate  which  were  with¬ 
out  the  rings;  as  I  could  manifestly  perceive  by  viewing  at  a  distance  the  rings 
made  by  the  two  object-glasses;  or  by  comparing  tw'o  bubbles  of  water  blown 
at  distant  times,  in  the  first  of  which  the  whiteness  appeared,  which  succeeded 
all  the  colours,  and,  in  the  other,  the  whiteness  which  preceded  them  all. 

Obs.  24.  When  the  two  object-glasses  were  laid  upon  one  another,  so  as  to 
make  the  rings  of  the  colours  appear,  though  with  my  naked  eye  I  could  not 
discern  above  eight  or  nine  of  those  rings,  yet  by  viewing  them  through  a  prism 
I  have  seen  a  far  greater  multitude,  insomuch  that  I  could  number  more  than 
forty,  besides  many  others,  that  were  so  very  small  and  close  together  that  I 
could  not  keep  my  eye  steady  on  them  severally  so  as  to  number  them,  but  by 
their  extent  I  have  sometimes  estimated  them  to  be  more  than  a  hundred.  And 
I  believe  the  experiment  may  be  improved  to  the  discovery  of  far  greater 
numbers.  For  they  seem  to  be  really  unlimited,  though  visible  only  so  far  as 
they  can  be  separated  by  the  refraction  of  the  prism,  as  I  shall  hereafter  explain. 

But  it  was  but  one  side  of  these  rings  (namely, 
that  towards  which  the  refraction  was  made)  Avhich 
by  that  refraction  was  rendered  distinct,  and  the 
other  side  became  more  confused  than  when  viewed 
by  the  naked  eye,  insomuch  that  there  I  could  not 
discern  above  one  or  two,  and  sometimes  none  of 
those  rings,  of  which  I  could  discern  eight  or  nine 
with  my  naked  eye.  And  their  segments  or  arcs, 
which  on  the  other  side  appeared  so  numerous,  for 
the  most  part  exceeded  not  the  third  part  of  a  circle. 
If  the  refraction  was  very  great,  or  the  prism  very 
distant  from  the  object-glasses,  the  middle  part  of 
those  arcs  became  also  confused,  so  as  to  disappear  and  constitute  an  even 
whiteness,  whilst  on  either  side  their  ends,  as  also  the  whole  arcs  farthest  from 
the  centre,  became  distincter  than  before,  appearing  in  the  form  as  you  see 
them  designed  in  the  fifth  Figure. 


470  Optics 

The  arcs,  where  they  seemed  distinctest,  were  only  white  and  black  succes¬ 
sively,  without  any  other  colours  intermixed.  But  in  other  places  there  ap¬ 
peared  colours  whose  order  was  inverted  by  the  refraction  in  such  manner  that, 
if  I  first  held  the  prism  very  near  the  object-glasses  and  then  gradually  re¬ 
moved  it  farther  off  towards  my  eye,  the  colours  of  the  2d,  3d,  4th  and  following 
rings,  shrunk  towards  the  white  that  emerged  between  them,  until  they  wholly 
vanished  into  it  at  the  middle  of  the  arcs,  and  afterwards  emerged  again  in  a 
contrary  order.  But  at  the  ends  of  the  arcs  they  retained  their  order  unchanged. 

I  have  sometimes  so  laid  one  object-glass  upon  the  other  that,  to  the  naked 
eye,  they  have  all  over  seemed  uniformly  white,  without  the  least  appearance 
of  any  of  the  coloured  rings;  and  yet,  by  viewing  them  through  a  prism,  great 
multitudes  of  those  rings  have  discovered  themselves.  And  in  like  manner 
plates  of  Muscovy  glass,  and  bubbles  of  glass  blown  at  a  lamp-furnace,  which 
were  not  so  thin  as  to  exhibit  any  colours  to  the  naked  eye,  have  through  the 
prism  exhibited  a  great  variety  of  them  ranged  irregularly  up  and  down  in  the 
form  of  waves.  And  so  bubbles  of  water,  before  they  began  to  exhibit  their 
colours  to  the  naked  eye  of  a  bystander,  have  appeared  through  a  prism,  girded 
about  with  many  parallel  and  horizontal  rings;  to  produce  which  effect  it  was 
necessary  to  hold  the  prism  parallel,  or  very  nearly  parallel,  to  the  horizon,  and 
to  dispose  it  so  that  the  rays  might  be  refracted  upwards. 


Part  II 


Remarks  upon  the  foregoing  Observations. 

Having  given  my  Observations  of  these  colours,  before  I  make  use  of  them  to 
unfold  the  causes  of  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  it  is  convenient  that,  by  the 
simplest  of  them  (such  as  are  the  2d,  3d,  4th,  9th,  12th,  18th,  20th,  and  24th) 
I  first  explain  the  more  compounded.  And  first,  to  shew  how  the  colours  in  the 
fourth  and  eighteenth  Observations  are  produced,  let  there  be  taken  in  any 
right  line  from  the  point  Y,  [Fig.  6]  the  lengths  YA,  YB,  YC,  YD,  YE,  YF, 
YG,  YH,  in  proportion  to  one  another,  as  the  cube  roots  of  the  squares  of  the 
numbers,  3^6,  whereby  the  lengths  of  a  musical  chord 

to  sound  all  the  notes  in  an  eighth  are  represented ;  that  is,  in  the  proportion  of 
the  numbers  6,300,  6,814,  7,114,  7,631,  8,255,  8,855,  9,243,  10,000.  And  at  the 
points  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  let  perpendiculars  Aa,  BjS,  &c.  be  erected,  by 
whose  intervals  the  extent  of  the  several  colours,  set  underneath  against  them, 
is  to  be  represented.  Then  divide  the  line  Aa  in  such  proportion  as  the  numbers 
1,  2,  3,  5,  6,  7,  9,  10,  11,  &c.  set  at  the  points  of  division  denote.  And  through 
those  divisions  from  Y  draw  lines  II,  2K,  3L,  5M,  6N,  70,  &c. 

Now,  if  A2  be  supposed  to  represent  the  thickness  of  any  thin  transparent 
body,  at  which  the  outmost  violet  is  most  copiously  reflected  in  the  first  ring, 
or  series  of  colours,  then  by  the  13th  Observation,  HK  will  represent  its  thick¬ 
ness,  at  which  the  utmost  red  is  most  copiously  reflected  in  the  same  series. 
Also,  by  the  5th  and  16th  Observations,  A6  and  HN  vdll  denote  the  thicknesses 
at  which  those  extreme  colours  are  most  copiously  reflected  in  the  second  series, 
and  AlO  and  HQ  the  thicknesses  at  which  they  are  most  copiously  reflected  in 
the  third  series,  and  so  on.  And  the  thickness  at  which  any  of  the  intermediate 


471 


Book  II:  Part  2 

colours  are  reflected  most  copiously,  will,  according  to  the  14th  Observation, 
be  defined  by  the  distance  of  the  line  AH  from  the  intermediate  parts  of  the 

lines  2K,  6N,  lOQ,  &c.  against 
which  the  names  of  those  colours 
are  written  below. 

But  farther,  to  define  the  latitude 
of  these  colours  in  each  ring  or 
series,  let  A1  design  the  least  thick¬ 
ness,  and  A3  the  greatest  thickness, 
at  which  the  extreme  violet  in  the 
first  series  is  reflected,  and  let  HI 
and  HL  design  the  like  limits  for 
the  extreme  red,  and  let  the  inter¬ 
mediate  colours  be  limited  by  the 
intermediate  parts  of  the  lines  II 
and  3L,  against  which  the  names 
of  those  colours  are  written,  and  so 
on;  but  yet  vdth  this  caution:  that 
the  reflexions  be  supposed  strongest 
at  the  intermediate  spaces,  2K,  6N, 
lOQ,  &c.  and  from  thence  to  de¬ 
crease  gradually  towards  these 
limits,  II,  3L,  5M,70,  &c.  on  either 
side;  where  you  must  not  conceive 
them  to  be  precisely  limited,  but  to 
decay  indefinitely.  And  whereas  I 
have  assigned  the  same  latitude  to 
every  series,  I  did  it  because,  al¬ 
though  the  colours  in  the  first  series 
seem  to  be  a  little  broader  than  the 
rest,  by  reason  of  a  stronger  reflexion 
there,  yet  that  inequality  is  so  in¬ 
sensible  as  scarcely  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  observation. 

Now,  according  to  this  descrip¬ 
tion,  conceiving  that  the  rays  originally  of  several  colours  are  by  turns  reflected 
at  the  spaces  II,  L3,  5M,  07,  9P,  Rll,  cfcc.  and  transmitted  at  the  spaces  AHIl, 
3LM5,  70P9,  &c.  it  is  easy  to  know  what  colour  must  in  the  open  air  be  exhib¬ 
ited  at  any  thickness  of  a  transparent  thin  body.  For  if  a  ruler  be  applied  parallel 
to  AH,  at  that  distance  from  it  by  which  the  thickness  of  the  body  is  represented, 
the  alternate  spaces  1IL3, 5M07,  cfcc.  which  it  crosseth  will  denote  the  reflected 
original  colours,  of  wRich  the  colour  exhibited  in  the  open  air  is  compounded. 
Thus,  if  the  constitution  of  the  green  in  the  third  series  of  colours  be  desired, 
apply  the  ruler  as  you  see  at  Trp<T<p,  and  by  its  passing  through  some  of  the  blue 
at  TT  and  yellow  at  o-.  as  well  as  through  the  green  at  p,  you  may  conclude  that 
the  green  exhibited  at  that  thickness  of  the  body  is  principally  constituted  of 
original  green,  but  not  without  a  mixture  of  some  blue  and  yellow. 

By  this  means  you  may  know  how’  the  colours  from  the  centre  of  the  rings 
outward  ought  to  succeed  in  order  as  they  were  described  in  the  4th  and  18th 


472  Optics 

Observations.  For  if  you  move  the  ruler  gradually  from  AH  through  all  dis¬ 
tances,  having  passed  over  the  first  space  which  denotes  little  or  no  reflexion  to 
be  made  by  thinnest  substances,  it  will  first  arrive  at  1  the  violet,  and  then  very 
quickly  at  the  blue  and  green,  which  together  with  that  violet  compound  blue, 
and  then  at  the  yellow  and  red,  by  whose  further  addition  that  blue  is  converted 
into  whiteness,  which  whiteness  continues  during  the  transit  of  the  edge  of  the 
ruler  from  I  to  3,  and  after  that  by  the  successive  deficience  of  its  component 
colours,  turns  first  to  compound  yellow,  and  then  to  red,  and  last  of  all  the  red 
ceaseth  at  L.  Then  begin  the  colours  of  the  second  series,  which  succeed  in 
order  during  the  transit  of  the  edge  of  the  ruler  from  5  to  0,  and  are  more  lively 
than  before,  because  more  expanded  and  severed.  And,  for  the  same  reason, 
instead  of  the  former  white  there  intercedes  between  the  blue  and  yellow  a 
mixture  of  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue  and  indigo,  all  which  together  ought  to 
exhibit  a  dilute  and  imperfect  green.  So  the  colours  of  the  third  series  all  succeed  in 
order;  first,  the  violet,  which  a  little  interferes  with  the  red  of  the  second  order, 
and  is  thereby  inclined  to  a  reddish  purple;  then  the  blue  and  green,  which  are 
less  mixed  with,  other  colours,  and  consequently  more  lively  than  before,  es¬ 
pecially  the  green;  then  follows  the  yellow,  some  of  which  towards  the  green 
is  distinct  and  good,  but  that  part  of  it  tow'ards  the  succeeding  red,  as  also  that 
red  is  mixed  mth  the  violet  and  blue  of  the  fourth  series,  whereby  various 
degrees  of  red  very  much  inclining  to  purple  are  compounded.  This  violet  and 
blue,  which  should  succeed  this  red,  being  mixed  with,  and  hidden  in  it,  there 
succeeds  a  green.  And  this  at  first  is  much  inclined  to  blue,  but  soon  becomes  a 
good  green,  the  only  unmixed  and  lively  colour  in  this  fourth  series.  For  as  it 
verges  towards  the  yellow,  it  begins  to  interfere  with  the  colours  of  the  fifth 
series,  by  whose  mixture  the  succeeding  yellow  and  red  are  very  much  diluted 
and  made  dirty,  especially  the  yellow,  which  being  the  weaker  colour  is  scarce 
able  to  shew  itself.  After  this  the  several  series  interfere  more  and  more,  and 
their  colours  become  more  and  more  intermixed,  till  after  three  or  four  more 
revolutions  (in  which  the  red  and  blue  predominate  by  turns)  all  sorts  of  colours 
are  in  all  places  pretty  equally  blended,  and  compound  an  even  whiteness. 

And  since,  by  the  15th  Observation,  the  rays  endued  with  one  colour  are 
transmitted,  where  those  of  another  colour  are  reflected,  the  reason  of  the 
colours  made  by  the  transmitted  light  in  the  9th  and  20th  Observations  is  from 
hence  evident. 

If  not  only  the  order  and  species  of  these  colours,  but  also  the  precise  thick¬ 
ness  of  the  plate,  or  thin  body  at  which  they  are  exhibited,  be  desired  in  parts 
of  an  inch,  that  may  be  also  obtained  by  assistance  of  the  6th  or  16th  Observa¬ 
tions.  For  according  to  those  Observations  the  thickness  of  the  thinned  air, 
which  between  two  glasses  exhibited  the  most  luminous  parts  of  the  first  six 

rings  were  1 7  g.o o o >  1 7  s. 0 0 0 >  1 7  s. 0 0 o>  1 7  s. 0 0 0 >  1 7  s. 0 0 0 »  ij  s.ooo  P^-rts  of  an  inch. 
Suppose  the  light  reflected  most  copiously  at  these  thicknesses  be  the  bright 
citrine  yellow,  or  confine  of  yellow  and  orange,  and  these  thicknesses  will  be  FX, 
Ffx,  Yv,  F^.  Fo,  Ft.  And  this  being  known,  it  is  easy  to  determine  what  thick¬ 
ness  of  air  is  represented  by  G^,  or  by  any  other  distance  of  the  ruler  from  AH. 

But  further,  since  by  the  10th  Observation  the  thickness  of  air  was  to  the 
thickness  of  w^ater,  which  between  the  same  glasses  exhibited  the  same  colour, 
as  4  to  3,  and  by  the  21st  Observation  the  colours  of  thin  bodies  are  not  varied 
by  varying  the  ambient  medium,  the  thickness  of  a  bubble  of  water,  exhibiting 


Book  II :  Part  2 


473 


any  colour  be  ^  of  the  thickness  of  air  producing  the  same  colour.  And  so, 
according  to  the  same  lOth  and  21st  Observations,  the  thickness  of  a  plate  of 
glass,  whose  refraction  of  the  mean  refrangible  ray,  is  measured  by  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  sines  31  to  20,  may  be  It  of  the  thickness  of  air  producing  the 
same  colours;  and  the  like  of  other  mediums.  I  do  not  affirm  that  this  propor¬ 
tion  of  20  to  31  holds  in  all  the  rays;  for  the  sines  of  other  sorts  of  rays  have 
other  proportions.  But  the  differences  of  those  proportions  are  so  little  that  I 
do  not  here  consider  them.  On  these  grounds  I  have  composed  the  follovdng 
Table,  wherein  the  thickness  of  air,  water,  and  glass,  at  which  each  colour  is 
most  intense  and  specific,  is  expressed  in  parts  of  an  inch  divided  into  ten 
hundred  thousand  equal  parts. 

The  thickness  of  coloured  plates  and  particles 


Their  colours  of  the  first  order .  .  .  . 


Of  the  second  order 


Of  the  third  order 


Of  the  fourth  order 


Of  the  fifth  order .  . . 
Of  the  sixth  order . . . 
Of  the  seventh  order 


of  Air  Water  Glass 


Very  black 

1 

2 

3 

8 

1  0 
3  1 

Black 

1 

3 

4 

‘2  0 
3  1 

Beginning  of  black 

2 

li 

^  7 

Blue 

n 

H 

lii 

White 

H 

3| 

Yellow 

7i 

5| 

4| 

Orange 

8 

6 

^6 

(Red 

9 

6f 

Violet 

Hi 

8f 

n- 

Indigo 

121 

Q  ^ 

8tY 

Blue 

14 

lOi 

9 

J  Green 

loi 

Ilf 

9f 

^  Yellow 

16^ 

12i 

lOf 

Orange 

17f 

13 

Hi 

Bright  red 

m 

13| 

H| 

Scarlet 

19| 

14| 

121 

Purple 

21 

15f 

13ii 

Indigo 

22,io 

164 

14i 

Blue 

23| 

17|i 

■{  Green 

25i 

ISyV 

161 

Yellow 

21\ 

20i 

Hi 

Red 

29 

21f 

18f 

^Bluish-red 

32 

24 

20f 

'Bluish-green 

34 

25| 

22 

j  Green 

35| 

26| 

22| 

1  Yellowish-green 

36 

27 

23f 

Red 

40i 

304 

26 

f  Greenish-blue 

46 

34i 

29| 

\Red 

521 

39| 

34 

/Greenish-blue 

58f 

44 

38 

\Red 

65 

48| 

42 

f  Greenish-blue 

71 

53t 

454 

\  Ruddy  white 

77 

57f 

49| 

Now,  if  this  Table  be  compared  with  the  6th  scheme,  you  vdll  there  see  the 
constitution  of  each  colour,  as  to  its  ingredients,  or  the  original  colours  of  which 
it  is  compounded,  and  thence  be  enabled  to  judge  of  its  intenseness  or  im¬ 
perfection;  which  may  suffice  in  explication  of  the  4th  and  18th  Observations, 


474  Optics 

unless  it  be  further  desired  to  delineate  the  manner  how  the  colours  appear 
when  the  two  object-glasses  are  laid  upon  one  another.  To  do  which,  let  there 
be  described  a  large  arc  of  a  circle,  and  a  straight  line  which  may  touch  that 
arc,  and  parallel  to  that  tangent  several  occult  lines,  at  such  distances  from  it 
as  the  numbers  set  against  the  several  colours  in  the  Table  denote.  For  the  arc 
and  its  tangent  will  represent  the  superficies  of  the  glasses  terminating  the 
interjacent  air;  and  the  places  where  the  occult  lines  cut  the  arc  will  show  at 
what  distances  from  the  centre,  or  point  of  contact,  each  colour  is  reflected. 

There  are  also  other  uses  of  this  Table.  For  by  its  assistance  the  thickness  of 
the  bubble  in  the  19th  Observation  was  determined  by  the  colours  which  it 
exhibited.  And  so  the  bigness  of  the  parts  of  natural  bodies  may  be  conjectured 
by  their  colours,  as  shall  be  hereafter  shewn.  Also,  if  two  or  more  very  thin 
plates  be  laid  one  upon  another,  so  as  to  compose  one  plate  equalling  them  all 
in  thickness,  the  resulting  colour  may  be  hereby  determined.  For  instance,  Mr. 
Hook  observed,  as  is  mentioned  in  his  Micrographia,  that  a  faint  yellow  plate 
of  iMuscovy  glass  laid  upon  a  blue  one,  constituted  a  very  deep  purple.  The 
yellow  of  the  first  order  is  a  faint  one,  and  the  thickness  of  the  plate  exhibiting 
it,  according  to  the  Table,  is  4^,  to  which  add  9,  the  thickness  exhibiting  blue 
of  the  second  order,  and  the  sum  will  be  which  is  the  thickness  exhibiting 
the  purple  of  the  third  order. 

To  explain,  in  the  next  place,  the  circumstances  of  the  2d  and  3d  Observa¬ 
tions;  that  is,  how  the  rings  of  the  colours  may  (by  turning  the  prisms  about 
their  common  axis  the  contrary  way  to  that  expressed  in  those  observations) 
be  converted  into  white  and  black  rings,  and  afterwards  into  rings  of  colours 
again,  the  colours  of  each  ring  lying  now  in  an  inverted  order:  it  must  be 
remembered  that  those  rings  of  colours  are  dilated  by  the  obliquation  of  the 
rays  to  the  air  which  intercedes  the  glasses,  and  that  according  to  the  Table  in 
the  7th  Observation  their  dilatation  or  increase  of  their  diameter  is  most  mani¬ 
fest  and  speedy  when  they  are  obliquest.  Now,  the  rays  of  yellow  being  more 
refracted  by  the  first  superficies  of  the  said  air  than  those  of  red,  are  thereby 
made  more  oblique  to  the  second  superficies,  at  which  they  are  reflected  to 
produce  the  coloured  rings,  and  consequently  the  yellow  circle  in  each  ring  will 
be  more  dilated  than  the  red;  and  the  excess  of  its  dilatation  will  be  so  much 
the  greater,  by  how  much  the  greater  is  the  obliquity  of  the  rays,  until  at  last  it 
become  of  equal  extent  Avith  the  red  of  the  same  ring.  And  for  the  same  reason 
the  green,  blue,  and  violet  will  be  also  so  much  dilated  by  the  still  greater 
obliquity  of  their  rays,  as  to  become  all  very  nearly  of  equal  extent  with  the 
red;  that  is,  equally  distant  from  the  centre  of  the  rings.  And  then  all  the 
colours  of  the  same  ring  must  be  coincident,  and  by  their  mixture  exhibit  a 
white  ring.  And  these  white  rings  must  have  black  and  dark  rings  between 
them,  because  they  do  not  spread  and  interfere  with  one  another,  as  before. 
And  for  that  reason  also  they  must  become  distincter,  and  visible  to  far  greater 
numbers.  But  yet  the  violet  being  obliquest  vdll  be  something  more  dilated,  in 
proportion  to  its  extent,  than  the  other  colours,  and  so  very  apt  to  appear  at 
the  exterior  verges  of  the  Avhite. 

Afterwards,  by  a  greater  obliquity  of  the  rays,  the  violet  and  blue  become 
more  sensibly  dilated  than  the  red  and  yelloAV,  and  so,  being  farther  removed 
from  the  centre  of  the  rings,  the  colours  must  emerge  out  of  the  white  in  an 
order  contrary  to  that  which  they  had  before;  the  violet  and  blue  at  the  exterior 


475 


Book  II :  Part  2 

limbs  of  each  ring,  and  the  red  and  yellow  at  the  interior.  And  the  violet,  by 
reason  of  the  greatest  obliquity  of  its  rays,  being  in  proportion  most  of  all  ex¬ 
panded,  will  soonest  appear  at  the  exterior  limb  of  each  white  ring,  and  become 
more  conspicuous  than  the  rest.  And  the  several  series  of  colours  belonging  to 
the  several  rings,  will,  by  their  unfolding  and  spreading,  begin  again  to  interfere, 
and  thereby  render  the  rings  less  distinct,  and  not  visible  to  so  great  numbers. 

If  instead  of  the  prisms  the  object-glasses  be  made  use  of,  the  rings  which 
they  exhibit  become  not  white  and  distinct  by  the  obliquity  of  the  eye,  by 
reason  that  the  rays  in  their  passage  through  that  air  which  intercedes  the 
glasses  are  very  nearly  parallel  to  those  lines  in  which  they  were  first  incident 
on  the  glasses,  and  consequently  the  rays  endued  vdth  several  colours  are  not 
inclined  one  more  than  another  to  that  air,  as  it  happens  in  the  prisms. 

There  is  yet  another  circumstance  of  these  experiments  to  be  considered,  and 
that  is  why  the  black  and  white  rings  which,  when  viewed  at  a  distance  appear 
distinct,  should  not  only  become  confused  by  viewing  them  near  at  hand,  but 
also  jdeld  a  violet  colour  at  both  the  edges  of  every  white  ring.  And  the  reason 
is  that  the  rays  which  enter  the  eye  at  several  parts  of  the  pupil  have  several 
obliquities  to  the  glasses,  and  those  which  are  most  oblique,  if  considered  apart, 
would  represent  the  rings  bigger  than  those  which  are  the  least  oblique.  Whence 
the  breadth  of  the  perimeter  of  every  white  ring  is  expanded  outwards  by  the 
obliquest  rays,  and  inwards  by  the  least  oblique.  And  this  expansion  is  so  much 
the  greater  by  how  much  the  greater  is  the  difference  of  the  obliquity;  that  is, 
by  how  much  the  pupil  is  wider,  or  the  eye  nearer  to  the  glasses.  And  the 
breadth  of  the  violet  must  be  most  expanded,  because  the  rays  apt  to  excite  a 
sensation  of  that  colour  are  most  oblique  to  a  second  or  farther  superficies  of 
the  thinned  air  at  which  they  are  reflected,  and  have  also  the  greatest  variation  of 
obliquity,  which  makes  that  colour  soonest  emerge  out  of  the  edges  of  the  white. 
And  as  the  breadth  of  every  ring  is  thus  augmented,  the  dark  intervals  must  be 
diminished,  until  the  neighbouring  rings  become  continuous,  and  are  blended, 
the  exterior  first,  and  then  those  nearer  the  centre;  so  that  they  can  no  longer  be 
distinguished  apart,  but  seem  to  constitute  an  even  and  uniform  w^hiteness. 

Among  all  the  Observations  there  is  none  accompanied  mth  so  odd  circum¬ 
stances  as  the  twenty-fourth.  Of  those  the  principal  are,  that  in  thin  plates, 
which  to  the  naked  eye  seem  of  an  even  and  uniform  transparent  whiteness, 
mthout  any  terminations  of  shadows,  the  refraction  of  a  prism  should  make 
rings  of  colours  appear,  whereas  it  usually  makes  objects  appear  coloured  only 
there  where  they  are  terminated  wdth  shadows,  or  have  parts  unequally  lumi¬ 
nous;  and  that  it  should  make  those  rings  exceedingly  distinct  and  white, 
although  it  usually  renders  objects  confused  and  coloured.  The  cause  of  these 
things  you  will  understand  by  considering  that  all  the  rings  of  colours  are  really 
in  the  plate,  when  viewed  with  the  naked  eye,  although  by  reason  of  the  great 
breadth  of  their  circumferences  they  so  much  interfere  and  are  blended  to¬ 
gether  that  they  seem  to  constitute  an  uniform  Avhiteness.  But  \vhen  the  rays 
pass  through  the  prism  to  the  eye,  the  orbits  of  the  several  colours  in  every  ring 
are  refracted,  some  more  than  others,  according  to  their  degrees  of  refrangi- 
bility ;  by  which  means  the  colours  on  one  side  of  the  ring  (that  is,  in  the  circum¬ 
ference  on  one  side  of  its  centre)  become  more  unfolded  and  dilated,  and  those 
on  the  other  side  more  complicated  and  contracted.  And  w^here  by  a  due  refrac¬ 
tion  they  are  so  much  contracted  that  the  several  rings  become  narrower  than 


476 


Optics 


to  interfere  ^vith  one  another,  they  must  appear  distinct,  and  also  white,  if 
the  constituent  colours  be  so  much  contracted  as  to  be  wholly  coincident.  But 
on  the  other  side,  where  the  orbit  of  every  ring  is  made  broader  by  the  farther 
unfolding  of  its  colours,  it  must  interfere  more  wth  other  rings  than  before, 
and  so  become  less  distinct. 

To  explain  this  a  little  further,  suppose  the  concentric  circles  AV,  and  BX, 
[Fig.  7]  represent  the  red  and  violet  of  any  order,  which,  together  mth  the 
intermediate  colours,  constitute  any  one  of  these  rings.  Now,  these  being 
viewed  through  a  prism,  the  \dolet  circle  BX,  will,  by  a  greater  refraction,  be 
farther  translated  from  its  place  than  the  red  AV,  and  so  approach  nearer  to  it 
on  that  side  of  the  circles,  towards  which  the  refractions  are  made.  For  instance, 
if  the  red  be  translated  to  av,  the  violet  may  be  translated  to  bx,  so  as  to  ap¬ 
proach  nearer  to  it  at  x  than  before;  and  if  the  red  be  farther  translated  to  av, 
the  violet  may  be  so  much  farther  translated  to  bx  as  to  convene  mth  it  at  x; 
and  if  the  red  be  yet  farther  translated  to  aT,  the  violet  may  be  still  so  much 
farther  translated  to  as  to  pass  beyond  it  at  and  convene  with  it  at  e  and/. 
And  this  being  understood  not  only  of  the  red  and  \holet,  but  of  all  the  other 
intermediate  colours,  and  also  of  every  revolution  of  those  colours,  you  mil 
easily  perceive  how  those  of  the  same  revolution  or  order,  by  their  nearness  at 


XV  and  T^,  and  their  coincidence  at  xv,  e  and  /,  ought  to  constitute  pretty  dis¬ 
tinct  arcs  of  circles,  especially  at  xv,  or  at  e  and  /;  and  that  they  will  appear 
severally  at  xv,  and  at  xv  exhibit  Avhiteness  by  their  coincidence,  and  again 
appear  severally  at  T^,  but  yet  in  a  contrary  order  to  that  which  they  had 
before,  and  still  retain  beyond  e  and  /.  But  on  the  other  side,  at  ah,  ab,  or  a/3, 
these  colours  must  become  much  more  confused  by  being  dilated  and  spread  so 
as  to  interfere  vith  those  of  other  orders.  And  the  same  confusion  mil  happen 
at  between  e  and  /,  if  the  refraction  be  very  great,  or  the  prism  very  distant 
from  the  object-glasses;  in  which  case  no  parts  of  the  rings  mil  be  seen,  save 
only  two  little  arcs  at  e  and  /,  whose  distance  from  one  another  mil  be  aug¬ 
mented  by  removing  the  prism  still  farther  from  the  object-glasses.  And  these 
little  arcs  must  be  distinctest  and  whitest  at  their  middle,  and  at  their  ends, 
where  they  begin  to  grow  confused,  they  must  be  coloured.  And  the  colours  at 
one  end  of  every  arc  must  be  in  a  contrary  order  to  those  at  the  other  end,  by 
reason  that  they  cross  in  the  intermediate  white;  namely,  their  ends,  which 
verge  towards  T|,  will  be  red  and  yellow  on  that  side  next  the  centre,  and  blue 
and  violet  on  the  other  side.  But  their  other  ends  which  verge  from  T^,  mil  on 
the  contrary  be  blue  and  violet  on  that  side  towards  the  centre,  and  on  the 
other  side  red  and  yellow. 

Now,  as  all  these  things  follow  from  the  properties  of  light  by  a  mathematical 
way  of  reasoning,  so  the  truth  of  them  may  be  manifested  by  experiments.  For 
in  a  dark  room,  by  viemng  these  rings  through  a  prism,  by  reflexion  of  the 
several  prismatic  colours,  which  an  assistant  causes  to  move  to  and  fro  upon  a 
wall  or  paper  from  whence  they  are  reflected,  whilst  the  spectator’s  eye,  the 
prism,  and  the  object-glasses  (as  in  the  13th  Observation)  are  placed  steady; 


477 


Book  II:  Part  2 

the  position  of  the  circles  made  successive!}^  by  the  several  colours,  will  be 
found  such,  in  respect  of  one  another,  as  I  have  described  in  the  Figures  abxv, 
or  abxv,  or  And  by  the  same  method  the  truth  of  the  explications  of 

other  Observations  may  be  examined. 

By  what  hath  been  said,  the  like  phenomena  of  water  and  thin  plates  of  glass 
may  be  understood.  But  in  small  fragments  of  those  plates  there  is  this  further 
observable,  that  where  they  lie  flat  upon  a  table,  and  are  turned  about  their 
centres  whilst  they  are  viewed  through  a  prism,  they  will  in  some  postures 
exhibit  waves  of  various  colours;  and  some  of  them  exhibit  these  waves  in  one 
or  two  positions  only,  but  the  most  of  them  do  in  all  positions  exhibit  them,  and 
make  them  for  the  most  part  appear  almost  all  over  the  plates.  The  reason  is 
that  the  superficies  of  such  plates  are  not  even,  but  have  many  cavities  and 
swellings,  which,  how  shallow  soever,  do  a  little  vary  the  thickness  of  the  plate. 
For  at  the  several  sides  of  those  cavities,  for  the  reasons  newly  described,  there 
ought  to  be  produced  waves  in  several  postures  of  the  prism.  Now,  though  it  be 
but  some  very  small  and  narrower  parts  of  the  glass  by  which  these  waves  for  the 
most  part  are  caused,  yet  they  may  seem  to  extend  themselves  over  the  whole 
glass,  because  from  the  narrowest  of  those  parts  there  are  colours  of  several 
orders;  that  is,  of  several  rings,  confusedly  reflected,  which  by  refraction  of  the 
prism  are  unfolded,  separated,  and,  according  to  their  degrees  of  refraction, 
dispersed  to  several  places,  so  as  to  constitute  so  many  several  waves,  as  there 
were  divers  orders  of  colours  promiscuously  reflected  from  that  part  of  the  glass. 

These  are  the  principal  phenomena  of  thin  plates  or  bubbles,  whose  ex¬ 
plications  depend  on  the  properties  of  light,  which  I  have  heretofore  delivered. 
And  these  you  see  do  necessarily  follow  from  them,  and  agree  vdth  them,  even 
to  their  very  least  circumstances;  and  not  only  so,  but  do  very  much  tend  to 
their  proof.  Thus,  by  the  24th  Observation  it  appears  that  the  rays  of  several 
colours,  made  as  well  by  thin  plates  or  bubbles  as  by  refractions  of  a  prism, 
have  several  degrees  of  refrangibility;  whereby  those  of  each  order,  which  at 
the  reflexion  from  the  plate  or  bubble  are  intermixed  with  those  of  other  orders, 
are  separated  from  them  by  refraction,  and  associated  together  so  as  to  become 
visible  by  themselves  like  arcs  of  circles.  For  if  the  rays  were  all  alike  refrangi¬ 
ble,  Tis  impossible  that  the  whiteness,  which  to  the  naked  sense  appears  uni¬ 
form,  should  by  refraction  have  its  parts  transposed  and  ranged  into  those 
black  and  white  arcs. 

It  appears  also  that  the  unequal  refractions  of  difform  rays  proceed  not  from 
any  contingent  irregularities;  such  as  are  veins,  an  uneven  polish,  or  for¬ 
tuitous  position  of  the  pores  of  glass;  unequal  and  casual  motions  in  the  air  or 
ether,  the  spreading,  breaking,  or  dividing  the  same  ray  into  many  diverging 
parts;  or  the  like.  For,  admitting  any  such  irregularities,  it  w'ould  be  impossible 
for  refractions  to  render  those  rings  so  very  distinct  and  well  defined  as  they  do 
in  the  24th  Observation.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  every  ray  have  its 
proper  and  constant  degree  of  refrangibility  connate  with  it,  according  to  which 
its  refraction  is  ever  justly  and  regularly  performed;  and  that  several  rays  have 
several  of  those  degrees. 

And  what  is  said  of  their  refrangibility  may  be  also  undersood  of  their 
reflexibility;  that  is,  of  their  dispositions  to  be  reflected,  some  at  a  greater  and 
others  at  a  less  thickness  of  thin  plates  or  bubbles;  namely,  that  those  disposi¬ 
tions  are  also  connate  vith  the  rays,  and  immutable;  as  may  appear  by  the 


478  Optics 

13th,  14th,  and  15th  Observations,  compared  with  the  fourth  and  eighteenth. 

By  the  precedent  Observations,  it  appears  also  that  whiteness  is  a  dissimilar 
mixture  of  all  colours,  and  that  light  is  a  mixture  of  rays  endued  with  all  those 
colours.  For,  considering  the  multitude  of  the  rings  of  colours  in  the  3d,  12th, 
and  24th  Observations,  it  is  manifest  that  although  in  the  4th  and  18th 
Observations  there  appear  no  more  than  eight  or  nine  of  those  rings,  yet  there 
are  really  a  far  greater  number,  which  so  much  interfere  and  mingle  with  one 
another  as,  after  those  eight  or  nine  revolutions,  to  dilute  one  another  wholly, 
and  constitute  an  even  and  sensibly  uniform  whiteness.  And,  consequently, 
that  whiteness  must  be  allowed  a  mixture  of  all  colours,  and  the  light  which 
convej^s  it  to  the  eye  must  be  a  mixture  of  rays  endued  with  all  those  colours. 

But  further;  by  the  24th  Observation  it  appears  that  there  is  a  constant 
relation  between  colours  and  refrangibility;  the  most  refrangible  rays  being 
violet,  the  least  refrangible  red,  and  those  of  intermediate  colours  having  pro- 
portionably  intermediate  degrees  of  refrangibility.  And  by  the  13th,  14th,  and 
15th  Observations,  compared  vdth  the  4th  or  18th,  there  appears  to  be  the  same 
constant  relation  between  colour  and  reflexibility ;  the  violet  being  in  like  cir¬ 
cumstances  reflected  at  least  thicknesses  of  any  thin  plate  or  bubble,  the  red  at 
greatest  thicknesses,  and  the  intermediate  colours  at  intermediate  thicknesses. 
Whence  it  follows  that  the  colorific  dispositions  of  rays  are  also  connate  with 
them,  and  immutable;  and,  by  consequence,  that  all  the  productions  and  ap¬ 
pearances  of  colours  in  the  world  are  derived,  not  from  any  physical  change 
caused  in  light  by  refraction  or  reflexion,  but  only  from  the  various  mixtures  or 
separations  of  rays,  by  \’irtue  of  their  different  refrangibility  or  reflexibility. 
And  in  this  respect  the  science  of  colours  becomes  a  speculation  as  truly  math¬ 
ematical  as  any  other  part  of  Optics.  I  mean,  so  far  as  they  depend  on  the 
nature  of  light,  and  are  not  produced  or  altered  by  the  power  of  imagination,  or 
by  striking  or  pressing  the  eye. 


Part  III 


Of  the  'permanent  colours  of  natural  bodies,  and  the  analogy  between  them  and  the 

colours  of  thin  transparent  plates. 

I  AM  now  come  to  another  part  of  this  design,  which  is  to  consider  how  the 
phenomena  of  thin  transparent  plates  stand  related  to  those  of  all  other  natural 
bodies.  Of  these  bodies  I  have  already  told  you  that  they  appear  of  divers 
colours,  accordingly  as  they  are  disposed  to  reflect  most  copiously  the  rays 
originally  endued  with  those  colours.  But  their  constitutions,  whereby  they 
reflect  some  rays  more  copiously  than  others,  remain  to  be  discovered;  and 
these  I  shall  endeavour  to  manifest  in  the  following  Propositions. 

Proposition  1 

Those  superficies  of  transparent  bodies  reflect  the  greatest  quantity  of  light,  which 
have  the  greatest  refracting  power;  that  is,  which  intercede  mediums  that  differ 
most  in  their  refractive  densities.  And  in  the  confines  of  equally  refracting  mediums 
there  is  no  reflexion. 

The  analogy  between  reflexion  and  refraction  will  appear  by  considering 


Book  11:  Part  3  479 

that,  when  light  passeth  obliquely  out  of  one  medium  into  another  which  re¬ 
fracts  from  the  perpendicular,  the  greater  is  the  difference  of  their  refractive 
density,  the  less  obliquity  of  incidence  is  requisite  to  cause  a  total  reflexion. 
For  as  the  sines  are  which  measure  the  refraction,  so  is  the  sine  of  incidence  at 
which  the  total  reflexion  begins,  to  the  radius  of  the  circle;  and,  consequently, 
that  angle  of  incidence  is  least  where  there  is  the  greatest  difference  of  the 
sines.  Thus,  in  the  passing  of  light  out  of  water  into  air,  where  the  refraction 
is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  the  sines  3  to  4,  the  total  reflexion  begins  when  the 
angle  of  incidence  is  about  48  degrees  35  minutes.  In  passing  out  of  glass  into 
air,  where  the  refraction  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  the  sines  20  to  31,  the  total 
reflexion  begins  when  the  angle  of  incidence  is  40  degrees  10  minutes;  and  so  in 
passing  out  of  crystal,  or  more  strongly  refracting  mediums  into  air,  there  is 
still  a  less  obliquity  requisite  to  cause  a  total  reflexion.  Superficies  therefore 
which  refract  most  do  soonest  reflect  all  the  light  which  is  incident  on  them,  and 
so  must  be  allowed  most  strongly  reflexive. 

But  the  truth  of  this  Proposition  will  further  appear  by  observing  that,  in 
the  superficies  interceding  two  transparent  mediums  (such  as  are  air,  water,  oil, 
common  glass,  crystal,  metalline  glasses,  island  glasses,  white  transparent  ar¬ 
senic,  diamonds,  &c.),  the  reflexion  is  stronger  or  weaker  accordingly  as  the 
superficies  hath  a  greater  or  less  refracting  power.  For  in  the  confine  of  air  and 
sal-gem  ’tis  stronger  than  in  the  confine  of  air  and  water,  and  still  stronger  in 
the  confine  of  air  and  common  glass  or  crystal,  and  stronger  in  the  confine  of 
air  and  a  diamond.  If  any  of  these,  and  such  like  transparent  solids,  be  im- 
merged  in  water,  its  reflexion  becomes  much  weaker  than  before;  and  still 
weaker  if  they  be  immerged  in  the  more  strongly  refracting  liquors  of  well- 
rectified  oil  of  vitriol  or  spirit  of  turpentine.  If  water  be  distinguished  into  two 
parts  by  any  imaginary  surface,  the  reflexion  in  the  confine  of  those  two  parts 
is  none  at  all.  In  the  confine  of  water  and  ice  ’tis  very  little;  in  that  of  water  and 
oil  ’tis  something  greater:  in  that  of  water  and  sal-gem  still  greater;  and  in 
that  of  water  and  glass,  or  crystal  or  other  denser  substances  still  greater, 
accordingly  as  those  mediums  differ  more  or  less  in  their  refracting  powers. 
Hence,  in  the  confine  of  common  glass  and  crystal,  there  ought  to  be  a  weak 
reflexion,  and  a  stronger  reflexion  in  the  confine  of  common  and  metalline 
glass;  though  I  have  not  yet  tried  this.  But  in  the  confine  of  two  glasses  of 
equal  density  there  is  not  any  sensible  reflexion,  as  was  shewn  in  the  first  Ob¬ 
servation.  And  the  same  may  be  understood  of  the  superficies  separating  two 
crystals,  or  two  liquors,  or  any  other  substances  in  which  no  refraction  is 
caused.  So,  then,  the  reason  why  uniform  pellucid  mediums  (such  as  water, 
glass,  or  crystal)  have  no  sensible  reflexion  but  in  their  external  superficies, 
where  they  are  adjacent  to  other  mediums  of  a  different  density,  is  because  all 
their  contiguous  parts  have  one  and  the  same  degree  of  density. 

Proposition  2 

The  least  parts  of  almost  all  natural  bodies  are  in  some  measure  transparent:  And 
the  opacity  of  those  bodies  ariseth  from  the  multitude  of  reflexions  caused  in  their 
internal  parts. 

That  this  is  so  has  been  observed  by  others,  and  will  easily  be  granted  by 
them  that  have  been  conversant  with  microscopes.  And  it  may  be  also  tried 
by  applying  any  substance  to  a  hole  through  which  some  light  is  immitted 


480  Optics 

into  a  dark  room.  For  how  opaque  soever  that  substance  may  seem  in  the  open 
air,  it  will  by  that  means  appear  very  manifestly  transparent  if  it  be  of  a  suffi¬ 
cient  thinness.  Only  white  metalline  bodies  must  be  excepted,  which  by  reason 
of  their  excessive  density  seem  to  reflect  almost  all  the  light  incident  on  their 
first  superficies;  unless  by  solution  in  menstruums  they  be  reduced  into  very 
small  particles,  and  then  they  become  transparent. 

Proposition  3 

Between  the  parts  of  opaque  and  coloured  bodies  are  many  spaces,  either  empty,  or 
replenished  with  mediums  of  other  densities;  as  water  between  the  tinging  corpuscles 
wherewith  any  liquor  is  impregnated,  air  between  the  aqueous  globules  that  consti¬ 
tute  clouds  or  mists;  and  for  the  most  part  spaces  void  of  both  air  and  water,  but 
yet  perhaps  not  wholly  void  of  all  substance,  between  the  parts  of  hard  bodies. 

The  truth  of  this  is  evinced  by  the  two  precedent  Propositions.  For,  by  the 
second  Proposition,  there  are  many  reflexions  made  by  the  internal  parts  of 
bodies,  which,  by  the  first  Proposition,  would  not  happen  if  the  parts  of  those 
bodies  were  continued  without  any  such  interstices  between  them;  because 
reflexions  are  caused  only  in  superficies,  which  separate  mediums  of  a  differing 
density  (Prop.  1). 

But  further,  that  this  discontinuity  of  parts  is  the  principal  cause  of  the 
opacity  of  bodies  will  appear  by  considering  that  opaque  substances  become 
transparent  by  filling  their  pores  with  any  substance  of  equal  or  almost  equal 
density  with  their  parts.  Thus,  paper  dipped  in  water  or  oil,  the  Oculus  mundi 
stone  steeped  in  water,  linen  cloth  oiled  or  varnished,  and  many  other  sub¬ 
stances  soaked  in  such  liquors  as  will  intimately  pervade  their  little  pores, 
become  by  that  means  more  transparent  than  othermse;  so,  on  the  contrary, 
the  most  transparent  substances  may,  by  evacuating  their  pores,  or  separating 
their  parts,  be  rendered  sufficiently  opaque;  as  salts  or  wet  paper,  or  the  Oculus 
mundi  stone  by  being  dried,  horn  by  being  scraped,  glass  by  being  reduced  to 
powder,  or  otherwise  flawed;  turpentine  by  being  stirred  about  \vith  water  till 
they  mix  imperfectly,  and  water  by  being  formed  into  many  small  bubbles, 
either  alone  in  the  form  of  froth,  or  by  shaking  it  together  with  oil  of  turpen¬ 
tine,  or  olive  oil,  or  with  some  other  convenient  liquor  with  which  it  will  not 
perfectly  incorporate.  And  to  the  increase  of  the  opacity  of  these  bodies,  it 
conduces  something,  that  by  the  23d  Observation  the  reflexions  of  very  thin 
transparent  substances  are  considerably  stronger  than  those  made  by  the  same 
substances  of  a  greater  thickness. 

Proposition  4 

The  parts  of  bodies  and  their  interstices  must  not  be  less  than  of  some  definite  big¬ 
ness,  to  render  them  opaque  and  coloured. 

For  the  opaquest  bodies,  if  their  parts  be  subtly  divided  (as  metals,  by 
being  dissolved  in  acid  menstruums,  &c.),  become  perfectly  transparent.  And 
you  may  also  remember  that  in  the  eighth  Observation  there  was  no  sensible 
reflexion  at  the  superficies  of  the  object-glasses,  where  they  were  very  near  one 
another,  though  they  did  not  absolutely  touch.  And  in  the  17th  Observation 
the  reflexion  of  the  water-bubble  where  it  became  thinnest  was  almost  insensi¬ 
ble,  so  as  to  cause  very  black  spots  to  appear  on  the  top  of  the  bubble,  by  the 
want  of  reflected  light. 


Book  II:  Part  3  481 

On  these  grounds  I  perceive  it  is  that  water,  salt,  glass,  stones,  and  such  like 
substances  are  transparent.  For,  upon  divers  considerations,  they  seem  to  be 
as  full  of  pores  or  interstices  between  their  parts  as  other  bodies  are,  but  yet 
their  parts  and  interstices  to  be  too  small  to  cause  reflexions  in  their  common 
surfaces. 


Proposition  5 

The  transparent  parts  of  bodies,  according  to  their  several  sizes,  reflect  rays  of  one 
colour,  and  transmit  those  of  another,  on  the  same  grounds  that  thin  plates  or 
bubbles  do  reflect  or  transmit  those  rays.  And  this  I  take  to  be  the  ground  of  all 
their  colours. 

For  if  a  thinned  or  plated  body,  which  being  of  an  even  thickness  appears 
all  over  of  one  uniform  colour,  should  be  slit  into  threads,  or  broken  into  frag¬ 
ments,  of  the  same  thickness  with  the  plate,  I  see  no  reason  why  every  thread 
or  fragment  should  not  keep  its  colour,  and  by  consequence  why  a  heap  of 
those  threads  or  fragments  should  not  constitute  a  mass  or  powder  of  the  same 
colour,  which  the  plate  exhibited  before  it  was  broken.  And  the  parts  of  all 
natural  bodies,  being  like  so  many  fragments  of  a  plate,  must  on  the  same 
grounds  exhibit  the  same  colours. 

Now,  that  they  do  so  mil  appear  by  the  affinity  of  their  properties.  The 
finely  coloured  feathers  of  some  birds,  and  particularly  those  of  peacocks’  tails, 
do,  in  the  very  same  part  of  the  feather,  appear  of  several  colours  in  several 
positions  of  the  eye,  after  the  very  same  manner  that  thin  plates  were  found 
to  do  in  the  7th  and  19th  Observations;  and,  therefore,  their  colours  arise  from 
the  thinness  of  the  transparent  parts  of  the  feathers;  that  is,  from  the  slender¬ 
ness  of  the  very  fine  hairs,  or  capillamenta,  which  grow  out  of  the  sides  of  the 
grosser  lateral  branches  or  fibres  of  those  feathers.  And  to  the  same  purpose 
it  is  that  the  webs  of  some  spiders,  by  being  spun  very  fine,  have  appeared 
coloured,  as  some  have  observed,  and  that  the  coloured  fibres  of  some  silks,  by 
varying  the  position  of  the  eye,  do  vary  their  colour.  Also  the  colours  of  silks, 
cloths,  and  other  substances,  which  water  or  oil  can  intimately  penetrate,  be¬ 
come  more  faint  and  obscure  by  being  immerged  in  those  liquors,  and  recover 
their  vigour  again  by  being  dried;  much  after  the  manner  declared  of  thin 
bodies  in  the  10th  and  21st  Observations.  Leaf-gold,  some  sorts  of  painted 
glass,  the  infusion  of  lignum  nephriticum,  and  some  other  substances,  reflect 
one  colour,  and  transmit  another,  like  thin  bodies  in  the  9th  and  20th  Observa¬ 
tions.  And  some  of  those  coloured  powders  which  painters  use  may  have  their 
colours  a  little  changed  by  being  very  elaborately  and  finely  ground.  Where  I 
see  not  what  can  be  justly  pretended  for  those  changes,  besides  the  breaking  of 
their  parts  into  less  parts  by  that  contrition,  after  the  same  manner  that  the 
colour  of  a  thin  plate  is  changed  by  varying  its  thickness.  For  which  reason 
also  it  is  that  the  coloured  flowers  of  plants  and  vegetables,  by  being  bruised, 
usually  become  more  transparent  than  before,  or  at  least  in  some  degree  or 
other  change  their  colours.  Nor  is  it  much  less  to  my  purpose  that,  by  mixing 
divers  liquors,  very  odd  and  remarkable  productions  and  changes  of  colours 
may  be  effected,  of  which  no  cause  can  be  more  obvious  and  rational  than  that 
the  saline  corpuscles  of  one  liquor  do  variously  act  upon  or  unite  with  the 
tinging  corpuscles  of  another,  so  as  to  make  them  swell,  or  shrink  (whereby 
not  only  their  bulk  but  their  density  also  may  be  changed)  or  to  divide  them 


482  Optics 

into  smaller  corpuscles  (whereby  a  coloured  liquor  may  become  transparent), 
or  to  make  many  of  them  associate  into  one  cluster,  whereby  two  transparent 
liquors  may  compose  a  coloured  one.  For  we  see  how  apt  those  saline  men- 
struums  are  to  penetrate  and  dissolve  substances  to  which  they  are  applied, 
and  some  of  them  to  precipitate  Avhat  others  dissolve.  In  like  manner,  if  Ave 
consider  the  various  phenomena  of  the  atmosphere,  Ave  may  observe  that  Avhen 
vapours  are  first  raised  they  hinder  not  the  transparency  of  the  air,  being 
divided  into  parts  too  small  to  cause  any  reflexion  in  their  superficies.  But 
AA'hen  in  order  to  compose  drops  of  rain  they  begin  to  coalesce  and  constitute 
globules  of  all  intermediate  sizes,  those  globules,  Avhen  they  become  of  con¬ 
venient  size  to  reflect  some  colours  and  transmit  others,  may  constitute  clouds 
of  various  colours,  according  to  their  sizes.  And  I  see  not  Avhat  can  be  rationally 
conceived  in  so  transparent  a  substance  as  Avater  for  the  production  of  these 
colours,  besides  the  various  sizes  of  its  fluid  and  globular  parcels. 

Proposition  6 

The  parts  of  bodies  on  which  their  colours  depend,  are  denser  than  the  medium 
which  pervades  their  interstices. 

This  Avill  appear  by  considering  that  the  colour  of  a  body  depends  not  only 
on  the  rays  AA^hich  are  incident  perpendicularly  on  its  parts,  but  on  those  also 
Avhich  are  incident  at  all  other  angles.  And  that,  according  to  the  7th  Observa¬ 
tion,  a  very  little  variation  of  obliquity  Avill  change  the  reflected  colour,  Avhere 
the  thin  body  or  small  particles  is  rarer  than  the  ambient  medium,  insomuch 
that  such  a  small  particle  AAdll  at  diversely  oblique  incidences  reflect  all  sorts 
of  colours,  in  so  great  a  variety  that  the  colour  resulting  from  them  all,  con¬ 
fusedly  reflected  from  a  heap  of  such  particles,  must  rather  be  a  Avhite  or  grey 
than  any  other  colour,  or  at  best  it  must  be  but  a  very  imperfect  and  dirty 
colour.  Whereas  if  the  thin  body  or  small  particle  be  much  denser  than  the 
ambient  medium,  the  colours,  according  to  the  19th  Observation,  are  so  little 
changed  by  the  variation  of  obliquity,  that  the  rays  Avhich  are  reflected  least 
obliquely  may  predominate  over  the  rest,  so  much  as  to  cause  a  heap  of  such 
particles  to  appear  very  intensely  of  their  colour. 

It  conduces  also  something  to  the  confirmation  of  this  Proposition  that,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  22d  Observation,  the  colours  exhibited  by  the  denser  thin  body 
Avithin  the  rarer  are  more  brisk  than  those  exhibited  by  the  rarer  Avithin  the 
denser. 


Proposition  7 

The  bigness  of  the  component  parts  of  natural  bodies  may  be  conjectured  by  their 
colours. 

For  since  the  parts  of  these  bodies  (by  Prop.  5),  do  most  probably  exhibit 
the  same  colours  Avith  a  plate  of  equal  thickness,  provided  they  have  the  same 
refractive  density;  and  since  their  parts  seem  for  the  most  part  to  have  much 
the  same  density  Avith  Avater  or  glass,  as  by  many  circumstances  is  obvious  to 
collect;  to  determine  the  sizes  of  those  parts,  you  need  only  have  recourse  to 
the  precedent  Tables,  in  Avhich  the  thickness  of  Avater  or  glass  exhibiting  any 
colour  is  expressed.  Thus,  if  it  be  desired  to  knoAv  the  diameter  of  a  corpuscle, 
which  being  of  equal  density  Avith  glass  shall  reflect  green  of  the  third  order, 
the  number  16)4  shews  it  to  be  ^  o.*o^o  P^^ts  of  an  inch. 


Book  II :  Part  3  483 

The  greatest  difficulty  is  here  to  know  of  what  order  the  colour  of  any  body 
is.  And  for  this  end  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  4th  and  18th  Observations; 
from  whence  may  be  collected  these  particulars. 

Scarlets,  and  other  reds,  oranges,  and  yellows,  if  they  be  pure  and  intense,  are 
most  probably  of  the  second  order.  Those  of  the  first  and  third  order  also  may 
be  pretty  good;  only  the  yellow  of  the  first  order  is  faint,  and  the  orange  and 
red  of  the  third  order  have  a  great  mixture  of  violet  and  blue. 

There  may  be  good  greens  of  the  fourth  order,  but  the  purest  are  of  the  third. 
And  of  this  order  the  green  of  all  vegetables  seems  to  be,  partly  by  reason  of  the 
intenseness  of  their  colours,  and  partly  because  when  they  wither  some  of  them 
turn  to  a  greenish  yellow,  and  others  to  a  more  perfect  yellow  or  orange,  or 
perhaps  to  red,  passing  first  through  all  the  aforesaid  intermediate  colours. 
Which  changes  seem  to  be  effected  by  the  exhaling  of  the  moisture  wffiich  may 
leave  the  tinging  corpuscles  more  dense,  and  something  augmented  by  the 
accretion  of  the  oily  and  earthy  part  of  that  moisture.  Now  the  green,  vdthout 
doubt,  is  of  the  same  order  with  those  colours  into  which  it  changeth,  because 
the  changes  are  gradual,  and  those  colours,  though  usually  not  very  full,  yet 
are  often  too  full  and  lively  to  be  of  the  fourth  order. 

Blues  and  purples  may  be  either  of  the  second  or  third  order,  but  the  best 
are  of  the  third.  Thus  the  colour  of  violets  seems  to  be  of  that  order,  because 
their  syrup  by  acid  liquors  turns  red,  and  by  urinous  and  alkalizate  turns 
green.  For  since  it  is  of  the  nature  of  acids  to  dissolve  or  attenuate,  and  of 
alkalies  to  precipitate  or  incrassate,  if  the  purple  colour  of  the  syrup  was  of  the 
second  order  an  acid  liquor,  by  attenuating  its  tinging  corpuscles,  would  change 
it  to  a  red  of  the  first  order,  and  an  alkali  by  incrassating  them  would  change  it 
to  a  green  of  the  second  order;  which  red  and  green,  especially  the  green,  seem 
too  imperfect  to  be  the  colours  produced  by  these  changes.  But  if  the  said 
purple  be  supposed  of  the  third  order,  its  change  to  red  of  the  second,  and  green 
of  the  third,  may  vdthout  any  inconvenience  be  allowed. 

If  there  be  found  any  body  of  a  deeper  and  less  reddish  purple  than  that  of 
the  violets,  its  colour  most  probably  is  of  the  second  order.  But  yet  there  being 
no  body  commonly  known  whose  colour  is  constantly  more  deep  than  theirs, 
I  have  made  use  of  their  name  to  denote  the  deepest  and  least  reddish  purples, 
such  as  manifestly  transcend  their  colour  in  purity. 

The  blue  of  the  first  order,  though  very  faint  and  little,  may  possibly  be  the 
colour  of  some  substances;  and  particularly  the  azure  colour  of  the  skies  seems 
to  be  of  this  order.  For  all  vapours  when  they  begin  to  condense  and  coalesce 
into  small  parcels  become  first  of  that  bigness,  whereby  such  an  azure  must  be 
reflected  before  they  can  constitute  clouds  of  other  colours.  And  so,  this  being 
the  first  colour  which  vapours  begin  to  reflect,  it  ought  to  be  the  colour  of  the 
finest  and  most  transparent  skies,  in  which  vapours  are  not  arrived  to  that 
grossness  requisite  to  reflect  other  colours,  as  we  find  it  is  by  experience. 

Whiteness,  if  most  intense  and  luminous,  is  that  of  the  first  order,  if  less 
strong  and  luminous,  a  mixture  of  the  colours  of  several  orders.  Of  this  last 
kind  is  the  whiteness  of  froth,  paper,  linen,  and  most  white  substances;  of  the 
former  I  reckon  that  of  white  metals  to  be.  For  whilst  the  densest  of  metals, 
gold,  if  foliated,  is  transparent,  and  all  metals  become  transparent  if  dissolved 
in  menstruums  or  vitrified,  the  opacity  of  white  metals  ariseth  not  from  their 
density  alone.  They,  being  less  dense  than  gold,  would  be  more  transparent 


484  Optics 

than  it,  did  not  some  other  cause  concur  with  their  density  to  make  them 
opaque.  And  this  cause  I  take  to  be  such  a  bigness  of  their  particles  as  fits 
them  to  reflect  the  white  of  the  first  order.  For,  if  they  be  of  other  thicknesses, 
they  may  reflect  other  colours,  as  is  manifest  by  the  colours  which  appear  upon 
hot  steel  in  tempering  it,  and  sometimes  upon  the  surface  of  melted  metals  in 
the  skin  or  scoria  which  arises  upon  them  in  their  cooling.  And  as  the  white  of 
the  first  order  is  the  strongest  which  can  be  made  by  plates  of  transparent 
substances,  so  it  ought  to  be  stronger  in  the  denser  substances  of  metals  than 
in  the  rarer  of  air,  water,  and  glass.  Nor  do  I  see  but  that  metallic  substances 
of  such  a  thickness  as  may  fit  them  to  reflect  the  white  of  the  first  order,  may, 
by  reason  of  their  great  density  (according  to  the  tenor  of  the  first  of  these 
Propositions)  reflect  all  the  light  incident  upon  them,  and  so  be  as  opaque  and 
splendent  as  it’s  possible  for  any  body  to  be.  Gold  or  copper  mixed  with  less 
than  half  their  weight  of  silver,  or  tin,  or  regulus  of  antimony,  in  fusion,  or 
amalgamed  mth  a  very  little  mercury,  become  white ;  which  shews  both  that 
the  particles  of  white  metals  have  much  more  superficies,  and  so  are  smaller, 
than  those  of  gold  and  copper,  and  also  that  they  are  so  opaque  as  not  to  suffer 
the  particles  of  gold  or  copper  to  shine  through  them.  Now,  it  is  scarce  to  be 
doubted  but  that  the  colours  of  gold  and  copper  are  of  the  second  and  third 
order;  and,  therefore,  the  particles  of  white  metals  cannot  be  much  bigger  than 
is  requisite  to  make  them  reflect  the  white  of  the  first  order.  The  volatility  of 
mercury  argues  that  they  are  not  much  bigger,  nor  may  they  be  much  less, 
lest  they  lose  their  opacity,  and  become  either  transparent  as  they  do  when  at¬ 
tenuated  by  vitrification,  or  by  solution  in  menstruums,  or  black  as  they  do 
when  ground  smaller,  by  rubbing  silver,  or  tin,  or  lead  upon  other  substances 
to  draw  black  lines.  The  first  and  only  colour  which  white  metals  take  by 
grinding  their  particles  smaller  is  black,  and  therefore  their  white  ought  to  be 
that  which  borders  upon  the  black  spot  in  the  centre  of  the  rings  of  colours; 
that  is,  the  white  of  the  first  order.  But,  if  you  would  hence  gather  the  bigness 
of  metallic  particles,  you  must  allow  for  their  density.  For  were  mercury  trans¬ 
parent,  its  density  is  such  that  the  sine  of  incidence  upon  it  (by  my  computa¬ 
tion)  would  be  to  the  sine  of  its  refraction  as  71  to  20,  or  7  to  2.  And,  therefore, 
the  thickness  of  its  particles,  that  they  may  exhibit  the  same  colours  mth 
those  of  bubbles  of  water,  ought  to  be  less  than  the  thickness  of  the  skin  of 
those  bubbles  in  the  proportion  of  2  to  7.  Whence  it’s  possible  that  the  particles 
of  mercury  may  be  as  little  as  the  particles  of  some  transparent  and  volatile 
fluids,  and  yet  reflect  the  white  of  the  first  order. 

Lastly,  for  the  production  of  black,  the  corpuscles  must  be  less  than  any  of 
those  which  exhibit  colours.  For  at  all  greater  sizes  there  is  too  much  light 
reflected  to  constitute  this  colour.  But  if  they  be  supposed  a  little  less  than  is 
requisite  to  reflect  the  white  and  very  faint  blue  of  the  first  order,  they  will, 
according  to  the  4th,  8th,  17th  and  18th  Observations,  reflect  so  very  little 
light  as  to  appear  intensely  black,  and  yet  may  perhaps  variously  refract  it  to 
and  fro  \vithin  themselves  so  long,  until  it  happen  to  be  stifled  and  lost,  by 
w’hich  means  they  ^vill  appear  black  in  all  positions  of  the  eye  -without  any 
transparency.  And  from  hence  may  be  understood  why  fire,  and  the  more 
subtle  dissolver  putrefaction,  by  dividing  the  particles  of  substances,  turn 
them  to  black;  why  small  quantities  of  black  substances  impart  their  colour 
very  freely  and  intensely  to  other  substances  to  which  they  are  applied,  the 


Book  II :  Part  3  485 

minute  particles  of  these,  by  reason  of  their  very  great  number,  easily  over¬ 
spreading  the  gross  particles  of  others;  why  glass  ground  very  elaborately  ^^dth 
sand  on  a  copper  plate,  till  it  be  well  polished,  makes  the  sand,  together  mth 
what  is  worn  off  from  the  glass  and  copper,  become  very  black:  why  black 
substances  do  soonest  of  all  others  become  hot  in  the  Sun's  light  and  burn 
(which  effect  may  proceed  partly  from  the  multitude  of  refractions  in  a  little 
room,  and  partly  from  the  easy  commotion  of  so  very  small  corpuscles;)  and 
why  blacks  are  usually  a  little  inclined  to  a  bluish  colour.  For  that  they  are  so 
may  be  seen  by  illuminating  white  paper  by  light  reflected  from  black  sub¬ 
stances.  For  the  paper  will  usually  appear  of  a  bluish- white ;  and  the  reason  is 
that  black  borders  in  the  obscure  blue  of  the  order  described  in  the  18th  Obser¬ 
vation,  and,  therefore,  reflects  more  rays  of  that  colour  than  of  any  other. 

In  these  descriptions  I  have  been  the  more  particular,  because  it  is  not  im¬ 
possible  but  that  miscroscopes  may  at  length  be  improved  to  the  discovery  of 
the  particles  of  bodies  on  which  their  colours  depend,  if  they  are  not  already 
in  some  measure  arrived  to  that  degree  of  perfection.  For  if  those  instruments 
are  or  can  be  so  far  improved  as  vith  sufficient  distinctness  to  represent  objects 
five  or  six  hundred  times  bigger  than  at  a  foot  distance  they  appear  to  our 
naked  eyes,  I  should  hope  that  we  might  be  able  to  discover  some  of  the  great¬ 
est  of  those  corpuscles.  And  by  one  that  would  magnify  three  or  four  thousand 
times  perhaps  they  might  all  be  discovered,  but  those  which  produce  blackness. 
In  the  meanwhile  I  see  nothing  material  in  this  discourse  that  may  rationally 
be  doubted  of,  excepting  this  position :  That  transparent  corpuscles  of  the  same 
thickness  and  density  nith  a  plate  do  exhibit  the  same  colour.  And  this  I  would 
have  understood  not  without  some  latitude,  as  well  because  those  corpuscles 
may  be  of  irregular  figures,  and  many  rays  must  be  obliquely  incident  on  them, 
and  so  have  a  shorter  way  through  them  than  the  length  of  their  diameters,  as 
because  the  straitness  of  the  medium  put  in  on  all  sides  vithin  such  corpuscles 
may  a  little  alter  its  motions  or  other  qualities  on  which  the  reflexion  depends. 
But  yet  I  cannot  much  suspect  the  last,  because  I  have  observed  of  some  small 
plates  of  Muscovy  glass,  which  were  of  an  even  thickness,  that  through  a  micro¬ 
scope  they  have  appeared  of  the  same  colour  at  their  edges  and  corners  where 
the  included  medium  was  terminated,  which  they  appeared  of  in  other  places. 
However,  it  will  add  much  to  our  satisfaction  if  those  corpuscles  can  be  dis¬ 
covered  vdth  microscopes;  which,  if  we  shall  at  length  attain  to,  I  fear  it  nill 
be  the  utmost  improvement  of  this  sense.  For  it  seems  impossible  to  see  the 
more  secret  and  noble  works  of  Nature  within  the  corpuscles  by  reason  of 

their  transparency.  _ 

Proposition  8 

The  cause  of  reflexion  is  not  the  impinging  of  light  on  the  solid  or  impervious  parts 
of  bodies,  as  is  coynmonly  believed. 

This  null  appear  by  the  following  considerations:  First,  that  in  the  passage 
of  light  out  of  glass  into  air  there  is  a  reflexion  as  strong  as  in  its  passage  out  of 
air  into  glass,  or  rather  a  little  stronger,  and  by  many  degrees  stronger  than  in 
its  passage  out  of  glass  into  water.  And  it  seems  not  probable  that  air  should 
have  more  strongly  reflecting  parts  than  water  or  glass.  But  if  that  should 
possibly  be  supposed,  yet  it  will  avail  nothing;  for  the  reflexion  is  as  strong  or 
stronger  when  the  air  is  drawn  aAvay  from  the  glass  (suppose  by  the  air-pump 
invented  by  Otto  Gueriet,  and  improved  and  made  useful  by  Mr.  Boyle)  as 


486  Optics 

when  it  is  adjacent  to  it.  Secondly,  if  light  in  its  passage  out  of  glass  into  air 
be  incident  more  obliquely  than  at  an  angle  of  40  or  41  degrees  it  is  wholly 
reflected,  if  less  obliquely  it  is  in  great  measure  transmitted.  Now,  it  is  not  to 
be  imagined  that  light  at  one  degree  of  obliquity  should  meet  ^nth  pores 
enough  in  the  air  to  transmit  the  greater  part  of  it,  and  at  another  degree  of 
obliquity  should  meet  ^^Tth  nothing  but  parts  to  reflect  it  wholly,  especially 
considering  that  in  its  passage  out  of  air  into  glass,  how  oblique  soever  be  its 
incidence,  it  finds  pores  enough  in  the  glass  to  transmit  a  great  part  of  it.  If  any 
man  suppose  that  it  is  not  reflected  by  the  air,  but  by  the  outmost  superficial 
parts  of  the  glass,  there  is  still  the  same  difficulty;  besides  that,  such  a  supposi¬ 
tion  is  unintelligible,  and  will  also  appear  to  be  false  by  applying  water  behind 
some  part  of  the  glass  instead  of  air.  For  so  in  a  convenient  obliquity  of  the 
rays,  (suppose  of  45  or  46  degrees)  at  which  they  are  all  reflected  where  the  air 
is  adjacent  to  the  glass,  they  shall  be  in  great  measure  transmitted  where  the 
water  is  adjacent  to  it;  which  argues  that  their  reflexion  or  transmission  de¬ 
pends  on  the  constitution  of  the  air  and  water  behind  the  glass,  and  not  on  the 
striking  of  the  rays  upon  the  parts  of  the  glass.  Thirdly,  if  the  colours  made  by 
a  prism  placed  at  the  entrance  of  a  beam  of  light  into  a  darkened  room  be 
successively  cast  on  a  second  prism  placed  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  for¬ 
mer,  in  such  manner  that  they  are  all  alike  incident  upon  it,  the  second  prism 
may  be  so  inclined  to  the  incident  rays  that  those  which  are  of  a  blue  colour 
shall  be  all  reflected  by  it,  and  yet  those  of  a  red  colour  pretty  copiously  trans¬ 
mitted.  Now,  if  the  reflexion  be  caused  by  the  parts  of  air  or  glass,  I  would  ask 
why  at  the  same  obliquity  of  incidence  the  blue  should  wholly  impinge  on  those 
parts,  so  as  to  be  all  reflected,  and  yet  the  red  find  pores  enough  to  be  in  a  great 
measure  transmitted.  Fourthly,  where  two  glasses  touch  one  another,  there  is 
no  sensible  reflexion,  as  was  declared  in  the  first  Observation;  and  yet  I  see  no 
reason  why  the  rays  should  not  impinge  on  the  parts  of  glass,  as  much  when 
contiguous  to  other  glass  as  when  contiguous  to  air.  Fifthly,  when  the  top  of  a 
water-bubble  (in  the  17th  Observation)  by  the  continual  subsiding  and  exhal¬ 
ing  of  the  water  grew  very  thin,  there  w'as  such  a  little  and  almost  insensible 
quantity  of  light  reflected  from  it  that  it  appeared  intensely  black;  w'hereas 
round  about  that  black  spot,  where  the  water  was  thicker,  the  reflexion  was  so 
strong  as  to  make  the  water  seem  very  white.  Nor  is  it  only  at  the  least  thick¬ 
ness  of  thin  plates  or  bubbles  that  there  is  no  manifest  reflexion,  but  at  many 
other  thicknesses  continually  greater  and  greater.  For  in  the  15th  Observation 
the  rays  of  the  same  colour  were  by  turns  transmitted  at  one  thickness,  and 
reflected  at  another  thickness,  for  an  indeterminate  number  of  successions. 
And  yet  in  the  superficies  of  the  thinned  body,  where  it  is  of  any  one  thickness, 
there  are  as  many  parts  for  the  rays  to  impinge  on  as  where  it  is  of  any  other 
thickness.  Sixthly,  if  reflexion  were  caused  by  the  parts  of  reflecting  bodies,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  thin  plates  or  bubbles,  at  one  and  the  same  place,  to 
reflect  the  rays  of  one  colour,  and  transmit  those  of  another,  as  they  do  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  13th  and  15th  Observations.  For  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  at  one 
place  the  rays  which,  for  instance,  exhibit  a  blue  colour,  should  have  the  for¬ 
tune  to  dash  upon  the  parts,  and  those  which  exhibit  a  red  to  hit  upon  the  pores 
of  the  body;  and  then  at  another  place,  where  the  body  is  either  a  little  thicker 
or  a  little  thinner,  that  on  the  contrary  the  blue  should  hit  upon  its  pores,  and 
the  red  upon  its  parts.  Lastly,  were  the  rays  of  light  reflected  by  impinging  on 


Book  II:  Part  3  487 

the  solid  parts  of  bodies,  their  reflexions  from  polished  bodies  could  not  be  so 
regular  as  they  are.  For  in  polishing  glass  ^^^th  sand,  putty,  or  tripoli.  it  is  not 
to  be  imagined  that  those  substances  can,  by  grating  and  fretting  the  glass, 
bring  all  its  least  particles  to  an  accurate  polish;  so  that  all  their  surfaces  shall 
be  truly  plane  or  truly  spherical,  and  look  all  the  same  way,  so  as  together  to 
compose  one  even  surface.  The  smaller  the  particles  of  those  substances  are, 
the  smaller  will  be  the  scratches  by  which  they  continually  fret  and  wear  away 
the  glass  until  it  be  polished;  but  be  they  never  so  small  they  can  wear  away 
the  glass  no  otherwise  than  by  grating  and  scratching  it,  and  breaking  the 
protuberances;  and,  therefore,  polish  it  no  otherwise  than  by  bringing  its 
roughness  to  a  very  fine  grain,  so  that  the  scratches  and  frettings  of  the  surface 
become  too  small  to  be  \dsible.  And,  therefore,  if  light  were  reflected  by  impinging 
upon  the  solid  parts  of  the  glass,  it  would  be  scattered  as  much  by  the  most 
polished  glass  as  by  the  roughest.  So,  then,  it  remains  a  problem  how  glass 
polished  by  fretting  substances  can  reflect  light  so  regularly  as  it  does.  And  this 
problem  is  scarce  otherwise  to  be  solved  than  by  saying  that  the  reflexion  of  a 
ray  is  effected,  not  by  a  single  point  of  the  reflecting  body,  but  by  some  power 
of  the  body  which  is  evenly  diffused  all  over  its  surface,  and  by  which  it  acts 
upon  the  ray  without  immediate  contact.  For  that  the  parts  of  bodies  do  act 
upon  light  at  a  distance  shall  be  shewn  hereafter. 

Now,  if  light  be  reflected,  not  by  impinging  on  the  solid  parts  of  bodies  but 
by  some  other  principle,  it’s  probable  that  as  many  of  its  rays  as  impinge  on 
the  solid  parts  of  bodies  are  not  reflected  but  stifled  and  lost  in  the  bodies.  For 
otherwise  we  must  allow  two  sorts  of  reflexions.  Should  all  the  rays  be  reflected 
which  impinge  on  the  internal  parts  of  clear  water  or  crystal,  those  substances 
would. rather  have  a  cloudy  colour  than  a  clear  transparency.  To  make  bodies 
look  black,  it’s  necessary  that  many  rays  be  stopped,  retained,  and  lost  in  them; 
and  it  seems  not  probable  that  any  rays  can  be  stopped  and  stifled  in  them 
which  do  not  impinge  on  their  parts. 

And  hence  we  may  understand  that  bodies  are  much  more  rare  and  porous 
than  is  commonly  believed.  Water  is  nineteen  times  lighter,  and  by  consequence 
nineteen  times  rarer,  than  gold;  and  gold  is  so  rare  as  very  readily  and  without 
the  least  opposition  to  transmit  the  magnetic  efflu^da,  and  easily  to  admit 
quick-silver  into  its  pores,  and  to  let  water  pass  through  it.  For  a  concave 
sphere  of  gold  filled  with  water,  and  soldered  up,  has,  upon  pressing  the  sphere 
with  great  force,  let  the  water  squeeze  through  it,  and  stand  all  over  its  outside 
in  multitudes  of  small  drops,  like  dew,  without  bursting  or  cracking  the  body 
of  the  gold,  as  I  have  been  informed  by  an  eye-witness.  From  all  which  we  may 
conclude  that  gold  has  more  pores  than  solid  parts,  and  by  consequence  that 
water  has  above  forty  times  more  pores  than  parts.  And  he  that  shall  find  out 
an  hypothesis  by  which  water  may  be  so  rare,  and  yet  not  be  capable  of  com¬ 
pression  by  force,  may  doubtless  by  the  same  hypothesis  make  gold,  and  water, 
and  all  other  bodies,  as  much  rarer  as  he  pleases ;  so  that  light  may  find  a  ready 
passage  through  transparent  substances. 

The  magnet  acts  upon  iron  through  all  dense  bodies  not  magnetic  nor  red 
hot,  vithout  any  diminution  of  its  virtue;  as  for  instance,  through  gold,  silver, 
lead,  glass,  water.  The  gra\dtating  power  of  the  Sun  is  transmitted  through  the 
vast  bodies  of  the  planets  without  any  diminution,  so  as  to  act  upon  all  their 
parts  to  their  very  centres  vdth  the  same  force  and  according  to  the  same  laws. 


488  Optics 

as  if  the  part  upon  which  it  acts  were  not  surrounded  with  the  body  of  the 
planet.  The  rays  of  light,  whether  they  be  very  small  bodies  projected,  or  only 
motion  or  force  propagated,  are  moved  in  right  lines;  and  whenever  a  ray  of 
light  is  by  any  obstacle  turned  out  of  its  rectilinear  way,  it  will  never  return 
into  the  same  rectilinear  way,  unless  perhaps  by  very  great  accident.  And  yet 
light  is  transmitted  through  pellucid  solid  bodies  in  right  lines  to  very  great 
distances.  How  bodies  can  have  a  sufficient  quantity  of  pores  for  producing 
these  effects  is  very  difficult  to  conceive,  but  perhaps  not  altogether  impossible. 
For  the  colours  of  bodies  arise  from  the  magnitudes  of  the  particles  which 
reflect  them,  as  was  explained  above.  Now,  if  we  conceive  these  particles  of 
bodies  to  be  so  disposed  amongst  themselves  that  the  intervals  or  empty  spaces 
between  them  may  be  equal  in  magnitude  to  them  all;  and  that  these  particles 
may  be  composed  of  other  particles  much  smaller,  which  have  as  much  empty 
space  between  them  as  equals  all  the  magnitudes  of  these  smaller  particles;  and 
that  in  like  manner  these  smaller  particles  are  again  composed  of  others  much 
smaller,  all  which  together  are  equal  to  all  the  pores  or  empty  spaces  between 
them;  and  so  on  perpetually  till  you  come  to  solid  particles,  such  as  have  no 
pores  or  empty  spaces  within  them;  and  if  in  any  gross  body  there  be,  for 
instance,  three  such  degrees  of  particles,  the  least  of  which  are  solid,  this  body 
will  have  seven  times  more  pores  than  solid  parts.  But  if  there  be  four  such 
degrees  of  particles,  the  least  of  which  are  solid,  the  body  uill  have  fifteen  times 
more  pores  than  solid  parts.  If  there  be  five  degrees,  the  body  Avill  have  one 
and  thirty  times  more  pores  than  solid  parts.  If  six  degrees,  the  body  will  have 
sixty  and  three  times  more  pores  than  solid  parts.  And  so  on  perpetually.  And 
there  are  other  ways  of  conceiving  how  bodies  may  be  exceeding  porous.  But 
what  is  really  their  inward  frame  is  not  yet  known  to  us. 

Peoposition  9 

Bodies  reflect  and  refract  light  by  one  and  the  same  power,  variously  exercised  in 
various  circumstances. 

This  appears  by  several  considerations.  First,  because  when  light  goes  out  of 
glass  into  air,  as  obliquely  as  it  can  possibly  do,  if  its  incidence  be  made  still 
more  oblique,  it  becomes  totally  reflected.  For  the  power  of  the  glass  after  it 
has  refracted  the  light  as  obliquely  as  is  possible,  if  the  incidence  be  still  made 
more  oblique,  becomes  too  strong  to  let  any  of  its  rays  go  through,  and  by 
consequence  causes  total  reflexions.  Secondly,  because  light  is  alternately  re¬ 
flected  and  transmitted  by  thin  plates  of  glass  for  many  successions,  accordingly 
as  the  thickness  of  the  plate  increases  in  an  arithmetical  progression.  For  here 
the  thickness  of  the  glass  determines  whether  that  power  by  which  glass  acts 
upon  light  shall  cause  it  to  be  reflected,  or  suffer  it  to  be  transmitted.  And, 
thirdly,  because  those  surfaces  of  transparent  bodies  wffiich  have  the  greatest 
refracting  power  reflect  the  greatest  quantity  of  light,  as  was  shewn  in  the  first 
Proposition. 

Peoposition  10 

If  light  be  swifter  in  bodies  than  in  vacuo,  in  the  proportion  of  the  sines  which 
measure  the  refraction  of  the  bodies  the  forces  of  the  bodies  to  reflect  and  refract  light 
are  very  nearly  proportional  to  the  densities  of  the  same  bodies)  excepting  that 
unctuous  and  sulphureous  bodies  refract  more  than  others  of  this  same  density. 

Let  AB  represent  the  refracting  plane  surface  of  any  body,  and  IC  a  ray 


Book  II:  Part  3  489 

incident  very  obliquely  upon  the  body  in  C,  so  that  the  angle  ACI  may  be 
infinitely  little,  and  let  CR  be  the  refracted  ray.  From  a  given  point  B  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  refracting  surface  erect  BR  meeting 
with  the  refracting  ray  CR  in  R,  and  if  CR  represent 
the  motion  of  the  refracted  ray,  and  this  motion  be 
distinguished  into  two  motions  CB  and  BR,  whereof 
CB  is  parallel  to  the  refracting  plane,  and  BR  per¬ 
pendicular  to  it:  CB  shall  represent  the  motion  of  the 
incident  ray,  and  BR  the  motion  generated  by  the 
refraction,  as  opticians  have  of  late  explained. 

Now,  if  any  body  or  thing,  in  moving  through  any  space  of  a  given  breadth 
terminated  on  both  sides  by  two  parallel  planes,  be  urged  forward  in  all  parts  of 
that  space  by  forces  tending  directly  forwards  towards  the  last  plane,  and, 
before  its  incidence  on  the  first  plane,  had  no  motion  towards  it,  or  but  an 
infinitely  little  one;  and  if  the  forces  in  all  parts  of  that  space,  between  the 
planes,  be  at  equal  distances  from  the  planes  equal  to  one  another,  but  at 
several  distances  be  bigger  or  less  in  any  given  proportion,  the  motion  gener¬ 
ated  by  the  forces  in  the  whole  passage  of  the  body  or  thing  through  that  space 
shall  be  in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  the  forces,  as  mathematicians  vill  easily 
understand.  And,  therefore,  if  the  space  of  activity  of  the  refracting  superficies 
of  the  body  be  considered  as  such  a  space,  the  motion  of  the  ray  generated  by 
the  refracting  force  of  the  body,  during  its  passage  through  that  space  (that  is, 
the  motion  BR)  must  be  in  subduplicate  proportion  of  that  refracting  force. 
I  say,  therefore,  that  the  square  of  the  line  BR,  and  by  consequence  the  refract¬ 
ing  force  of  the  body,  is  very  nearly  as  the  density  of  the  same  body.  For  this 
will  appear  by  the  follomng  Table,  wherein  the  proportion  of  the  sines  which 
measure  the  refractions  of  several  bodies,  the  square  of  BR,  supposing  CB  an 
unit,  the  densities  of  the  bodies  estimated  by  their  specific  gravities,  and  their 
refractive  power  in  respect  of  their  densities  are  set  down  in  several  columns. 

The  refraction  of  the  air  in  this  Table  is  determined  by  that  of  the  atmosphere 
observed  by  astronomers.  For,  if  light  pass  through  many  refracting  substances 
or  mediums  gradually  denser  and  denser,  and  terminated  with  parallel  surfaces, 
the  sum  of  all  the  refractions  \vi\\  be  equal  to  the  single  refraction  which  it 
would  have  suffered  in  passing  immediately  out  of  the  first  medium  into  the 
last.  And  this  holds  true,  though  the  number  of  the  refracting  substances  be 
increased  to  infinity,  and  the  distances  from  one  another  as  much  decreased,  so 
that  the  light  may  be  refracted  in  every  point  of  its  passage,  and  by  continual 
refractions  bent  into  a  curve-line.  And,  therefore,  the  whole  refraction  of  light, 
in  passing  through  the  atmosphere  from  the  highest  and  rarest  part  thereof 
down  to  the  lowest  and  densest  part,  must  be  equal  to  the  refraction  which  it 
would  suffer  in  passing  at  like  obliquity  out  of  a  vacuum  immediately  into  air 
of  equal  density  with  that  in  the  low’est  part  of  the  atmosphere. 

No\v,  although  a  pseudo-topaz,  a  selenitis,  rock  crystal,  island  crystal,  \mlgar 
glass  (that  is,  sand  melted  together)  and  glass  of  antimony,  which  are  terres¬ 
trial  stony  alkalizate  concretes,  and  air  w’hich  probably  arises  from  such  sub¬ 
stances  by  fermentation,  be  substances  very  differing  from  one  another  in 
density,  yet  by  this  Table,  they  have  their  refractive  powers  almost  in  the  same 
proportion  to  one  another  as  their  densities  are,  excepting  that  the  refraction 
of  that  strange  substance,  island  crystal,  is  a  little  bigger  than  the  rest.  And 


490  Optics 

particularly  air,  which  is  3,500  times  rarer  than  the  pseudo-topaz,  and  4,400 
times  rarer  than  glass  of  antimony,  and  2,000  times  rarer  than  the  selenitis,  glass 
vulgar,  or  crystal  of  the  rock,  has  notwithstanding  its  rarity  the  same  refractive 


The  refracting  bodies 

The  proportion 
of  the  sifies 
of  incidence  and 
refraction  of 
yellow  light 

The  square 
of  BR,  to 
which  the 
refracting 
force  of  the 
body  is 
proportionate 

The  density 
and  specific 
gravity  of 
the  body 

The^ 

refractive 
power  of 
the  body  in 
respect  of 
Us  density 

A  pseudo-topazius,  being  a 
natural,  pellucid,  brittle,  hairy 
stone,  of  a  yellow  colour .... 

23  to 

14 

1.699 

4.27 

3979 

Air . 

3201  to  3200 

0.000625 

0.0012 

5208 

Glass  of  antimony . 

17  to 

9 

2.568 

5.28 

4864 

A  selenitis . 

61  to 

41 

1.213 

2.252 

5386 

Glass  vulgar . 

31  to 

20 

1.4025 

2.58 

5436 

Crystal  of  the  rock . 

25  to 

16 

1.445 

2.65 

5450 

Island  crystal . 

5  to 

3 

1.778 

2.72 

6536 

Sal  gemmse . 

17  to 

11 

1.388 

2.143 

6477 

Alum . 

35  to 

24 

1 . 1267 

1.714 

6570 

Borax . 

22  to 

15 

1.1511 

1.714 

6716 

Nitre . 

32  to 

21 

1.345 

1.9 

7079 

Danzig  vitriol . 

303  to 

200 

1.295 

1.715 

7551 

Oil  of  vitriol . 

10  to 

7 

1.041 

1.7 

6124 

Rain  water . 

529  to 

396 

0.7845 

1. 

7845 

Gum  arabic . 

31  to 

21 

1.179 

1.375 

8574 

Spirit  of  wine  well  rectified.. 

100  to 

73 

0.8765 

0.866 

10121 

Camphor . 

3  to 

2 

1.25 

0.996 

12551 

Olive  oil . 

22  to 

15 

1.1511 

0.913 

12607 

Linseed  oil . 

40  to 

27 

1.1948 

0.932 

12819 

Spirit  of  turpentine . 

25  to 

17 

1 . 1626 

0.874 

13222 

Amber . 

14  to 

9 

1.42 

1.04 

13654 

A  diamond . 

100  to 

41 

4.949 

3.4 

14556 

power  in  respect  of  its  density  which  those  very  dense  substances  have  in  re¬ 
spect  of  theirs,  excepting  so  far  as  those  differ  from  one  another. 

Again,  the  refraction  of  camphor,  olive  oil,  linseed  oil,  spirit  of  turpentine 
and  amber,  which  are  fat  sulphureous  unctuous  bodies,  and  a  diamond,  which 
probably  is  an  unctuous  substance  coagulated,  have  their  refractive  powers  in 
proportion  to  one  another  as  their  densities  without  any  considerable  variation. 
But  the  refractive  powers  of  these  unctuous  substances  are  two  or  three  times 
greater  in  respect  of  their  densities  than  the  refractive  powers  of  the  former 
substances  in  respect  of  theirs. 

Water  has  a  refractive  power  in  a  middle  degree  between  those  two  sorts  of 
substances,  and  probably  is  of  a  middle  nature.  For  out  of  it  grow  all  vegetable 
and  animal  substances,  which  consist  as  well  of  sulphureous  fat  and  inflam¬ 
mable  parts,  as  of  earthy  lean  and  alkalizate  ones. 

Salts  and  vitriols  have  refractive  powers  in  a  middle  degree  between  those  of 
earthy  substances  and  water,  and  accordingly  are  composed  of  those  two  sorts 
of  substances.  For  by  distillation  and  rectification  of  their  spirits  a  great  part  of 


Book  II:  Part  3  491 

them  goes  into  water,  and  a  great  part  remains  behind  in  the  form  of  a  dry  fixed 
earth  capable  of  vitrification. 

Spirit  of  wine  has  a  refractive  power  in  a  middle  degree  between  those  of 
water  and  oily  substances,  and  accordingly  seems  to  be  composed  of  both, 
united  by  fermentation;  the  water,  by  means  of  some  saline  spirits  with  which 
’tis  impregnated,  dissolving  the  oil,  and  volatizing  it  by  the  action.  For  spirit  of 
wine  is  inflammable  by  means  of  its  oily  parts,  and  being  distilled  often  from 
salt  of  tartar,  grows  by  every  distillation  more  and  more  aqueous  and  phleg¬ 
matic.  And  chemists  observe  that  vegetables  (as  lavender,  rue,  marjoram,  &c.) 
distilled  per  se,  before  fermentation  yield  oils  without  any  burning  spirits,  but 
after  fermentation  yield  ardent  spirits  without  oils;  which  shews  that  their 
oil  is  by  fermentation  converted  into  spirit.  They  find  also  that  if  oils  be  poured 
in  a  small  quantity  upon  fermentating  vegetables,  they  distil  over  after  fer¬ 
mentation  in  the  form  of  spirits. 

So  then,  by  the  foregoing  Table,  all  bodies  seem  to  have  their  refractive 
powers  proportional  to  their  densities  (or  very  nearly) ;  excepting  so  far  as  they 
partake  more  or  less  of  sulphureous  oily  particles,  and  thereby  have  their 
refractive  power  made  greater  or  less.  Whence  it  seems  rational  to  attribute 
the  refractive  power  of  all  bodies  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  to  the  sulphureous  parts 
with  which  they  abound.  For  it’s  probable  that  all  bodies  abound  more  or  less 
with  sulphurs.  And  as  light  congregated  by  a  burning-glass  acts  most  upon 
sulphureous  bodies,  to  turn  them  into  fire  and  flame,  so,  since  all  action  is  mutu¬ 
al,  sulphurs  ought  to  act  most  upon  light.  For  that  the  action  between  light  and 
bodies  is  mutual  may  appear  from  this  consideration :  that  the  densest  bodies 
which  refract  and  reflect  light  most  strongly  grow  hottest  in  the  summer  Sun, 
by  the  action  of  the  refracted  or  reflected  light. 

I  have  hitherto  explained  the  power  of  bodies  to  reflect  and  refract,  and 
shewed  that  thin  transparent  plates,  fibres,  and  particles  do,  according  to  their 
several  thicknesses  and  densities,  reflect  several  sorts  of  rays,  and  thereby 
appear  of  several  colours;  and  by  consequence  that  nothing  more  is  requisite 
for  producing  all  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  than  the  several  sizes  and  densi¬ 
ties  of  their  transparent  particles.  But  whence  it  is  that  these  plates,  fibres,  and 
particles  do,  according  to  their  several  thicknesses  and  densities,  reflect  several 
sorts  of  rays,  I  have  not  yet  explained.  To  give  some  insight  into  this  matter, 
and  make  way  for  understanding  the  next  part  of  this  book,  I  shall  conclude 
this  part  with  a  few  more  Propositions.  Those  which  preceded  respect  the 
nature  of  bodies,  these  the  nature  of  light ;  for  both  must  be  understood  before 
the  reason  of  their  actions  upon  one  another  can  be  known.  And  because  the 
last  Proposition  depended  upon  the  velocity  of  light,  I  will  begin  with  a 
Proposition  of  that  kind. 


Proposition  11 

Light  is  propagated  from  luminous  bodies  in  time,  and  spends  about  seven  or  eight 
minutes  of  an  hour  in  passing  from  the  Sun  to  the  Earth. 

This  was  observed  first  by  Romer,  and  then  by  others,  by  means  of  the  eclipses 
of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.  For  these  eclipses,  when  the  Earth  is  between  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter,  happen  about  seven  or  eight  minutes  sooner  than  they  ought  to  do 
by  the  Tables,  and  when  the  Earth  is  beyond  the  Sun  they  happen  about  seven 
or  eight  minutes  later  than  they  ought  to  do ;  the  reason  being  that  the  light  of 


492  Optics 

the  satellites  has  farther  to  go  in  the  latter  case  than  in  the  former  by  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  Earth’s  orbit.  Some  inequalities  of  time  may  arise  from  the  eccen¬ 
tricities  of  the  orbs  of  the  satellites;  but  those  cannot  answer  in  all  the  satellites, 
and  at  all  times  to  the  position  and  distance  of  the  Earth  from  the  Sun.  The 
mean  motions  of  Jupiter’s  satellites  is  also  swifter  in  his  descent  from  his 
aphelium  to  his  perihelium,  than  in  his  ascent  in  the  other  half  of  his  orb.  But 
this  inequality  has  no  respect  to  the  position  of  the  Earth,  and  in  the  three 
interior  satellites  is  insensible,  as  I  find  by  computation  from  the  theory  of 
their  gravity. 


Proposition  12 

Every  ray  of  light  in  its  passage  through  any  refracting  surface  is  put  into  a  certain 
transient  constitution  or  state,  which  in  the  progress  of  the  ray  returns  at  equal 
intervals,  and  disposes  the  ray  at  every  return  to  he  easily  transmitted  through  the 
next  refracting  surface,  and  between  the  returns  to  he  easily  reflected  by  it. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  5th,  9th,  12th,  and  15th  Observations.  For  by  those 
Observations  it  appears  that  one  and  the  same  sort  of  rays  at  equal  angles  of 
incidence  on  any  thin  transparent  plate,  is  alternately  reflected  and  trans¬ 
mitted  for  many  successions  accordingly  as  the  thickness  of  the  plate  increases 
in  arithmetical  progression  of  the  numbers,  0,  1,2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  &c.  so  that  if 
the  first  reflexion  (that  which  makes  the  first  or  innermost  of  the  rings  of 
colours  there  described)  be  made  at  the  thickness  1,  the  rays  shall  be  trans¬ 
mitted  at  the  thicknesses  0,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  &c.  and  thereby  make  the  central 
spot  and  rings  of  light,  which  appear  by  transmission,  and  be  reflected  at  the 
thickness  1,  3,  5,  7,  9,  11,  &c.  and  thereby  make  the  rings  which  appear  by 
reflexion.  And  this  alternate  reflexion  and  transmission,  as  I  gather  by  the  24th 
Observation,  continues  for  above  a  hundred  vicissitudes,  and  by  the  Observa¬ 
tions  in  the  next  part  of  this  book,  for  many  thousands,  being  propagated  from 
one  surface  of  a  glass  plate  to  the  other,  though  the  thickness  of  the  plate  be  a 
quarter  of  an  inch  or  above;  so  that  this  alternation  seems  to  be  propagated 
from  every  refracting  surface  to  all  distances  without  end  or  limitation. 

This  alternate  reflexion  and  refraction  depends  on  both  the  surfaces  of  every 
thin  plate,  because  it  depends  on  their  distance.  By  the  21st  Observation,  if 
either  surface  of  a  thin  plate  of  Muscovy  glass  be  wetted,  the  colours  caused  by 
the  alternate  reflexion  and  refraction  grow  faint;  and,  therefore,  it  depends  on 
them  both. 

It  is  therefore  performed  at  the  second  surface;  for  if  it  were  performed  at  the 
flrst,  before  the  rays  arrive  at  the  second,  it  would  not  depend  on  the  second. 

It  is  also  influenced  by  some  action  or  disposition  propagated  from  the  first 
to  the  second,  because  otherwise  at  the  second  it  would  not  depend  on  the  first. 
And  this  action  or  disposition,  in  its  propagation,  intermits  and  returns  by 
equal  intervals,  because  in  all  its  progress  it  inclines  the  ray  at  one  distance 
from  the  first  surface  to  be  reflected  by  the  second,  at  another  to  be  transmitted 
by  it,  and  that  by  equal  intervals  for  innumerable  vicissitudes.  And  because 
the  ray  is  disposed  to  reflexion  at  the  distances  1,  3,  5,  7,  9,  &c.  and  to  trans¬ 
mission  at  the  distances  0,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  &c.  (for  its  transmission  through  the 
first  surface  is  at  the  distance  0,  and  it  is  transmitted  through  both  together,  if 
their  distance  be  infinitely  little  or  much  less  than  1)  the  disposition  to  be 
transmitted  at  the  distances  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  &c.  is  to  be  accounted  a  return  of  the 


Book  II:  Part  3  493 

same  disposition  which  the  ray  first  had  at  the  distance  0;  that  is,  at  its  trans¬ 
mission  through  the  first  refracting  surface.  All  which  is  the  thing  I  would 
prove. 

What  kind  of  action  or  disposition  this  is;  whether  it  consists  in  a  circulating 
or  a  vibrating  motion  of  the  ray,  or  of  the  medium,  or  something  else,  I  do  not 
here  enquire.  Those  that  are  averse  from  assenting  to  any  new  discoveries,  but 
such  as  they  can  explain  by  an  hypothesis,  may  for  the  present  suppose  that  as 
stones  by  falling  upon  water  put  the  water  into  an  undulating  motion,  and  all 
bodies  by  percussion  excite  vibrations  in  the  air,  so  the  rays  of  light,  by  imping¬ 
ing  on  any  refracting  or  reflecting  surface,  excite  vibrations  in  the  refracting  or 
reflecting  medium  or  substance,  and  by  exciting  them  agitate  the  solid  parts  of 
the  refracting  or  reflecting  body,  and  by  agitating  them  cause  the  body  to  grow 
warm  or  hot;  that  the  vibrations  thus  excited  are  propagated  in  the  refracting 
or  reflecting  medium  or  substance,  much  after  the  manner  that  vibrations  are 
propagated  in  the  air  for  causing  sound,  and  move  faster  than  the  rays  so  as  to 
overtake  them;  and  that  when  any  ray  is  in  that  part  of  the  vibration  which 
conspires  \vith  its  motion,  it  easily  breaks  through  a  refracting  surface,  but 
when  it  is  in  the  contrary  part  of  the  vibration  which  impedes  its  motion  it  is 
easily  reflected;  and,  by  consequence,  that  every  ray  is  successively  disposed  to 
be  easily  reflected,  or  easily  transmitted,  by  every  vibration  which  overtakes  it. 
But  whether  this  hypothesis  be  true  or  false  I  do  not  here  consider.  I  content 
myself  with  the  bare  discovery  that  the  rays  of  light  are,  by  some  cause  or 
other,  alternately  disposed  to  be  reflected  or  refracted  for  many  vicissitudes. 

DEFINITION 

The  returns  of  the  disposition  of  any  ray  to  he  reflected  I  will  call  its  fits  of 
easy  reflexion,  and  those  of  its  disposition  to  he  transmitted  its  fits  of  easy 
transmisson,  and  the  space  it  passes  between  every  return  and  the  next  return, 
the  interval  of  its  fits. 


Proposition  13 

The  reason  why  the  surfaces  of  all  thick  transparent  bodies  reflect  part  of  the  light 
incident  on  them,  and  refract  the  rest,  is  that  some  rays  at  their  incidence  are  in  fits 
of  easy  reflexion,  and  others  in  fits  of  easy  transmission. 

This  may  be  gathered  from  the  24th  Observation,  where  the  light  reflected 
by  thin  plates  of  air  and  glass,  which  to  the  naked  eye  appeared  evenly  white 
all  over  the  plate,  did  through  a  prism  appear  waved  with  many  successions  of 
light  and  darkness  made  by  alternate  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission, 
the  prism  severing  and  distinguishing  the  waves  of  which  the  white  reflected 
light  was  composed,  as  was  explained  above. 

And  hence  light  is  in  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission  before  its 
incidence  on  transparent  bodies.  And  probably  it  is  put  into  such  fits  at  its  first 
emission  from  luminous  bodies,  and  continues  in  them  during  all  its  progress. 
For  these  fits  are  of  a  lasting  nature,  as  will  appear  by  the  next  part  of  this  book. 

In  this  Proposition  I  suppose  the  transparent  bodies  to  be  thick;  because  if 
the  thickness  of  the  body  be  much  less  than  the  interval  of  the  fits  of  easy 
reflexion  and  transmission  of  the  rays,  the  body  loseth  its  reflecting  power.  For 
if  the  rays,  which  at  their  entering  into  the  body  are  put  into  fits  of  easy  trans¬ 
mission,  arrive  at  the  farthest  surface  of  the  body  before  they  be  out  of  those 


494  Optics 

fits,  they  must  be  transmitted.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  bubbles  of  water  lose 
their  reflecting  power  when  they  grow  very  thin;  and  why  all  opaque  bodies, 
when  reduced  into  very  small  parts,  become  transparent. 

Proposition  14 

Those  surfaces  of  transparent  bodies,  which  if  the  ray  he  in  a  fit  of  refraction  do 
refract  it  most  strongly,  if  the  ray  he  in  a  fit  of  reflexion  do  reflect  it  most  easily. 

For  we  shewed  above,  in  Prop.  8,  that  the  cause  of  reflexion  is  not  the 
impinging  of  light  on  the  solid  impervious  parts  of  bodies,  but  some  other 
power  by  which  those  solid  parts  act  on  light  at  a  distance.  We  shewed  also,  in 
Prop.  9,  that  bodies  reflect  and  refract  light  by  one  and  the  same  power, 
variously  exercised  in  various  circumstances;  and  in  Prop.  1  that  the  most 
strongly  refracting  surfaces  reflect  the  most  light.  All  which  compared  together 
evince  and  rarify  both  this  and  the  last  Proposition. 

Proposition  15 

In  any  one  and  the  same  sort  of  rays,  emerging  in  any  angle  out  of  any  refracting 
surface  into  one  and  the  same  medium,  the  interval  of  the  following  fits  of  easy 
reflexion  and  transmission  are  either  accurately  or  very  nearly  as  the  rectangle  of  the 
secant  of  the  angle  of  refraction,  and  of  the  secant  of  another  angle,  whose  sine  is 
the  first  of  106  arithmetical  mean  proportionals,  between  the  sines  of  incidence  and 
refraction,  counted  from  the  sine  of  refraction. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  7th  and  19th  Observations. 

Proposition  16 

In  several  sorts  of  rays  emerging  in  equal  angles  out  of  any  refracting  surface  into 
the  same  medium,  the  intervals  of  the  following  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  trans¬ 
mission  are  either  accurately,  or  very  nearly,  as  the  cube  roots  of  the  squares  of  the 
lengths  of  a  chord,  which  found  the  notes  in  an  eight,  sol,  la,  fa,  sol,  la,  mi,  fa,  sol, 
with  all  their  intermediate  degrees  answering  to  the  colours  of  those  rays,  according 
to  the  analogy  described  in  the  seventh  experiment  of  the  second  part  of  the  first  book. 
This  is  manifest  by  the  13th  and  14th  Observations. 

Proposition  17 

If  rays  of  any  sort  pass  perpendicularly  into  several  mediums,  the  intervals  of  the 
fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  transmission  in  any  one  medium  are  to  those  intervals  in 
any  other,  as  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction,  when  the  rays  pass  out  of 
the  first  of  those  two  mediums  into  the  second. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  10th  Observation. 

Proposition  18 

If  the  rays  which  paint  the  colour  in  the  confine  of  yellow  and  orange  pass  perpen¬ 
dicularly  out  of  any  medium  into  air,  the  intervals  of  their  fits  of  easy  reflexion  are 
the  89,000^^  of  an  inch.  And  of  the  same  length  are  the  intervals  of  their  fits 
of  easy  transmission. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  6th  Observation. 

From  these  Propositions  it  is  easy  to  collect  the  intervals  of  the  fits  of  easy 
reflexion  and  easy  transmission  of  any  sort  of  rays  refracted  in  any  angle  into 
any  medium ;  and  thence  to  know  whether  the  rays  shall  be  reflected  or  trans- 


Book  II:  Part  3  4.95 

mitted  at  their  subsequent  incidence  upon  any  other  pellucid  medium.  Which 
thing,  being  useful  for  understanding  the  next  part  of  this  book,  was  here  to  be 
set  down.  And  for  the  same  reason  I  add  the  two  follo^^'ing  Propositions. 

Proposition  19 

If  any  sort  of  rays  falling  on  the  polite  surface  of  any  pellucid  medium  he  reflected 
back,  the  fits  of  easy  reflexion,  which  they  have  at  the  point  of  reflexion,  shall  still 
continue  to  return;  and  the  returns  shall  be  at  distances  from  the  point  of  reflexion 
in  the  arithmetical  progression  of  the  numbers  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  &c.  and  between 
these  fits  the  rays  shall  be  in  fits  of  easy  transmission. 

For  since  the  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission  are  of  a  returning 
nature,  there  is  no  reason  why  these  fits,  which  continued  till  the  ray  arrived  at 
the  reflecting  medium  and  there  inclined  the  ray  to  reflexion,  should  there 
cease.  And  if  the  ray  at  the  point  of  reflexion  was  in  a  fit  of  easy  reflexion,  the 
progression  of  the  distances  of  these  fits  from  that  point  must  begin  from  0,  and 
so  be  of  the  numbers  0,  2,  4,  6,  8,  &c.  And,  therefore,  the  progression  of  the 
distances  of  the  intermediate  fits  of  easy  transmission,  reckoned  from  the  same 
point,  must  be  in  the  progression  of  the  odd  numbers  1,  3,  5,  7,  9,  cfec,  contrary 
to  what  happens  when  the  fits  are  propagated  from  points  of  refraction. 

Proposition  20 

The  intervals  of  the  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission,  propagated  from 
points  of  reflexion  into  any  medium,  are  equal  to  the  intervals  of  the  like  fits  which 
the  same  rays  would  have  if  refracted  into  the  same  medium  in  angles  of  refraction 
equal  to  their  angles  of  reflexion. 

For  when  light  is  reflected  by  the  second  surface  of  thin  plates,  it  goes  out 
afterwards  freely  at  the  first  surface  to  make  the  rings  of  colours  which  appear 
by  reflexion;  and,  by  the  freedom  of  its  egress,  makes  the  colours  of  these  rings 
more  vivid  and  strong  than  those  which  appear  on  the  other  side  of  the  plates 
by  the  transmitted  light.  The  reflected  rays  are,  therefore,  in  fits  of  easy  trans¬ 
mission  at  their  egress;  which  would  not  always  happen  if  the  intervals  of  the 
fits  vithin  the  plate  after  reflexion  were  not  equal,  both  in  length  and  number, 
to  their  intervals  before  it.  And  this  confirms  also  the  proportions  set  down  in 
the  former  Proposition.  For  if  the  rays  both  in  going  in  and  out  at  the  first 
surface  be  in  fits  of  easy  transmission,  and  the  intervals  and  numbers  of  those 
fits  between  the  first  and  second  surface,  before  and  after  reflexion,  be  equal, 
the  distances  of  the  fits  of  easy  transmission  from  either  surface  must  be  in  the 
same  progression  after  reflexion  as  before;  that  is,  from  the  first  surface  which 
transmitted  them  in  the  progression  of  the  even  numbers  0,  2,  4,  6,  8,  &c.  and 
from  the  second  which  reflected  them,  in  that  of  the  odd  numbers  1,  3,  5,  7,  &c. 
But  these  two  Propositions  will  become  much  more  evident  by  the  Observa¬ 
tions  in  the  following  part  of  this  book. 


496 


Optics 


Part  IV 


Observations  concerning  the  reflexions  and  colours  of  thick  transparent  polished 
plates. 

There  is  no  glass  or  speculum  how  well  soever  polished  but,  besides  the  light 
which  it  refracts  or  reflects  regularly,  scatters  every  way  irregularly  a  faint 
light,  by  means  of  which  the  polished  surface,  when  illuminated  in  a  dark  room 
by  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  may  be  easily  seen  in  all  positions  of  the  eye. 
There  are  certain  phenomena  of  this  scattered  light,  which  when  I  first  ob¬ 
served  them,  seemed  very  strange  and  surprising  to  me.  My  Observations  were 
as  follows. 

Obs.  1.  The  Sun  shining  into  my  darkened  chamber  through  a  hole  one-third 
of  an  inch  wide,  I  let  the  intromitted  beam  of  light  fall  perpendicularly  upon  a 
glass  speculum  ground  concave  on  one  side  and  convex  on  the  other,  to  a  sphere 
of  five  feet  and  eleven  inches  radius,  and  quick-silvered  over  on  the  convex 
side.  And  holding  a  white  opaque  chart  or  a  quire  of  paper  at  the  centre  of  the 
spheres  to  which  the  speculum  was  ground  (that  is,  at  the  distance  of  about 
five  feet  and  eleven  inches  from  the  speculum,  in  such  manner  that  the  beam 
of  light  might  pass  through  a  little  hole  made  in  the  middle  of  the  chart  to  the 
speculum,  and  thence  be  reflected  back  to  the  same  hole)  I  observed  upon  the 
chart  four  or  five  concentric  irises  or  rings  of  colours,  like  rainbows,  encompass¬ 
ing  the  hole  much  after  the  manner  that  those,  which  in  the  fourth  and  following 
Observations  of  the  first  part  of  this  book  appeared  between  the  object-glasses, 
encompassed  the  black  spot,  but  yet  larger  and  fainter  than  those.  These  rings 
as  they  grew  larger  and  larger  became  diluter  and  fainter,  so  that  the  fifth  was 
scarce  visible.  Yet  sometimes,  when  the  Sun  shone  very  clear,  there  appeared 
faint  lineaments  of  a  sixth  and  seventh.  If  the  distance  of  the  chart  from  the 
speculum  was  much  greater  or  much  less  than  that  of  six  feet,  the  rings  became 
dilute  and  vanished.  And  if  the  distance  of  the  speculum  from  the  \vindow  was 
much  greater  than  that  of  six  feet,  the  reflected  beam  of  light  would  be  so  broad, 
at  the  distance  of  six  feet  from  the  speculum  where  the  rings  appeared,  as  to 
obscure  one  or  two  of  the  innermost  rings.  And,  therefore,  I  usually  placed  the 
speculum  at  about  six  feet  from  the  window,  so  that  its  focus  might  there  fall  in 
with  the  centre  of  its  concavity  at  the  rings  upon  the  chart.  And  this  posture  is 
always  to  be  understood  in  the  following  Observations  where  no  other  is 
expressed. 

Obs.  2.  The  colours  of  these  rainbows  succeeded  one  another  from  the  centre 
outwards,  in  the  same  form  and  order  with  those  which  were  made  in  the  ninth 
Observation  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  by  light  not  reflected  but  transmitted 
through  the  two  object-glasses.  For,  first,  there  was  in  their  common  centre  a 
white  round  spot  of  faint  light,  something  broader  than  the  reflected  beam  of 
light,  which  beam  sometimes  fell  upon  the  middle  of  the  spot,  and  sometimes 
by  a  little  inclination  of  the  speculum  receded  from  the  middle,  and  left  the 
spot  white  to  the  centre. 

This  white  spot  was  immediately  encompassed  with  a  dark  grey  or  russet, 
and  that  dark  grey  with  the  colours  of  the  first  iris;  which  colours  on  the  inside 


Book  II:  Part  4  497 

next  the  dark  grey  were  a  little  violet  and  indigo,  and  next  to  that  a  blue,  which 
on  the  outside  grew  pale,  and  then  succeeded  a  little  greenish  yellow,  and  after 
that  a  brighter  yellow,  and  then  on  the  outward  edge  of  the  iris  a  red  which  on 
the  outside  inclined  to  purple. 

This  iris  was  immediately  encompassed  with  a  second,  whose  colours  were, 
in  order  from  the  inside  outwards:  purple,  blue,  green,  yellow,  light  red,  a  red 
mixed  vdth  purple. 

Then  immediately  followed  the  colours  of  the  third  iris,  which  were  in  order 
outwards  a  green  inclining  to  purple,  a  good  green,  and  a  red  more  bright  than 
that  of  the  former  iris. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  iris  seemed  of  a  bluish-green  mthin,  and  red  mthout, 
but  so  faintly  that  it  was  difficult  to  discern  the  colours. 

Obs.  3.  Measuring  the  diameters  of  these  rings  upon  the  chart  as  accurately 
as  I  could,  I  found  them  also  in  the  same  proportion  to  one  another  vith  the 
rings  made  by  light  transmitted  through  the  two  object-glasses.  For  the  diam¬ 
eters  of  the  four  first  of  the  bright  rings  measured  between  the  brightest  parts 
of  their  orbits,  at  the  distance  of  six  feet  from  the  speculum,  were  1‘M6,  2^, 
2^M2.  3^  inches,  whose  squares  are  in  arithmetical  progression  of  the  numbers 
1,  2,  3,  4.  If  the  white  circular  spot  in  the  middle  be  reckoned  amongst  the 
rings,  and  its  central  light,  where  it  seems  to  be  most  luminous,  be  put  equi¬ 
pollent  to  an  infinitely  little  ring,  the  squares  of  the  diameters  of  the  rings  will 
be  in  the  progression  0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  &c.  I  measured  also  the  diameters  of  the  dark 
circles  between  these  luminous  ones,  and  found  their  squares  in  the  progression 
of  the  numbers  3^,  Ij^,  23^,  33^,  &c.  the  diameters  of  the  first  four,  at  the 
distance  of  six  feet  from  the  speculum,  being  1^6,  23/^6,  2%,  3/^o  inches.  If 
the  distance  of  the  chart  from  the  speculum  was  increased  or  diminished,  the 
diameters  of  the  circles  were  increased  or  diminished  proportionally. 

Obs.  4.  By  the  analogy  between  these  rings  and  those  described  in  the  Ob¬ 
servations  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  I  suspected  that  there  were  many  more 
of  them  which  spread  into  one  another,  and  by  interfering  mixed  their  colours, 
and  diluted  one  another  so  that  they  could  not  be  seen  apart.  I  viewed  them, 
therefore,  through  a  prism,  as  I  did  those  in  the  24th  Observation  of  the  first 
part  of  this  book.  And  when  the  prism  was  so  placed  as  by  refracting  the  light 
of  their  mixed  colours  to  separate  them,  and  distinguish  the  rings  from  one 
another,  as  it  did  those  in  that  Observation,  I  could  then  see  them  distincter 
than  before,  and  easily  number  eight  or  nine  of  them,  and  sometimes  twelve  or 
thirteen.  And  had  not  their  light  been  so  very  faint,  I  question  not  but  that  I 
might  have  seen  many  more. 

Obs.  5.  Placing  a  prism  at  the  window  to  refract  the  intromitted  beam  of 
light,  and  cast  the  oblong  spectrum  of  colours  on  the  speculum,  I  covered  the 
speculum  Mth  a  black  paper  which  had  in  the  middle  of  it  a  hole  to  let  any  one 
of  the  colours  pass  through  to  the  speculum,  whilst  the  rest  were  intercepted  by 
the  paper.  And  now  I  found  rings  of  that  colour  only  which  fell  upon  the  specu¬ 
lum.  If  the  speculum  was  illuminated  with  red,  the  rings  were  totally  red  with 
dark  intervals;  if  with  blue  they  were  totally  blue;  and  so  of  the  other  colours. 
And  when  they  were  illuminated  vdth  any  one  colour,  the  squares  of  their 
diameters,  measured  between  their  most  luminous  parts,  were  in  the  arith¬ 
metical  progression  of  the  numbers,  0,  1,  2,  3,  4  and  the  squares  of  the  diame¬ 
ters  of  their  dark  intervals  in  the  progression  of  the  intermediate  numbers 


498  Optics 

1/^)  23/2<  3H-  But  if  the  colour  was  varied,  they  varied  their  magnitude.  In 
the  red  they  were  largest,  in  the  indigo  and  violet  least,  and  in  the  intermediate 
colours  (yellow,  green,  and  blue)  they  were  of  several  intermediate  bignesses 
answering  to  the  colour;  that  is,  greater  in  yellow  than  in  green,  and  greater  in 
green  than  in  blue.  And  hence  I  knew'  that  when  the  speculum  was  illuminated 
with  white  light,  the  red  and  yellow  on  the  outside  of  the  rings  were  produced 
by  the  least  refrangible  rays,  and  the  blue  and  violet  by  the  most  refrangible, 
and  that  the  colours  of  each  ring  spread  into  the  colours  of  the  neighbouring 
rings  on  either  side,  after  the  manner  explained  in  the  first  and  second  parts  of 
this  book,  and  by  mixing  diluted  one  another  so  that  they  could  not  be  dis¬ 
tinguished,  unless  near  the  centre  where  they  were  least  mixed.  For  in  this 
Observation  I  could  see  the  rings  more  distinctly,  and  to  a  greater  number  than 
before,  being  able  in  the  yellow  light  to  number  eight  or  nine  of  them,  besides  a 
faint  shadow  of  a  tenth.  To  satisfy  myself  how  much  the  colours  of  the  several 
rings  spread  into  one  another,  I  measured  the  diameters  of  the  second  and 
third  rings,  and  found  them,  when  made  by  the  confine  of  the  red  and  orange, 
to  be  to  the  same  diameters  when  made  by  the  confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as  9 
to  8,  or  thereabouts.  For  it  was  hard  to  determine  this  proportion  accurately. 
Also  the  circles  made  successively  by  the  red,  yellow,  and  green  differed  more 
from  one  another  than  those  made  successively  by  the  green,  blue  and  indigo. 
For  the  circle  made  by  the  violet  was  too  dark  to  be  seen.  To  carry  on  the 
computation,  let  us  therefore  suppose  that  the  differences  of  the  diameters  of 
circles  made  by  the  outmost  red,  the  confine  of  red  and  orange,  the  confine  of 
orange  and  yellow,  the  confine  of  yellow  and  green,  the  confine  of  green  and 
blue,  the  confine  of  blue  and  indigo,  the  confine  of  indigo  and  violet,  and  out¬ 
most  violet,  are  in  proportion  as  the  differences  of  the  lengths  of  a  monochord 
which  sound  the  tones  in  an  eight :  sol,  la,  fa,  sol,  la,  mi,  fa,  sol;  that  is,  as  the 
numbers  ]/g,  Ms.  M2,  M2,  Mt,  Mt,  Ms-  And  if  the  diameter  of  the  circle  made  by 
the  confine  of  red  and  orange  be  9A,  and  that  of  the  circle  made  by  the  confine 
of  blue  and  indigo  be  8A  as  above,  their  difference  (9A  — 8A)  will  be  to  the  dif¬ 
ference  of  the  diameters  of  the  circles  made  by  the  outmost  red,  and  by  the  con¬ 
fine  of  red  and  orange,  as  MS+M2+M2+M7  to  M  (that  is,  as  Mr  to  M?  or  8  to 
3)  and  to  the  difference  of  the  circles  made  by  the  outmost  violet,  and  by  the  con¬ 
fine  of  blue  and  indigo,  as  MS+M2+M2+M7  to  M7+Ms  (that  is,  as  M7  to  M4, 
or  as  16  to  5).  And,  therefore,  these  differences  will  be  MA  and  MeA.  Add  the 
first  to  9A  and  subduct  the  last  from  8A,  and  you  ^\'ill  have  the  diameters  of 
the  circles  made  by  the  least  and  most  refrangible  rays  ^MA  and  These 

diameters  are,  therefore,  to  one  another  as  75  to  61M  or  50  to  41,  and  their 
squares  as  2,500  to  1,681;  that  is,  as  3  to  2  very  nearly.  Which  proportion  dif¬ 
fers  not  much  from  the  proportion  of  the  diameters  of  the  circles  made  by  the 
outmost  red  and  outmost  violet,  in  the  13th  Observation  of  the  first  part  of 
this  book. 

Obs.  6.  Placing  my  eye  where  these  rings  appeared  plainest,  I  saw  the  specu¬ 
lum  tinged  all  over  wdth  waves  of  colours  (red,  yellow,  green,  blue)  like  those 
which  in  the  Observations  of  the  first  part  of  this  book  appeared  between  the 
object-glasses,  and  upon  bubbles  of  water,  but  much  larger.  And  after  the 
manner  of  those,  they  were  of  various  magnitudes  in  various  positions  of  the 
eye,  swelling  and  shrinking  as  I  moved  my  eye  this  way  and  that  way.  They 
were  formed  like  arcs  of  concentric  circles,  as  those  were;  and  when  my  eye  was 


Book  II:  Part  4  499 

over  against  the  centre  of  the  concavity  of  the  speculum,  (that  is,  5  feet  and 
10  inches  distant  from  the  speculum)  their  common  centre  was  in  a  right  line 
mth  that  centre  of  concavity,  and  with  the  hole  in  the  window.  But  in  other 
postures  of  my  eye  their  centre  had  other  positions.  They  appeared  by  the  light 
of  the  clouds  propagated  to  the  speculum  through  the  hole  in  the  vindow;  and 
when  the  Sun  shone  through  that  hole  upon  the  speculum,  his  light  upon  it  was 
of  the  colour  of  the  ring  whereon  it  fell,  but  by  its  splendor  obscured  the  rings 
made  by  the  light  of  the  clouds,  unless  when  the  speculum  was  removed  to  a 
great  distance  from  the  window  so  that  his  light  upon  it  might  be  broad  and 
faint.  By  varying  the  position  of  my  eye,  and  moving  it  nearer  to  or  farther 
from  the  direct  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  the  colour  of  the  Sun’s  reflected  light 
constantly  varied  upon  the  speculum,  as  it  did  upon  my  eye,  the  same  colour 
always  appearing  to  a  bystander  upon  my  eye  which  to  me  appeared  upon  the 
speculum.  And  thence  I  knew  that  the  rings  of  colours  upon  the  chart  were 
made  by  these  reflected  colours,  propagated  thither  from  the  speculum  in 
several  angles,  and  that  their  production  depended  not  upon  the  termination  of 
light  and  shadow. 

Obs.  7.  By  the  analogy  of  all  these  phenomena  vith  those  of  the  like  rings  of 
colours  described  in  the  first  part  of  this  book,  it  seemed  to  me  that  these 
colours  were  produced  by  this  thick  plate  of  glass,  much  after  the  manner  that 
those  were  produced  by  very  thin  plates.  For,  upon  trial,  I  found  that  if  the 
quick-silver  were  rubbed  off  from  the  backside  of  the  speculum,  the  glass  alone 
would  cause  the  same  rings  of  colours,  but  much  more  faint  than  before;  and, 
therefore,  the  phenomenon  depends  not  upon  the  quick-silver,  unless  so  far  as 
the  quick-silver,  by  increasing  the  reflexion  of  the  backside  of  the  glass,  in¬ 
creases  the  light  of  the  rings  of  colours.  I  found  also  that  a  speculum  of  metal 
without  glass  made  some  years  since  for  optical  uses,  and  very  well  wrought, 
produced  none  of  those  rings;  and  thence  I  understood  that  these  rings  arise 
not  from  one  specular  surface  alone,  but  depend  upon  the  two  surfaces  of  the 
plate  of  glass  whereof  the  speculum  was  made,  and  upon  the  thickness  of  the 
glass  between  them.  For  as  in  the  7th  and  19th  Observations  of  the  first  part  of 
this  book  a  thin  plate  of  air,  water,  or  glass  of  an  even  thickness  appeared  of  one 
colour  when  the  rays  were  perpendicular  to  it,  of  another  when  they  were  a 
little  oblique,  of  another  when  more  oblique,  of  another  when  still  more  oblique, 
and  so  on;  so  here,  in  the  sixth  Observation,  the  light  which  emerged  out  of  the 
glass  in  several  obliquities  made  the  glass  appear  of  several  colours,  and  being 
propagated  in  those  obliquities  to  the  chart,  there  painted  rings  of  those 
colours.  And  as  the  reason  why  a  thin  plate  appeared  of  several  colours  in 
several  obliquities  of  the  rays  was  that  the  rays  of  one  and  the  same  sort  are 
reflected  by  the  thin  plate  at  one  obliquity  and  transmitted  at  another,  and 
those  of  other  sorts  transmitted  where  these  are  reflected,  and  reflected  where 
these  are  transmitted;  so  the  reason  why  the  thick  plate  of  glass  whereof  the 
speculum  was  made  did  appear  of  various  colours  in  various  obliquities,  and 
in  those  obliquities  propagated  those  colours  to  the  chart,  was  that  the  rays  of 
one  and  the  same  sort  did  at  one  obliquity  emerge  out  of  the  glass,  at  another 
did  not  emerge,  but  were  reflected  back  towards  the  quick-silver  by  the  hither 
surface  of  the  glass,  and  accordingly  as  the  obliquity  became  greater  and 
greater,  emerged  and  were  reflected  alternately  for  many  successions;  and  that 
in  one  and  the  same  obliquity  the  rays  of  one  sort  were  reflected,  and  those  of 


500  Optics 

another  transmitted.  This  is  manifest  by  the  fifth  Observation  of  this  part  of 
this  book.  For  in  that  Observation,  when  the  speculum  was  illuminated  by  any 
one  of  the  prismatic  colours,  that  light  made  many  rings  of  the  same  colour 
upon  the  chart  with  dark  intervals,  and,  therefore,  at  its  emergence  out  of  the 
speculum  was  alternately  transmitted  and  not  transmitted  from  the  speculum 
to  the  chart  for  many  successions,  according  to  the  various  obliquities  of  its 
emergence.  And  when  the  colour  cast  on  the  speculum  by  the  prism  was  varied, 
the  rings  became  of  the  colour  cast  on  it,  and  varied  their  bigness  with  their 
colour;  and,  therefore,  the  light  was  now  alternately  transmitted  and  not  trans¬ 
mitted  from  the  speculum  to  the  chart  at  other  obliquities  than  before.  It 
seemed  to  me,  therefore,  that  these  rings  were  of  one  and  the  same  original  with 
those  of  thin  plates,  but  yet  with  this  difference :  that  those  of  thin  plates  are 
made  by  the  alternate  reflexions  and  transmissions  of  the  rays  at  the  second 
surface  of  the  plate,  after  one  passage  through  it;  but  here  the  rays  go  twice 
through  the  plate  before  they  are  alternately  reflected  and  transmitted.  First, 
they  go  through  it  from  the  first  surface  to  the  quick-silver,  and  then  return 
through  it  from  the  quick-silver  to  the  first  surface,  and  there  are  either  transmit¬ 
ted  to  the  chart  or  reflected  back  to  the  quick-silver,  accordingly  as  they  are  in 
their  fits  of  easy  reflexion  or  transmission  when  they  arrive  at  that  surface.  For 
the  intervals  of  the  fits  of  the  rays  which  fall  perpendicularly  on  the  speculum, 
and  are  reflected  back  in  the  same  perpendicular  lines,  by  reason  of  the  equality  of 
these  angles  and  lines,  are  of  the  same  length  and  number  wfithin  the  glass  after 
reflexion  as  before,  by  the  19th  Proposition  of  the  third  part  of  this  book.  And, 
therefore,  since  all  the  rays  that  enter  through  the  first  surface  are  in  their  fits 
of  easy  transmission  at  their  entrance,  and  as  many  of  these  as  are  reflected  by 
the  second  are  in  their  fits  of  easy  reflexion  there,  all  these  must  be  again  in 
their  fits  of  easy  transmission  at  their  return  to  the  first,  and  by  consequence 
there  go  out  of  the  glass  to  the  chart,  and  form  upon  it  the  white  spot  of  light  in 
the  centre  of  the  rings.  For  the  reason  holds  good  in  all  sorts  of  rays,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  all  sorts  must  go  out  promiscuously  to  that  spot,  and  by  their  mixture 
cause  it  to  be  white.  But  the  intervals  of  the  fits  of  those  rays  which  are  reflected 
more  obliquely  than  they  enter,  must  be  greater  after  reflexion  than  before,  by 
the  15th  and  20th  Propositions.  And  thence  it  may  happen  that  the  rays  at 
their  return  to  the  first  surface  may  in  certain  obliquities  be  in  fits  of  easy 
reflexion,  and  return  back  to  the  quick-silver,  and  in  other  intermediate 
obliquities  be  again  in  fits  of  easy  transmission,  and  so  go  out  to  the  chart,  and 
paint  on  it  the  rings  of  colours  about  the  white  spot.  And  because  the  intervals 
of  the  fits  at  equal  obliquities  are  greater  and  fewer  in  the  less  refrangible  rays, 
and  less  and  more  numerous  in  the  more  refrangible,  therefore  the  less  re¬ 
frangible  at  equal  obliquities  shall  make  fewer  rings  than  the  more  refrangible, 
and  the  rings  made  by  those  shall  be  larger  than  the  like  number  of  rings  made 
by  these;  that  is,  the  red  rings  shall  be  larger  than  the  yellow,  the  yellow  than 
the  green,  the  green  than  the  blue,  and  the  blue  than  the  violet,  as  they  were 
really  found  to  be  in  the  fifth  Observation.  And,  therefore,  the  first  ring  of  all 
colours  encompassing  the  white  spot  of  light  shall  be  red  without  any  violet 
within,  and  yellow^,  and  green,  and  blue  in  the  middle,  as  it  was  found  in  the 
second  Observation;  and  these  colours  in  the  second  ring,  and  those  that  follow, 
shall  be  more  expanded,  till  they  spread  into  one  another,  and  blend  one  an¬ 
other  by  interfering. 


Book  II:  Part  4  501 

These  seem  to  be  the  reasons  of  these  rings  in  general ;  and  this  put  me  upon 
observing  the  thickness  of  the  glass,  and  considering  whether  the  dimensions 
and  proportions  of  the  rings  may  be  truly  derived  from  it  by  computation, 

Obs,  8.  I  measured,  therefore,  the  thickness  of  this  concavo-convex  plate  of 
glass,  and  found  it  everywhere  one-quarter  of  an  inch  precisely.  Xow,  by  the 
sixth  Observation  of  the  first  part  of  this  book,  a  thin  plate  of  air  transmits  the 
brightest  light  of  the  first  ring  (that  is,  the  bright  yellow)  when  its  thickness  is 
the  8  9.000^^  inch;  and  by  the  tenth  Observation  of  the  same  part,  a 

thin  plate  of  glass  transmits  the  same  light  of  the  same  ring  when  its  thickness 
is  less  in  proportion  of  the  sine  of  refraction  to  the  sine  of  incidence  (that  is, 
when  its  thickness  is  the  i.siafooo^^  13 7^5 4 5th  part  of  an  inch,  supposing  the 
sines  are  as  11  to  17).  And  if  this  thickness  be  doubled,  it  transmits  the  same 
bright  light  of  the  second  ring;  if  tripled,  it  transmits  that  of  the  third,  and  so 
on;  the  bright  yellow  light  in  all  these  cases  being  in  its  fits  of  transmission. 
And,  therefore,  if  its  thickness  be  multiplied  34,386  times,  so  as  to  become 
one-quarter  of  an  inch,  it  transmits  the  same  bright  light  of  the  34,386th  ring. 
Suppose  this  be  the  bright  yellow  light  transmitted  perpendicularly  from  the 
reflecting  convex  side  of  the  glass  through  the  concave  side  to  the  white  spot  in 
the  centre  of  the  rings  of  colours  on  the  chart;  and  by  a  rule  in  the  7th  and  19th 
Observations  in  the  first  part  of  this  book,  and  by  the  15th  and  20th  Proposi¬ 
tions  of  the  third  part  of  this  book,  if  the  rays  be  made  oblique  to  the  glass,  the 
thickness  of  the  glass  requisite  to  transmit  the  same  bright  light  of  the  same 
ring  in  any  obliquity  is  to  this  thickness  of  one-quarter  of  an  inch,  as  the  secant 
of  a  certain  angle  to  the  radius,  the  sine  of  which  angle  is  the  first  of  a  hundred 
and  six  arithmetical  means  between  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction, 
counted  from  the  sine  of  incidence  when  the  refraction  is  made  out  of  any 
plated  body  into  any  medium  encompassing  it;  that  is,  in  this  case,  out  of  glass 
into  air.  Now,  if  the  thickness  of  the  glass  be  increased  by  degrees,  so  as  to  bear 
to  its  first  thickness  (viz.,  that  of  a  quarter  of  an  inch),  the  proportions  which 
34,386  (the  number  of  fits  of  the  perpendicular  rays  in  going  through  the  glass 
towards  the  white  spot  in  the  centre  of  the  rings)  hath  to  34,385,  34,384,  34,383, 
and  34,382  (the  numbers  of  the  fits  of  the  oblique  rays  in  going  through  the 
glass  towards  the  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  rings  of  colours);  and  if  the 
first  thickness  be  divided  into  100,000,000  equal  parts,  the  increased  thicknesses 
will  be  100,002,908,  100,005,816,  100,008,725,  and  100,011,633,  and  the  angles 
of  which  these  thicknesses  are  secants  'will  be  26'  13",  37'  5",  45'  6",  and  52' 
26",  the  radius  being  100,000,000;  and  the  sines  of  these  angles  are  762,  1,079, 
1,321,  and  1,525,  and  the  proportional  sines  of  refraction  1,172,  1,659,  2,031, 
and  2,345,  the  radius  being  100,000.  For  since  the  sines  of  incidence  out  of  glass 
into  air  are  to  the  sines  of  refraction  as  11  to  17,  and  to  the  above-mentioned 
secants  as  11  to  the  first  of  106  arithmetical  means  bet^veen  11  and  17  (that  is, 
as  11  to  11  tutt),  those  secants  mil  be  to  the  sines  of  refraction  as  11  tw  to 
17,  and  by  this  analogy  will  give  these  sines.  So,  then,  if  the  obliquities  of  the 
rays  to  the  concave  surface  of  the  glass  be  such  that  the  sines  of  their  refraction 
in  passing  out  of  the  glass  through  that  surface  into  the  air  be  1,172,  1,659, 
2,031,  2,345,  the  bright  light  of  the  34,386th  ring  shall  emerge  at  the  thicknesses 
of  the  glass,  which  are  to  one-quarter  of  an  inch  as  34,386  to  34,385,  34,384, 
34,383,  34,382,  respectively.  And,  therefore,  if  the  thickness  in  all  these  cases 
be  one-quarter  of  an  inch  (as  it  is  in  the  glass  of  which  the  speculum  was  made) 


502  Optics 

the  bright  light  of  the  34,385th  ring  shall  emerge  where  the  sine  of  refraction  is 
1,172,  and  that  of  the  34;384th,  34;383rd,  and  34,382nd  ring  where  the  sine  is 
1,659,  2,031,  and  2,345,  respectively.  And  in  these  angles  of  refraction  the  light 
of  these  rings  shall  be  propagated  from  the  speculum  to  the  chart,  and  there 
paint  rings  about  the  white  central  round  spot  of  light  which,  we  said,  was  the 
light  of  the  34,386th  ring.  And  the  semidiameters  of  these  rings  shall  subtend 
the  angles  of  refraction  made  at  the  concave  surface  of  the  speculum,  and  by 
consequence  their  diameters  shall  be  to  the  distance  of  the  chart  from  the 
speculum  as  those  sines  of  refraction  doubled  are  to  the  radius  (that  is,  as  1,172, 
1,659,  2,031,  and  2,345,  doubled,  are  to  100,000).  And,  therefore,  if  the  distance 
of  the  chart  from  the  concave  surface  of  the  speculum  be  six  feet  (as  it  was  in 
the  third  of  these  Observations),  the  diameters  of  the  rings  of  this  bright  yellow 
light  upon  the  chart  shall  be  1.688,  2.389,  2.925,  3.375  inches;  for  these  diam¬ 
eters  are  to  six  feet  as  the  above-mentioned  sines  doubled  are  to  the  radius. 
Now,  these  diameters  of  the  bright  yellow  rings,  thus  found  by  computation, 
are  the  v^ery  same  uith  those  found  in  the  third  of  these  Observations  by 
measuring  them,  viz.,  with  2^,  and  3%  inches;  and,  therefore, 

the  theory  of  deriving  these  rings  from  the  thickness  of  the  plate  of  glass  of 
which  the  speculum  was  made,  and  from  the  obliquity  of  the  emerging  rays, 
agrees  with  the  Observation.  In  this  computation  I  have  equalled  the  diameters 
of  the  bright  rings  made  by  light  of  all  colours,  to  the  diameters  of  the  rings 
made  by  the  bright  yellow.  For  this  yellow  makes  the  brightest  part  of  the  rings 
of  all  colours.  If  you  desire  the  diameters  of  the  rings  made  by  the  light  of  any 
other  unmixed  colour,  you  may  find  them  readily  by  putting  them  to  the  diam¬ 
eters  of  the  bright  yellow  ones  in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  the  intervals  of 
the  fits  of  the  rays  of  those  colours  when  equally  inclined  to  the  refracting  or 
reflecting  surface  which  caused  those  fits;  that  is,  by  putting  the  diameters  of 
the  rings  made  by  the  rays  in  the  extremities  and  limits  of  the  seven  colours 
(red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo,  \dolet)  proportional  to  the  cube  roots 
of  the  numbers,  1,  3^,  34,  Me,  34,  which  express  the  lengths  of  a 

monochord  sounding  the  notes  in  an  eighth.  For  by  this  means  the  diameters  of 
the  rings  of  these  colours  will  be  found  pretty  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  to 
one  another  which  they  ought  to  have  by  the  fifth  of  these  Observations. 

And  thus  I  satisfied  myself  that  these  rings  were  of  the  same  kind  and  origi¬ 
nal  with  those  of  thin  plates,  and  by  consequence  that  the  fits  or  alternate 
dispositions  of  the  rays  to  be  reflected  and  transmitted  are  propagated  to  great 
distances  from  every  reflecting  and  refracting  surface.  But  yet  to  put  the 
matter  out  of  doubt,  I  added  the  following  Observation. 

Obs.  9.  If  these  rings  thus  depend  on  the  thickness  of  the  plate  of  glass,  their 
diameters  at  equal  distances  from  several  speculums  made  of  such  concavo- 
convex  plates  of  glass  as  are  ground  on  the  same  sphere  ought  to  be  reciprocally 
in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  the  thicknesses  of  the  plates  of  glass.  And  if 
this  proportion  be  found  true  by  experience  it  vill  amount  to  a  demonstration 
that  these  rings  (like  those  formed  in  thin  plates)  do  depend  on  the  thickness  of 
the  glass.  I  procured,  therefore,  another  concavo-convex  plate  of  glass  ground 
on  both  sides  to  the  same  sphere  with  the  former  plate.  Its  thickness  was  ^ 
parts  of  an  inch;  and  the  diameters  of  the  three  first  bright  rings  measured 
between  the  brightest  parts  of  their  orbits  at  the  distance  of  six  feet  from  the 
glass  were  3,  5)4  inches.  Now,  the  thickness  of  the  other  glass  being  one- 


Book  II :  Part  4  503 

quarter  of  an  inch  was  to  the  thickness  of  this  glass  as  ^  to  °/62',  that  is,  as  31 
to  10,  or  310,000,000  to  100,000,000;  and  the  roots  of  these  numbers  are  17,607 
and  10,000,  and  in  the  proportion  of  the  first  of  these  roots  to  the  second  are  the 
diameters  of  the  bright  rings  made  in  this  Observation  by  the  thinner  glass,  3, 
4j/6,  5^,  to  the  diameters  of  the  same  rings  made  in  the  third  of  these  Observa¬ 
tions  by  the  thicker  glass  l^Me-  2^,  that  is,  the  diameters  of  the  rings 

are  reciprocally  in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  the  thicknesses  of  the  plates  of 
glass. 

So,  then,  in  plates  of  glass  which  are  alike  concave  on  one  side,  and  alike 
convex  on  the  other  side,  and  alike  quick-silvered  on  the  convex  sides,  and 
differ  in  nothing  but  their  thickness,  the  diameters  of  the  rings  are  reciprocally 
in  a  subduplicate  proportion  of  the  thicknesses  of  the  plates.  And  this  shews 
sufficiently  that  the  rings  depend  on  both  the  surfaces  of  the  glass.  They  depend 
on  the  convex  surface  because  they  are  more  luminous  when  that  surface  is 
quick-silvered  over  than  when  it  is  without  quick-silver.  They  depend  also 
upon  the  concave  surface,  because  without  that  surface  a  speculum  makes  them 
not.  They  depend  on  both  surfaces,  and  on  the  distances  between  them,  because 
their  bigness  is  varied  by  varying  only  that  distance.  And  this  dependence  is  of 
the  same  kind  vdth  that  which  the  colours  of  thin  plates  have  on  the  distance  of 
the  surfaces  of  those  plates,  because  the  bigness  of  the  rings,  and  their  pro¬ 
portion  to  one  another,  and  the  variation  of  their  bigness  arising  from  the 
variation  of  the  thickness  of  the  glass,  and  the  orders  of  their  colours,  is  such  as 
ought  to  result  from  the  Propositions  in  the  end  of  the  third  part  of  this  book, 
derived  from  the  phenomena  of  the  colours  of  thin  plates  set  dovm  in  the  first 
part. 

There  are  yet  other  phenomena  of  these  rings  of  colours,  but  such  as  follow 
from  the  same  Propositions,  and  therefore  confirm  both  the  truth  of  those 
Propositions,  and  the  analogy  between  these  rings  and  the  rings  of  colours 
made  by  very  thin  plates.  I  shall  subjoin  some  of  them. 

Obs.  10.  Wffien  the  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light  was  reflected  back  from  the  specu¬ 
lum,  not  directly  to  the  hole  in  the  window  but  to  a  place  a  little  distant  from 
it,  the  common  centre  of  that  spot,  and  of  all  the  rings  of  colours,  fell  in  the 
middle  way  between  the  beam  of  the  incident  light  and  the  beam  of  the  re¬ 
flected  light,  and  by  consequence  in  the  centre  of  the  spherical  concavity  of  the 
speculum,  whenever  the  chart  on  which  the  rings  of  colours  fell  was  placed  at 
that  centre.  And  as  the  beam  of  reflected  light  by  inclining  the  speculum  re¬ 
ceded  more  and  more  from  the  beam  of  incident  light  and  from  the  common 
centre  of  the  coloured  rings  between  them,  those  rings  grew  bigger  and  bigger, 
and  so  also  did  the  white  round  spot,  and  new  rings  of  colours  emerged  succes¬ 
sively  out  of  their  common  centre,  and  the  white  spot  became  a  white  ring 
encompassing  them;  and  the  incident  and  reflected  beams  of  light  always  fell 
upon  the  opposite  parts  of  this  white  ring,  illuminating  its  perimeter  like  two 
mock  Suns  in  the  opposite  parts  of  an  iris.  So,  then,  the  diameter  of  this  ring, 
measured  from  the  middle  of  its  light  on  one  side  to  the  middle  of  its  light  on 
the  other  side,  was  always  equal  to  the  distance  between  the  middle  of  the 
incident  beam  of  light,  and  the  middle  of  the  reflected  beam  measured  at  the 
chart  on  which  the  rings  appeared.  And  the  rays  which  formed  this  ring  were 
reflected  by  the  speculum  in  angles  equal  to  their  angles  of  incidence,  and  by 
consequence  to  their  angles  of  refraction  at  their  entrance  into  the  glass,  but 


504  Optics 

yet  their  angles  of  reflexion  were  not  in  the  same  planes  with  their  angles  of 
incidence. 

Obs.  11.  The  colours  of  the  new  rings  were  in  a  contrary  order  to  those  of  the 
former,  and  arose  after  this  manner:  the  white  round  spot  of  light  in  the  middle 
of  the  rings  continued  white  to  the  centre  till  the  distance  of  the  incident  and 
reflected  beams  at  the  chart  was  about  parts  of  an  inch,  and  then  it  began  to 
grow  dark  in  the  middle.  And  when  that  distance  was  about  l^e  of  an  inch, 
the  white  spot  was  become  a  ring  encompassing  a  dark  round  spot  which  in  the 
middle  inclined  to  violet  and  indigo.  And  the  luminous  rings  encompassing  it 
were  grown  equal  to  those  dark  ones  which  in  the  four  first  Observations  en¬ 
compassed  them;  that  is  to  say,  the  white  spot  was  grown  a  white  ring  equal  to 
the  first  of  those  dark  rings,  and  the  first  of  those  luminous  rings  was  now 
grown  equal  to  the  second  of  those  dark  ones,  and  the  second  of  those  luminous 
ones  to  the  third  of  those  dark  ones,  and  so  on.  For  the  diameters  of  the  lu¬ 
minous  rings  were  now  l^^ie,  2%,  3^20,  &c.  inches. 

When  the  distance  between  the  incident  and  reflected  beams  of  light  became 
a  little  bigger,  there  emerged  out  of  the  middle  of  the  dark  spot  after  the  indigo 
a  blue,  and  then  out  of  that  blue  a  pale  green,  and  soon  after  a  yellow  and  red. 
And  when  the  colour  at  the  centre  was  brightest  (being  between  yellow  and 
red)  the  bright  rings  were  grown  equal  to  those  rings  which  in  the  four  first 
Observations  next  encompassed  them;  that  is  to  say,  the  white  spot  in  the 
middle  of  those  rings  was  now  become  a  white  ring  equal  to  the  first  of  those 
bright  rings,  and  the  first  of  those  bright  ones  was  now  become  equal  to  the 
second  of  those,  and  so  on.  For  the  diameters  of  the  white  ring,  and  of  the  other 
luminous  rings  encompassing  it,  were  now  I'Me,  2^,  2^1/12,  3%,  &c.  or  there¬ 
abouts. 

When  the  distance  of  the  two  beams  of  light  at  the  chart  was  a  little  more 
increased,  there  emerged  out  of  the  middle,  in  order,  after  the  red:  a  purple,  a 
blue,  a  green,  a  yellow,  and  a  red  inclining  much  to  purple;  and  when  the  colour 
was  brightest  (being  between  yellow  and  red)  the  former  indigo,  blue,  green, 
yellow,  and  red  were  become  an  iris  or  ring  of  colours  equal  to  the  first  of  those 
luminous  rings  which  appeared  in  the  four  first  Observations,  and  the  white 
ring  which  was  now  become  the  second  of  the  luminous  rings  was  grown  equal 
to  the  second  of  those,  and  the  first  of  those  which  was  now  become  the  third 
ring  was  become  equal  to  the  third  of  those,  and  so  on.  For  their  diameters 
were  2^/^,  3^  inches,  the  distance  of  the  two  beams  of  light,  and 

the  diameter  of  the  white  ring  being  2^  inches. 

When  these  two  beams  became  more  distant  there  emerged  out  of  the  middle 
of  the  purplish  red,  first  a  darker  round  spot,  and  then  out  of  the  middle  of  that 
spot  a  brighter.  And  now  the  former  colours  (purple,  blue,  green,  yelloAv,  and 
purplish  red)  were  become  a  ring  equal  to  the  first  of  the  bright  rings  mentioned 
in  the  four  first  Observations,  and  the  rings  about  this  ring  were  grown  equal  to 
the  rings  about  that,  respectively;  the  distance  between  the  tAvo  beams  of  light 
and  the  diameter  of  the  Avhite  ring  (Avhich  was  noAV  become  the  third  ring)  being 
about  3  inches. 

The  colours  of  the  rings  in  the  middle  began  now  to  grow  very  dilute,  and  if 
the  distance  between  the  tAvo  beams  AA^as  increased  half  an  inch,  or  an  inch 
more,  they  vanished  Avhilst  the  Avhite  ring,  AAuth  one  or  tAvo  of  the  rings  next  it 
on  either  side,  continued  still  Ausible.  But  if  the  distance  of  the  tAA^o  beams  of 


Book  II :  Part  4  505 

light  was  still  more  increased,  these  also  vanished;  for  the  light  which  coming 
from  several  parts  of  the  hole  in  the  window  fell  upon  the  speculum  in  several 
angles  of  incidence,  made  rings  of  several  bignesses,  which  diluted  and  blotted 
out  one  another,  as  I  knew  by  intercepting  some  part  of  that  light.  For  if  I 
intercepted  that  part  which  was  nearest  to  the  axis  of  the  speculum,  the  rings 
would  be  less;  if  the  other  part  which  was  remotest  from  it,  they  would  be 
bigger. 

Obs.  12.  When  the  colours  of  the  prism  were  cast  successively  on  the  specu¬ 
lum,  that  ring  which  in  the  two  last  Observations  was  white,  was  of  the  same 
bigness  in  all  the  colours,  but  the  rings  without  it  were  greater  in  the  green  than 
in  the  blue,  and  still  greater  in  the  yellow,  and  greatest  in  the  red.  And,  on  the 
contrary,  the  rings  vdthin  that  white  circle  were  less  in  the  green  than  in  the 
blue,  and  still  less  in  the  yellow,  and  least  in  the  red.  For  the  angles  of  reflexion 
of  those  rays  which  made  this  ring,  being  equal  to  their  angles  of  incidence,  the 
fits  of  every  reflected  ray  vithin  the  glass  after  reflexion  are  equal  in  length  and 
number  to  the  fits  of  the  same  ray  within  the  glass  before  its  incidence  on  the 
reflecting  surface.  And,  therefore,  since  all  the  rays  of  all  sorts  at  their  entrance 
into  the  glass  were  in  a  fit  of  transmission,  they  were  also  in  a  fit  of  transmission 
at  their  returning  to  the  same  surface  after  reflexion;  and  by  consequence  were 
transmitted,  and  went  out  to  the  white  ring  on  the  chart.  This  is  the  reason 
why  that  ring  was  of  the  same  bigness  in  all  the  colours,  and  why  in  a  mixture 
of  all  it  appears  white.  But  in  rays  which  are  reflected  in  other  angles,  the 
intervals  of  the  fits  of  the  least  refrangible  being  greatest,  make  the  rings  of 
their  colour  in  their  progress  from  this  white  ring,  either  outwards  or  inwards, 
increase  or  decrease  by  the  greatest  steps;  so  that  the  rings  of  this  colour  vdth- 
out  are  greatest,  and  within  least.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  in  the  last 
Observation,  when  the  speculum  was  illuminated  mth  white  light,  the  exterior 
rings  made  by  all  colours  appeared  red  mthout  and  blue  -within,  and  the  interior 
blue  -without  and  red  within. 

These  are  the  phenomena  of  thick  convexo-concave  plates  of  glass,  which 
are  everywhere  of  the  same  thickness.  There  are  yet  other  phenomena  when 
these  plates  are  a  little  thicker  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  and  others  when 
the  plates  are  more  or  less  concave  than  convex,  or  plano-convex,  or  double- 
convex.  For  in  all  these  cases  the  plates  make  rings  of  colours,  but  after  various 
manners;  all  which,  so  far  as  I  have  yet  observed,  follow  from  the  Propositions 
in  the  end  of  the  third  part  of  this  book,  and  so  conspire  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
those  Propositions.  But  the  phenomena  are  too  various,  and  the  calculations 
whereby  they  follow'  from  those  Propositions  too  intricate,  to  be  here  prose¬ 
cuted.  I  content  myself  wdth  having  prosecuted  this  kind  of  phenomena  so  far 
as  to  discover  their  cause,  and  by  discovering  it  to  ratify  the  Propositions  in 
the  third  Part  of  this  book. 

Obs.  13.  As  light  reflected  by  a  lens  quick-silvered  on  the  backside  makes  the 
rings  of  colours  above  described,  so  it  ought  to  make  the  like  rings  of  colours  in 
passing  through  a  drop  of  water.  At  the  first  reflexion  of  the  rays  within  the 
drop,  some  colours  ought  to  be  transmitted,  as  in  the  case  of  a  lens,  and  others 
to  be  reflected  back  to  the  eye.  For  instance,  if  the  diameter  of  a  small  drop  or 
globule  of  w'ater  be  about  the  500th  part  of  an  inch,  so  that  a  red-making  ray 
in  passing  through  the  middle  of  this  globule  has  250  fits  of  easy  transmission 
within  the  globule,  and  that  all  the  red-making  rays  which  are  at  a  certain  dis* 


506  Optics 

tance  from  this  middle  ray  round  about  it  have  249  fits  within  the  globule, 
and  all  the  like  rays  at  a  certain  farther  distance  round  about  it  have  248 
fits,  and  all  those  at  a  certain  farther  distance  247  fits,  and  so  on;  these  concen¬ 
tric  circles  of  rays  after  their  transmission,  falling  on  a  white  paper,  will  make 
concentric  rings  of  red  upon  the  paper,  supposing  the  light  which  passes 
through  one  single  globule  strong  enough  to  be  sensible.  And,  in  like  manner, 
the  rays  of  other  colours  will  make  rings  of  other  colours.  Suppose,  now,  that 
in  a  fair  day  the  Sun  shines  through  a  thin  cloud  of  such  globules  of  water  or 
hail,  and  that  the  globules  are  all  of  the  same  bigness;  and  the  Sun  seen  through 
this  cloud  shall  appear  encompassed  with  the  like  concentric  rings  of  colours, 
and  the  diameter  of  the  first  ring  of  red  shall  be  734°,  that  of  the  second  1034°, 
that  of  the  third  12°  33'.  And  accordingly,  as  the  globules  of  w^ater  are  big¬ 
ger  or  less,  the  rings  shall  be  less  or  bigger.  This  is  the  theory,  and  experience 
answ'ers  it.  For  in  June,  1692,  I  saw  by  reflexion  in  a  vessel  of  stagnating 
w'ater  three  halos,  crowns,  or  rings  of  colours  about  the  Sun,  like  three  little 
rainbows,  concentric  to  his  body.  The  colours  of  the  first  or  innermost  crown 
were  blue  next  the  Sun,  red  without,  and  w^hite  in  the  middle  between  the 
blue  and  red.  Those  of  the  second  crowm  were  purple  and  blue  within,  and 
pale  red  without,  and  green  in  the  middle.  And  those  of  the  third  were  pale 
blue  within,  and  pale  red  without;  these  crowms  enclosed  one  another  imme¬ 
diately,  so  that  their  colours  proceeded  in  this  continual  order  from  the  Sun 
outward:  blue,  white,  red;  purple,  blue,  green,  pale  yellow  and  red;  pale  blue, 
pale  red.  The  diameter  of  the  second  crowm  measured  from  the  middle  of  the 
yellow  and  red  on  one  side  of  the  Sun,  to  the  middle  of  the  same  colour  on  the 
other  side  was  934  degrees,  or  thereabouts.  The  diameters  of  the  first  and  third 
I  had  not  time  to  measure,  but  that  of  the  first  seemed  to  be  about  five  or  six 
degrees,  and  that  of  the  third  about  twelve.  The  like  crowms  appear  sometimes 
about  the  Moon;  for  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1664,  February  19th  at  night, 
I  saw^  two  such  crowms  about  her.  The  diameter  of  the  first  or  innermost  w'as 
about  three  degrees,  and  that  of  the  second  about  five  degrees  and  a  half.  Next 
about  the  Moon  was  a  circle  of  white,  and  next  about  that  the  inner  croAvn, 
which  was  of  a  bluish-green  within  next  the  wTite,  and  of  a  yellow  and  red 
without,  and  next  about  these  colours  were  blue  and  green  on  the  inside  of  the 
outw'ard  crowm,  and  red  on  the  outside  of  it.  At  the  same  time  there  appeared  a 
halo  about  22  degrees  35'  distant  from  the  centre  of  the  Moon.  It  was  elliptical, 
and  its  long  diameter  was  perpendicular  to  the  horizon,  verging  below  farthest 
from  the  Moon.  I  am  told  that  the  Moon  has  sometimes  three  or  more  concen¬ 
tric  crowms  of  colours  encompassing  one  another  next  about  her  body.  The 
more  equal  the  globules  of  water  or  ice  are  to  one  another,  the  more  crowms  of 
colours  will  appear,  and  the  colours  will  be  the  more  lively.  The  halo  at  the 
distance  of  2234  degrees  from  the  Moon  is  of  another  sort.  By  its  being  oval 
and  remoter  from  the  Moon  below  than  above,  I  conclude  that  it  was  made 
by  refraction  in  some  sort  of  hail  or  snow'  floating  in  the  air  in  an  horizontal 
posture,  the  refracting  angle  being  about  58  or  60  degrees. 


BOOK  THREE 
Part  I 


Observations  concerning  the  inflexions  of  the  rays  of  light,  and 
the  colours  made  thereby. 

Grimaldi  has  informed  us  that  if  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light  be  let  into  a  dark 
room  through  a  very  small  hole,  the  shadows  of  things  in  this  light  will  be 
larger  than  they  ought  to  be  if  the  rays  went  on  by  the  bodies  in  straight  lines, 
and  that  these  shadows  have  three  parallel  fringes,  bands  or  ranks  of  coloured 
light  adjacent  to  them.  But  if  the  hole  be  enlarged  the  fringes  grow  broad  and 
run  into  one  another,  so  that  they  cannot  be  distinguished.  These  broad  shad¬ 
ows  and  fringes  have  been  reckoned  by  some  to  proceed  from  the  ordinary  re¬ 
fraction  of  the  air,  but  \vithout  due  examination  of  the  matter.  For  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  phenomenon,  so  far  as  I  have  observed  them,  are  as  follows: 

Obs.  1. 1  made  in  a  piece  of  lead  a  small  hole  with  a  pin,  whose  breadth  was 
the  42d  part  of  an  inch,  for  21  of  those  pins  laid  together  took  up  the  breadth  of 
half  an  inch.  Through  this  hole  I  let  into  my  darkened  chamber  a  beam  of  the 
Sun’s  light,  and  found  that  the  shadows  of  hairs,  thread,  pins,  straws,  and  such 
like  slender  substances  placed  in  this  beam  of  light,  were  considerably  broader 
than  they  ought  to  be,  if  the  rays  of  light  passed  on  by  these  bodies  in  right 
lines.  And  particularly  a  hair  of  a  man’s  head,  whose  breadth  was  but  the  280th 
part  of  an  inch,  being  held  in  this  light,  at  the  distance  of  about  twelve  feet 
from  the  hole,  did  cast  a  shadow  which  at  the  distance  of  four  inches  from  the 
hair  was  the  sixtieth  part  of  an  inch  broad  (that  is,  above  four  times  broader 
than  the  hair),  and  at  the  distance  of  two  feet  from  the  hair  was  about  the  eight 
and  twentieth  part  of  an  inch  broad  (that  is,  ten  times  broader  than  the  hair), 
and  at  the  distance  of  ten  feet  was  the  eighth  part  of  an  inch  broad  (that  is, 
35  times  broader) . 

Nor  is  it  material  whether  the  hair  be  encompassed  with  air,  or  with  any 
other  pellucid  substance.  For  I  wetted  a  polished  plate  of  glass,  and  laid  the 
hair  in  the  water  upon  the  glass,  and  then  laying  another  polished  plate  of  glass 
upon  it,  so  that  the  water  might  fill  up  the  space  between  the  glasses,  I  held 
them  in  the  aforesaid  beam  of  light,  so  that  the  light  might  pass  through  them 
perpendicularly,  and  the  shadow  of  the  hair  was  at  the  same  distances  as  big  as 
before.  The  shadows  of  scratches  made  in  polished  plates  of  glass  were  also 
much  broader  than  they  ought  to  be,  and  the  veins  in  polished  plates  of  glass 
did  also  cast  the  like  broad  shadows.  And,  therefore,  the  great  breadth  of  these 
shadows  proceeds  from  some  other  cause  than  the  refraction  of  the  air. 

Let  the  circle  X  [Fig.  1]  represent  the  middle  of  the  hair;  ADG,  BEH,  CFI, 
three  rays  passing  by  one  side  of  the  hair  at  several  distances;  KNQ,  LOR, 
MBS,  three  other  rays  passing  by  the  other  side  of  the  hair  at  the  like  distances; 
D,  E,  F,  and  N,  0,  P,  the  places  where  the  rays  are  bent  in  their  passage  by  the 
hair;  G,  H,  I,  and  Q,  R,  S,  the  places  where  the  rays  fall  on  a  paper  GQ;  IS  the 

507 


508  Optics 

breadth  of  the  shadow  of  the  hair  cast  on  the  paper,  and  TI,  VS,  two  rays  pass¬ 
ing  to  the  points  I  and  S  without  bending  when  the  hair  is  taken  away.  And  it’s 
manifest  that  all  the  light  between  these  two  rays  TI  and  VS  is  bent  in  passing 
by  the  hair,  and  turned  aside  from  the  shadow  IS,  because  if  any  part  of  this 
light  were  not  bent  it  would  fall  on  the  paper  within  the  shadow,  and  there 


illuminate  the  paper,  contrary  to  experience.  And  because  when  the  paper  is  at 
a  great  distance  from  the  hair,  the  shadow  is  broad,  and  therefore  the  rays  TI 
and  VS  are  at  a  great  distance  from  one  another,  it  follows  that  the  hair  acts 
upon  the  rays  of  light  at  a  good  distance  in  their  passing  by  it.  But  the  action  is 
strongest  on  the  rays  which  pass  by  at  least  distances,  and  grows  weaker  and 
weaker  accordingly  as  the  rays  pass  by  at  distances  greater  and  greater,  as  is 
represented  in  the  scheme.  For  thence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  shadow  of  the 
hair  is  much  broader  in  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the  paper  from  the  hair, 
when  the  paper  is  nearer  the  hair,  than  when  it  is  at  a  great  distance  from  it. 

Obs.  2.  The  shadows  of  all  bodies  (metals,  stones,  glass,  wood,  horn,  ice,  &c.) 
in  this  light  were  bordered  with  three  parallel  fringes  or  bands  of  coloured  light, 
whereof  that  which  was  contiguous  to  the  shadow  was  broadest  and  most 
luminous,  and  that  which  was  remotest  from  it  was  narrowest,  and  so  faint,  as 
not  easily  to  be  visible.  It  was  difficult  to  distinguish  the  colours,  unless  when 
the  light  fell  very  obliquely  upon  a  smooth  paper,  or  some  other  smooth  white 
body,  so  as  to  make  them  appear  much  broader  than  they  would  otherwise  do. 
And  then  the  colours  were  plainly  visible  in  this  order:  the  first  or  innermost 
fringe  was  violet  and  deep  blue  next  the  shadow,  and  then  light  blue,  green, 
and  yellow  in  the  middle,  and  red  wthout.  The  second  fringe  was  almost  con¬ 
tiguous  to  the  first,  and  the  third  to  the  second,  and  both  were  blue  within,  and 
yellow  and  red  without,  but  their  colours  were  very  faint,  especially  those  of 
the  third.  The  colours,  therefore,  proceeded  in  this  order  from  the  shadow: 
violet,  indigo,  pale  blue,  green,  yellow,  red;  blue,  yellow,  red;  pale  blue,  pale 
yellow  and  red.  The  shadows  made  by  scratches  and  bubbles  in  polished  plates 
of  glass  were  bordered  vith  the  like  fringes  of  coloured  light.  And  if  plates  of 
looking-glass,  sloped  off  near  the  edges  mth  a  diamond-cut,  be  held  in  the 
same  beam  of  light,  the  light  which  passes  through  the  parallel  planes  of  the 
glass  vill  be  bordered  with  the  like  fringes  of  colours  where  those  planes  meet 
with  the  diamond-cut,  and  by  this  means  there  will  sometimes  appear  four  or 


Book  III ;  Part  1  509 

five  fringes  of  colours.  Let  AB,  CD  [Fig.  2]  represent  the  parallel  planes  of  a 
looking-glass,  and  BD  the  plane  of  the  diamond-cut,  making  at  B  a  very  obtuse 
angle  mth  the  plane  AB.  And  let  all  the  light  between  the  rays  ENI  and  FBM 
pass  directly  through  the  parallel  planes  of  the  glass,  and  fall  upon  the  paper 


between  I  and  M,  and  all  the  light  between  the  rays  GO  and  HD  be  refracted 
by  the  oblique  plane  of  the  diamond-cut  BD,  and  fall  upon  the  paper  between 
K  and  L;  and  the  light  which  passes  directly  through  the  parallel  planes  of  the 
glass,  and  falls  upon  the  paper  between  I  and  M,  will  be  bordered  witP  three  or 
more  fringes  at  M. 

So,  by  looking  on  the  Sun  through  a  feather  or  black  ribband  held  close  to 
the  eye,  several  rainbows  mil  appear;  the  shadows  which  the  fibres  or  threads 
cast  on  the  tunica  retina  being  bordered  with  the  like  fringes  of  colours. 

Obs.  3.  When  the  hair  was  twelve  feet  distant  from  this  hole,  and  its  shadow 
fell  obliquely  upon  a  fiat  white  scale  of  inches  and  parts  of  an  inch  placed  half  a 
foot  beyond  it,  and  also  when  the  shadow  fell  perpendicularly  upon  the  same 
scale  placed  nine  feet  beyond  it,  I  measured  the  breadth  of  the  shadow  and 
fringes  as  accurately  as  I  could,  and  found  them  in  parts  of  an  inch  as  follows: 


At  the  distance  of 

Half  afoot 

Nine  feet 

The  breadth  of  the  shadow . 

1 

5  4 

1 

9 

The  breadth  between  the  middles  of  the  brightest  light  of  the 
innermost  fringes  on  either  side  the  shadow . 

3  8^^  3  9 

7 

5  0 

The  breadth  between  the  middles  of  the  brightest  light  of  the 
middlemost  fringes  on  either  side  the  shadow . 

1 

23^4 

4 

1  7 

The  breadth  between  the  middles  of  the  brightest  light  of  the 
outmost  fringes  on  either  side  the  shadow . 

xVor  18H 

3 

1  0 

The  distance  between  the  middles  of  the  brightest  light  of  the 
first  and  second  fringes . 

1 

12  0 

1 

2T 

The  distance  between  the  middles  of  the  brightest  light  of  the 
second  and  third  fringes . 

1 

17  0 

1 

3  1 

The  breadth  of  the  luminous  part  (green,  white,  yellow,  and 
red)  of  the  first  fringe . 

1 

TTo" 

1 

32 

The  breadth  of  the  darker  space  between  the  first  and  second 
fringes . 

1 

2  4  0 

1 

4:^ 

The  breadth  of  the  luminous  part  of  the  second  fringe . 

1 

2  9  0 

T 

5  5 

The  breadth  of  the  darker  space  between  the  second  and  third 
fringes . 

1 

3  4  0 

1 

63 

510  Optics 

These  measures  I  took  by  letting  the  shadow  of  the  hair,  at  half  a  foot  dis¬ 
tance,  fall  so  obliquely  on  the  scale  as  to  appear  twelve  times  broader  than 
when  it  fell  perpendicularly  on  it  at  the  same  distance,  and  setting  down  in  this 
Table  the  twelfth  part  of  the  measures  I  then  took. 

Obs.  4.  When  the  shadow  and  fringes  were  cast  obliquely  upon  a  smooth 
white  body,  and  that  body  was  removed  farther  and  farther  from  the  hair,  the 
first  fringe  began  to  appear  and  look  brighter  than  the  rest  of  the  light  at  the 
distance  of  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  inch  from  the  hair,  and  the  dark  line  or 
shadow  between  that  and  the  second  fringe  began  to  appear  at  a  less  distance 
from  the  hair  than  that  of  the  third  part  of  an  inch.  The  second  fringe  began  to 
appear  at  a  distance  from  the  hair  of  less  than  half  an  inch,  and  the  shadow 
between  that  and  the  third  fringe  at  a  distance  less  than  an  inch,  and  the  third 
fringe  at  a  distance  less  than  three  inches.  At  greater  distances  they  became 
much  more  sensible,  but  kept  very  nearly  the  same  proportion  of  their  breadths 
and  intervals  which  they  had  at  their  first  appearing.  For  the  distance  between 
the  middle  of  the  first,  and  middle  of  the  second  fringe,  was  to  the  distance 
between  the  middle  of  the  second  and  middle  of  the  third  fringe  as  three  to  two, 
or  ten  to  seven.  And  the  last  of  these  two  distances  was  equal  to  the  breadth  of 
the  bright  light  or  luminous  part  of  the  first  fringe.  And  this  breadth  was  to  the 
breadth  of  the  bright  light  of  the  second  fringe  as  seven  to  four,  and  to  the  dark 
interval  of  the  first  and  second  fringe  as  three  to  two,  and  to  the  like  dark 
interval  between  the  second  and  third  as  two  to  one.  For  the  breadths  of  the 
fringes  seemed  to  be  in  the  progression  of  the  numbers  1,  and  their 

intervals  to  be  in  the  same  progression  with  them;  that  is,  the  fringes  and  their 
intervals  together  to  be  in  the  continual  progression  of  the  numbers  1, 

VM)  Wsj  or  thereabouts.  And  these  proportions  held  the  same  very 
nearly  at  all  distances  from  the  hair;  the  dark  intervals  of  the  fringes  being  as 
broad  in  proportion  to  the  breadth  of  the  fringes  at  their  first  appearance  as 
afterwards  at  great  distances  from  the  hair,  though  not  so  dark  and  distinct. 

Obs.  5.  The  Sun  shining  into  my  darkened  chamber  through  a  hole  a  quarter 
of  an  inch  broad,  I  placed  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  feet  from  the  hole  a 
sheet  of  pasteboard,  which  was  blacked  all  over  on  both  sides,  and  in  the  middle 
of  it  had  a  hole  about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  square  for  the  light  to  pass 
through.  And  behind  the  hole  I  fastened  to  the  pasteboard  mth  pitch  the  blade 
of  a  sharp  knife,  to  intercept  some  part  of  the  light  which  passed  through  the 
hole.  The  planes  of  the  pasteboard  and  blade  of  the  knife  were  parallel  to  one 
another,  and  perpendicular  to  the  rays.  And  when  they  were  so  placed  that 
none  of  the  Sun’s  light  fell  on  the  pasteboard,  but  all  of  it  passed  through  the 
hole  to  the  knife,  and  there  part  of  it  fell  upon  the  blade  of  the  knife,  and  part 
of  it  passed  by  its  edge,  I  let  this  part  of  the  light  which  passed  by,  fall  on  a 
white  paper  two  or  three  feet  beyond  the  knife,  and  there  saw  two  streams  of 
faint  light  shoot  out  both  ways  from  the  beam  of  light  into  the  shadow,  like  the 
tails  of  comets.  But  because  the  Sun’s  direct  light  by  its  brightness  upon  the 
paper  obscured  these  faint  streams,  so  that  I  could  scarce  see  them,  I  made  a 
little  hole  in  the  midst  of  the  paper  for  that  light  to  pass  through  and  fall  on  a 
black  cloth  behind  it;  and  then  I  saw  the  two  streams  plainly.  They  were  like 
one  another,  and  pretty  nearly  equal  in  length,  and  breadth,  and  quantity  of 
light. Their  light  at  that  end  next  the  Sun’s  direct  light  was  pretty  strong  for  the 
space  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch,  or  half  an  inch,  and  in  all  its  progress  from 


Book  III:  Part  1  511 

that  direct  light  decreased  gradually  till  it  became  insensible.  The  whole  length 
of  either  of  these  streams  measured  upon  the  paper  at  the  distance  of  three  feet 
from  the  knife  was  about  six  or  eight  inches;  so  that  it  subtended  an  angle  at 
the  edge  of  the  knife  of  about  10  or  12,  or  at  most  14  degrees.  Yet  sometimes  I 
thought  I  saw  it  shoot  three  or  four  degrees  farther,  but  ^nth  a  light  so  very 
faint  that  I  could  scarce  perceive  it,  and  suspected  it  might  (in  some  measure, 
at  least)  arise  from  some  other  cause  than  the  two  streams  did.  For,  placing  my 
eye  in  that  light  beyond  the  end  of  that  stream  which  was  behind  the  knife,  and 
looking  towards  the  knife,  I  could  see  a  line  of  light  upon  its  edge,  and  that  not 
only  when  my  eye  was  in  the  line  of  the  streams,  but  also  when  it  was  without 
that  line  either  towards  the  point  of  the  knife,  or  towards  the  handle.  This  line 
of  light  appeared  contiguous  to  the  edge  of  the  knife,  and  was  narrower  than 
the  light  of  the  innermost  fringe,  and  narrowest  when  my  eye  was  farthest  from 
the  direct  light,  and  therefore  seemed  to  pass  between  the  light  of  that  fringe 
and  the  edge  of  the  knife,  and  that  which  passed  nearest  the  edge  to  be  most 
bent,  though  not  all  of  it. 

Obs.  6.  I  placed  another  knife  by  this,  so  that  their  edges  might  be  parallel, 
and  look  towards  one  another,  and  that  the  beam  of  light  might  fall  upon  both 
the  knives,  and  some  part  of  it  pass  between  their  edges.  And  when  the  distance 
of  their  edges  was  about  the  400th  part  of  an  inch,  the  stream  parted  in  the 
middle,  and  left  a  shadow  between  the  two  parts.  This  shadow  was  so  black 
and  dark  that  all  the  light  which  passed  between  the  knives  seemed  to  be  bent, 
and  turned  aside  to  the  one  hand  or  to  the  other.  And  as  the  knives  still  ap¬ 
proached  one  another  the  shadow  grew  broader,  and  the  streams  shorter  at 
their  inward  ends  which  were  next  the  shadow,  until  upon  the  contact  of  the 
knives  the  whole  light  vanished,  leaving  its  place  to  the  shadow. 

And  hence  I  gather  that  the  light  which  is  least  bent,  and  goes  to  the  inward 
ends  of  the  streams,  passes  by  the  edges  of  the  knives  at  the  greatest  distance ; 
and  this  distance,  when  the  shadow  begins  to  appear  between  the  streams,  is 
about  the  800th  part  of  an  inch.  And  the  light  which  passes  by  the  edges  of  the 
knives  at  distances  still  less  and  less  is  more  and  more  bent,  and  goes  to  those 
parts  of  the  streams  which  are  farther  and  farther  from  the  direct  light;  because, 
when  the  knives  approach  one  another  till  they  touch,  those  parts  of  the  streams 
vanish  last  which  are  farthest  from  the  direct  light. 

Obs.  7.  In  the  fifth  Observation  the  fringes  did  not  appear,  but  by  reason  of 
the  breadth  of  the  hole  in  the  -window  became  so  broad  as  to  run  into  one 
another,  and,  by  joining,  to  make  one  continued  light  in  the  beginning  of  the 
streams.  But  in  the  sixth,  as  the  knives  approached  one  another  a  little  before 
the  shadow  appeared  between  the  two  streams,  the  fringes  began  to  appear  on 
the  inner  ends  of  the  streams  on  either  side  of  the  direct  light;  three  on  one  side 
made  by  the  edge  of  one  knife,  and  three  on  the  other  side  made  by  the  edge  of 
the  other  knife.  They  were  distinctest  when  the  knives  were  placed  at  the 
greatest  distance  from  the  hole  in  the  -window,  and  still  became  more  distinct 
by  making  the  hole  less,  insomuch  that  I  could  sometimes  see  a  faint  lineament 
of  a  fourth  fringe  beyond  the  three  above  mentioned.  And  as  the  knives  con¬ 
tinually  approached  one  another,  the  fringes  grew  distincter  and  larger,  until 
they  vanished.  The  outmost  fringe  vanished  first,  and  the  middlemost  next, 
and  the  innermost  last.  And  after  they  were  all  vanished,  and  the  line  of  light 
which  was  in  the  middle  between  them  was  grovm  very  broad,  enlarging  itself 


512  Oi'Tics 

on  both  sides  into  the  streams  of  light  described  in  the  fifth  Observation,  the 
above-mentioned  shadow  began  to  appear  in  the  middle  of  this  line,  and  divide 
it  along  the  middle  into  two  lines  of  light,  and  increased  until  the  whole  light 
vanished.  This  enlargement  of  the  fringes  was  so  great  that  the  rays  which  go 
to  the  innermost  fringe  seemed  to  be  bent  above  twenty  times  more  when  this 
fringe  was  ready  to  vanish  than  when  one  of  the  knives  was  taken  away. 

And  from  this  and  the  former  Observation  compared,  I  gather  that  the  light 
of  the  first  fringe  passed  by  the  edge  of  the  knife  at  a  distance  greater  than  the 
800th  part  of  an  inch,  and  the  light  of  the  second  fringe  passed  by  the  edge  of 
the  knife  at  a  greater  distance  than  the  light  of  the  first  fringe  did,  and  that  of 
the  third  at  a  greater  distance  than  that  of  the  second,  and  that  of  the  streams 
of  light  described  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  Observations  passed  by  the  edges  of  the 
knives  at  less  distances  than  that  of  any  of  the  fringes. 

Obs.  8.  I  caused  the  edges  of  two  knives  to  be  ground  truly  straight,  and 
pricking  their  points  into  a  board  so  that  their  edges  might  look  towards  one 
another,  and  meeting  near  their  points  contain  a  rectilinear  angle,  I  fastened 
their  handles  together  with  pitch  to  make  this  angle  invariable.  The  distance  of 
the  edges  of  the  knives  from  one  another  at  the  distance  of  four  inches  from  the 
angular  point,  where  the  edges  of  the  knives  met,  was  the  eighth  part  of  an 
inch;  and,  therefore,  the  angle  contained  by  the  edges  was  about  1  degree  54'. 
The  knives  thus  fixed  together  I  placed  in  a  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  let  into  my 
darkened  chamber  through  a  hole  the  42d  part  of  an  inch  wide,  at  the  distance 
of  10  or  15  feet  from  the  hole,  and  let  the  light  which  passed  between  their  edges 
fall  very  obliquely  upon  a  smooth  white  ruler  at  the  distance  of  half  an  inch, 
or  an  inch  from  the  knives,  and  there  saw  the  fringes  by  the  two  edges  of  the 
knives  run  along  the  edges  of  the  shadows  of  the  knives  in  lines  parallel  to 
those  edges  without  growing  sensibly  broader,  till  they  met  in  angles  equal  to 
the  angle  contained  by  the  edges  of  the  knives,  and  where  they  met  and  joined 
they  ended  without  crossing  one  another.  But  if  the  ruler  was  held  at  a  much 
greater  distance  from  the  knives,  the  fringes  where  they  were  farther  from  the 
place  of  their  meeting  were  a  little  narrower,  and  became  something  broader 
and  broader  as  they  approached  nearer  and  nearer  to  one  another,  and  after 
they  met  they  crossed  one  another,  and  then  became  much  broader  than  before. 

Whence  I  gather  that  the  distances  at  which  the  fringes  pass  by  the  knives 
are  not  increased  nor  altered  by  the  approach  of  the  knives,  but  the  angles  in 
which  the  rays  are  there  bent  are  much  increased  by  that  approach ;  and  that 
the  knife  which  is  nearest  any  ray  determines  which  way  the  ray  shall  be  bent, 
and  the  other  knife  increases  the  bent. 

Obs.  9.  When  the  rays  fell  very  obliquely  upon  the  ruler  at  the  distance  of 
the  third  part  of  an  inch  from  the  knives,  the  dark  line  between  the  first  and 
second  fringe  of  the  shadow  of  one  knife,  and  the  dark  line  between  the  first 
and  second  fringe  of  the  shadow  of  the  other  knife  met  mth  one  another,  at  the 
distance  of  the  fifth  part  of  an  inch  from  the  end  of  the  light  which  passed 
between  the  knives  at  the  concourse  of  their  edges.  And,  therefore,  the  distance 
of  the  edges  of  the  knives  at  the  meeting  of  these  dark  lines  was  the  160th  part 
of  an  inch.  For  as  four  inches  to  the  eighth  part  of  an  inch,  so  is  any  length  of 
the  edges  of  the  knives  measured  from  the  point  of  their  concourse  to  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  edges  of  the  knives  at  the  end  of  that  length,  and  so  is  the  fifth  part 
of  an  inch  to  the  160th  part.  So,  then,  the  dark  lines  above  mentioned  meet  in 


Book  III:  Part  1  513 

the  middle  of  the  light  which  passes  between  the  knives  where  they  are  distant 
the  160th  part  of  an  inch,  and  the  one  half  of  that  light  passes  by  the  edge  of 
one  knife  at  a  distance  not  greater  than  the  320th  part  of  an  inch,  and  falling 
upon  the  paper  makes  the  fringes  of  the  shadow  of  that  knife,  and  the  other 
half  passes  by  the  edge  of  the  other  knife,  at  a  distance  not  greater  than  the 
320th  part  of  an  inch,  and  falling  upon  the  paper  makes  the  fringes  of  the  shad¬ 
ow  of  the  other  knife.  But  if  the  paper  be  held  at  a  distance  from  the  knives 
greater  than  the  third  part  of  an  inch,  the  dark  lines  above  mentioned  meet  at 
a  greater  distance  than  the  fifth  part  of  an  inch  from  the  end  of  the  light  which 
passed  between  the  knives  at  the  concourse  of  their  edges;  and,  therefore,  the 
light  which  falls  upon  the  paper  where  those  dark  lines  meet  passes  between  the 
knives  where  the  edges  are  distant  above  the  160th  part  of  an  inch. 

For  at  another  time,  when  the  two  knives  were  distant  eight  feet  and  five 
inches  from  the  little  hole  in  the  window,  made  with  a  small  pin  as  above,  the 
light  which  fell  upon  the  paper  where  the  aforesaid  dark  lines  met,  passed 
between  the  knives,  where  the  distance  between  their  edges  was  as  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Table,  when  the  distance  of  the  paper  from  the  knives  was  also  as 
follows: 


Distances  of  the  paper  from 
the  knives  in  inches 

Distances  between  the  edges  of  the  knives 
in  millesimal  parts  of  an  inch 

H 

0.012 

3i 

0.020 

8| 

0.034 

32 

0.057 

96 

0.081 

131 

0.087 

And  hence  I  gather  that  the  light  which  makes  the  fringes  upon  the  paper  is 
not  the  same  light  at  all  distances  of  the  paper  from  the  knives,  but  when  the 
paper  is  held  near  the  knives,  the  fringes  are  made  by  light  which  passes  by  the 
edges  of  the  knives  at  a  less  distance,  and  is  more  bent  than  when  the  paper  is 
held  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  knives. 

Obs.  10.  When  the  fringes  of  the  shadows  of  the  knives  fell  perpendicularly 
upon  a  paper  at  a  great  distance  from  the  knives,  they  were  in  the  form  of 
hyperbolas,  and  their  dimensions  were  as  follows:  Let  CA,  CB  [Fig.  3]  represent 
lines  drawn  upon  the  paper  parallel  to  the  edges  of  the  knives,  and  between 
which  all  the  light  would  fall  if  it  passed  between  the  edges  of  the  knives  with¬ 
out  inflexion;  DE  a  right  line  drawn  through  C  making  the  angles  ACD,  BCE, 
equal  to  one  another,  and  terminating  all  the  light  which  falls  upon  the  paper 
from  the  point  where  the  edges  of  the  knives  meet;  eis,  fkt,  and  glv,  three  hyper¬ 
bolical  lines  representing  the  terminus  of  the  shadow  of  one  of  the  knives,  the 
dark  line  between  the  first  and  second  fringes  of  that  shadow,  and  the  dark  line 
between  the  second  and  third  fringes  of  the  same  shadow;  xip,  ykq,  and  zlr, 
three  other  hyperbolical  lines  representing  the  terminus  of  the  shadow  of  the 
other  knife,  the  dark  line  between  the  first  and  second  fringes  of  that  shadow, 
and  the  dark  line  between  the  second  and  third  fringes  of  the  same  shadow. 


514  Optics 

And  conceive  that  these  three  hyperbolas  are  like  and  equal  to  the  former  three, 
and  cross  them  in  the  points  i,  k,  and  I,  and  that  the  shadows  of  the  knives  are 
terminated  and  distinguished  from  the  first  luminous  fringes  by  the  lines  eis 
and  xip,  until  the  meeting  and  crossing  of  the  fringes,  and  then  those  lines  cross 
the  fringes  in  the  form  of  dark  lines,  terminating  the  first  luminous  fringes 


vdthin  side,  and  distinguishing  them  from  another  light  which  begins  to  appear 
at  i,  and  illuminates  all  the  triangular  space  fpDEs  comprehended  by  these 
dark  lines,  and  the  right  line  DE.  Of  these  hyperbolas  one  asymptote  is  the  line 
DE,  and  their  other  asymptotes  are  parallel  to  the  lines  CA  and  CB.  Let  rv 
represent  a  line  dra^vn  any^vhere  upon  the  paper  parallel  to  the  asymptote  DE, 
and  let  this  line  cross  the  right  lines  AC  in  m,  and  BC  in  n,  and  the  six  dark 
hyperbolical  lines  in  p,  q,  r;  s,  t,v;  and  by  measuring  the  distances  ps,  qt,  rv,  and 
thence  collecting  the  lengths  of  the  ordinates  np,  nq,  nr  or  ms,  mt,  mv,  and  doing 
this  at  several  distances  of  the  line  rv  from  the  asymptote  DE,  you  may  find  as 
many  points  of  these  hyperbolas  as  you  please,  and  thereby  know  that  these 
curve  lines  are  hyperbolas  differing  little  from  the  conical  hyperbola.  And  by 
measuring  the  lines  Ci,  Ck,  Cl,  you  may  find  other  points  of  these  curves. 

For  instance,  when  the  knives  were  distant  from  the  hole  in  the  vdndow  ten 
feet,  and  the  paper  from  the  knives  nine  feet,  and  the  angle  contained  by  the 
edges  of  the  knives  to  which  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  was  subtended  by  a  chord 
which  was  to  the  radius  as  1  to  32,  and  the  distance  of  the  line  rv  from  the 
asymptote  DE  was  half  an  inch,  I  measured  the  lines  ps,  qt,  rv,  and  found  them 
0.35,  0.65,  0.98  inch,  respectively;  and  by  adding  to  their  halves  the  line  }^mn 
(which  here  was  the  128th  part  of  an  inch,  or  0.0078  inch),  the  sums  np,  nq,  nr, 
were  0.1828,  0.3328,  0.4978  inch.  I  measured  also  the  distances  of  the  brightest 
parts  of  the  fringes  which  run  between  pq  and  st,  qr  and  tv,  and  next  beyond  r 
and  V,  and  found  them  0.5,  0.8,  and  1.17  inches. 

Obs.  11.  The  Sun  shining  into  my  darkened  room  through  a  small  round  hole 
made  in  a  plate  of  lead  with  a  slender  pin,  as  above,  I  placed  at  the  hole  a  prism 
to  refract  the  light,  and  form  on  the  opposite  wall  the  spectrum  of  colours, 
described  in  the  third  experiment  of  the  first  book.  And  then  I  found  that  the 
shadows  of  all  bodies  held  in  the  coloured  light  between  the  prism  and  the  wall 
were  bordered  with  fringes  of  the  colour  of  that  light  in  which  they  were  held. 


515 


Book  III :  Part  1 

In  the  full  red  light  they  were  totally  red  without  any  sensible  blue  or  violet, 
and  in  the  deep  blue  light  they  were  totally  blue  without  any  sensible  red  or 
yellow;  and  so  in  the  green  light  they  were  totally  green,  excepting  a  little 
yellow  and  blue,  which  were  mixed  in  the  green  light  of  the  prism.  And  compar¬ 
ing  the  fringes  made  in  the  several  coloured  lights,  I  found  that  those  made  in 
the  red  light  were  largest,  those  made  in  the  violet  were  least,  and  those  made 
in  the  green  were  of  a  middle  bigness.  For  the  fringes  with  which  the  shadow  of 
a  man’s  hair  were  bordered,  being  measured  across  the  shadow  at  the  distance 
of  six  inches  from  the  hair,  the  distance  between  the  middle  and  most  luminous 
part  of  the  first  or  innermost  fringe  on  one  side  of  the  shadow,  and  that  of  the 
like  fringe  on  the  other  side  of  the  shadow,  was  in  the  full  red  light  of  an 
inch,  and  in  the  full  violet  %6-  And  the  like  distance  between  the  middle  and 
most  luminous  parts  of  the  second  fringes  on  either  side  the  shadow  was  in  the 
full  red  light  ^22,  and  in  the  violet  j/27  of  an  inch.  And  these  distances  of  the 
fringes  held  the  same  proportion  at  all  distances  from  the  hair  without  any 
sensible  variation. 

So,  then,  the  rays  which  made  these  fringes  in  the  red  light  passed  by  the  hair 
at  a  greater  distance  than  those  did  which  made  the  like  fringes  in  the  violet; 
and,  therefore,  the  hair  in  causing  these  fringes  acted  alike  upon  the  red  light 
or  least  refrangible  rays  at  a  greater  distance,  and  upon  the  violet  or  most 
refrangible  rays  at  a  less  distance,  and  by  those  actions  disposed  the  red  light 
into  larger  fringes,  and  the  violet  into  smaller,  and  the  lights  of  intermediate 
colours  into  fringes  of  intermediate  bignesses  without  changing  the  colour  of 
any  sort  of  light. 

When,  therefore,  the  hair  in  the  first  and  second  of  these  Observations  was 
held  in  the  white  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  and  cast  a  shadow  which  was  bor¬ 
dered  Avith  three  fringes  of  coloured  light,  those  colours  arose  not  from  any  new 
modifications  impressed  upon  the  rays  of  light  by  the  hair,  but  only  from  the 
various  inflexions  whereby  the  several  sorts  of  rays  were  separated  from  one  an¬ 
other,  which  before  separation,  by  the  mixture  of  all  their  colours,  composed 
the  white  beam  of  the  Sun’s  light,  but  whenever  separated  compose  lights 
of  the  several  colours  which  they  are  originally  disposed  to  exhibit.  In  this 
11th  Observation,  where  the  colours  are  separated  before  the  light  passes 
by  the  hair,  the  least  refrangible  rays,  which  when  separated  from  the  rest 
make  red,  were  inflected  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  hair,  so  as  to  make 
three  red  fringes  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  middle  of  the  shadow  of  the 
hair;  and  the  most  refrangible  rays  which  when  separated  make  violet,  were 
inflected  at  a  less  distance  from  the  hair,  so  as  to  make  three  violet  fringes  at  a 
less  distance  from  the  middle  of  the  shadow  of  the  hair.  And  other  rays  of 
intermediate  degrees  of  refrangibility  were  inflected  at  intermediate  distances 
from  the  hair,  so  as  to  make  fringes  of  intermediate  colours  at  intermediate 
distances  from  the  middle  of  the  shadow  of  the  hair.  And  in  the  second  Obser¬ 
vation,  where  all  the  colours  are  mixed  in  the  white  light  which  passes  by  the 
hair,  these  colours  are  separated  by  the  various  inflexions  of  the  rays,  and  the 
fringes  which  they  make  appear  all  together,  and  the  innermost  fringes  being 
contiguous  make  one  broad  fringe  composed  of  all  the  colours  in  due  order,  the 
violet  lying  on  the  inside  of  the  fringe  next  the  shadow,  the  red  on  the  outside 
farthest  from  the  shadow,  and  the  blue,  green,  and  yellow,  in  the  middle.  And, 
in  like  manner,  the  middlemost  fringes  of  all  the  colours  lying  in  order,  and 


516  Optics 

being  contiguous,  make  another  broad  fringe  composed  of  all  the  colours;  and 
the  outmost  fringes  of  all  the  colours  lying  in  order,  and  being  contiguous, 
make  a  third  broad  fringe  composed  of  all  the  colours.  These  are  the  three 
fringes  of  coloured  light  with  which  the  shadows  of  all  bodies  are  bordered  in 
the  second  Observation. 

When  I  made  the  foregoing  Observations,  I  designed  to  repeat  most  of  them 
with  more  care  and  exactness,  and  to  make  some  new  ones  for  determining  the 
manner  how  the  rays  of  light  are  bent  in  their  passage  by  bodies,  for  making 
the  fringes  of  colours  with  the  dark  lines  between  them.  But  I  was  then  inter¬ 
rupted,  and  cannot  now  think  of  taking  these  things  into  further  consideration. 
And  since  I  have  not  finished  this  part  of  my  design,  I  shall  conclude  with 
proposing  only  some  queries,  in  order  to  a  further  search  to  be  made  by  others. 

Query  1.  Do  not  bodies  act  upon  light  at  a  distance,  and  by  their  action  bend 
its  rays;  and  is  not  this  action  (cceteris  paribus)  strongest  at  the  least  distance? 

Qu.  2.  Do  not  the  rays  which  differ  in  refrangibility  differ  also  in  flexibility; 
and  are  they  not  by  their  different  inflexions  separated  from  one  another,  so  as 
after  separation  to  make  the  colours  in  the  three  fringes  above  described?  And 
after  what  manner  are  they  inflected  to  make  those  fringes? 

Qu.  3.  Are  not  the  rays  of  light,  in  passing  by  the  edges  and  sides  of  bodies, 
bent  several  times  backwards  and  forwards,  with  a  motion  like  that  of  an  eel? 
And  do  not  the  three  fringes  of  coloured  light  above  mentioned  arise  from  three 
such  bendings? 

Qu.  4.  Do  not  the  rays  of  light  which  fall  upon  bodies,  and  are  reflected  or 
refracted,  begin  to  bend  before  they  arrive  at  the  bodies;  and  are  they  not  re¬ 
flected,  refracted,  and  inflected,  by  one  and  the  same  principle,  acting  variously 
in  various  circumstances? 

Qu.  5.  Do  not  bodies  and  light  act  mutually  upon  one  another;  that  is  to  say, 
bodies  upon  light  in  emitting,  reflecting,  refracting  and  inflecting  it,  and  light 
upon  bodies  for  heating  them,  and  putting  their  parts  into  a  vibrating  motion 
wherein  heat  consists? 

Qu.  6.  Do  not  black  bodies  conceive  heat  more  easily  from  light  than  those  of 
other  colours  do,  by  reason  that  the  light  falling  on  them  is  not  reflected  out¬ 
wards,  but  enters  the  bodies,  and  is  often  reflected  and  refracted  udthin  them, 
until  it  be  stifled  and  lost? 

Qu.  7.  Is  not  the  strength  and  vigor  of  the  action  between  light  and  sul¬ 
phureous  bodies  observed  above,  one  reason  why  sulphureous  bodies  take  fire 
more  readily,  and  burn  more  vehemently  than  other  bodies  do? 

Qu.  8.  Do  not  all  fixed  bodies,  when  heated  beyond  a  certain  degree,  emit 
light  and  shine;  and  is  not  this  emission  performed  by  the  vibrating  motions 
of  their  parts?  And  do  not  all  bodies  which  abound  with  terrestrial  parts,  and 
especially  with  sulphureous  ones,  emit  light  as  often  as  those  parts  are  suffi¬ 
ciently  agitated;  whether  that  agitation  be  made  by  heat,  or  by  friction,  or 
percussion,  or  putrefaction,  or  by  any  vital  motion,  or  any  other  cause?  As  for 
instance;  sea-water  in  a  raging  storm;  quick-silver  agitated  m  vacuo',  the  back  of 
a  cat,  or  neck  of  a  horse,  obliquely  struck  or  rubbed  in  a  dark  place;  wood,  flesh 
and  fish  while  they  putrefy;  vapours  arising  from  putrefied  waters,  usually 
called  ignes  fatui;  stacks  of  moist  hay  or  corn  growing  hot  by  fermentation; 
glow-worms  and  the  eyes  of  some  animals  by  vital  motions;  the  vulgar  phos- 


Book  III:  Part  1  517 

phorus  agitated  by  the  attrition  of  any  body,  or  by  the  acid  particles  of  the  air; 
amber  and  some  diamonds  by  striking,  pressing  or  rubbing  them;  scrapings  of 
steel  struck  off  with  a  flint;  iron  hammered  very  nimbly  till  it  become  so  hot  as 
to  kindle  sulphur  thrown  upon  it;  the  axletrees  of  chariots  taking  fire  by  the 
rapid  rotation  of  the  wheels;  and  some  liquors  mixed  with  one  another  whose 
particles  come  together  with  an  impetus,  as  oil  of  vitriol  distilled  from  its 
weight  of  nitre,  and  then  mixed  with  twice  its  weight  of  oil  of  anniseeds.  So  also 
a  globe  of  glass  about  8  or  10  inches  in  diameter,  being  put  into  a  frame  where 
it  may  be  swiftly  turned  round  its  axis,  will  in  turning  shine  where  it  rubs 
against  the  palm  of  one’s  hand  applied  to  it.  And  if  at  the  same  time  a  piece  of 
white  paper  or  white  cloth,  or  the  end  of  one’s  finger  be  held  at  the  distance  of 
about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  or  half  an  inch  from  that  part  of  the  glass  where  it  is 
most  in  motion,  the  electric  vapour  which  is  excited  by  the  friction  of  the  glass 
against  the  hand  wiW  (by  dashing  against  the  white  paper,  cloth  or  finger)  be 
put  into  such  an  agitation  as  to  emit  light,  and  make  the  white  paper,  cloth,  or 
finger  appear  lucid  like  a  glow-worm;  and  in  rushing  out  of  the  glass  vdll  some¬ 
times  push  against  the  finger  so  as  to  be  felt.  And  the  same  things  have  been 
found  by  rubbing  a  long  and  large  cylinder  or  glass  or  amber  with  a  paper  held 
in  one’s  hand,  and  continuing  the  friction  till  the  glass  grew  warm. 

Qu.  9.  Is  not  fire  a  body  heated  so  hot  as  to  emit  light  copiously?  For  what 
else  is  a  red  hot  iron  than  fire?  And  what  else  is  a  burning  coal  than  red  hot 
wood? 

Qu.  10.  Is  not  flame  a  vapour,  fume  or  exhalation  heated  red  hot;  that  is,  so 
hot  as  to  shine?  For  bodies  do  not  flame  without  emitting  a  copious  fume,  and 
this  fume  burns  in  the  flame.  The  ignis  fatuus  is  a  vapour  shining  without 
heat,  and  is  there  not  the  same  difference  between  this  vapour  and  flame  as 
between  rotten  wood  shining  without  heat  and  burning  coals  of  fire?  In  distill¬ 
ing  hot  spirits,  if  the  head  of  the  still  be  taken  off,  the  vapour  which  ascends  out 
of  the  still  vdll  take  fire  at  the  flame  of  a  candle,  and  turn  into  flame,  and  the 
flame  will  run  along  the  vapour  from  the  candle  to  the  still.  Some  bodies  heated 
by  motion,  or  fermentation,  if  the  heat  grow  intense,  fume  copiously,  and  if  the 
heat  be  great  enough  the  fumes  will  shine  and  become  flame.  Metals  in  fusion 
do  not  flame  for  want  of  a  copious  fume,  except  spelter,  which  fumes  copiously, 
and  thereby  flames.  All  flaming  bodies,  as  oil,  tallow,  wax,  wood,  fossil  coals, 
pitch,  sulphur,  by  flaming  waste  and  vanish  into  burning  smoke,  which  smoke, 
if  the  flame  be  put  out,  is  very  thick  and  visible,  and  sometimes  smells  strongly, 
but  in  the  flame  loses  its  smell  by  burning,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
smoke  the  flame  is  of  several  colours,  as  that  of  sulphur  blue,  that  of  copper 
opened  with  sublimate  green,  that  of  tallow  yellow,  that  of  camphor  white. 
Smoke  passing  through  flame  cannot  but  grow  red-hot,  and  red-hot  smoke 
can  have  no  other  appearance  than  that  of  flame.  When  gunpowder  takes 
fire,  it  goes  away  into  flaming  smoke.  For  the  charcoal  and  sulphur  easily 
take  fire,  and  set  fire  to  the  nitre,  and  the  spirit  of  the  nitre  being  thereby 
rarified  into  vapour,  rushes  out  with  explosion  much  after  the  manner  that 
the  vapour  of  water  rushes  out  of  an  aeolipile;  the  sulphur  also  being  volatile 
is  converted  into  vapour,  and  augments  the  explosion.  And  the  acid  vapour 
of  the  sulphur  (namely,  that  which  distils  under  a  bell  into  oil  of  sulphur) 
entering  violently  into  the  fixed  body  of  the  nitre,  sets  loose  the  spirit  of  the 
nitre,  and  excites  a  great  fermentation  whereby  the  heat  is  further  aug- 


518  Optics 

merited,  and  the  fixed  body  of  the  nitre  is  also  rarified  into  fume,  and  the  ex¬ 
plosion  is  thereby  made  more  vehement  and  quick.  For  if  salt  of  tartar  be 
mixed  with  gunpowder,  and  that  mixture  be  warmed  till  it  takes  fire,  the 
explosion  vill  be  more  violent  and  quick  than  that  of  gunpowder  alone;  which 
cannot  proceed  from  any  other  cause  than  the  action  of  the  vapour  of  the  gun¬ 
powder  upon  the  salt  of  tartar,  whereby  that  salt  is  rarified.  The  explosion  of 
gunpowder  arises,  therefore,  from  the  violent  action  whereby  all  the  mixture, 
being  quickly  and  vehemently  heated,  is  rarified  and  converted  into  fume  and 
vapour:  which  vapour,  bj'  the  violence  of  that  action,  becoming  so  hot  as  to 
shine,  appears  in  the  form  of  flame. 

Qu.  11.  Do  not  great  bodies  conserve  their  heat  the  longest,  their  parts 
heating  one  another,  and  may  not  great  dense  and  fixed  bodies,  when  heated 
beyond  a  certain  degree,  emit  light  so  copiously,  as  by  the  emission  and  reaction 
of  its  light,  and  the  reflexions  and  refractions  of  its  rays  mthin  its  pores  to  grow 
still  hotter,  till  it  comes  to  a  certain  period  of  heat,  such  as  is  that  of  the  Sun? 
And  are  not  the  Sun  and  fixed  stars  great  earths  vehemently  hot,  whose  heat  is 
conserved  by  the  greatness  of  the  bodies,  and  the  mutual  action  and  reaction 
between  them,  and  the  light  which  they  emit,  and  whose  parts  are  kept  from 
fuming  away,  not  only  by  their  fixity,  but  also  by  the  vast  weight  and  density 
of  the  atmospheres  incumbent  upon  them ;  and  very  strongly  compressing  them, 
and  condensing  the  vapours  and  exhalations  which  arise  from  them?  For  if 
water  be  made  warm  in  any  pellucid  vessel  emptied  of  air,  that  water  in  the 
vacuum  vill  bubble  and  boil  as  vehemently  as  it  would  in  the  open  air  in  a 
vessel  set  upon  the  fire  till  it  conceives  a  much  greater  heat.  For  the  weight  of 
the  incumbent  atmosphere  keeps  down  the  vapours,  and  hinders  the  Avater  from 
boiling,  until  it  grow  much  hotter  than  is  requisite  to  make  it  boil  in  vacuo.  Also 
a  mixture  of  tin  and  lead  being  put  upon  a  red-hot  iron  in  vacuo  emits  a  fume 
and  flame,  but  the  same  mixture  in  the  open  air,  by  reason  of  the  incumbent 
atmosphere,  does  not  so  much  as  emit  any  fume  which  can  be  perceived  by 
sight.  In  like  manner  the  great  weight  of  the  atmosphere  which  lies  upon  the 
globe  of  the  Sun  may  hinder  bodies  there  from  rising  up  and  going  away  from 
the  Sun  in  the  form  of  vapours  and  fumes,  unless  by  means  of  a  far  greater  heat 
than  that  which  on  the  surface  of  our  Earth  Avould  very  easily  turn  them  into 
vapours  and  fumes.  And  the  same  great  weight  may  condense  those  vapours 
and  exhalations  as  soon  as  they  shall  at  any  time  begin  to  ascend  from  the  Sun, 
and  make  them  presently  fall  back  again  into  him,  and  by  that  action  increase 
his  heat  much  after  the  manner  that  in  our  Earth  the  air  increases  the  heat  of  a 
culinary  fire.  And  the  same  weight  may  hinder  the  globe  of  the  Sun  from  being 
diminished,  unless  by  the  emission  of  light,  and  a  very  small  quantity  of  vapours 
and  exhalations. 

Qu.  12.  Do  not  the  rays  of  light  in  falling  upon  the  bottom  of  the  eye  excite 
vibrations  in  the  tunica  retina?  Which  vibrations,  being  propagated  along  the 
solid  fibres  of  the  optic  nerves  into  the  brain,  cause  the  sense  of  seeing?  For 
because  dense  bodies  conserve  their  heat  a  long  time,  and  the  densest  bodies 
conserve  their  heat  the  longest,  the  vibrations  of  their  parts  are  of  a  lasting 
nature,  and  therefore  may  be  propagated  along  solid  fibres  of  uniform  dense 
matter  to  a  great  distance,  for  conveying  into  the  brain  the  impressions  made 
upon  all  the  organs  of  sense.  For  that  motion  which  can  continue  long  in  one 
and  the  same  part  of  a  body,  can  be  propagated  a  long  way  from  one  part  to 


Book  III:  Part  1  519 

another,  supposing  the  body  homogeneal.  so  that  the  motion  may  not  be 
reflected,  refracted,  interrupted  or  disordered  by  any  unevenness  of  the  body. 

Qu.  13.  Do  not  several  sorts  of  rays  make  vibrations  of  several  bignesses, 
which  according  to  their  bignesses  excite  sensations  of  several  colours,  much 
after  the  manner  that  the  vibrations  of  the  air,  according  to  their  several 
bignesses  excite  sensations  of  several  sounds?  And  particularly  do  not  the  most 
refrangible  rays  excite  the  shortest  vibrations  for  making  a  sensation  of  deep 
violet,  the  least  refrangible  the  largest  for  making  a  sensation  of  deep  red,  and 
the  several  intermediate  sorts  of  rays,  vibrations  of  several  intermediate  big¬ 
nesses  to  make  sensations  of  the  several  intermediate  colours? 

Qu.  14.  May  not  the  harmony  and  discord  of  colours  arise  from  the  pro¬ 
portions  of  the  vibrations  propagated  through  the  fibres  of  the  optic  nerves  into 
the  brain,  as  the  harmony  and  discord  of  sounds  arise  from  the  proportions  of 
the  vibrations  of  the  air?  For  some  colours,  if  they  be  viewed  together,  are 
agreeable  to  one  another,  as  those  of  gold  and  indigo,  and  others  disagree. 

Qu.  15.  Are  not  the  species  of  objects  seen  with  both  eyes  united  where  the 
optic  nerves  meet  before  they  come  into  the  brain,  the  fibres  on  the  right  side  of 
both  nerves  uniting  there,  and  after  union  going  thence  into  the  brain  in  the 
nerve  which  is  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and  the  fibres  on  the  left  side  of 
both  nerves  uniting  in  the  same  place,  and  after  union  going  into  the  brain  in 
the  nerve  which  is  on  the  left  side  of  the  head,  and  these  two  nerves  meeting  in 
the  brain  in  such  a  manner  that  their  fibres  make  but  one  entire  species  or 
picture,  half  of  which  on  the  right  side  of  the  sensorium  comes  from  the  right 
side  of  both  eyes  through  the  right  side  of  both  optic  nerves  to  the  place  where 
the  nerves  meet,  and  from  thence  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  into  the  brain, 
and  the  other  half  on  the  left  side  of  the  sensorium  comes  in  like  manner  from 
the  left  side  of  both  eyes?  For  the  optic  nerves  of  such  animals  as  look  the  same 
way  with  both  eyes  (as  of  men,  dogs,  sheep,  oxen,  cfec.)  meet  before  they  come 
into  the  brain,  but  the  optic  nerves  of  such  animals  as  do  not  look  the  same  way 
mth  both  eyes  (as  of  fishes,  and  of  the  chameleon)  do  not  meet,  if  I  am  rightly 
informed. 

Qu.  16.  When  a  man  in  the  dark  presses  either  corner  of  his  eye  ’with  his 
finger,  and  turns  his  eye  away  from  his  finger,  he  will  see  a  circle  of  colours  like 
those  in  the  feather  of  a  peacock’s  tail.  If  the  eye  and  the  finger  remain  quiet 
these  colours  vanish  in  a  second  minute  of  time,  but  if  the  finger  be  moved  vdth 
a  quavering  motion  they  appear  again.  Do  not  these  colours  arise  from  such 
motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  by  the  pressure  and  motion  of  the 
finger  as  at  other  times  are  excited  there  by  light  for  causing  vision?  And  do  not 
the  motions  once  excited  continue  about  a  second  of  time  before  they  cease? 
And  when  a  man  by  a  stroke  upon  his  eye  sees  a  flash  of  light,  are  not  the  like 
motions  excited  in  the  retina  by  the  stroke?  And  Avhen  a  coal  of  fire,  moved 
nimbly  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  makes  the  whole  circumference  appear 
like  a  circle  of  fire,  is  it  not  because  the  motions  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye 
by  the  rays  of  light  are  of  a  lasting  nature,  and  continue  till  the  coal  of  fire  in  going 
round  returns  to  its  former  place?  And  considering  the  lastingness  of  the  motions 
excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  by  light,  are  they  not  of  a  vibrating  nature? 

Qu.  17.  If  a  stone  be  thrown  into  stagnating  water,  the  waves  excited  there¬ 
by  continue  some  time  to  arise  in  the  place  where  the  stone  fell  into  the  water, 
and  are  propagated  from  thence  in  concentric  circles  upon  the  surface  of  the 


520  Optics 

water  to  great  distances.  And  the  vibrations  or  tremors  excited  in  the  air  by 
percussion  continue  a  little  time  to  move  from  the  place  of  percussion  in  con¬ 
centric  spheres  to  great  distances.  And  in  like  manner,  when  a  ray  of  light 
falls  upon  the  surface  of  any  pellucid  body,  and  is  there  refracted  or  reflected, 
may  not  waves  of  vibrations,  or  tremors,  be  thereby  excited  in  the  refracting 
or  reflecting  medium  at  the  point  of  incidence,  and  continue  to  arise  there,  and 
to  be  propagated  from  thence  as  long  as  they  continue  to  arise  and  be  propa¬ 
gated,  when  they  are  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  by  the  pressure  or  motion 
of  the  finger  or  by  the  light  which  comes  from  the  coal  of  fire  in  the  experi¬ 
ments  above  mentioned?  And  are  not  these  vibrations  propagated  from  the 
point  of  incidence  to  great  distances?  And  do  they  not  overtake  the  rays  of 
light,  and,  by  overtaking  them  successively,  do  they  not  put  them  into  the 
fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission  described  above?  For  if  the  rays 
endeavour  to  recede  from  the  densest  part  of  the  vibration,  they  may  be  alter¬ 
nately  accelerated  and  retarded  by  the  \'ibrations  overtaking  them. 

Qu.  18.  If  in  two  large  tall  cylindrical  vessels  of  glass  inverted,  two  little 
thermometers  be  suspended  so  as  not  to  touch  the  vessels,  and  the  air  be  drawn 
out  of  one  of  these  vessels,  and  these  vessels  thus  prepared  be  carried  out  of  a 
cold  place  into  a  warm  one,  the  thermometer  in  vacuo  will  grow  warm  as  much, 
and  almost  as  soon,  as  the  thermometer  which  is  not  in  vacuo.  And  when  the 
vessels  are  carried  back  into  the  cold  place,  the  thermometer  in  vacuo  will  grow 
cold  almost  as  soon  as  the  other  thermometer.  Is  not  the  heat  of  the  warm 
room  conveyed  through  the  vacuum  by  the  vibrations  of  a  much  subtiler 
medium  than  air,  \vhich  after  the  air  w^as  drawm  out  remained  in  the  vacuum? 
And  is  not  this  medium  the  same  with  that  medium  by  w^hich  light  is  refracted 
and  reflected,  and  by  whose  vibrations  light  communicates  heat  to  bodies,  and 
is  put  into  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission?  And  do  not  the  vibra¬ 
tions  of  this  medium  in  hot  bodies  contribute  to  the  intenseness  and  duration 
of  their  heat?  And  do  not  hot  bodies  communicate  their  heat  to  contiguous 
cold  ones,  by  the  vibrations  of  this  medium  propagated  from  them  into  the 
cold  ones?  And  is  not  this  medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and  subtile  than  the 
air,  and  exceedingly  more  elastic  and  active?  And  doth  it  not  readily  pervade 
all  bodies?  And  is  it  not  (by  its  elastic  force)  expanded  through  all  the  heavens? 

Qu.  19.  Doth  not  the  refraction  of  light  proceed  from  the  different  density 
of  this  aethereal  medium  in  different  places,  the  light  receding  always  from  the 
denser  parts  of  the  medium?  And  is  not  the  density  thereof  greater  in  free  and 
open  spaces  void  of  air  and  other  grosser  bodies,  than  wdthin  the  pores  of  water, 
glass,  crystal,  gems,  and  other  compact  bodies?  For  when  light  passes  through 
glass  or  crystal,  and  falling  very  obliquely  upon  the  farther  surface  thereof  is 
totally  reflected,  the  total  reflexion  ought  to  proceed  rather  from  the  density 
and  vigour  of  the  medium  without  and  beyond  the  glass,  than  from  the  rarity 
and  weakness  thereof. 

Qu.  20.  Doth  not  this  sethereal  medium  in  passing  out  of  water,  glass,  crystal, 
and  other  compact  and  dense  bodies  into  empty  spaces,  grow^  denser  and  denser 
by  degrees,  and  by  that  means  refract  the  rays  of  light  not  in  a  point,  but  by 
bending  them  gradually  in  curved  lines?  And  doth  not  the  gradual  condensa¬ 
tion  of  this  medium  extend  to  some  distance  from  the  bodies,  and  thereby 
cause  the  inflexions  of  the  rays  of  light,  w'hich  pass  by  the  edges  of  dense  bodies, 
at  some  distance  from  the  bodies? 


Book  III:  Part  1  521 

Qu.  21.  Is  not  this  medium  much  rarer  within  the  dense  bodies  of  the  Sun, 
stars,  planets  and  comets,  than  in  the  empty  celestial  spaces  between  them? 
And  in  passing  from  them  to  great  distances,  doth  it  not  grow  denser  and 
denser  perpetually,  and  thereby  cause  the  gravity  of  those  great  bodies  towards 
one  another,  and  of  their  parts  towards  the  bodies;  every  body  endeavouring 
to  go  from  the  denser  parts  of  the  medium  towards  the  rarer?  For  if  this  me¬ 
dium  be  rarer  \vithin  the  Sun’s  body  than  at  its  surface,  and  rarer  there  than  at 
the  hundredth  part  of  an  inch  from  its  body,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  fiftieth 
part  of  an  inch  from  its  body,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the  orb  of  Saturn,  I  see 
no  reason  why  the  increase  of  density  should  stop  anywhere,  and  not  rather  be 
continued  through  all  distances  from  the  Sun  to  Saturn,  and  beyond.  And 
though  this  increase  of  density  may  at  great  distances  be  exceeding  slow,  yet 
if  the  elastic  force  of  this  medium  be  exceeding  great,  it  may  suffice  to  impel 
bodies  from  the  denser  parts  of  the  medium  towards  the  rarer,  with  all  that 
power  which  we  call  gravity.  And  that  the  elastic  force  of  this  medium  is  ex¬ 
ceeding  great,  may  be  gathered  from  the  smftness  of  its  vibrations.  Sounds 
move  about  1,140  English  feet  in  a  second  minute  of  time,  and  in  seven  or 
eight  minutes  of  time  they  move  about  one  hundred  English  miles.  Light 
moves  from  the  Sun  to  us  in  about  seven  or  eight  minutes  of  time,  which  dis¬ 
tance  is  about  7,000,000  English  miles,  supposing  the  horizontal  parallax  of 
the  Sun  to  be  about  12".  And  the  vibrations  or  pulses  of  this  medium,  that 
they  may  cause  the  alternate  fits  of  easy  transmission  and  easy  reflexion,  must 
be  swifter  than  light,  and  by  consequence  above  700,000  times  swifter  than 
sounds.  And,  therefore,  the  elastic  force  of  this  medium,  in  proportion  to  its 
density,  must  be  above  700,000X700,000  (that  is,  above  490,000,000,000) 
times  greater  than  the  elastic  force  of  the  air  is  in  proportion  to  its  density. 
For  the  velocities  of  the  pulses  of  elastic  mediums  are  in  a  subduplicate  ratio 
of  the  elasticities  and  the  rarities  of  the  mediums  taken  together. 

As  attraction  is  stronger  in  small  magnets  than  in  great  ones  in  proportion 
to  their  bulk,  and  gravity  is  greater  in  the  surfaces  of  small  planets  than  in 
those  of  great  ones  in  proportion  to  their  bulk,  and  small  bodies  are  agitated 
much  more  by  electric  attraction  than  great  ones;  so  the  smallness  of  the  rays 
of  light  may  contribute  very  much  to  the  power  of  the  agent  by  which  they 
are  refracted.  And  so  if  any  one  should  suppose  that  aether  (like  our  air)  may 
contain  particles  which  endeavour  to  recede  from  one  another  (for  I  do  not 
know  what  this  aether  is)  and  that  its  particles  are  exceedingly  smaller  than 
those  of  air,  or  even  than  those  of  light :  the  exceeding  smallness  of  its  particles 
may  contribute  to  the  greatness  of  the  force  by  which  those  particles  may 
recede  from  one  another,  and  thereby  make  that  medium  exceedingly  more 
rare  and  elastic  than  air,  and  by  consequence  exceedingly  less  able  to  resist  the 
motions  of  projectiles,  and  exceedingly  more  able  to  press  upon  gross  bodies, 
by  endeavouring  to  expand  itself. 

Qu,  22,  May  not  planets  and  comets,  and  all  gross  bodies,  perform  their 
motions  more  freely,  and  mth  less  resistance  in  this  aethereal  medium  than  in 
any  fluid,  which  fills  all  space  adequately  Avithout  leaving  any  pores,  and  by 
consequence  is  much  denser  than  quick-silver  or  gold?  And  may  not  its  resist¬ 
ance  be  so  small,  as  to  be  inconsiderable?  For  instance :  if  this  aether  (for  so  I 
will  call  it)  should  be  supposed  700,000  times  more  elastic  than  our  air,  and 
above  700,000  times  more  rare,  its  resistance  would  be  above  600,000,000  times 


522  Optics 

less  than  that  of  water.  And  so  small  a  resistance  would  scarce  make  any 
sensible  alteration  in  the  motions  of  the  planets  in  ten  thousand  years.  If  any 
one  would  ask  how  a  medium  can  be  so  rare,  let  him  tell  me  how  the  air,  in  the 
upper  parts  of  the  atmosphere,  can  be  above  a  hundred  thousand  thcusand 
times  rarer  than  gold.  Let  him  also  tell  me  how  an  electric  body  can  by  friction 
emit  an  exhalation  so  rare  and  subtile,  and  yet  so  potent,  as  by  its  emission  to 
cause  no  sensible  diminution  of  the  weight  of  the  electric  body,  and  to  be 
expanded  through  a  sphere,  whose  diameter  is  above  two  feet,  and  yet  to  be 
able  to  agitate  and  carry  up  leaf  copper,  or  leaf  gold,  at  the  distance  of  above  a 
foot  from  the  electric  body?  And  how  the  effluvia  of  a  magnet  can  be  so  rare 
and  subtile  as  to  pass  through  a  plate  of  glass  without  any  resistance  or  dimi¬ 
nution  of  their  force,  and  yet  so  potent  as  to  turn  a  magnetic  needle  beyond  the 
glass? 

Qu.  23.  Is  not  vision  performed  chiefly  by  the  vibrations  of  this  medium, 
excited  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  by  the  rays  of  light,  and  propagated  through 
the  solid,  pellucid  and  uniform  capillamenta  of  the  optic  nerves  into  the  place 
of  sensation?  And  is  not  hearing  performed  by  the  vibrations  either  of  this  or 
some  other  medium,  excited  in  the  auditory  nerves  by  the  tremors  of  the  air, 
and  propagated  through  the  solid,  pellucid  and  uniform  capillamenta  of  those 
nerves  into  the  place  of  sensation?  And  so  of  the  other  senses. 

Qu.  24.  Is  not  animal  motion  performed  by  the  vibrations  of  this  medium, 
excited  in  the  brain  by  the  power  of  the  will,  and  propagated  from  thence 
through  the  solid,  pellucid  and  uniform  capillamenta  of  the  nerves  into  the 
muscles,  for  contracting  and  dilating  them?  I  suppose  that  the  capillamenta  of 
the  nerves  are  each  of  them  solid  and  uniform,  that  the  vibrating  motion  of 
the  scthereal  medium  may  be  propagated  along  them  from  one  end  to  the  other 
uniformly,  and  without  interruption,  for  obstructions  in  the  nerves  create 
palsies.  And  that  they  may  be  sufficiently  uniform,  I  suppose  them  to  be 
pellucid  when  viewed  singly,  tho’  the  reflexions  in  their  cylindrical  surfaces 
may  make  the  whole  nerve  (composed  of  many  capillamenta)  appear  opaque 
and  white.  For  opacity  arises  from  reflecting  surfaces,  such  as  may  disturb  and 
interrupt  the  motions  of  this  medium. 

Qu.  25.  Are  there  not  other  original  properties  of  the  rays  of  light,  besides 
those  already  described?  An  instance  of  another  original  property  we  have  in 
the  refraction  of  island  crystal,  described  first  by  Erasmus  Bartholinus,  and 
afterwards  more  exactly  by  Huygens,  in  his  book  De  la  Lumiere.  This  crystal  is 
a  pellucid,  fissile  stone,  clear  as  water  or  crystal  of  the  rock,  and  Avithout 
colour:  enduring  a  red  heat  without  losing  its  transparency,  and  in  a  very 
strong  heat  calcining  without  fusion.  Steeped  a  day  or  two  in  water,  it  loses 
its  natural  polish.  Being  rubbed  on  cloth,  it  attracts  pieces  of  straws  and  other 
light  things,  like  amber  or  glass;  and  Avith  aqua  fortis  it  makes  an  ebullition. 
It  seems  to  be  a  sort  of  talc,  and  is  found  in  form  of  an  oblique  parallelepiped, 
Avith  six  parallelogram  sides  and  eight  solid  angles.  The  obtuse  angles  of  the 
parallelograms  are  each  of  them  101  degrees  and  52  minutes;  the  acute  ones 
78  degrees  and  8  minutes.  Tavo  of  the  solid  angles  opposite  to  one  another,  as 
C  and  E,  are  compassed  each  of  them  AAuth  three  of  these  obtuse  angles,  and 
each  of  the  other  six  AAuth  one  obtuse  and  tAvo  acute  ones  [Fig.  4].  It  cleaves 
easily  in  planes  parallel  to  any  of  its  sides,  and  not  in  any  other  planes.  It 
cleaves  Avith  a  glossy  polite  surface  not  perfectly  plane,  but  Avith  some  little 


Book  III :  Part  1  523 

unevenness.  It  is  easily  scratched,  and  by  reason  of  its  softness  it  takes  a  polish 
very  difficultly.  It  polishes  better  upon  polished  looking-glass  than  upon  metal, 

and  perhaps  better  upon  pitch, 
leather  or  parchment.  Afterwards  it 
must  be  rubbed  with  a  little  oil  or 
white  of  an  egg  to  fill  up  its  scratches; 
whereby  it  will  become  very  trans¬ 
parent  and  polite.  But  for  several 
experiments  it  is  not  necessary  to 
polish  it.  If  a  piece  of  this  crystalline 
stone  be  laid  upon  a  book,  every 
letter  of  the  book  seen  through  it 
will  appear  double,  by  means  of  a 
double  refraction.  And  if  any  beam 
of  light  falls  either  perpendicularly, 
or  in  any  oblique  angle  upon  any 
surface  of  this  crystal,  it  becomes 
divided  into  two  beams  by  means  of 
the  same  double  refraction.  Which 
beams  are  of  the  same  colour  with 
the  incident  beam  of  light,  and  seem 
equal  to  one  another  in  the  quantity  of  their  light,  or  very  nearly  equal.  One 
of  these  refractions  is  performed  by  the  usual  rule  of  Optics,  the  sine  of  in¬ 
cidence  out  of  air  into  this  crystal  being  to  the  sine  of  refraction  as  five  to 
three.  The  other  refraction,  which  may  be  called  the  unusual  refraction,  is 
performed  by  the  following  rule : 

Let  ADBC  represent  the  refracting  surface  of  the  crystal,  C  the  biggest 
solid  angle  at  that  surface,  GEHF  the  opposite  surface,  and  CK  a  perpendic¬ 
ular  on  that  surface.  This  perpendicular  makes  with  the  edge  of  the  crystal 
CF,  an  angle  of  19  degrees  3'.  Join  KF,  and  in  it  take  KL,  so  that  the  angle 
KCL  be  6  degrees  40'.  and  the  angle  LCF  12  degrees  23'.  And  if  ST  represent 
any  beam  of  light  incident  at  T  in  any  angle  upon  the  refracting  surface  ADBC, 
let  TV  be  the  refracted  beam  determined  by  the  given  portion  of  the  sines  5  to 
3,  according  to  the  usual  rule  of  Optics.  Draw  VX  parallel  and  equal  to  KL. 
Draw  it  the  same  way  from  V  in  which  L  lieth  from  K;  and  joining  TX,  this 
line  TX  shall  be  the  other  refracted  beam  carried  from  T  to  X,  by  the  unusual 
refraction. 

If,  therefore,  the  incident  beam  ST  be  perpendicular  to  the  refracting  sur¬ 
face,  the  two  beams  TV  and  TX,  into  which  it  shall  become  divided,  shall  be 
parallel  to  the  lines  CK  and  CL;  one  of  those  beams  going  through  the  crystal 
perpendicularly,  as  it  ought  to  do  by  the  usual  laws  of  Optics,  and  the  other 
TX  by  an  unusual  refraction  diverging  from  the  perpendicular,  and  making 
with  it  an  angle  VTX  of  about  6%  degrees,  as  is  found  by  experience.  And 
hence,  the  plane  VTX,  and  such  like  planes  which  are  parallel  to  the  plane 
CFK,  may  be  called  the  planes  of  perpendicular  refraction.  And  the  coast  to¬ 
wards  which  the  lines  KL  and  VX  are  drawn,  may  be  called  the  coast  of  un¬ 
usual  refraction. 

In  like  manner,  crystal  of  the  rock  has  a  double  refraction;  but  the  difference 
of  the  two  refractions  is  not  so  great  and  manifest  as  in  island  crystal. 


524  Optics 

When  the  beam  ST  incident  on  island  crystal  is  divided  into  two  beams  TV 
and  TX,  and  these  two  beams  arrive  at  the  farther  surface  of  the  glass,  the 
beam  TV,  which  was  refracted  at  the  first  surface  after  the  usual  manner,  shall 
be  again  refracted  entirely  after  the  usual  manner  at  the  second  surface;  and 
the  beam  TX,  which  was  refracted  after  the  unusual  manner  in  the  first  sur¬ 
face,  shall  be  again  refracted  entirely  after  the  unusual  manner  in  the  second 
surface ;  so  that  both  these  beams  shall  emerge  out  of  the  second  surface  in  lines 
parallel  to  the  first  incident  beam  ST. 

And  if  two  pieces  of  island  crystal  be  placed  one  after  another,  in  such  man¬ 
ner  that  all  the  surfaces  of  the  latter  be  parallel  to  all  the  corresponding  sur¬ 
faces  of  the  former,  the  rays  which  are  refracted  after  the  usual  manner  in  the 
first  surface  of  the  first  crystal,  shall  be  refracted  after  the  usual  manner  in  all 
the  following  surfaces;  and  the  rays  which  are  refracted  after  the  unusual 
manner  in  the  first  surface  shall  be  refracted  after  the  unusual  manner  in  all 
the  following  surfaces.  And  the  same  thing  happens,  though  the  surfaces  of  the 
crystals  be  any  ways  inclined  to  one  another,  provided  that  their  planes  of 
perpendicular  refraction  be  parallel  to  one  another. 

And,  therefore,  there  is  an  original  difference  in  the  rays  of  light,  by  means 
of  which  some  rays  are  in  this  experiment  constantly  refracted  after  the  usual 
manner,  and  others  constantly  after  the  unusual  manner;  for  if  the  difference 
be  not  original,  but  arises  from  new  modifications  impressed  on  the  rays  at 
their  first  refraction,  it  would  be  altered  by  new  modifications  in  the  three 
following  refractions;  whereas  it  suffers  no  alteration,  but  is  constant,  and  has 
the  same  effect  upon  the  rays  in  all  the  refractions.  The  unusual  refraction  is, 
therefore,  performed  by  an  original  property  of  the  rays.  And  it  remains  to  be 
enquired  whether  the  rays  have  not  more  original  properties  than  are  yet 
discovered. 

Qu.  26.  Have  not  the  rays  of  light  several  sides,  endued  with  several  original 
properties?  For  if  the  planes  of  perpendicular  refraction  of  the  second  crystal 
be  at  right  angles  with  the  planes  of  perpendicular  refraction  of  the  first  crys¬ 
tal,  the  rays  which  are  refracted  after  the  usual  manner  in  passing  through  the 
first  crystal  will  be  all  of  them  refracted  after  the  unusual  manner  in  passing 
through  the  second  crystal;  and  the  rays  which  are  refracted  after  the  unusual 
manner  in  passing  through  the  first  crystal  ufill  be  all  of  them  refracted  after 
the  usual  manner  in  passing  through  the  second  crystal.  And,  therefore,  there 
are  not  two  sorts  of  rays  differing  in  their  nature  from  one  another,  one  of  which 
is  constantly  and  in  all  positions  refracted  after  the  usual  manner,  and  the  other 
constantly  and  in  all  positions  after  the  unusual  manner.  The  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  two  sorts  of  rays,  in  the  experiment  mentioned  in  the  25th  Question, 
was  only  in  the  positions  of  the  sides  of  the  rays  to  the  planes  of  perpendicular 
refraction.  For  one  and  the  same  ray  is  here  refracted,  sometimes  after  the 
usual,  and  sometimes  after  the  unusual  manner,  according  to  the  position 
which  its  sides  have  to  the  crystals.  If  the  sides  of  the  ray  are  posited  the  same 
way  to  both  crystals,  it  is  refracted  after  the  same  manner  in  them  both ;  but 
if  that  side  of  the  ray  which  looks  towards  the  coast  of  the  unusual  refraction 
of  the  first  crystal  be  90  degrees  from  that  side  of  the  same  ray  which  looks 
toward  the  coast  of  the  unusual  refraction  of  the  second  crystal  (which  may 
be  effected  by  varying  the  position  of  the  second  crystal  to  the  first,  and  by 
consequence  to  the  rays  of  light),  the  ray  shall  be  refracted  after  several  man- 


Book  III:  Part  1  525 

ners  in  the  several  crystals.  There  is  nothing  more  required  to  determine 
whether  the  rays  of  light  which  fall  upon  the  second  crystal  shall  be  refracted 
after  the  usual  or  after  the  unusual  manner,  but  to  turn  about  this  crystal,  so 
that  the  coast  of  this  crystal’s  unusual  refraction  may  be  on  this  or  on  that 
side  of  the  ray.  And,  therefore,  every  ray  may  be  considered  as  having  four 
sides  or  quarters,  two  of  which  opposite  to  one  another  incline  the  ray  to  be 
refracted  after  the  unusual  manner,  as  often  as  either  of  them  are  turned  to¬ 
wards  the  coast  of  unusual  refraction;  and  the  other  two,  whenever  either  of 
them  are  turned  towards  the  coast  of  unusual  refraction,  do  not  incline  it  to 
be  otherwise  refracted  than  after  the  usual  manner.  The  two  first  may,  there¬ 
fore,  be  called  the  sides  of  unusual  refraction.  And  since  these  dispositions 
were  in  the  rays  before  their  incidence  on  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  surfaces 
of  the  two  crystals,  and  suffered  no  alteration  (so  far  as  appears)  by  the  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  rays  in  their  passage  through  those  surfaces,  and  the  rays  were 
refracted  by  the  same  laws  in  all  the  four  surfaces,  it  appears  that  those 
dispositions  were  in  the  rays  originally,  and  suffered  no  alteration  by  the  first 
refraction,  and  that  by  means  of  those  dispositions  the  rays  were  refracted 
at  their  incidence  on  the  first  surface  of  the  first  crystal,  some  of  them  after 
the  usual,  and  some  of  them  after  the  unusual  manner,  accordingly  as  their 
sides  of  unusual  refraction  were  then  turned  towards  the  coast  of  the  unusual 
refraction  of  that  crystal,  or  sideways  from  it. 

Every  ray  of  light  has,  therefore,  two  opposite  sides,  originally  endued  with 
a  property  on  which  the  unusual  refraction  depends,  and  the  other  two  oppo¬ 
site  sides  not  endued  with  that  property.  And  it  remains  to  be  enquired 
whether  there  are  not  more  properties  of  light  by  which  the  sides  of  the  rays 
differ,  and  are  distinguished  from  one  another. 

In  explaining  the  difference  of  the  sides  of  the  rays  above  mentioned,  I  have 
supposed  that  the  rays  fall  perpendicularly  on  the  first  crystal.  But  if  they  fall 
obliquely  on  it,  the  success  is  the  same.  Those  rays  which  are  refracted  after 
the  usual  manner  in  the  first  crystal  will  be  refracted  after  the  unusual  manner 
in  the  second  crystal,  supposing  the  planes  of  perpendicular  refraction  to  be 
at  right  angles  with  one  another,  as  above;  and  on  the  contrary. 

If  the  planes  of  the  perpendicular  refraction  of  the  two  crystals  be  neither 
parallel  nor  perpendicular  to  one  another,  but  contain  an  acute  angle,  the  two 
beams  of  light  which  emerge  out  of  the  first  crystal  will  be  each  of  them  divided 
into  two  more  at  their  incidence  on  the  second  crystal.  For  in  this  case  the  rays 
in  each  of  the  two  beams  will  some  of  them  have  their  sides  of  unusual  refrac¬ 
tion,  and  some  of  them  their  other  sides  turned  towards  the  coast  of  the  un¬ 
usual  refraction  of  the  second  crystal. 

Qu.  27.  Are  not  all  hypotheses  erroneous  which  have  hitherto  been  invented 
for  explaining  the  phenomena  of  light,  by  new  modifications  of  the  rays?  For 
those  phenomena  depend  not  upon  new  modifications,  as  has  been  supposed, 
but  upon  the  original  and  unchangeable  properties  of  the  rays. 

Qu.  28.  Are  not  all  hypotheses  erroneous  in  which  light  is  supposed  to  con¬ 
sist  in  pression  or  motion,  propagated  through  a  fluid  medium?  For  in  all  these 
hypotheses  the  phenomena  of  light  have  been  hitherto  explained  by  supposing 
that  they  arise  from  new  modifications  of  the  rays ;  which  is  an  erroneous  sup¬ 
position. 

If  light  consisted  only  in  pression  propagated  without  actual  motion,  it 


526  Optics 

would  not  be  able  to  agitate  and  heat  the  bodies  which  refract  and  reflect  it. 
If  it  consisted  in  motion  propagated  to  all  distances  in  an  instant,  it  would  re¬ 
quire  an  infinite  force  every  moment,  in  every  shining  particle,  to  generate 
that  motion.  And  if  it  consisted  in  pression  or  motion,  propagated  either  in  an 
instant  or  in  time,  it  would  bend  into  the  shadow.  For  pression  or  motion  can¬ 
not  be  propagated  in  a  fluid  in  right  lines,  beyond  an  obstacle  which  stops  part 
of  the  motion,  but  will  bend  and  spread  every  way  into  the  quiescent  medium 
which  lies  beyond  the  obstacle.  Gravity  tends  downwards,  but  the  pressure  of 
water  arising  from  gravity  tends  every  way  with  equal  force,  and  is  propagated 
as  readily,  and  with  as  much  force  sideways  as  downwards,  and  through 
crooked  passages  as  through  straight  ones.  The  waves  on  the  surface  of  stag¬ 
nating  water,  passing  by  the  sides  of  a  broad  obstacle  which  stops  part  of  them, 
bend  afterwards  and  dilate  themselves  gradually  into  the  quiet  water  behind 
the  obstacle.  The  waves,  pulses  or  vibrations  of  the  air,  wherein  sounds  con¬ 
sist,  bend  manifestly,  though  not  so  much  as  the  waves  of  water.  For  a  bell  or 
a  cannon  may  be  heard  beyond  a  hill  which  intercepts  the  sight  of  the  sounding 
body,  and  sounds  are  propagated  as  readily  through  crooked  pipes  as  through 
straight  ones.  But  light  is  never  known  to  follow  crooked  passages  nor  to  bend 
into  the  shadow.  For  the  fixed  stars  by  the  interposition  of  any  of  the  planets 
cease  to  be  seen.  And  so  do  the  parts  of  the  sun  by  the  interposition  of  the 
Moon,  Mercury  or  Venus.  The  rays  which  pass  very  near  to  the  edges  of  any 
body  are  bent  a  little  by  the  action  of  the  body,  as  we  shewed  above ;  but  this 
bending  is  not  towards  but  from  the  shadow,  and  is  performed  only  in  the 
passage  of  the  ray  by  the  body,  and  at  a  very  small  distance  from  it.  So  soon 
as  the  ray  is  past  the  body,  it  goes  right  on. 

To  explain  the  unusual  refraction  of  island  crystal  by  pression  or  motion 
propagated,  has  not  hitherto  been  attempted  (to  my  knowledge)  except  by 
Huygens,  who  for  that  end  supposed  two  several  vibrating  mediums  within 
that  crystal.  But  when  he  tried  the  refractions  in  two  successive  pieces  of  that 
crystal,  and  found  them  such  as  is  mentioned  above,  he  confessed  himself  at 
a  loss  for  explaining  them.  For  pressions  or  motions,  propagated  from  a  shining 
body  through  an  uniform  medium,  must  be  on  all  sides  alike;  whereas  by  those 
experiments  it  appears  that  the  rays  of  light  have  different  properties  in  their 
different  sides.  He  suspected  that  the  pulses  of  sether  in  passing  through  the 
first  crystal  might  receive  certain  new  modifications,  which  might  determine 
them  to  be  propagated  in  this  or  that  medium  within  the  second  crystal,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  position  of  that  crystal.  But  what  modifications  those  might  be 
he  could  not  say,  nor  think  of  anything  satisfactory  in  that  point.  And  if  he 
had  known  that  the  unusual  refraction  depends  not  on  new  modifications,  but 
on  the  original  and  unchangeable  dispositions  of  the  rays,  he  would  have  found 
it  as  difficult  to  explain  how  those  dispositions,  which  he  supposed  to  be  im¬ 
pressed  on  the  rays  by  the  first  crystal,  could  be  in  them  before  their  incidence 
on  that  crystal,  and  in  general,  how  all  rays  emitted  by  shining  bodies  can  have 
those  dispositions  in  them  from  the  beginning.  To  me,  at  least,  this  seems  in¬ 
explicable,  if  light  be  nothing  else  than  pression  or  motion  propagated  through 
aether. 

And  it  is  as  difficult  to  explain  by  these  hypotheses  how  rays  can  be  alter¬ 
nately  in  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission,  unless  perhaps  one  might 
suppose  that  there  are  in  all  space  two  aethereal  vibrating  mediums,  and  that 


Book  III:  Part  1  527 

the  vibrations  of  one  of  them  constitute  light,  and  the  vibrations  of  the  other 
are  svifter,  and  as  often  as  they  overtake  the  vibrations  of  the  first,  put  them 
into  those  fits.  But  hov  two  aethers  can  be  diffused  through  all  space,  one  of 
which  acts  upon  the  other,  and  by  consequence  is  reacted  upon,  without  re¬ 
tarding,  shattering,  dispersing  and  confounding  one  another’s  motions,  is  in¬ 
conceivable.  And  against  filling  the  heavens  with  fluid  mediums,  unless  they 
be  exceeding  rare,  a  great  objection  arises  from  the  regular  and  very  lasting 
motions  of  the  planets  and  comets  in  all  manner  of  courses  through  the  heav¬ 
ens.  For  thence  it  is  manifest  that  the  heavens  are  void  of  all  sensible  resistance, 
and  by  consequence  of  all  sensible  matter. 

For  the  resisting  power  of  fluid  mediums  arises  partly  from  the  attrition  of 
the  parts  of  the  medium,  and  partly  from  the  vis  inertice  of  the  matter.  That 
part  of  the  resistance  of  a  spherical  body  which  arises  from  the  attrition  of  the 
parts  of  the  medium  is  very  nearly  as  the  diameter,  or,  at  the  most,  as  the 
factu7n  of  the  diameter,  and  the  velocity  of  the  spherical  body  together.  And 
that  part  of  the  resistance  which  arises  from  the  vis  inertice  of  the  matter  is  as 
the  square  of  that  factum.  And  by  this  difference  the  two  sorts  of  resistance 
may  be  distinguished  from  one  another  in  any  medium;  and  these  being  dis¬ 
tinguished,  it  will  be  found  that  almost  all  the  resistance  of  bodies  of  a  com¬ 
petent  magnitude  moving  in  air,  water,  quick-silver,  and  such  like  fluids  with 
a  competent  velocity,  arises  from  the  vis  inertice  of  the  parts  of  the  fluid. 

Now,  that  part  of  the  resisting  power  of  any  medium  which  arises  from  the 
tenacity,  friction  or  attrition  of  the  parts  of  the  medium,  may  be  diminished 
by  dividing  the  matter  into  smaller  parts,  and  making  the  parts  more  smooth 
and  slippery;  but  that  part  of  the  resistance  which  arises  from  the  vis  inertice 
is  proportional  to  the  density  of  the  matter,  and  cannot  be  diminished  by 
dividing  the  matter  into  smaller  parts,  nor  by  any  other  means  than  by  de¬ 
creasing  the  density  of  the  medium.  And  for  these  reasons  the  density  of  fluid 
mediums  is  very  nearly  proportional  to  their  resistance.  Liquors  which  differ 
not  much  in  density  as  water,  spirit  of  wine,  spirit  of  turpentine,  hot  oil,  differ 
not  much  in  resistance.  Water  is  thirteen  or  fourteen  times  lighter  than  quick¬ 
silver  and  by  consequence  thirteen  or  fourteen  times  rarer,  and  its  resistance  is 
less  than  that  of  quick-silver  in  the  same  proportion,  or  thereabouts,  as  I  have 
found  by  experiments  made  with  pendulums.  The  open  air  in  which  we  breathe 
is  eight  or  nine  hundred  times  lighter  than  water,  and  by  consequence  eight 
or  nine  hundred  times  rarer,  and  accordingly  its  resistance  is  less  than  that  of 
water  in  the  same  proportion,  or  thereabouts,  as  I  have  also  found  by  experi¬ 
ments  made  with  pendulums.  And  in  thinner  air  the  resistance  is  still  less,  and 
at  length,  by  rarefjdng  the  air,  becomes  insensible.  For  small  feathers  falling 
in  the  open  air  meet  wdth  great  resistance,  but  in  a  tall  glass  w'ell  emptied  of 
air,  they  fall  as  fast  as  lead  or  gold,  as  I  have  seen  tried  several  times.  Whence 
the  resistance  seems  still  to  decrease  in  proportion  to  the  density  of  the  fluid. 
For  I  do  not  find  by  any  experiments  that  bodies  moving  in  quick-silver,  water, 
or  air  meet  with  any  other  sensible  resistance  than  what  arises  from  the  density 
and  tenacity  of  those  sensible  fluids,  as  they  would  do  if  the  pores  of  those 
fluids,  and  all  other  spaces,  were  filled  with  a  dense  and  subtile  fluid.  Now,  if 
the  resistance  in  a  vessel  well  emptied  of  air  was  but  a  hundred  times  less  than 
in  the  open  air,  it  would  be  about  a  million  of  times  less  than  in  quick-silver. 
But  it  seems  to  be  much  less  in  such  a  vessel,  and  still  much  less  in  the  heavens. 


528  Optics 

at  the  height  of  three  or  four  hundred  miles  from  the  Earth,  or  above.  For  Mr. 
lioyle  has  shewed  that  air  may  be  rarified  above  ten  thousand  times  in  vessels 
of  glass;  and  the  heavens  are  much  emptier  of  air  than  any  vacuum  we  can 
make  below.  For  since  the  air  is  compressed  by  the  weight  of  the  incumbent 
atmosphere,  and  the  density  of  air  is  proportional  to  the  force  compressing  it, 
it  follows  by  computation  that,  at  the  height  of  about  seven  and  a  half  English 
miles  from  the  Earth,  the  air  is  four  times  rarer  than  at  the  surface  of  the 
Earth;  and  at  the  height  of  15  miles  it  is  sixteen  times  rarer  than  that  at  the 
surface  of  the  Earth ;  and  at  the  height  of  223/^,  30,  or  38  miles,  it  is  respectively 
04,  250,  or  1,024  times  rarer,  or  thereabouts:  and  at  the  height  of  70,  152,  228 
miles,  it  is  about  1,000,000,  1,000,000,000,000,  or  1,000,000,000,000,000,000 
times  rarer;  and  so  on. 

Heat  promotes  fluidity  very  much  by  diminishing  the  tenacity  of  bodies.  It 
makes  many  bodies  fluid  which  are  not  fluid  in  cold,  and  increases  the  fluidity 
of  tenacious  liquids,  as  of  oil,  balsam,  and  honey,  and  thereby  decreases  their 
resistance.  But  it  decreases  not  the  resistance  of  water  considerably,  as  it  would 
do  if  any  considerable  part  of  the  resistance  of  water  arose  from  the  attrition 
or  tenacity  of  its  parts.  And,  therefore,  the  resistance  of  water  arises  prin¬ 
cipally  and  almost  entirely  from  the  vis  inertice  of  its  matter;  and  by  conse¬ 
quence,  if  the  heavens  were  as  dense  as  water,  they  would  not  have  much  less 
resistance  than  water;  if  as  dense  as  quick-silver,  they  would  not  have  much 
less  resistance  than  quick-silver;  if  absolutely  dense,  or  full  of  matter  without 
any  vacuum,  let  the  matter  be  never  so  subtile  and  fluid,  they  would  have  a 
greater  resistance  than  quick-silver.  A  solid  globe  in  such  a  medium  would  lose 
above  half  its  motion  in  moving  three  times  the  length  of  its  diameter,  and  a 
globe  not  solid  (such  as  are  the  planets),  would  be  retarded  sooner.  And,  there¬ 
fore,  to  make  way  for  the  regular  and  lasting  motions  of  the  planets  and  com¬ 
ets,  it’s  necessary  to  empty  the  heavens  of  all  matter,  except  perhaps  some 
very  thin  vapours,  steams,  or  effluvia,  arising  from  the  atmospheres  of  the 
Earth,  planets,  and  comets,  and  from  such  an  exceedingly  rare  sethereal  me¬ 
dium  as  we  described  above.  A  dense  fluid  can  be  of  no  use  for  explaining  the 
phenomena  of  Nature,  the  motions  of  the  planets  and  comets  being  better 
explained  without  it.  It  serves  only  to  disturb  and  retard  the  motions  of  those 
great  bodies,  and  make  the  frame  of  Nature  languish;  and  in  the  pores  of 
bodies  it  serves  only  to  stop  the  vibrating  motions  of  their  parts,  wherein  their 
heat  and  activity  consists.  And  as  it  is  of  no  use,  and  hinders  the  operations  of 
Nature,  and  makes  her  languish,  so  there  is  no  evidence  for  its  existence;  and, 
therefore,  it  ought  to  be  rejected.  And  if  it  be  rejected,  the  hypotheses  that 
light  consists  in  pression  or  motion,  propagated  through  such  a  medium,  are 
rejected  with  it. 

And,  for  rejecting  such  a  medium,  we  have  the  authority  of  those  the  oldest 
and  most  celebrated  philosophers  of  Greece  and  Phoenicia,  who  made  a  vac¬ 
uum,  and  atoms,  and  the  gravity  of  atoms,  the  first  principles  of  their  philoso¬ 
phy;  tacitly  attributing  gravity  to  some  other  cause  than  dense  matter.  Later 
philosophers  banish  the  consideration  of  such  a  cause  out  of  natural  philoso¬ 
phy,  feigning  hypotheses  for  explaining  all  things  mechanically,  and  referring 
other  causes  to  metaphysics;  whereas  the  main  business  of  natural  philosophy 
is  to  argue  from  phenomena  wdthout  feigning  hypotheses,  and  to  deduce  causes 
from  effects,  till  we  come  to  the  very  first  cause,  which  certainly  is  not  mechan- 


Book  III:  Part  1  529 

ical;  and  not  only  to  unfold  the  mechanism  of  the  world,  but  chiefly  to  resolve 
these  and  such  like  questions.  What  is  there  in  places  almost  empty  of  matter, 
and  whence  is  it  that  the  Sun  and  planets  gravitate  towards  one  another,  with¬ 
out  dense  matter  between  them?  Whence  is  it  that  Nature  doth  nothing  in 
vain;  and  whence  arises  all  that  order  and  beauty  which  we  see  in  the  world? 
To  what  end  are  comets,  and  whence  is  it  that  planets  move  all  one  and  the 
same  way  in  orbs  concentric,  while  comets  move  all  manner  of  ways  in  orbs 
very  eccentric ;  and  what  hinders  the  fixed  stars  from  falling  upon  one  another? 
How  came  the  bodies  of  animals  to  be  contrived  with  so  much  art,  and  for 
what  ends  were  their  several  parts?  Was  the  eye  contrived  without  skill  in 
Optics,  and  the  ear  without  knowledge  of  sounds?  How  do  the  motions  of  the 
body  follow  from  the  will,  and  whence  is  the  instinct  in  animals?  Is  not  the 
sensory  of  animals  that  place  to  which  the  sensitive  substance  is  present,  and 
into  which  the  sensible  species  of  things  are  carried  through  the  nerves  and 
brain,  that  there  they  may  be  perceived  by  their  immediate  presence  to  that 
substance?  And  these  things  being  rightly  dispatched,  does  it  not  appear  from 
phenomena  that  there  is  a  Being  incorporeal,  living,  intelligent,  omnipresent, 
who  in  infinite  space  (as  it  were  in  his  sensory)  sees  the  things  themselves 
intimately,  and  throughly  perceives  them,  and  comprehends  them  wholly  by 
their  immediate  presence  to  himself?  Of  which  things  the  images  only  carried 
through  the  organs  of  sense  into  our  little  sensoriums  are  there  seen  and  be¬ 
held  by  that  which  in  us  perceives  and  thinks.  And  though  every  true  step  made 
in  this  philosophy  brings  us  not  immediately  to  the  knowledge  of  the  First 
Cause,  yet  it  brings  us  nearer  to  it,  and  on  that  account  is  to  be  highly  valued. 

Qu.  29.  Are  not  the  rays  of  light  very  small  bodies  emitted  from  shining 
substances?  For  such  bodies  will  pass  through  uniform  mediums  in  right  lines 
without  bending  into  the  shadow,  which  is  the  nature  of  the  rays  of  light.  They 
will  also  be  capable  of  several  properties,  and  be  able  to  conserve  their  proper¬ 
ties  unchanged  in  passing  through  several  mediums,  which  is  another  condition 
of  the  rays  of  light  .  Pellucid  substances  act  upon  the  rays  of  light  at  a  distance 
in  refracting,  reflecting,  and  inflecting  them,  and  the  rays  mutually  agitate  the 
parts  of  those  substances  at  a  distance  for  heating  them;  and  this  action  and 
reaction  at  a  distance  very  much  resembles  an  attractive  force  between  bodies. 
If  refraction  be  performed  by  attraction  of  the  rays,  the  sines  of  incidence  must 
be  to  the  sines  of  refraction  in  a  given  proportion,  as  we  shewed  in  our  principles 
of  philosophy.  And  this  rule  is  true  by  experience.  The  rays  of  light  in  going  out 
of  glass  into  a  vacuum,  are  bent  towards  the  glass;  and  if  they  fall  too  obliquely 
on  the  vacuum,  they  are  bent  backwards  into  the  glass,  and  totally  reflected; 
and  this  reflexion  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  resistance  of  an  absolute  vacuum, 
but  must  be  caused  by  the  power  of  the  glass  attracting  the  rays  at  their  going 
out  of  it  into  the  vacuum,  and  bringing  them  back.  For  if  the  farther  surface  of 
the  glass  be  moistened  with  water  or  clear  oil,  or  liquid  and  clear  honey,  the 
rays  which  would  otherwise  be  reflected  mil  go  into  the  water,  oil,  or  honey; 
and,  therefore,  are  not  reflected  before  they  arrive  at  the  farther  surface  of  the 
glass,  and  begin  to  go  out  of  it.  If  they  go  out  of  it  into  the  water,  oil,  or  honey, 
they  go  on,  because  the  attraction  of  the  glass  is  almost  balanced  and  rendered 
ineffectual  by  the  contrary  attraction  of  the  liquor.  But  if  they  go  out  of  it  into 
a  vacuum  which  has  no  attraction  to  balance  that  of  the  glass,  the  attraction  of 
the  glass  either  bends  and  refracts  them,  or  brings  them  back  and  reflects  them. 


530  Optics 

And  this  is  still  more  evident  by  laying  together  two  prisms  of  glass,  or  two 
object-glasses  of  very  long  telescopes,  the  one  plane,  the  other  a  little  convex, 
and  so  compressing  them  that  they  do  not  fully  touch,  nor  are  too  far 
asunder.  For  the  light  which  falls  upon  the  farther  surface  of  the  first  glass 
where  the  interval  between  the  glasses  is  not  above  the  ten  hundred  thousandth 
part  of  an  inch,  will  go  through  that  surface,  and  through  the  air  or  vacuum 
between  the  glasses,  and  enter  into  the  second  glass,  as  was  explained  in  the 
first,  fourth,  and  eighth  Observations  of  the  first  part  of  the  second  book.  But, 
if  the  second  glass  be  taken  away,  the  light  which  goes  out  of  the  second  surface 
of  the  first  glass  into  the  air  or  vacuum,  vill  not  go  on  forwards,  but  turns 
back  into  the  first  glass,  and  is  reflected;  and,  therefore,  it  is  drawn  back  by  the 
power  of  the  first  glass,  there  being  nothing  else  to  turn  it  back.  Nothing  more 
is  requisite  for  producing  all  the  variety  of  colours,  and  degrees  of  refrangibility, 
than  that  the  rays  of  light  be  bodies  of  different  sizes,  the  least  of  which  may 
take  violet  the  weakest  and  darkest  of  the  colours,  and  be  more  easily  diverted 
by  refracting  surfaces  from  the  right  course;  and  the  rest,  as  they  are  bigger 
and  bigger,  may  make  the  stronger  and  more  lucid  colours  (blue,  green,  yellow, 
and  red)  and  be  more  and  more  difficultly  diverted.  Nothing  more  is  requisite 
for  putting  the  rays  of  light  into  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and  easy  transmission, 
than  that  they  be  small  bodies  which  by  their  attractive  powers,  or  some  other 
force,  stir  up  vibrations  in  what  they  act  upon,  which  vibrations,  being  swifter 
than  the  rays,  overtake  them  successively,  and  agitate  them  so  as  by  turns  to 
increase  and  decrease  their  velocities,  and  thereby  put  them  into  those  fits. 
And,  lastly,  the  unusual  refraction  of  island  crystal  looks  very  much  as  if  it 
were  performed  by  some  kind  of  attractive  virtue  lodged  in  certain  sides  both 
of  the  rays,  and  of  the  particles  of  the  crystal.  For  were  it  not  for  some  kind  of 
disposition  or  virtue  lodged  in  some  sides  of  the  particles  of  the  crystal,  and  not 
in  their  other  sides,  and  which  inclines  and  bends  the  rays  towards  the  coast  of 
unusual  refraction,  the  rays  which  fall  perpendicularly  on  the  crystal  would  not 
be  refracted  towards  that  coast  rather  than  towards  any  other  coast,  both  at 
their  incidence  and  at  their  emergence,  so  as  to  emerge  perpendicularly  by  a 
contrary  situation  of  the  coast  of  unusual  refraction  at  the  second  surface;  the 
crystal  acting  upon  the  rays  after  they  have  passed  through  it,  and  are  emerg¬ 
ing  into  the  air;  or,  if  you  please,  into  a  vacuum.  And  since  the  crystal  by  this 
disposition  or  virtue  does  not  act  upon  the  rays,  unless  when  one  of  their  sides 
of  unusual  refraction  looks  towards  that  coast,  this  argues  a  virtue  or  disposi¬ 
tion  in  those  sides  of  the  rays  which  answers  to,  and  sympathizes  vfith,  that 
virtue  or  disposition  of  the  crystal  as  the  poles  of  two  magnets  answer  to  one 
another.  And  as  magnetism  may  be  intended  and  remitted,  and  is  found  only 
in  the  magnet  and  in  iron,  so  this  virtue  of  refracting  the  perpendicular  rays  is 
greater  in  island  crystal,  less  in  crystal  of  the  rock,  and  is  not  yet  found  in 
other  bodies.  I  do  not  say  that  this  virtue  is  magnetical :  it  seems  to  be  of  an¬ 
other  kind.  I  only  say  that  whatever  it  be,  it’s  difficult  to  conceive  how  the 
rays  of  light,  unless  they  be  bodies,  can  have  a  permanent  \’irtue  in  two  of 
their  sides  which  is  not  in  their  other  sides,  and  this  without  any  regard  to 
their  position  to  the  space  or  medium  through  which  they  pass. 

What  I  mean  in  this  Question  by  a  vacuum,  and  by  the  attractions  of  the 
rays  of  light  towards  glass  or  crystal,  may  be  understood  by  what  was  said  in 
the  18th,  19th,  and  20th  Questions. 


Book  III:  Part  1  531 

Qu.  30.  Are  not  gross  bodies  and  light  convertible  into  one  another,  and  may 
not  bodies  receive  much  of  their  activity  from  the  particles  of  light  which  enter 
their  composition?  For  all  fixed  bodies  being  heated  emit  light  so  long  as  they 
continue  sufficiently  hot,  and  light  mutually  stops  in  bodies  as  often  as  its  rays 
strike  upon  their  parts,  as  we  shewed  above.  I  know  no  body  less  apt  to  shine 
than  water ;  and  yet  water,  by  frequent  distillations,  changes  into  fixed  earth, 
as  Mr.  Boyle  has  tried,  and  then  this  earth  being  enabled  to  endure  a  sufficient 
heat,  shines  by  heat  like  other  bodies. 

The  changing  of  bodies  into  light,  and  light  into  bodies,  is  very  conformable 
to  the  course  of  Nature,  which  seems  delighted  with  transmutations.  Water, 
which  is  a  very  fluid,  tasteless  salt  she  changes  by  heat  into  vapour,  which  is  a 
sort  of  air,  and  by  cold  into  ice,  which  is  a  hard,  pellucid,  brittle,  fusible  stone; 
and  this  stone  returns  into  water  by  heat,  and  vapour  returns  into  water 
by  cold.  Earth  by  heat  becomes  fire,  and  by  cold  returns  into  earth.  Dense 
bodies  by  fermentation  rarefy  into  several  sorts  of  air,  and  this  air  by  fermenta¬ 
tion,  and  sometimes  without  it,  returns  into  dense  bodies.  Mercury  appears 
sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  fluid  metal,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  hard  brittle 
metal,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  corrosive  pellucid  salt  called  sublimate, 
sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  tasteless,  pellucid,  volatile  white  earth  called 
Mercurius  dulcis;  or  in  that  of  a  red  opaque  volatile  earth  called  Cinnabar;  or 
in  that  of  a  red  or  white  precipitate,  or  in  that  of  a  fluid  salt;  and  in  distillation 
it  turns  into  vapour,  and  being  agitated  in  vacuo,  it  shines  like  fire.  And  after  all 
these  changes  it  returns  again  into  its  first  form  of  mercury.  Eggs  grow  from 
insensible  magnitudes,  and  change  into  animals;  tadpoles  into  frogs;  and  worms 
into  flies.  All  birds,  beasts  and  fishes,  insects,  trees,  and  other  vegetables,  with 
their  several  parts,  grow  out  of  water  and  watery  tinctures  and  salts,  and  by 
putrefaction  return  again  into  watery  substances.  And  water  standing  a  few 
days  in  the  open  air,  yields  a  tincture,  which  (like  that  of  malt)  by  standing 
longer  yields  a  sediment  and  a  spirit,  but  before  putrefaction  is  fit  nourishment 
for  animals  and  vegetables.  And  among  such  various  and  strange  transmuta¬ 
tions,  why  may  not  Nature  change  bodies  into  light,  and  light  into  bodies? 

Qu.  31 .  Have  not  the  small  particles  of  bodies  certain  powers,  virtues,  or  forces, 
by  which  they  act  at  a  distance,  not  only  upon  the  rays  of  light  for  reflecting, 
refracting,  and  inflecting  them,  but  also  upon  one  another  for  producing  a  great 
part  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature?  For  it’s  well  known  that  bodies  act  one  upon 
another  by  the  attractions  of  gravity,  magnetism,  and  electricity;  and  these 
instances  shew  the  tenor  and  course  of  Nature,  and  make  it  not  improbable  but 
that  there  may  be  more  attractive  powers  than  these.  For  Nature  is  very  con¬ 
sonant  and  conformable  to  herself.  How  these  attractions  may  be  performed  I 
do  not  here  consider.  What  I  call  attraction  may  be  performed  by  impulse,  or 
by  some  other  means  unknown  to  me.  I  use  that  word  here  to  signify  only  in 
general  any  force  by  which  bodies  tend  towards  one  another,  whatsoever  be  the 
cause.  For  we  must  learn  from  the  phenomena  of  Nature  what  bodies  attract 
one  another,  and  what  are  the  laws  and  properties  of  the  attraction,  before  we 
enquire  the  cause  by  which  the  attraction  is  performed.  The  attractions  of 
gravity,  magnetism,  and  electricity  reach  to  very  sensible  distances,  and  so 
have  been  observed  by  vulgar  eyes,  and  there  may  be  others  which  reach  to  so 
small  distances  as  hitherto  escape  observation;  and  perhaps  electrical  attrac¬ 
tion  may  reach  to  such  small  distances,  even  without  being  excited  by  friction. 


532  Optics 

For  when  salt  of  tartar  runs  per  deliquium,  is  not  this  done  by  an  attraction 
between  the  particles  of  the  salt  of  tartar,  and  the  particles  of  the  water  which 
float  in  the  air  in  the  form  of  vapours?  And  why  does  not  common  salt,  or  salt¬ 
petre,  or  vitriol,  run  per  deliquium,  but  for  want  of  such  an  attraction?  Or  why 
does  not  salt  of  tartar  draw  more  water  out  of  the  air  than  in  a  certain  propor¬ 
tion  to  its  quantity,  but  for  want  of  an  attractive  force  after  it  is  satiated  with 
water?  And  whence  is  it  but  from  this  attractive  power  that  water  which  alone 
distils  with  a  gentle  luke-warm  heat,  will  not  distil  from  salt  of  tartar  without  a 
great  heat?  And  is  it  not  from  the  like  attractive  power  between  the  particles  of 
oil  of  vitriol  and  the  particles  of  water,  that  oil  of  vitriol  draws  to  it  a  good 
quantity  of  water  out  of  the  air,  and  after  it  is  satiated  draws  no  more,  and  in 
distillation  lets  go  the  water  very  difficultly?  And  when  water  and  oil  of  vitriol 
poured  successively  into  the  same  vessel  grow  very  hot  in  the  mixing,  does  not 
this  heat  argue  a  great  motion  in  the  parts  of  the  liquors?  And  does  not  this 
motion  argue  that  the  parts  of  the  two  liquors  in  mixing  coalesce  with  violence, 
and  by  consequence  rush  towards  one  another  with  an  accelerated  motion? 
And  when  aqua  fortis,  or  spirit  of  vitriol  poured  upon  filings  of  iron  dissolves 
the  filings  with  a  great  heat  and  ebullition,  is  not  this  heat  and  ebullition  ef¬ 
fected  by  a  violent  motion  of  the  parts,  and  does  not  that  motion  argue  that 
the  acid  parts  of  the  liquor  rush  towards  the  parts  of  the  metal  with  violence, 
and  run  forcibly  into  its  pores  till  they  get  between  its  outmost  particles,  and 
the  main  mass  of  the  metal,  and  surrounding  those  particles  loosen  them  from 
the  main  mass,  and  set  them  at  liberty  to  float  off  into  the  water?  And  when 
the  acid  particles,  wffiich  alone  would  distil  with  an  easy  heat,  will  not  separate 
from  the  particles  of  the  metal  without  a  very  violent  heat,  does  not  this  con¬ 
firm  the  attraction  between  them? 

When  spirit  of  vitriol  poured  upon  common  salt  or  saltpetre  makes  an  ebulli¬ 
tion  with  the  salt,  and  unites  with  it,  and  in  distillation  the  spirit  of  the  com¬ 
mon  salt  or  saltpetre  comes  over  much  easier  than  it  would  do  before,  and  the 
acid  part  of  the  spirit  of  vitriol  stays  behind,  does  not  this  argue  that  the  fixed 
alkali  of  the  salt  attracts  the  acid  spirit  of  the  vitriol  more  strongly  than  its  own 
spirit,  and  not  being  able  to  hold  them  both,  lets  go  its  own?  And  when  oil  of 
vitriol  is  drawn  off  from  its  weight  of  nitre,  and  from  both  the  ingredients  a 
compound  spirit  of  nitre  is  distilled,  and  two  parts  of  this  spirit  are  poured  on 
one  part  of  oil  of  cloves  or  caraway  seeds,  or  of  any  ponderous  oil  of  vegetable 
or  animal  substances,  or  oil  of  turpentine  thickened  with  a  little  balsam  of  sul¬ 
phur,  and  the  liquors  grow  so  very  hot  in  mixing,  as  presently  to  send  up  a 
burning  flame — does  not  this  very  great  and  sudden  heat  argue  that  the  two 
liquors  mix  with  violence,  and  that  their  parts  in  mixing  run  towards  one  an¬ 
other  with  an  accelerated  motion,  and  clash  with  the  greatest  force?  And  is  it 
not  for  the  same  reason  that  well-rectified  spirit  of  wane  poured  on  the  same 
compound  spirit  flashes;  and  that  the  pulvis  fulminans,  composed  of  sulphur, 
nitre,  and  salt  of  tartar,  goes  off  with  a  more  sudden  and  violent  explosion  than 
gunpowder,  the  acid  spirits  of  the  sulphur  and  nitre  rushing  towards  one  an¬ 
other,  and  towards  the  salt  of  tartar,  with  so  great  a  violence  as  by  the  shock  to 
turn  the  whole  at  once  into  vapour  and  flame?  Where  the  dissolution  is  slow,  it 
makes  a  slow  ebullition  and  a  gentle  heat;  and  where  it  is  quicker,  it  makes  a 
greater  ebullition  with  more  heat;  and  where  it  is  done  at  once,  the  ebullition  is 
contracted  into  a  sudden  blast  or  violent  explosion,  with  a  heat  equal  to  that  of 


Book  III:  Part  1  533 

fire  and  flame.  So  when  a  drachm  of  the  above-mentioned  compound  spirit  of 
nitre  was  poured  upon  half  a  drachm  of  oil  of  caraway  seeds  in  vacuo,  the  mix¬ 
ture  immediately  made  a  flash  like  gunpowder,  and  burst  the  exhausted  re¬ 
ceiver,  which  was  a  glass  six  inches  wide  and  eight  inches  deep.  And  even  the 
gross  body  of  sulphur  powdered,  and  with  an  equal  weight  of  iron  filings  and  a 
little  water  made  into  paste,  acts  upon  the  iron,  and  in  five  or  six  hours  grows 
too  hot  to  be  touched,  and  emits  a  flame.  And  by  these  experiments  compared 
with  the  great  quantity  of  sulphur  with  which  the  Earth  abounds,  and  the 
warmth  of  the  interior  parts  of  the  Earth,  and  hot  springs,  and  burning  moun¬ 
tains,  and  with  damps,  mineral  coruscations,  earthquakes,  hot  suffocating  ex¬ 
halations,  hurricanes,  and  spouts,  we  may  learn  that  sulphureous  steams  abound 
in  the  bowels  of  the  Earth  and  ferment  with  minerals,  and  sometimes  take  fire 
with  a  sudden  coruscation  and  explosion;  and,  if  pent  up  in  subterraneous  cav¬ 
erns,  burst  the  caverns  with  a  great  shaking  of  the  Earth,  as  in  springing  of  a 
mine.  And  then  the  vapour  generated  by  the  explosion,  expiring  through  the 
pores  of  the  Earth,  feels  hot  and  suffocates,  and  makes  tempests  and  hurri¬ 
canes,  and  sometimes  causes  the  land  to  slide,  or  the  sea  to  boil,  and  carries  up 
the  water  thereof  in  drops,  which  by  their  weight  fall  down  again  in  spouts. 
Also  some  sulphureous  steams,  at  all  times  when  the  Earth  is  dry,  ascending 
into  the  air,  ferment  there  with  nitrous  acids,  and  sometimes  taking  fire  cause 
lightning  and  thunder,  and  fiery  meteors.  For  the  air  abounds  with  acid  va¬ 
pours  fit  to  promote  fermentations,  as  appears  by  the  rusting  of  iron  and  cop¬ 
per  in  it,  the  kindling  of  fire  by  blowing,  and  the  beating  of  the  heart  by  means 
of  respiration.  Now,  the  above-mentioned  motions  are  so  great  and  violent  as 
to  shew  that  in  fermentations  the  particles  of  bodies  which  almost  rest  are  put 
into  new  motions  by  a  very  potent  principle,  which  acts  upon  them  only  when 
they  approach  one  another,  and  causes  them  to  meet  and  clash  with  great  vi¬ 
olence,  and  grow  hot  with  the  motion,  and  dash  one  another  into  pieces,  and 
vanish  into  air  and  vapour  and  flame. 

When  salt  of  tartar  per  deliquiurn,  being  poured  into  the  solution  of  any 
metal,  precipitates  the  metal  and  makes  it  fall  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  liquor 
in  the  form  of  mud,  does  not  this  argue  that  the  acid  particles  are  attracted 
more  strongly  by  the  salt  of  tartar  than  by  the  metal,  and  by  the  stronger  at¬ 
traction  go  from  the  metal  to  the  salt  of  tartar?  And  so  when  a  solution  of  iron 
in  aqua  fortis  dissolves  the  lapis  calaminaris,  and  lets  go  the  iron,  or  a  solu¬ 
tion  of  copper  dissolves  iron  immersed  in  it  and  lets  go  the  copper,  or  a  solution 
of  silver  dissolves  copper  and  lets  go  the  silver,  or  a  solution  of  mercury  in  aqua 
fortis  being  poured  upon  iron,  copper,  tin,  or  lead,  dissolves  the  metal  and  lets 
go  the  mercury — does  not  this  argue  that  the  acid  particles  of  the  aqua  fortis 
are  attracted  more  strongly  by  the  lapis  calaminaris  than  by  iron,  and  more 
strongly  by  iron  than  by  copper,  and  more  strongly  by  copper  than  by  silver, 
and  more  strongly  by  iron,  copper,  tin,  and  lead,  than  by  mercury?  And  is  it 
not  for  the  same  reason  that  iron  requires  more  aqua  fortis  to  dissolve  it  than 
copper,  and  copper  more  than  the  other  metals;  and  that,  of  all  metals,  iron  is 
dissolved  most  easily,  and  is  most  apt  to  rust;  and,  next  after  iron,  copper? 

When  oil  of  vitriol  is  mixed  with  a  little  water,  or  is  run  per  deliquiurn,  and  in 
distillation  the  water  ascends  difficultly,  and  brings  over  with  it  some  part  of 
the  oil  of  vitriol  in  the  form  of  spirit  of  vitriol,  and  this  spirit  (being  poured 
upon  iron,  copper,  or  salt  of  tartar)  unites  with  the  body  and  lets  go  the  water 


534  Optics 

— doth  not  this  shew  that  the  acid  spirit  is  attracted  by  the  water,  and  more  at¬ 
tracted  by  the  fixed  body  than  by  tlie  water,  and  therefore  lets  go  the  water  to 
close  with  the  fixed  body?  And  is  it  not  for  the  same  reason  that  the  water  and 
acid  spirits  which  are  mixed  together  in  vinegar,  aquafortis,  and  spirit  of  salt, 
cohere  and  rise  together  in  distillation;  but  if  the  menstruum  be  poured  on  salt 
of  tartar,  or  on  lead,  or  iron,  or  any  fixed  body  which  it  can  dissolve,  the  acid  by 
a  stronger  attraction  adheres  to  the  body,  and  lets  go  the  water?  And  is  it  not 
also  from  a  mutual  attraction  that  the  spirits  of  soot  and  sea-salt  unite  and 
compose  the  particles  of  sal-ammoniac,  which  are  less  volatile  than  before,  be¬ 
cause  grosser  and  freer  from  water;  and  that  the  particles  of  sal-ammoniac  in 
sublimation  carry  up  the  particles  of  antimony,  which  will  not  sublime  alone : 
and  that  the  particles  of  mercury  uniting  with  the  acid  particles  of  spirit  of  salt 
compose  mercury  sublimate  and  with  the  particles  of  sulphur,  compose  cinna¬ 
bar;  and  that  the  particles  of  spirit  of  wine  and  spirit  of  urine  well  rectified 
unite  and,  letting  go  the  water  which  dissolved  them,  compose  a  consistent 
body;  and  that  in  subliming  cinnabar  from  salt  of  tartar,  or  from  quicklime, 
the  sulphur  by  a  stronger  attraction  of  the  salt  or  lime  lets  go  the  mercury,  and 
stays  with  the  fixed  body  ;  and  that  when  mercury  sublimate  is  sublimed  from 
antimony,  or  from  regulus  of  antimony,  the  spirit  of  salt  lets  go  the  mercury, 
and  unites  with  the  antimonial  metal  which  attracts  it  more  strongly,  and  stays 
with  it  till  the  heat  be  great  enough  to  make  them  both  ascend  together,  and 
then  carries  up  the  metal  with  it  in  the  form  of  a  very  fusible  salt  called  butter 
of  antimony,  although  the  spirit  of  salt  alone  be  almost  as  volatile  as  water, 
and  the  antimony  alone  as  fixed  as  lead? 

When  aquafortis  dissolves  silver  and  not  gold,  and  aqua  regia  dissolves  gold 
and  not  silver,  may  it  not  be  said  that  aqua  fortis  is  subtile  enough  to  penetrate 
gold  as  well  as  silver,  but  wants  the  attractive  force  to  give  it  entrance;  and 
that  aqua  regia  is  subtile  enough  to  penetrate  silver  as  well  as  gold,  but  wants 
the  attractive  force  to  give  it  entrance?  Fora^wa  regia  is  nothing  else  than  aqua 
fortis  mixed  with  some  spirit  of  salt,  or  with  sal-ammoniac ;  and  even  common 
salt  dissolved  in  aqua  fortis  enables  the  menstruum  to  dissolve  gold,  though 
the  salt  be  a  gross  body.  When,  therefore,  spirit  of  salt  precipitates  silver  out  of 
aqua  fortis,  is  it  not  done  by  attracting  and  mixing  with  the  aqua  fortis,  and 
not  attracting,  or  perhaps  repelling  silver?  And  when  water  precipitates  anti¬ 
mony  out  of  the  sublimate  of  antimony  and  sal-ammoniac,  or  out  of  butter  of 
antimony,  is  it  not  done  by  its  dissolving,  mixing  with,  and  weakening  the  sal- 
armoniac  or  spirit  of  salt,  and  its  not  attracting,  or  perhaps  repelling,  the  anti¬ 
mony?  And  is  it  not  for  want  of  an  attractive  virtue  between  the  parts  of  water 
and  oil,  of  quick-silver  and  antimony,  of  lead  and  iron,  that  these  substances  do 
not  mix;  and  by  a  weak  attraction,  that  quick-silver  and  copper  mix  difficultly; 
and  from  a  strong  one,  that  quick-silver  and  tin,  antimony  and  iron,  water  and 
salts,  mix  readily?  And,  in  general,  is  it  not  from  the  same  principle  that  heat 
congregates  homogeneal  bodies,  and  separates  heterogeneal  ones? 

When  arsenic  with  soap  gives  a  regulus,  and  with  mercury  sublimate  a  vola¬ 
tile  fusible  salt,  like  butter  of  antimony,  doth  not  this  shew  that  arsenic,  which 
is  a  substance  totally  volatile,  is  compounded  of  fixed  and  volatile  parts,  strong¬ 
ly  cohering  by  a  mutual  attraction,  so  that  the  volatile  will  not  ascend  without 
carrying  up  the  fixed?  And  so,  when  an  equal  weight  of  spirit  of  wine  and  oil  of 
vitriol  are  digested  together,  and  in  distillation  yield  two  fragrant  and  volatile 


Book  III:  Part  1  535 

spirits  which  mil  not  mix  with  one  another,  and  a  fixed  black  earth  remains  be¬ 
hind — doth  not  this  shew  that  oil  of  vitriol  is  composed  of  volatile  and  fixed 
parts  strongly  united  by  attraction,  so  as  to  ascend  together  in  form  of  a  vola¬ 
tile,  acid,  fluid  salt,  until  the  spirit  of  wine  attracts  and  separates  the  volatile 
parts  from  the  fixed?  And,  therefore,  since  oil  of  sulphur  per  campanam  is  of  the 
same  nature  vith  oil  of  vitriol,  may  it  not  be  inferred  that  sulphur  is  also  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  volatile  and  fixed  parts  so  strongly  cohering  by  attraction  as  to  ascend 
together  in  sublimation?  By  dissolving  flowers  of  sulphur  in  oil  of  turpentine, 
and  distilling  the  solution,  it  is  found  that  sulphur  is  composed  of  an  inflamma¬ 
ble  thick  oil  or  fat  bitumen,  an  acid  salt,  a  very  fixed  earth,  and  a  little  metal. 
The  three  first  were  found  not  much  unequal  to  one  another,  the  fourth  in  so 
small  a  quantity  as  scarce  to  be  worth  considering.  The  acid  salt,  dissolved  in 
water,  is  the  same  with  oil  of  sulphur  per  campanam,  and  abounding  much  in 
the  bowels  of  the  Earth,  and  particularly  in  marcasites — unites  itself  to  the 
other  ingredients  of  the  marcasite,  which  are,  bitumen,  iron,  copper,  and  earth, 
and  vith  them  compounds  alum,  vitriol,  and  sulphur.  With  the  earth  alone  it 
compounds  alum;  vuth  the  metal  alone,  or  metal  and  earth  together,  it  com¬ 
pounds  vitriol;  and  mth  the  bitumen  and  earth  it  compounds  sulphur.  ^ATience 
it  comes  to  pass  that  marcasites  abound  vfith  those  three  minerals.  And  is  it 
not  from  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  ingredients  that  they  stick  together  for 
compounding  these  minerals,  and  that  the  bitumen  carries  up  the  other  ingre¬ 
dients  of  the  sulphur,  which  without  it  would  not  sublime?  And  the  same  ques¬ 
tion  may  be  put  concerning  all,  or  almost  all,  the  gross  bodies  in  Nature.  For 
all  the  parts  of  animals  and  vegetables  are  composed  of  substances  volatile  and 
fixed,  fluid  and  solid,  as  appears  by  their  analysis;  and  so  are  salts  and  minerals, 
so  far  as  chemists  have  been  hitherto  able  to  examine  their  composition. 

When  mercury  sublimate  is  re-sublimed  vith  fresh  mercury,  and  becomes 
mercurius  dulcis,  which  is  a  white,  tasteless  earth  scarce  dissolvable  in  water, 
and  mercurius  dulcis  re-sublimed  vith  spirit  of  salt  returns  into  mercury  subli¬ 
mate;  and  when  metals  corroded  mth  a  little  acid  turn  into  rust,  which  is  an 
earth  tasteless  and  indissolvable  in  water,  and  this  earth  imbibed  with  more 
acid  becomes  a  metallic  salt;  and  when  some  stones,  as  spar  of  lead,  dissolved 
in  proper  menstruums  become  salts — do  not  these  things  shew  that  salts  are 
dry  earth  and  watery  acid  united  by  attraction,  and  that  the  earth  vill  not  be¬ 
come  a  salt  without  so  much  acid  as  makes  it  dissolvable  in  water?  Do  not  the 
sharp  and  pungent  tastes  of  acids  arise  from  the  strong  attraction  whereby  the 
acid  particles  rush  upon  and  agitate  the  particles  of  the  tongue?  And  when 
metals  are  dissolved  in  acid  menstruums,  and  the  acids  in  conjunction  with  the 
metal  act  after  a  different  manner,  so  that  the  compound  has  a  different  taste 
much  milder  than  before,  and  sometimes  a  sweet  one — is  it  not  because  the 
acids  adhere  to  the  metallic  particles,  and  thereby  lose  much  of  their  activity? 
And  if  the  acid  be  in  too  small  a  proportion  to  make  the  compound  dissolvable 
in  water,  vdll  it  not  by  adhering  strongly  to  the  metal  become  unactive  and  lose 
its  taste,  and  the  compound  be  a  tasteless  earth?  For  such  things  as  are  not  dis¬ 
solvable  by  the  moisture  of  the  tongue,  act  not  upon  the  taste. 

As  gravity  makes  the  sea  flow  round  the  denser  and  weightier  parts  of  the 
globe  of  the  Earth,  so  the  attraction  may  make  the  watery  acid  flow  round  the 
denser  and  compacter  particles  of  earth  for  composing  the  particles  of  salt.  For 
otherwse  the  acid  would  not  do  the  office  of  a  medium  between  the  earth  and 


53G  Optics 

common  watei',  for  making  salts  dissolvable  in  the  water;  nor  would  salt  of  tar¬ 
tar  readily  draw  off  the  acid  from  dissolved  metals,  nor  metals  the  acid  from 
mercury.  Now,  as  in  the  great  globe  of  the  Earth  and  sea,  the  densest  bodies 
by  their  gravity  sink  down  in  water,  and  always  endeavour  to  go  towards  the 
centre  of  the  globe ;  so  in  particles  of  salt  the  densest  matter  may  always  en¬ 
deavour  to  approach  the  centre  of  the  particle ;  so  that  a  particle  of  salt  may  be 
compared  to  a  chaos,  being  dense,  hard,  dry,  and  earthy  in  the  centre;  and  rare, 
soft,  moist,  and  watery  in  the  circumference.  And  hence  it  seems  to  be  that 
salts  are  of  a  lasting  nature,  being  scarce  destroyed  unless  by  drawing  away 
their  watery  parts  by  violence,  or  by  letting  them  soak  into  the  pores  of  the 
central  earth  by  a  gentle  heat  in  putrefaction,  until  the  earth  be  dissolved  by 
the  water,  and  separated  into  smaller  particles,  which  by  reason  of  their  small¬ 
ness  make  the  rotten  compound  appear  of  a  black  colour.  Hence  also  it  may  be 
that  the  parts  of  animals  and  vegetables  preserve  their  several  forms,  and  as¬ 
similate  their  nourishment;  the  soft  and  moist  nourishment  easily  changing  its 
texture  by  a  gentle  heat  and  motion  till  it  becomes  like  the  dense,  hard,  dry, 
and  durable  earth  in  the  centre  of  each  particle.  But  when  the  nourishment 
grows  unfit  to  be  assimilated,  or  the  central  earth  grows  too  feeble  to  assimilate 
it,  the  motion  ends  in  confusion,  putrefaction,  and  death. 

If  a  very  small  quantity  of  any  salt  or  vitriol  be  dissolved  in  a  great  quantity 
of  water,  the  particles  of  the  salt  or  vitriol  will  not  sink  to  the  bottom,  though 
they  be  heavier  in  species  than  the  water,  but  wall  evenly  diffuse  themselves 
into  all  the  water,  so  as  to  make  it  as  saline  at  the  top  as  at  the  bottom.  And 
does  not  this  imply  that  the  parts  of  the  salt  or  vitriol  recede  from  one  another, 
and  endeavour  to  expand  themselves,  and  get  as  far  asunder  as  the  quantity  of 
water,  in  which  they  float,  will  allow?  And  does  not  this  endeavour  imply  that 
they  have  a  repulsive  force  by  which  they  fly  from  one  another,  or,  at  least,  that 
they  attract  the  water  more  strongly  than  they  do  one  another?  For  as  all 
things  ascend  in  water  which  are  less  attracted  than  water,  by  the  gravitating 
power  of  the  Earth;  so  all  the  particles  of  salt  which  float  in  water,  and  are  less 
attracted  than  water  by  any  one  particle  of  salt,  must  recede  from  that  particle, 
and  give  way  to  the  more  attracted  water. 

When  any  saline  liquor  is  evaporated  to  a  cuticle  and  let  cool,  the  salt  con¬ 
cretes  in  regular  figures;  which  argues  that  the  particles  of  the  salt,  before  they 
concreted,  floated  in  the  liquor  at  equal  distances  in  rank  and  file,  and  by  con¬ 
sequence  that  they  acted  upon  one  another  by  some  power  which  at  equal  dis¬ 
tances  is  equal,  at  unequal  distances  unequal.  For  by  such  a  power  they  will 
range  themselves  uniformly,  and  mthout  it  they  will  float  irregularly,  and  come 
together  as  irregularly.  And  since  the  particles  of  island  crystal  act  all  the  same 
way  upon  the  rays  of  light  for  causing  the  unusual  refraction,  may  it  not  be  sup¬ 
posed  that,  in  the  formation  of  this  crystal,  the  particles  not  only  ranged  them¬ 
selves  in  rank  and  file  for  concreting  in  regular  figures,  but  also  by  some  kind  of 
polar  virtue  turned  their  homogeneal  sides  the  same  way. 

The  parts  of  all  homogeneal  hard  bodies  which  fully  touch  one  another  stick 
together  very  strongly.  And  for  explaining  how  this  may  be,  some  have  in¬ 
vented  hooked  atoms,  which  is  begging  the  question;  and  others  tell  us  that 
bodies  are  glued  together  by  rest  (that  is,  by  an  occult  quality,  or  rather  by 
nothing) ;  and  others,  that  they  stick  together  by  conspiring  motions  (that  is, 
by  relative  rest  amongst  themselves).  I  had  rather  infer  from  their  cohesion 


Book  III:  Part  1  537 

that  their  particles  attract  one  another  by  some  force,  which  in  immediate  con¬ 
tact  is  exceeding  strong,  at  small  distances  performs  the  chemical  operations 
above  mentioned,  and  reaches  not  far  from  the  particles  with  any  sensible  ef¬ 
fect. 

All  bodies  seem  to  be  composed  of  hard  particles,  for  otherwise  fluids  would 
not  congeal;  as  water,  oils,  vinegar,  and  spirit  or  oil  of  vitriol  do  by  freezing; 
mercury  by  fumes  of  lead;  spirit  of  nitre  and  mercury  by  dissolving  the  mer¬ 
cury  and  evaporating  the  phlegm;  spirit  of  wine  and  spirit  of  urine  by  de- 
phlegming  and  mixing  them;  and  spirit  of  urine  and  spirit  of  salt  by  subliming 
them  together  to  make  sal-ammoniac.  Even  the  rays  of  light  seem  to  be  hard 
bodies ;  for  otherwise  they  would  not  retain  different  properties  in  their  differ¬ 
ent  sides.  And,  therefore,  hardness  may  be  reckoned  the  property  of  all  uncom¬ 
pounded  matter.  At  least,  this  seems  to  be  as  evident  as  the  universal  impene¬ 
trability  of  matter.  For  all  bodies,  so  far  as  experience  reaches,  are  either  hard, 
or  may  be  hardened ;  and  we  have  no  other  evidence  of  universal  impenetrabil¬ 
ity,  besides  a  large  experience  without  an  experimental  exception.  Now,  if  com¬ 
pound  bodies  are  so  very  hard  as  we  find  some  of  them  to  be,  and  yet  are  very 
porous,  and  consist  of  parts  which  are  only  laid  together,  the  simple  particles 
which  are  void  of  pores,  and  were  never  yet  divided,  must  be  much  harder.  For 
such  hard  particles,  being  heaped  up  together,  can  scarce  touch  one  another  in 
more  than  a  few  points,  and  therefore  must  be  separable  by  much  less  force 
than  is  requisite  to  break  a  solid  particle  whose  parts  touch  in  all  the  space  be¬ 
tween  them,  without  any  pores  or  interstices  to  weaken  their  cohesion.  And 
how  such  very  hard  particles,  which  are  only  laid  together  and  touch  only  in  a 
few  points,  can  stick  together,  and  that  so  firmly  as  they  do,  without  the  assist¬ 
ance  of  something  which  causes  them  to  be  attracted  or  pressed  towards  one 
another,  is  very  difficult  to  conceive. 

The  same  thing  I  infer  also  from  the  cohering  of  two  polished  marbles  in  vac¬ 
uo,  and  from  the  standing  of  quick-silver  in  the  barometer  at  the  height  of  50, 
60  or  70  inches,  or  above,  whenever  it  is  well-purged  of  air  and  carefully  poured 
in,  so  that  its  parts  be  everywhere  contiguous  both  to  one  another  and  to  the 
glass.  The  atmosphere  by  its  weight  presses  the  quick-silver  into  the  glass,  to 
the  height  of  29  or  30  inches.  And  some  other  agent  raises  it  higher,  not  by 
pressing  it  into  the  glass,  but  by  making  its  parts  stick  to  the  glass,  and  to  one 
another.  For  upon  any  discontinuation  of  parts,  made  either  by  bubbles  or  by 
shaking  the  glass,  the  whole  mercury  falls  down  to  the  height  of  29  or  30  inches. 

And  of  the  same  kind  with  these  experiments  are  those  that  follow:  If  two 
plane  polished  plates  of  glass  (suppose  two  pieces  of  a  polished  looking-glass)  be 
laid  together,  so  that  their  sides  be  parallel  and  at  a  very  small  distance  from 
one  another,  and  then  their  lower  edges  be  dipped  into  water,  the  water  will 
rise  up  between  them.  And  the  less  the  distance  of  the  glasses  is,  the  greater  will 
be  the  height  to  which  the  water  will  rise.  If  the  distance  be  about  the  hun¬ 
dredth  part  of  an  inch,  the  water  will  rise  to  the  height  of  about  an  inch;  and  if 
the  distance  be  greater  or  less  in  any  proportion,  the  height  will  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  distance  very  nearly.  For  the  attractive  force  of  the  glasses 
is  the  same,  whether  the  distance  between  them  be  greater  or  less;  and  the 
weight  of  the  water  drawn  up  is  the  same,  if  the  height  of  it  be  reciprocally  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  distance  of  the  glasses.  And  in  like  manner,  water  ascends  be¬ 
tween  two  marbles  polished  plane,  when  their  polished  sides  are  parallel,  and  at 


538  Optics 

a  very  little  distance  from  one  another.  And  if  slender  pipes  of  glass  be  dipped 
at  one  end  into  stagnating  water,  the  water  will  rise  up  within  the  pipe,  and  the 
height  to  which  it  rises  will  be  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  diameter  of  the 
cavity  of  the  pipe,  and  will  equal  the  height  to  which  it  rises  between  two  planes 
of  glass,  if  the  semi-diameter  of  the  cavity  of  the  pipe  be  equal  to  the  distance 
between  the  planes,  or  thereabouts.  And  these  experiments  succeed  after  the 
same  manner  in  vacuo  as  in  the  open  air  (as  hath  been  tried  before  the  Royal 
Society)  and  therefore  are  not  influenced  by  the  weight  or  pressure  of  the  at¬ 
mosphere. 

And  if  a  large  pipe  of  glass  be  filled  with  sifted  ashes  well  pressed  together  in 
the  glass,  and  one  end  of  the  pipe  be  dipped  into  stagnating  water,  the  water 
will  rise  up  slowly  in  the  ashes,  so  as  in  the  space  of  a  week  or  fortnight  to  reach 
up  within  the  glass  to  the  height  of  30  or  40  inches  above  the  stagnating  water. 
And  the  water  rises  up  to  this  height  by  the  action  only  of  those  particles  of  the 
ashes  which  are  upon  the  surface  of  the  elevated  water;  the  particles  which  are 
within  the  water  attracting  or  repelling  it  as  much  downwards  as  upwards. 
And,  therefore,  the  action  of  the  particles  is  very  strong.  But  the  particles  of 
the  ashes  being  not  so  dense  and  close  together  as  those  of  glass,  their  action  is 
not  so  strong  as  that  of  glass,  which  keeps  quick-silver  suspended  to  the  height 
of  60  or  70  inches,  and,  therefore,  acts  with  a  force  which  would  keep  water  sus¬ 
pended  to  the  height  of  above  60  feet. 

By  the  same  principle,  a  sponge  sucks  in  water,  and  the  glands  in  the  bodies 
of  animals,  according  to  their  several  natures  and  dispositions,  suck  in  various 
juices  from  the  blood. 

If  two  plane  polished  plates  of  glass  three  or  four  inches  broad,  and  twenty  or 
twenty-five  long,  be  laid  one  of  them  parallel  to  the  horizon,  the  other  upon  the 
first,  so  as  at  one  of  their  ends  to  touch  one  another,  and  contain  an  angle  of 
about  10  or  15  minutes,  and  the  same  be  first  moistened  on  their  inward  sides 
with  a  clean  cloth  dipped  into  oil  of  oranges  or  spirit  of  turpentine,  and  a  drop 
or  two  of  the  oil  or  spirit  be  let  fall  upon  the  lower  glass  at  the  other;  so  soon  as 
the  upper  glass  is  laid  down  upon  the  lower,  so  as  to  touch  it  at  one  end  as 
above,  and  to  touch  the  drop  at  the  other  end,  making  with  the  lower  glass  an 
angle  of  about  10  or  15  minutes,  the  drop  will  begin  to  move  towards  the  con¬ 
course  of  the  glasses,  and  will  continue  to  move  with  an  accelerated  motion  till 
it  arrives  at  that  concourse  of  the  glasses.  For  the  two  glasses  attract  the  drop, 
and  make  it  run  that  way  towards  which  the  attractions  incline.  And  if  when 
the  drop  is  in  motion  you  lift  up  that  end  of  the  glasses  where  they  meet,  and 
towards  which  the  drop  moves,  the  drop  will  ascend  between  the  glasses,  and 
therefore  is  attracted.  And  as  you  lift  up  the  glasses  more  and  more,  the  drop 
will  ascend  slower  and  slower,  and  at  length  rest,  being  then  carried  downward 
by  its  weight,  as  much  as  upwards  by  the  attraction.  And  by  this  means  you 
may  know  the  force  by  which  the  drop  is  attracted  at  all  distances  from  the 
concourse  of  the  glasses. 

Now,  by  some  experiments  of  this  kind  (made  by  Mr.  Hauksbee),  it  has  been 
found  that  the  attraction  is  almost  reciprocally  in  a  duplicate  proportion  of  the 
distance  of  the  middle  of  the  drop  from  the  concourse  of  the  glasses,  viz.,  re¬ 
ciprocally  in  a  simple  proportion,  by  reason  of  the  spreading  of  the  drop,  and 
its  touching  each  glass  in  a  larger  surface ;  and  again  reciprocally  in  a  simple 
proportion,  by  reason  of  the  attractions  growing  stronger  within  the  same  quan- 


Book  III:  Part  1  539 

tity  of  attracting  surface.  The  attraction,  therefore,  within  the  same  quantity 
of  attracting  surface,  is  reciprocally  as  the  distance  between  the  glasses.  And, 
therefore,  where  the  distance  is  exceeding  small,  the  attraction  must  be  exceed¬ 
ing  great.  By  the  Table  in  the  second  part  of  the  second  book,  wherein  the 
thicknesses  of  coloured  plates  of  water  between  two  glasses  are  set  down,  the 
thickness  of  the  plate  where  it  appears  very  black  is  three-eighths  of  the  ten 
hundred  thousandth  part  of  an  inch.  And  where  the  oil  of  oranges  between  the 
glasses  is  of  this  thickness,  the  attraction  collected  by  the  foregoing  rule  seems 
to  be  so  strong  as,  within  a  circle  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  to  suffice  to  hold  up  a 
weight  equal  to  that  of  a  cylinder  of  water  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  two  or 
three  furlongs  in  length.  And  where  it  is  of  a  less  thickness,  the  attraction  may 
be  proportionally  greater,  and  continue  to  increase,  until  the  thickness  do  not 
exceed  that  of  a  single  particle  of  the  oil.  There  are,  therefore,  agents  in  nature 
able  to  make  the  particles  of  bodies  stick  together  by  very  strong  attractions. 
And  it  is  the  business  of  experimental  philosophy  to  find  them  out. 

Now,  the  smallest  particles  of  matter  may  cohere  by  the  strongest  attrac¬ 
tions,  and  compose  bigger  particles  of  weaker  virtue;  and  many  of  these  may 
cohere  and  compose  bigger  particles  whose  virtue  is  still  weaker,  and  so  on  for 
divers  successions,  until  the  progression  end  in  the  biggest  particles  on  which 
the  operations  in  chemistry,  and  the  colours  of  natural  bodies  depend,  and 
which  by  cohering  compose  bodies  of  a  sensible  magnitude.  If  the  body  is  com¬ 
pact,  and  bends  or  yields  inward  to  pression — without  any  sliding  of  its  parts, 
it  is  hard  and  elastic,  returning  to  its  figure  with  a  force  rising  from  the  mutual 
attraction  of  its  parts.  If  the  parts  slide  upon  one  another,  the  body  is  malle¬ 
able  or  soft.  If  they  slip  easily,  and  are  of  a  fit  size  to  be  agitated  by  heat,  and 
the  heat  is  big  enough  to  keep  them  in  agitation,  the  body  is  fluid ;  and  if  it  be 
apt  to  stick  to  things,  it  is  humid ;  and  the  drops  of  every  fluid  affect  a  round 
figure  by  the  mutual  attraction  of  their  parts,  as  the  globe  of  the  Earth  and  sea 
affects  a  round  figure  by  the  mutual  attraction  of  its  parts  by  gravity. 

Since  metals  dissolved  in  acids  attract  but  a  small  quantity  of  the  acid,  their 
attractive  force  can  reach  but  to  a  small  distance  from  them.  And  as  in  algebra, 
where  affirmative  quantities  vanish  and  cease,  there  negative  ones  begin;  so  in 
mechanics,  where  attraction  ceases,  there  a  repulsive  virtue  ought  to  succeed. 
And  that  there  is  such  a  virtue  seems  to  follow  from  the  reflexions  and  inflex¬ 
ions  of  the  rays  of  light.  For  the  rays  are  repelled  by  bodies  in  both  these  cases, 
without  the  immediate  contact  of  the  reflecting  or  inflecting  body.  It  seems 
also  to  follow  from  the  emission  of  light,  the  ray  so  soon  as  it  is  shaken  off 
from  a  shining  body  by  the  vibrating  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  body,  and  gets 
beyond  the  reach  of  attraction,  being  driven  away  with  exceeding  great  veloc¬ 
ity.  For  that  force  which  is  sufficient  to  turn  it  back  in  reflexion  may  be  suffi¬ 
cient  to  emit  it.  It  seems  also  to  follow  from  the  production  of  air  and  vapour. 
The  particles  when  they  are  shaken  off  from  bodies  by  heat  or  fermentation, 
so  soon  as  they  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  attraction  of  the  body,  receding 
from  it,  and  also  from  one  another  with  great  strength,  and  keeping  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  so  as  sometimes  to  take  up  above  a  million  of  times  more  space  than  they 
did  before  in  the  form  of  a  dense  body.  Which  vast  contraction  and  expansion 
seems  unintelligible,  by  feigning  the  particles  of  air  to  be  springy  and  ramous, 
or  rolled  up  like  hoops,  or  by  any  other  means  than  a  repulsive  power.  The 
particles  of  fluids  which  do  not  cohere  too  strongly,  and  are  of  such  a  smallness 


540  Optics 

as  renders  them  most  susceptible  to  those  agitations  which  keep  liquors  in  a 
Fluor,  are  most  easily  separated  and  rarefied  into  vapour,  and  in  the  language 
of  the  chemists  they  are  volatile,  rarefying  with  an  easy  heat,  and  condensing 
with  cold.  But  those  which  are  grosser,  and  so  less  susceptible  of  agitation,  or 
cohere  by  a  stronger  attraction,  are  not  separated  without  a  stronger  heat,  or 
perhaps  not  without  fermentation.  And  these  last  are  the  bodies  which  chem¬ 
ists  call  fixed,  and  being  rarefied  by  fermentation  become  true,  permanent  air; 
those  particles  receding  from  one  another  with  the  greatest  force,  and  being 
most  difficultly  brought  together,  which  upon  contact  cohere  most  strongly. 
And  because  the  particles  of  permanent  air  are  grosser,  and  arise  from  denser 
substances  than  those  of  vapours,  thence  it  is  that  true  air  is  more  ponderous 
than  vapour,  and  that  a  moist  atmosphere  is  lighter  than  a  dry  one,  quantity 
for  quantity.  From  the  same  repelling  power  it  seems  to  be  that  flies  walk  upon 
the  water  without  wetting  their  feet;  and  that  the  object-glasses  of  long  tele¬ 
scopes  lie  upon  one  another  without  touching;  and  that  dry  powders  are  diffi¬ 
cultly  made  to  touch  one  another  so  as  to  stick  together,  unless  by  melting 
them,  or  wetting  them  with  water,  which  by  exhaling  may  bring  them  together ; 
and  that  two  polished  marbles,  which  by  immediate  contact  stick  together,  are 
difficultly  brought  so  close  together  as  to  stick. 

And  thus  Nature  ^vill  be  very  conformable  to  herself  and  very  simple,  per¬ 
forming  all  the  great  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  by  the  attraction  of  grav¬ 
ity  which  intercedes  those  bodies,  and  almost  all  the  small  ones  of  their  parti¬ 
cles  by  some  other  attractive  and  repelling  powers  which  intercede  the  particles. 
The  vis  inertias  is  a  passive  principle  by  which  bodies  persist  in  their  motion  or 
rest,  receive  motion  in  proportion  to  the  force  impressing  it,  and  resist  as  much 
as  they  are  resisted.  By  this  principle  alone  there  never  could  have  been  any 
motion  in  the  world.  Some  other  principle  was  necessary  for  putting  bodies 
into  motion;  and  now  they  are  in  motion,  some  other  principle  is  necessary  for 
conserving  the  motion.  For  from  the  various  composition  of  two  motions,  Tis 
very  certain  that  there  is  not  always  the  same  quantity  of  motion  in  the  world. 
For  if  two  globes,  joined  by  a  slender  rod,  revolve  about  their  common  centre 
of  gravity  with  a  uniform  motion,  while  that  centre  moves  on  uniformly  in  a 
right  line  drawn  in  the  plane  of  their  circular  motion,  the  sum  of  the  motions  of 
the  two  globes,  as  often  as  the  globes  are  in  the  right  line  described  by  their 
common  centre  of  gravity,  will  be  bigger  than  the  sum  of  their  motions  when 
they  are  in  a  line  perpendicular  to  that  right  line.  By  this  instance  it  appears 
that  motion  may  be  got  or  lost.  But  by  reason  of  the  tenacity  of  fluids,  and  at¬ 
trition  of  their  parts,  and  the  weakness  of  elasticity  in  solids,  motion  is  much 
more  apt  to  be  lost  than  got,  and  is  always  upon  the  decay.  For  bodies  which 
are  either  absolutely  hard,  or  so  soft  as  to  be  void  of  elasticity,  will  not  rebound 
from  one  another.  Impenetrability  makes  them  only  stop.  If  two  equal  bodies 
meet  directly  in  vacuo,  they  mil  by  the  laws  of  motion  stop  where  they  meet, 
and  lose  all  their  motion,  and  remain  in  rest,  unless  they  be  elastic,  and  receive 
new  motion  from  their  spring.  If  they  have  so  much  elasticity  as  suffices  to 
make  them  re-bound  mth  a  quarter,  or  half,  or  three-quarters  of  the  force  with 
which  they  come  together,  they  will  lose  three-quarters,  or  half,  or  a  quarter  of 
their  motion.  And  this  may  be  tried  by  letting  two  equal  pendulums  fall  against 
one  another  from  equal  heights.  If  the  pendulums  be  of  lead  or  soft  clay,  they 
will  lose  all  or  almost  all  their  motions;  if  of  elastic  bodies  they  will  lose  all  but 


Book  III :  Part  1  541 

what  they  recover  from  their  elasticity.  If  it  be  said  that  they  can  lose  no  mo¬ 
tion  blit  what  they  communicate  to  other  bodies,  the  consequence  is,  that  in 
vacuo  they  can  lose  no  motion,  but  when  they  meet  they  must  go  on  and  pene¬ 
trate  one  another’s  dimensions.  If  three  equal  round  vessels  be  filled  (the  one 
with  water,  the  other  vnth  oil,  the  third  with  molten  pitch),  and  the  liquors  be 
stirred  about  alike  to  give  them  a  vortical  motion,  the  pitch  by  its  tenacity  will 
lose  its  motion  quickly,  the  oil  being  less  tenacious  will  keep  it  longer,  and  the 
water  being  less  tenacious  will  keep  it  longest,  but  yet  vdll  lose  it  in  a  short 
time.  Whence  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  if  many  contiguous  vortices  of  mol¬ 
ten  pitch  were  each  of  them  as  large  as  those  which  some  suppose  to  revolve 
about  the  Sun  and  fixed  stars,  yet  these  and  all  their  parts  would,  by  their  te¬ 
nacity  and  stiffness,  communicate  their  motion  to  one  another  till  they  all  rested 
among  themselves.  Vortices  of  oil  or  water,  or  some  fluider  matter,  might  con¬ 
tinue  longer  in  motion;  but  unless  the  matter  were  void  of  all  tenacity  and 
attrition  of  parts,  and  communication  of  motion  (which  is  not  to  be  sup¬ 
posed),  the  motion  would  constantly  decay.  Seeing,  therefore,  the  variety  of 
motion  which  we  find  in  the  world  is  always  decreasing,  there  is  a  necessity 
of  conserving  and  recruiting  it  by  active  principles,  such  as  are  the  cause 
of  gravity,  by  which  planets  and  comets  keep  their  motions  in  their  orbs, 
and  bodies  acquire  great  motion  in  falling;  and  the  cause  of  fermentation,  by 
which  the  heart  and  blood  of  animals  are  kept  in  perpetual  motion  and  heat; 
the  inward  parts  of  the  earth  are  constantly  warmed,  and  in  some  places  grow 
very  hot;  bodies  burn  and  shine,  mountains  take  fire,  the  caverns  of  the  earth 
are  blown  up,  and  the  Sun  continues  violently  hot  and  lucid,  and  warms  all 
things  by  his  light.  For  we  meet  with  very  little  motion  in  the  world,  besides 
what  is  owing  to  these  active  principles.  And  if  it  were  not  for  these  principles, 
the  bodies  of  the  earth,  planets,  comets.  Sun,  and  all  things  in  them,  would 
grow  cold  and  freeze,  and  become  inactive  masses;  and  all  putrefaction,  gen¬ 
eration,  vegetation  and  life  would  cease,  and  the  planets  and  comets  would  not 
remain  in  their  orbs. 

All  these  things  being  considered,  it  seems  probable  to  me  that  God  in  the 
beginning  formed  matter  in  solid,  massy,  hard,  impenetrable,  moveable  parti¬ 
cles,  of  such  sizes  and  figures,  and  with  such  other  properties,  and  in  such  pro¬ 
portion  to  space,  as  most  conduced  to  the  end  for  which  he  formed  them;  and 
that  these  primitive  particles  being  solids,  are  incomparably  harder  than  any 
porous  bodies  compounded  of  them;  even  so  very  hard  as  never  to  wear  or 
break  in  pieces;  no  ordinary  power  being  able  to  divide  what  God  himself  made 
one  in  the  first  creation.  While  the  particles  continue  entire,  they  may  compose 
bodies  of  one  and  the  same  nature  and  texture  in  all  ages ;  but  should  they  wear 
away,  or  break  in  pieces,  the  nature  of  things  depending  on  them  ivould  be 
changed.  Water  and  earth,  composed  of  old  worn  particles  and  fragments  of 
particles,  would  not  be  of  the  same  nature  and  texture  now,  with  water  and 
earth  composed  of  entire  particles  in  the  beginning.  And,  therefore,  that  Na¬ 
ture  may  be  lasting,  the  changes  of  corporeal  things  are  to  be  placed  only  in  the 
various  separations  and  new  associations  and  motions  of  these  permanent  par¬ 
ticles;  compound  bodies  being  apt  to  break,  not  in  the  midst  of  solid  particles, 
but  where  those  particles  are  laid  together,  and  only  touch  in  a  few  points. 

It  seems  to  me,  further,  that  these  particles  have  not  only  a  vis  inertice,  ac¬ 
companied  with  such  passive  laws  of  motion  as  naturally  result  from  that  force. 


542  Optics 

but  also  that  they  are  moved  by  certain  active  principles,  such  as  is  that  of 
gravity,  and  that  which  causes  fermentation,  and  the  cohesion  of  bodies.  These 
principles  I  consider,  not  as  occult  qualities,  supposed  to  result  from  the  spe¬ 
cific  forms  of  things,  but  as  general  laws  of  nature,  by  which  the  things  them¬ 
selves  are  formed;  their  truth  appearing  to  us  by  phenomena,  though  their 
causes  be  not  yet  discovered.  For  these  are  manifest  qualities,  and  their  causes 
only  are  occult.  And  the  Aristotelians  gave  the  name  of  occult  qualities,  not  to 
manifest  qualities,  but  to  such  qualities  only  as  they  supposed  to  lie  hid  in 
bodies,  and  to  be  the  unknown  causes  of  manifest  effects.  Such  as  would  be  the 
causes  of  gravity,  and  of  magnetic  and  electric  attractions,  and  of  fermenta¬ 
tions,  if  we  should  suppose  that  these  forces  or  actions  arose  from  qualities  un¬ 
known  to  us,  and  incapable  of  being  discovered  and  made  manifest.  Such  oc¬ 
cult  qualities  put  a  stop  to  the  improvement  of  natural  philosophy,  and  there¬ 
fore  of  late  years  have  been  rejected.  To  tell  us  that  every  species  of  things  is 
endowed  with  an  occult  specific  quality  by  which  it  acts  and  produces  manifest 
effects,  is  to  tell  us  nothing;  but  to  derive  two  or  three  general  principles  of  mo¬ 
tion  from  phenomena,  and  afterwards  to  tell  us  how  the  properties  and  actions  of 
all  corporeal  things  follow  from  those  manifest  principles,  would  be  a  very  great 
step  in  philosophy,  though  the  causes  of  those  principles  were  not  yet  discov¬ 
ered.  And,  therefore,  I  scruple  not  to  propose  the  principles  of  motion  above  men¬ 
tioned,  they  being  of  very  general  extent,  and  leave  their  causes  to  be  found  out. 

Now,  by  the  help  of  these  principles,  all  material  things  seem  to  have  been 
composed  of  the  hard  and  solid  particles  above  mentioned,  variously  associ¬ 
ated  in  the  first  creation  by  the  counsel  of  an  intelligent  agent.  For  it  became 
Him  who  created  them  to  set  them  in  order.  And  if  He  did  so,  it’s  unphilosophi- 
cal  to  seek  for  any  other  origin  of  the  world,  or  to  pretend  that  it  might  arise 
out  of  a  chaos  by  the  mere  laws  of  Nature;  though,  being  once  formed,  it  may 
continue  by  those  laws  for  many  ages.  For  while  comets  move  in  very  eccentric 
orbs  in  all  manner  of  positions,  blind  fate  could  never  make  all  the  planets  move 
one  and  the  same  way  in  orbs  concentric,  some  inconsiderable  irregularities  ex¬ 
cepted,  which  may  have  risen  from  the  mutual  actions  of  comets  and  planets 
upon  one  another,  and  which  \vill  be  apt  to  increase,  till  this  system  wants  a 
reformation.  Such  a  wonderful  uniformity  in  the  planetary  system  must  be  al¬ 
lowed  the  effect  of  choice.  And  so  must  the  uniformity  in  the  bodies  of  animals, 
they  having  generally  a  right  and  a  left  side  shaped  alike,  and  on  either  side  of 
their  bodies  two  legs  behind,  and  either  two  arms,  or  two  legs,  or  two  mngs  be¬ 
fore  upon  their  shoulders,  and  between  their  shoulders  a  neck  running  down 
into  a  backbone,  and  a  head  upon  it;  and  in  the  head  two  ears,  two  eyes,  a  nose, 
a  mouth,  and  a  tongue,  alike  situated.  Also  the  first  contrivance  of  those  very 
artificial  parts  of  animals,  the  eyes,  ears,  brain,  muscles,  heart,  lungs,  midriff, 
glands,  larynx,  hands,  wings,  swimming  bladders,  natural  spectacles,  and  other 
organs  of  sense  and  motion ;  and  the  instinct  of  brutes  and  insects  can  be  the 
effect  of  nothing  else  than  the  wisdom  and  skill  of  a  powerful,  ever-living  agent, 
who  being  in  all  places,  is  more  able  by  His  mil  to  move  the  bodies  within  His 
boundless  uniform  sensoriura,  and  thereby  to  form  and  reform  the  parts  of  the 
Universe,  than  we  are  by  our  will  to  move  the  parts  of  our  own  bodies.  And  yet 
w^e  are  not  to  consider  the  wmiid  as  the  body  of  God,  or  the  several  parts  thereof 
as  the  parts  of  God.  He  is  a  uniform  Being,  void  of  organs,  members  or  parts, 
and  they  are  his  creatures  subordinate  to  him,  and  subservient  to  His  will;  and 


Book  III:  Part  1  543 

He  is  no  more  the  soul  of  them  than  the  soul  of  man  is  the  soul  of  the  species  of 
things  carried  through  the  organs  of  sense  into  the  place  of  its  sensation,  where 
it  perceives  them  by  means  of  its  immediate  presence,  without  the  intervention 
of  any  third  thing.  The  organs  of  sense  are  not  for  enabling  the  soul  to  perceive 
the  species  of  things  in  its  sensorium,  but  only  for  conveying  them  thither;  and 
God  has  no  need  of  such  organs,  He  being  everywhere  present  to  the  things 
themselves.  And  since  space  is  divisible  in  infinitum,  and  matter  is  not  neces¬ 
sarily  in  all  places,  it  may  be  also  allowed  that  God  is  able  to  create  particles  of 
matter  of  several  sizes  and  figures,  and  in  several  proportions  to  space,  and  per¬ 
haps  of  different  densities  and  forces,  and  thereby  to  vary  the  laws  of  Nature, 
and  make  worlds  of  several  sorts  in  several  parts  of  the  Universe.  At  least,  I  see 
nothing  of  contradiction  in  all  this. 

As  in  mathematics,  so  in  natural  philosophy,  the  investigation  of  difficult 
things  by  the  method  of  analysis,  ought  ever  to  precede  the  method  of  composi¬ 
tion.  This  analysis  consists  in  making  experiments  and  observations,  and  in 
drawing  general  conclusions  from  them  by  induction,  and  admitting  of  no  ob¬ 
jections  against  the  conclusions  but  such  as  are  taken  from  experiments,  or 
other  certain  truths.  For  hypotheses  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  experimental 
philosophy.  And  although  the  arguing  from  experiments  and  observations  by 
induction  be  no  demonstration  of  general  conclusions,  yet  it  is  the  best  way  of 
arguing  which  the  nature  of  things  admits  of,  and  may  be  looked  upon  as  so 
much  the  stronger,  by  how  much  the  induction  is  more  general.  And  if  no  ex¬ 
ception  occur  from  phenomena,  the  conclusion  may  be  pronounced  generally. 
But  if  at  any  time  afterw^ards  any  exception  shall  occur  from  experiments,  it 
may  then  begin  to  be  pronounced  wdth  such  exceptions  as  occur.  By  this  w^ay  of 
analysis  we  may  proceed  from  compounds  to  ingredients,  and  from  motions  to 
the  forces  producing  them;  and,  in  general,  from  effects  to  their  causes,  and 
from  particular  causes  to  more  general  ones,  till  the  argument  end  in  the  most 
general.  This  is  the  method  of  analysis;  and  the  synthesis  consists  in  assuming 
the  causes  discovered,  and  established  as  principles,  and  by  them  explaining 
the  phenomena  proceeding  from  them,  and  proving  the  explanations. 

In  the  tw’o  first  books  of  these  Optics,  I  proceeded  by  this  analysis  to  dis¬ 
cover  and  prove  the  original  differences  of  the  rays  of  light  in  respect  of  refran- 
gibility,  reflexibility,  and  colour,  and  their  alternate  fits  of  easy  reflexion  and 
easy  transmission,  and  the  properties  of  bodies,  both  opaque  and  pellucid,  on 
which  their  reflexions  and  colours  depend.  And  these  discoveries,  being  proved, 
may  be  assumed  in  the  method  of  composition  for  explaining  the  phenomena 
arising  from  them,  an  instance  of  w'hich  method  I  gave  in  the  end  of  the  first 
book.  In  this  third  book  I  have  only  begun  the  analysis  of  what  remains  to  be 
discovered  about  light  and  its  effects  upon  the  frame  of  Nature,  hinting  several 
things  about  it,  and  leaving  the  hints  to  be  examined  and  improved  by  the  fur¬ 
ther  experiments  and  observations  of  such  as  are  inquisitive.  And  if  natural 
philosophy  in  all  its  parts,  by  pursuing  this  method,  shall  at  length  be  per¬ 
fected,  the  bounds  of  moral  philosophy  will  be  also  enlarged.  For  so  far  as  we 
can  know  by  natural  philosophy  wffiat  is  the  First  Cause,  wffiat  pow'er  He  has 
over  us,  and  wffiat  benefits  we  recieve  from  Him,  so  far  our  duty  towards  Him, 
as  well  as  that  towards  one  another,  wall  appear  to  us  by  the  light  of  Nature. 
And  no  doubt,  if  the  worship  of  false  gods  had  not  blinded  the  heathen,  their 
moral  philosophy  would  have  gone  farther  than  to  the  four  cardinal  virtues; 


544  Optics 

and  instead  of  teaching  the  transmigration  of  souls,  and  to  worship  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  and  dead  heroes,  they  would  have  taught  us  to  worship  our  true  Author 
and  Benefactor,  as  their  ancestors  did  under  the  government  of  Noah  and  his 
sons  before  they  corrupted  themselves. 


TREATISE  ON  LIGHT 


V 


.« -TVI  oai  m  <»U(t  «<»  ^ 

-  ''  ‘W  .iT(|iJ{|  MV  tM  ^ci*>Utp  0^  rn«»  /liit)t<3f 

u  v,  MOfluf  tt«»fK'rn<i»Airt  t^  JNNuJi  ' 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Christiaan  Huygens,  1629-1695 


The  family  into  which  Christiaan  Huygens 
was  born,  April  14,  1629,  at  The  Hague,  was 
one  of  the  most  eminent  in  both  the  political 
and  literary  development  of  the  Dutch  Renais¬ 
sance.  The  father  of  the  scientist,  Constantijn 
Huygens,  Lord  of  Zuylichem,  was  secretary  of 
state  for  three  successive  Princes  of  Orange;  he 
carried  out  many  diplomatic  missions,  particu¬ 
larly  to  England  where  he  was  knighted  in 
1621.  While  there  he  became  the  friend  of 
Donne,  whose  poetry  he  began  translating 
into  Dutch.  As  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Am¬ 
sterdam  school,  he  was  the  intimate  friend  of 
Vondel,  the  Dutch  national  poet,  and  was  him¬ 
self  Holland’s  foremost  classical  poet. 

Sir  Constantijn,  who  was  a  distinguished 
Latinist,  a  musician,  and  a  mathematician, 
took  upon  himself  the  preliminary  instruction 
of  his  sons.  Christiaan,  the  second  son,  was 
trained  as  a  boy  in  languages,  drawing,  and 
music.  At  thirteen  he  began  the  study  of  me¬ 
chanics,  which  together  with  mathematics 
soon  became  his  chief  interest.  But  before  de¬ 
voting  his  entire  attention  to  these  subjects  he 
was  sent  to  Leyden  to  study  law  with  Vinnius, 
who  later  dedicated  his  famous  commentary 
on  the  Institutes  to  him.  In  1646  Huygens 
transferred  to  Breda,  where  his  father  directed 
the  new  university,  and  two  years  later  he  took 
his  degree  in  law.  In  both  places  he  continued 
his  pursuit  of  mathematics,  particularly  with 
Van  Schooten,  who  included  some  of  Huygens’ 
notes  in  his  edition  of  Descartes’  Geometry. 

At  seventeen  Huygens  communicated  his 
first  mathematical  discovery  to  Mersenne, 
who  introduced  him  to  the  learned  world  as 
“the  Dutch  Archimedes,”  and  soon  after,  he 
was  in  correspondence  with  the  leading  scien¬ 
tists  of  Europe.  Descartes,  on  being  shown  a 
mathematical  paper  of  Huygens,  declared  his 
confidence  that  “he  will  excel  in  this  science 
wherein  I  see  hardly  anyone  who  knows  any¬ 
thing.”  Although  Descartes  frequented  Sir 
Constantijn’s  house,  it  does  not  appear  that  he 
ever  met  his  son.  They  exchanged  letters,  Des¬ 
cartes  called  Huygens  “a  son  of  his  own  blood,” 
and  when  Huygens  was  traveling  in  Denmark 
in  1649  with  the  Count  of  Nassau,  he  regretted 


that  time  and  weather  did  not  permit  his 
crossing  over  to  Sweden  to  visit  Descartes, 
who  was  then  living  there  at  the  invitation  of 
Queen  Christina. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-one  Huygens  published 
his  first  works  on  mathematics,  dealing  with 
the  quadrature  of  conic  sections,  and  in  1654, 
he  made  the  closest  approximation  so  far  ob¬ 
tained  of  the  area  of  the  circle.  Two  years 
later  he  sent  to  Van  Schooten  his  work  on 
probability,  which  while  recognizing  the  pri¬ 
ority  of  Pascal’s  and  Fermat’s  treatment,  con¬ 
stituted  the  first  treatise  on  the  subject  when 
published  in  a  volume  of  Van  Schooten’s  math¬ 
ematical  writings.  At  the  same  time  Huygens 
was  working  with  his  elder  brother  on  astron¬ 
omy.  They  found  a  new  method  of  grinding 
and  polishing  lenses  which  overcame  the  de¬ 
fects  of  spherical  and  chromatic  aberration  and 
enabled  them  to  construct  an  improved  tele¬ 
scope.  Huygens’  first  observations  yielded  the 
discovery  of  the  Orion  nebula  and  of  a  new 
satellite  to  Saturn  as  well  as  a  truer  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  rings  about  that  planet.  The  need 
for  an  exact  measure  of  time  in  observing  the 
heavens  led  Huygens  to  the  invention  of  the 
pendulum-clock,  which  was  presented  to  the 
states-general  in  1657  and  was  followed  a  year 
later  by  a  description  of  the  requisite  mecha¬ 
nism. 

Huygens’  reputation  now  became  interna¬ 
tional.  As  early  as  1655  the  University  of  An¬ 
gers  had  distinguished  him  with  an  honorary 
degree  of  doctor  of  laws.  In  1663,  on  the  occa¬ 
sion  of  a  visit  to  England,  he  was  elected  a 
fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.  Two  years  later, 
on  the  establishment  of  the  French  Royal 
Academy  of  Sciences,  Colbert  invited  him  to 
be  its  first  foreign  resident,  and  for  the  next 
fifteen  years  Huygens  made  his  home  in 
France.  He  received  a  handsome  pension  from 
Louis  XIV  and  lived  at  Paris  in  the  Biblio- 
theque  du  Roi.  Although  Huygens  disliked  the 
world  of  rank,  wealth,  and  fashion,  he  did  not 
live  the  life  of  a  recluse  in  Paris;  he  even  wrote 
some  verses  to  the  celebrated  Ninon  de  Len- 
clos.  Yet  the  greater  part  of  his  efforts,  despite 
delicate  health,  were  spent  in  intense  scien- 
547 


Biographical  Note 


548 

tific  research.  His  treatises  on  “Dioptrics”  and 
the  concussion  of  elastic  bodies  were  hailed 
not  only  for  their  discoveries,  but  also  for  the 
style  in  which  they  were  presented,  and 
Newton  claimed  that  among  modern  writers 
he  had  most  closely  approximated  the  style  of 
the  ancients.  His  greatest  work,  the  Horolo¬ 
gium  oscillatorium  (1673),  dealt  with  the  prob¬ 
lems  raised  by  the  pendulum-clock,  and  con¬ 
tained  original  discoveries  sufficient  for  sev¬ 
eral  important  treatises. 

Twice  during  his  residence  in  Paris,  Huy¬ 
gens  returned  to  Holland  in  the  hope  that  his 
native  air  would  restore  his  health,  and  in 
1681,  perhaps  because  of  the  revocation  of  the 
Edict  of  Nantes,  he  severed  his  connections 
and  left  France.  Upon  his  return  to  Holland, 
Huygens  took  up  again  the  study  of  optics, 
physics,  and  astronomy.  He  had  always  been 
interested  in  useful  inventions  and,  in  addition 
to  the  pendulum-clock,  had  already  improved 
the  air  pump  and  the  barometer,  provided  the 
first  idea  of  the  micrometer,  and  introduced 
the  use  of  a  spiral  band  for  a  watch-spring.  In 


Holland  he  turned  again  to  the  construction  of 
telescopes.  Using  lenses  of  long  focal  distance 
mounted  on  poles,  he  produced  what  were 
called  “aerial  telescopes.”  He  also  succeeded 
in  constructing  an  almost  perfectly  achromatic 
eye-piece,  still  known  by  his  name.  His  re¬ 
searches  in  optics  finally  led  him  to  publish  in 
1690  his  Treatise  on  Light,  which  had  been 
written  in  French  in  1678  while  at  Paris.  In 
response  to  the  need  for  some  means  of  repre¬ 
senting  the  solar  system,  Huygens  constructed 
a  “planetary  machine”  capable  of  showing  the 
motions  of  the  planets.  It  was  apparently  also 
at  this  time  that  he  wrote  the  imaginative 
work  found  among  his  posthumous  papers 
called  Cosmotheoros,  and  translated  into  Eng¬ 
lish  under  the  title,  “The  celestial  worlds  dis¬ 
covered,  or  conjectures  concerning  the  inhabi¬ 
tants,  plants,  and  productions  of  the  worlds  in 
the  planets.” 

Worn  out  by  his  great  and  varied  activity 
and  the  burden  of  an  enormous  correspondence, 
Huygens  died  at  The  Hague,  June  8,  1695,  at 
the  age  of  sixty-six. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  note  547 

Preface  551 

CHAPTER 

I.  On  rays  'propagated  in  straight  lines  553 

II.  On  reflexion  563 

III.  On  refraction  566 

IV.  On  the  refraction  of  the  air  575 

V.  On  the  strange  refractions  of  Iceland  crystal  579 

VI.  On  the  figures  of  transparent  bodies  lohich 

serve  for  refraction  and  for  reflexion  607 


549 


m 


AX*  N 

’  *A)|IV>1  Aijitf  h  ^  cot4«ttacf,i<?« 

^*4'.  ’  JwW  Ke.  'iiitKiuliN^  ^h&i  i/reft  ' 


li9*'  ■  ■‘^'^' ' '  |iy)6, 

IN" 


g  j^U  '^‘'fftTW  aliia  |lu^l^«^^«1J(K| 

Er,  v^af  yi^air.  Hig 

^ptAoi*  fil^pM^^'ll^riitai  CM.'pabi^B’ 

,  ■.4*'A«„.>ik  '^bui,  heott 


oJ  rspr^ 


1«0  *^.)s 

j4>A<lt<4‘n3r«^  W;'  iiiut<in;viih?t  • ,  _■' 


?t.u. 

•"'' ,'.  ,  '  W9II6II  W  >>y  lik  ifrt^4'iu;d  ■Vdi‘fv''i  ietivi^jr 

i^A,„  H«^>'<»^>iliil'ia  Til«'Ha^  - -  ' 


PREFACE 


I  WROTE  this  treatise  during  my  sojourn  in  France  twelve  years  ago,  and  I 
communicated  it  in  the  year  1678  to  the  learned  persons  who  then  composed 
the  Royal  Academy  of  Science,  to  the  membership  of  which  the  King  had  done 
me  the  honour  of  calling  me.  Several  of  that  body  who  are  still  alive  will  re¬ 
member  having  been  present  when  I  read  it,  and  above  the  rest  those  amongst 
them  who  applied  themselves  particularly  to  the  study  of  mathematics;  of 
whom  I  cannot  cite  more  than  the  celebrated  gentlemen,  Cassini,  Romer,  and 
de  la  Hire.  And,  although  I  have  since  corrected  and  changed  some  parts,  the 
copies  which  I  had  made  of  it  at  that  time  may  serve  for  proof  that  I  have  yet 
added  nothing  to  it  save  some  conjectures  touching  the  formation  of  Iceland 
crystal,  and  a  novel  observation  on  the  refraction  of  rock  crystal.  I  have  de¬ 
sired  to  relate  these  particulars  to  make  kno^vn  how  long  I  have  meditated  the 
things  which  now  I  publish,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  detracting  from  the 
merit  of  those  who,  udthout  having  seen  anything  that  I  have  written,  may  be 
found  to  have  treated  of  like  matters:  as  has,  in  fact,  occurred  to  two  eminent 
geometricians,  Messieurs  Newton  and  Leibnitz,  with  respect  to  the  problem 
of  the  figure  of  glasses  for  collecting  rays  when  one  of  the  surfaces  is  given. 

One  may  ask  why  I  have  so  long  delayed  to  bring  this  work  to  the  light. 
The  reason  is  that  I  wrote  it  rather  carelessly  in  the  language  in  which  it 
appears,  with  the  intention  of  translating  it  into  Latin,  so  doing  in  order  to 
obtain  greater  attention  to  the  thing.  After  wLich  I  proposed  to  myself  to  give 
it  out  along  with  another  treatise  on  dioptrics,  in  which  I  explain  the  effects  of 
telescopes  and  those  things  which  belong  more  to  that  science.  But  the  pleasure 
of  novelty  being  past,  I  have  put  off  from  time  to  time  the  execution  of  this 
design,  and  I  know^  not  when  I  shall  ever  come  to  an  end  of  it,  being  often 
turned  aside  either  by  business  or  by  some  new  study.  Considering  which  I 
have  finally  judged  that  it  was  better  worth  while  to  publish  this  writing, 
such  as  it  is,  than  to  let  it  run  the  risk,  by  waiting  longer,  of  remaining  lost. 

There  will  be  seen  in  it  demonstrations  of  those  kinds  which  do  not  produce 
as  great  a  certitude  as  those  of  geometry,  and  wKich  even  differ  much  there¬ 
from,  since,  whereas  the  geometers  prove  their  propositions  by  fixed  and  in¬ 
contestable  principles,  here  the  principles  are  verified  by  the  conclusions  to  be 
drawn  from  them;  the  nature  of  these  things  not  allowing  of  this  being  done 
otherwise.  It  is  always  possible  to  attain  thereby  to  a  degree  of  probability 
which  very  often  is  scarcely  less  than  complete  proof.  To  wit,  when  things 
which  have  been  demonstrated  by  the  principles  that  have  been  assumed  cor¬ 
respond  perfectly  to  the  phenomena  which  experiment  has  brought  under  ob¬ 
servation;  especially  wLen  there  are  a  great  number  of  them,  and  further,  prin¬ 
cipally,  when  one  can  imagine  and  foresee  new  phenomena  which  ought  to 
follow  from  the  hypotheses  which  one  employs,  and  when  one  finds  that  therein 
the  fact  corresponds  to  our  prevision.  But  if  all  these  proofs  of  probability  are 
met  vdth  in  that  which  I  propose  to  discuss,  as  it  seems  to  me  they  are,  this 
ought  to  be  a  very  strong  confirmation  of  the  success  of  my  inquiry;  and  it 

551 


552  Treatise  on  Light 

must  be  ill  if  the  facts  are  not  pretty  much  as  I  represent  them.  I  would  believe 
then  that  those  who  love  to  know  the  causes  of  things  and  who  are  able  to 
admire  the  marvels  of  light,  will  find  some  satisfaction  in  these  various  specu¬ 
lations  regarding  it,  and  in  the  new  explanation  of  its  famous  property  which 
is  the  main  foundation  of  the  construction  of  our  eyes,  and  of  those  great 
inventions  which  extend  so  vastly  the  use  of  them.  I  hope  also  that  there  vnW 
be  some  who,  by  following  these  beginnings,  mil  penetrate  much  further  into 
this  question  than  I  have  been  able  to  do,  since  the  subject  must  be  far  from 
being  exhausted.  This  appears  from  the  passages  which  I  have  indicated  where 
I  leave  certain  difficulties  without  having  resolved  them,  and  still  more  from 
matters  which  I  have  not  touched  at  all,  such  as  luminous  bodies  of  several 
sorts,  and  all  that  concerns  colours;  in  which  no  one  until  now  can  boast  of 
having  succeeded.  Finally,  there  remains  much  more  to  be  investigated  touch¬ 
ing  the  nature  of  light  which  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  disclosed,  and  I  shall 
owe  much  in  return  to  him  who  shall  be  able  to  supplement  that  which  is  here 
lacking  to  me  in  knowledge. 


The  Hague,  January  8,  1690 


CHAPTER  ONE 
On  Rays  Propagated  in  Straight  Lines 


As  happens  in  all  the  sciences  in  which  geometry  is  applied  to  matter,  the 
demonstrations  concerning  Optics  are  founded  on  truths  drawn  from  expe¬ 
rience.  Such  are: that  the  rays  of  light  are  propagated  in  straight  lines; that  the 
angles  of  reflexion  and  of  incidence  are  equal;  and  that  in  refraction  the  ray  is 
bent  according  to  the  law  of  sines,  now  so  well-known,  and  which  is  no  less  cer¬ 
tain  than  the  preceding  laws. 

The  majority  of  those  who  have  written  touching  the  various  parts  of  Optics 
have  contented  themselves  with  presuming  these  truths.  But  some,  more  in¬ 
quiring,  have  desired  to  investigate  the  origin  and  the  causes,  considering 
these  to  be  in  themselves  w'onderful  effects  of  nature.  In  which  they  advanced 
some  ingenious  things,  but  not,  however,  such  that  the  most  intelligent  folk 
do  not  wish  for  better  and  more  satisfactory  explanations.  Wherefore  I  here 
desire  to  propound  what  I  have  meditated  on  the  subject,  so  as  to  contribute 
as  much  as  I  can  to  the  explanation  of  this  department  of  natural  science, 
which,  not  \vithout  reason,  is  reputed  to  be  one  of  its  most  difficult  parts.  I 
recognize  myself  to  be  much  indebted  to  those  who  were  the  first  to  begin 
to  dissipate  the  strange  obscurity  in  which  these  things  were  enveloped,  and  to 
give  us  hope  that  they  might  be  explained  by  intelligible  reasoning.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  I  am  astonished  also  that  even  here  these  have  often  been  vailing 
to  offer,  as  assured  and  demonstrative,  reasonings  which  were  far  from  conclu¬ 
sive.  For  I  do  not  find  that  any  one  has  yet  given  a  probable  explanation  of 
the  first  and  most  notable  phenomena  of  light,  namely,  why  it  is  not  propa¬ 
gated  except  in  straight  lines,  and  how  visible  rays,  coming  from  an  infinitude 
of  diverse  places,  cross  one  another  without  hindering  one  another  in  any  way. 

I  shall  therefore  essay  in  this  book,  to  give,  in  accordance  with  the  principles 
accepted  in  the  philosophy  of  the  present  day,  some  clearer  and  more  probable 
reasons,  firstly,  of  these  properties  of  light  propagated  rectilinearly;  secondly, 
of  light  which  is  reflected  on  meeting  other  bodies.  Then  I  shall  explain  the 
phenomena  of  those  rays  which  are  said  to  suffer  refraction  on  passing  through 
transparent  bodies  of  different  sorts;  and  in  this  part  I  shall  also  explain  the 
effects  of  the  refraction  of  the  air  by  the  different  densities  of  the  atmosphere. 

Thereafter,  I  shall  examine  the  causes  of  the  strange  refraction  of  a  certain 
kind  of  crystal  which  is  brought  from  Iceland.  And,  finally,  I  shall  treat  of  the 
various  shapes  of  transparent  and  reflecting  bodies  by  which  rays  are  collected 
at  a  point  or  are  turned  aside  in  various  ways.  From  this  it  will  be  seen  Avith 
w'hat  facility,  folloving  our  new  theory,  we  find  not  only  the  ellipses,  hyperbo¬ 
las,  and  other  curves  which  M.  Descartes  has  ingeniously  invented  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  ;  but  also  those  which  the  surface  of  a  glass  lens  ought  to  possess  when  its 
other  surface  is  given  as  spherical  or  plane,  or  of  any  other  figure  that  may  be. 

It  is  inconceivable  to  doubt  that  light  consists  in  the  motion  of  some  sort  of 
matter.  For  whether  one  considers  its  production,  one  sees  that  here  upon  the 

553 


554  Treatise  on  Light 

earth  it  is  chiefly  engendered  by  fire  and  flame  which  contain  ^nthout  doubt 
bodies  that  are  in  rapid  motion,  since  they  dissolve  and  melt  many  other  bodies, 
even  the  most  solid ;  or  whether  one  considers  its  effects,  one  sees  that  when  light  is 
collected,  as  by  concave  mirrors,  it  has  the  property  of  burning  as  a  fire  does,  that 
is  to  say,  it  disunites  the  particles  of  bodies.  This  is  assuredly  the  mark  of  motion, 
at  least  in  the  true  philosophy,  in  which  one  conceives  the  causes  of  all  natural 
effects  in  terms  of  mechanical  motions.  This,  in  my  opinion,  we  must  necessarily 
do,  or  else  renounce  all  hopes  of  ever  comprehending  anything  in  physics. 

And  as,  according  to  this  philosophy,  one  holds  as  certain  that  the  sensation 
of  sight  is  excited  only  by  the  impression  of  some  movement  of  a  kind  of  mat¬ 
ter  which  acts  on  the  nerves  at  the  back  of  our  eyes,  there  is  here  yet  one  reason 
more  for  believing  that  light  consists  in  a  movement  of  the  matter  which  exists 
between  us  and  the  luminous  body. 

Further,  when  one  considers  the  extreme  speed  ^\^th  which  light  spreads  on 
every  side,  and  how,  when  it  comes  from  different  regions,  even  from  those 
directly  opposite,  the  rays  traverse  one  another  without  hindrance,  one  may 
well  understand  that  when  we  see  a  luminous  object,  it  cannot  be  by  any  trans¬ 
port  of  matter  coming  to  us  from  this  object,  in  the  way  in  which  a  shot  or  an 
arrow  traverses  the  air;  for  assuredly  that  would  too  greatly  impugn  these  two 
properties  of  light,  especially  the  second  of  them.  It  is  then  in  some  other  way 
that  light  spreads ;  and  that  which  can  lead  us  to  comprehend  it  is  the  knowl¬ 
edge  which  we  have  of  the  spreading  of  sound  in  the  air. 

We  know  that  by  means  of  the  air,  which  is  an  invisible  and  impalpable  body, 
sound  spreads  around  the  spot  where  it  has  been  produced  by  a  movement 
which  is  passed  on  successively  from  one  part  of  the  air  to  another;  and  that 
the  spreading  of  this  movement,  taking  place  equally  rapidly  on  all  sides, 
ought  to  form  spherical  surfaces  ever  enlarging  and  which  strike  our  ears.  Now 
there  is  no  doubt  at  all  that  light  also  comes  from  the  luminous  body  to  our 
eyes  by  some  movement  impressed  on  the  matter  which  is  between  the  two; 
since,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  cannot  be  by  the  transport  of  a  body  which 
passes  from  one  to  the  other.  If,  in  addition,  light  takes  time  for  its  passage — 
which  we  are  now  going  to  examine — it  ^\^ll  follow  that  this  movement,  im¬ 
pressed  on  the  intervening  matter,  is  successive ;  and  consequently  it  spreads, 
as  sound  does,  by  spherical  surfaces  and  waves:  for  I  call  them  waves  from 
their  resemblance  to  those  which  are  seen  to  be  formed  in  water  when  a  stone 
is  thrown  into  it,  and  which  present  a  successive  spreading  as  circles,  though 
these  arise  from  another  cause,  and  are  only  in  a  flat  surface. 

To  see  then  whether  the  spreading  of  light  takes  time,  let  us  consider  first 
whether  there  are  any  facts  of  experience  which  can  convince  us  to  the  con¬ 
trary.  As  to  those  which  can  be  made  here  on  the  earth,  by  striking  lights  at 
great  distances,  although  they  prove  that  light  takes  no  sensible  time  to  pass 
over  these  distances,  one  may  say  with  good  reason  that  they  are  too  small, 
and  that  the  only  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  them  is  that  the  passage  of  light 
is  extremely  rapid.  M.  Descartes,  who  was  of  opinion  that  it  is  instantaneous, 
founded  his  views,  not  without  reason,  upon  a  better  basis  of  experience,  drawn 
from  the  eclipses  of  the  moon;  which,  nevertheless,  as  I  shall  show,  is  not  at  all 
convincing.  I  will  set  it  forth,  in  a  way  a  little  different  from  his,  in  order  to 
make  the  conclusion  more  comprehensible. 

Let  A  be  the  place  of  the  sun,  BD  a  part  of  the  orbit  or  annual  path  of  the 


Chapter  I 


555 


earth:  ABC  a  straight  line  which  I  suppose  to  meet  the  orbit  of  the  moon, 
w’hich  is  represented  by  the  circle  CD,  at  C. 

Now  if  light  requires  time,  for  example  one  hour,  to  traverse  the  space  which 
is  between  the  earth  and  the  moon,  it  Avill  follow  that  the  earth  having  arrived 
at  B,  the  shadow  which  it  casts,  or  the  interruption  of  the  light,  will  not  yet 
have  arrived  at  the  point  C,  but  will  only  arrive  there  an  hour  after.  It  \vill 
then  be  one  hour  after,  reckoning  from  the  moment  when  the  earth  was  at  B, 
that  the  moon,  arriving  at  C,  mil  be  obscured :  but  this  obscuration  or  inter¬ 
ruption  of  the  light  mil  not  reach  the  earth  till  after  another  hour.  Let  us  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  earth  in  these  two  hours  mil  have  arrived  at  E.  The  earth  then, 
being  at  E,  mil  see  the  eclipsed  moon  at  C,  which  it  left  an  hour  before,  and  at 
the  same  time  mil  see  the  sun  at  A.  For  it  being  immovable,  as  I  suppose  mth 
Copernicus,  and  the  light  moving  always  in  straight  lines,  it  must  always  ap¬ 
pear  where  it  is.  But  one  has  always  observed,  we  are  told,  that  the  eclipsed 
moon  appears  at  the  point  of  the  ecliptic  opposite  to  the  sun;  and  yet  here  it 
would  appear  in  arrear  of  that  point  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  angle  GEC, 
the  supplement  of  AEC.  This,  however,  is  contrary  to  experience,  since  the 
angle  GEC  would  be  very  sensible,  and  about  33  degrees.  Now  according  to 
our  computation,  which  is  given  in  the  treatise  on  the  causes  of  the  phenom¬ 
ena  of  Saturn,  the  distance  BA  between  the  earth  and  the  sun  is  about  twelve 
thousand  diameters  of  the  earth,  and  hence  four  hundred  times  greater  than 
BC  the  distance  of  the  moon,  which  is  30  diameters.  Then  the  angle  ECB  will 
be  nearly  four  hundred  times  greater  than  BAE,  which  is  five  minutes;  name¬ 
ly,  the  path  which  the  earth  travels  in  two  hours  along  its  orbit ;  and  thus  the 
angle  BCE  will  be  nearly  33  degrees;  and  likewise  the  angle  CEG,  which  is 
greater  by  five  minutes. 

But  it  must  be  noted  that  the  speed  of  light  in  this  argument  has  been  as¬ 
sumed  such  that  it  takes  a  time  of  one  hour  to  make  the  passage  from  here  to 
the  moon.  If  one  supposes  that  for  this  it  requires  only  one  minute  of  time,  then 
it  is  manifest  that  the  angle  CEG  "will  only  be  33  minutes;  and  if  it  requires 
only  ten  seconds  of  time,  the  angle  'wdll  be  less  than  six  minutes.  And  then  it 
vill  not  be  easy  to  perceive  anything  of  it  in  observations  of  the  eclipse;  nor, 
consequently,  'will  it  be  permissible  to  deduce  from  it  that  the  movement  of 
light  is  instantaneous. 

It  is  true  that  we  are  here  supposing  a  strange  velocity  that  would  be  a  him- 


556  Treatise  on  Light 

dred  thousand  times  greater  than  that  of  sound.  For  sound,  according  to  what  I 
have  observed,  travels  about  180  toises  in  the  time  of  one  second,  or  in  about 
one  beat  of  the  pulse.  But  this  supposition  ought  not  to  seem  to  be  an  impossi¬ 
bility;  since  it  is  not  a  question  of  the  transport  of  a  body  with  so  great  a 
speed,  but  of  a  successive  movement  which  is  passed  on  from  some  bodies  to 
others.  I  have  then  made  no  difficulty,  in  meditating  on  these  things,  in  sup¬ 
posing  that  the  emanation  of  light  is  accomplished  mth  time,  seeing  that  in 
this  way  all  its  phenomena  can  be  explained,  and  that  in  following  the  contrary 
opinion  everything  is  incomprehensible.  For  it  has  always  seemed  to  me  that 
even  M.  Descartes,  whose  aim  has  been  to  treat  all  the  subjects  of  physics  in¬ 
telligibly,  and  who  assuredly  has  succeeded  in  this  better  than  anyone  before 
him,  has  said  nothing  that  is  not  full  of  difficulties,  or  even  inconceivable,  in 
dealing  with  light  and  its  properties. 

But  that  which  I  employed  only  as  a  hypothesis,  has  recently  received  great 
seemingness  as  an  established  truth  by  the  ingenious  proof  of  Mr.  Romer 
which  I  am  going  here  to  relate,  expecting  him  himself  to  give  all  that  is  needed 
for  its  confirmation.  It  is  founded,  as  is  the  preceding  argument,  upon  celestial 
observations,  and  proves  not  only  that  light  takes  time  for  its  passage,  but  also 
demonstrates  how  much  time  it  takes,  and  that  its  velocity  is  even  at  least  six 
times  greater  than  that  which  I  have  just  stated. 

For  this  he  makes  use  of  the  eclipses  suffered  by  the  little  planets  which 
revolve  around  Jupiter,  and  which  often  enter  his  shadow:  and  see  what  is  his 
reasoning.  Let  A  be  the  sun,  BCDE  the  annual 
orbit  of  the  earth,  F  Jupiter,  GN  the  orbit  of  the 
nearest  of  his  satellites,  for  it  is  this  one  which  is 
more  apt  for  this  investigation  than  any  of  the 
other  three  because  of  the  quickness  of  its  revolu¬ 
tion.  Let  G  be  this  satellite  entering  into  the 
shadow  of  Jupiter,  H  the  same  satellite  emerging 
from  the  shadow. 

Let  it  be  then  supposed,  the  earth  being  at  B 
some  time  before  the  last  quadrature,  that  one 
has  seen  the  said  satellite  emerge  from  the  shadow; 
it  must  needs  be,  if  the  earth  remains  at  the  same 
place,  that,  after  42]^  hours,  one  would  again  see 
a  similar  emergence,  because  that  is  the  time  in 
which  it  makes  the  round  of  its  orbit,  and  when  it 
would  come  again  into  opposition  to  the  sun.  And 
if  the  earth,  for  instance,  were  to  remain  always 
at  B  during  30  revolutions  of  this  satellite,  one 
would  see  it  again  emerge  from  the  shadow  after 
30  times  42}/^  hours.  But  the  earth  having  been 
carried  along  during  this  time  to  C,  increasing 
thus  its  distance  from  Jupiter,  it  follows  that  if 
light  requires  time  for  its  passage  the  illumination 
of  the  little  planet  will  be  perceived  later  at  C 
than  it  would  have  been  at  B,  and  that  there  must 
be  added  to  this  time  of  30  times  42}/^  hours  that  which  the  light  has  required 
to  traverse  the  space  MC,  the  difference  of  the  spaces  CH,  BH.  Similarly,  at 


Chapter  I  557 

the  other  quadrature  when  the  earth  has  come  to  E  from  D  while  approach¬ 
ing  toward  Jupiter,  the  immersions  of  the  satellite  ought  to  be  observed  at  E 
earlier  than  they  would  have  been  seen  if  the  earth  had  remained  at  D. 

Now  in  quantities  of  observations  of  these  eclipses,  made  during  ten  con¬ 
secutive  years,  these  differences  have  been  found  to  be  very  considerable,  such 
as  ten  minutes  and  more ;  and  from  them  it  has  been  concluded  that  in  order  to 
traverse  the  whole  diameter  of  the  annual  orbit  KL,  which  is  double  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  here  to  the  sun,  light  requires  about  22  minutes  of  time. 

The  movement  of  Jupiter  in  his  orbit  while  the  earth  passed  from  B  to  C, 
or  from  D  to  E,  is  included  in  this  calculation ;  and  this  makes  it  evident  that 
one  cannot  attribute  the  retardation  of  these  illuminations  or  the  anticipation 
of  the  eclipses,  either  to  any  irregularity  occurring  in  the  movement  of  the 
little  planet  or  to  its  eccentricity. 

If  one  considers  the  vast  size  of  the  diameter  KL,  which  according  to  me  is 
some  24  thousand  diameters  of  the  earth,  one  \vill  acknowledge  the  extreme 
velocity  of  light.  For,  supposing  that  KL  is  no  more  than  22  thousand  of  these 
diameters,  it  appears  that  being  traversed  in  22  minutes  this  makes  the  speed 
a  thousand  diameters  in  one  minute,  that  is  16%  diameters  in  one  second  or  in 
one  beat  of  the  pulse,  which  makes  more  than  11  hundred  times  a  hundred 
thousand  toises;  since  the  diameter  of  the  earth  contains  2,865  leagues,  reck¬ 
oned  at  25  to  the  degree,  and  each  league  is  2,282  toises,  according  to  the  exact 
measurement  which  Mr.  Picard  made  by  order  of  the  King  in  1669.  But  sound, 
as  I  have  said  above,  only  travels  180  toises  in  the  same  time  of  one  second: 
hence  the  velocity  of  light  is  more  than  six  hundred  thousand  times  greater 
than  that  of  sound.  This,  however,  is  quite  another  thing  from  being  instan¬ 
taneous,  since  there  is  all  the  difference  between  a  finite  thing  and  an  infinite. 
Now  the  successive  movement  of  light  being  confirmed  in  this  way,  it  follows, 
as  I  have  said,  that  it  spreads  by  spherical  waves,  like  the  movement  of  sound. 

But  if  the  one  resembles  the  other  in  this  respect,  they  differ  in  many  other 
things;  to  wit,  in  the  first  production  of  the  movement  which  causes  them;  in 
the  matter  in  which  the  movement  spreads;  and  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
propagated.  As  to  that  which  occurs  in  the  production  of  sound,  one  knows 
that  it  is  occasioned  by  the  agitation  undergone  by  an  entire  body,  or  by  a 
considerable  part  of  one,  which  shakes  all  the  contiguous  air.  But  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  light  must  originate  as  from  each  point  of  the  luminous  object, 
else  we  should  not  be  able  to  perceive  all  the  different  parts  of  that  object,  as 
mil  be  more  evident  in  that  which  follows.  And  I  do  not  believe  that  this  move¬ 
ment  can  be  better  explained  than  by  supposing  that  all  those  of  the  luminous 
bodies  which  are  liquid,  such  as  flames,  and  apparently  the  sun  and  the  stars, 
are  composed  of  particles  which  float  in  a  much  more  subtle  medium  which 
agitates  them  mth  great  rapidity,  and  makes  them  strike  against  the  particles 
of  the  ether  which  surrounds  them,  and  which  are  much  smaller  than  they. 
But  I  hold  also  that  in  luminous  solids  such  as  charcoal  or  metal  made  red-hot 
in  the  fire,  this  same  movement  is  caused  by  the  violent  agitation  of  the  par¬ 
ticles  of  the  metal  or  of  the  wood;  those  of  them  which  are  on  the  surface 
striking  similarly  against  the  ethereal  matter.  The  agitation,  moreover,  of  the 
particles  which  engender  the  light  ought  to  be  much  more  prompt  and  more 
rapid  than  is  that  of  the  bodies  which  cause  sound,  since  we  do  not  see  that 
the  tremors  of  a  body  which  is  giving  out  a  sound  are  capable  of  giving  rise  to 


558  Treatise  on  Light 

light,  even  as  the  movement  of  the  hand  in  the  air  is  not  capable  of  producing 
sound. 

Now  if  one  examines  what  this  matter  may  be  in  which  the  movement  com¬ 
ing  from  the  luminous  body  is  propagated,  which  I  call  ethereal  matter,  one 
will  see  that  it  is  not  the  same  that  serves  for  the  propagation  of  sound.  For 
one  finds  that  the  latter  is  really  that  which  we  feel  and  which  we  breathe,  and 
which  being  removed  from  any  place  still  leaves  there  the  other  kind  of  matter 
that  serves  to  convey  light.  This  may  be  proved  by  shutting  up  a  sounding 
body  in  a  glass  vessel  from  which  the  air  is  withdrawn  by  the  machine  which 
Mr.  Boyle  has  given  us,  and  with  which  he  has  performed  so  many  beautiful 
experiments.  But  in  doing  this  of  which  I  speak,  care  must  be  taken  to  place 
the  sounding  body  on  cotton  or  on  feathers,  in  such  a  way  that  it  cannot  com¬ 
municate  its  tremors  either  to  the  glass  vessel  which  encloses  it,  or  to  the  ma¬ 
chine;  a  precaution  which  has  hitherto  been  neglected.  For  then  after  having 
exhausted  all  the  air  one  hears  no  sound  from  the  metal,  though  it  is  struck. 

One  sees  here  not  only  that  our  air,  which  does  not  penetrate  through  glass, 
is  the  matter  by  which  sound  spreads;  but  also  that  it  is  not  the  same  air  but 
another  kind  of  matter  in  which  light  spreads ;  since  if  the  air  is  removed  from 
the  vessel  the  light  does  not  cease  to  traverse  it  as  before. 

And  this  last  point  is  demonstrated  even  more  clearly  by  the  celebrated 
experiment  of  Torricelli,  in  which  the  tube  of  glass  from  which  the  quicksilver 
has  withdrawn  itself,  remaining  void  of  air,  transmits  light  just  the  same  as 
when  air  is  in  it.  For  this  proves  that  a  matter  different  from  air  exists  in  this 
tube,  and  that  this  matter  must  have  penetrated  the  glass  or  the  quicksilver, 
either  one  or  the  other,  though  they  are  both  impenetrable  to  the  air.  And 
when,  in  the  same  experiment,  one  makes  the  vacuum  after  putting  a  little 
water  above  the  quicksilver,  one  concludes  equally  that  the  said  matter  passes 
through  glass  or  water,  or  through  both. 

As  regards  the  different  modes  in  which  I  have  said  the  movements  of  sound 
and  of  light  are  communicated,  one  may  sufficiently  comprehend  how  this 
occurs  in  the  case  of  sound  if  one  considers  that  the  air  is  of  such  a  nature  that 
it  can  be  compressed  and  reduced  to  a  much  smaller  space  than  that  which  it 
ordinarily  occupies.  And  in  proportion  as  it  is  compressed  the  more  does  it 
exert  an  effort  to  regain  its  volume;  for  this  property  along  mth  its  penetra¬ 
bility,  which  remains  notwithstanding  its  compression,  seems  to  prove  that  it 
is  made  up  of  small  bodies  which  float  about  and  which  are  agitated  very 
rapidly  in  the  ethereal  matter  composed  of  much  smaller  parts.  So  that  the 
cause  of  the  spreading  of  sound  is  the  effort  which  these  little  bodies  make  in 
collisions  with  one  another,  to  regain  freedom  when  they  are  a  little  more 
squeezed  together  in  the  circuit  of  these  waves  than  elsewhere. 

But  the  extreme  velocity  of  light,  and  other  properties  which  it  has,  cannot 
admit  of  such  a  propagation  of  motion,  and  I  am  about  to  show  here  the  way 
in  which  I  conceive  it  must  occur.  For  this,  it  is  needful  to  explain  the  property 
which  hard  bodies  must  possess  to  transmit  movement  from  one  to  another. 

When  one  takes  a  number  of  spheres  of  equal  size,  made  of  some  very  hard 
substance,  and  arranges  them  in  a  straight  line,  so  that  they  touch  one  another, 
one  finds,  on  striking  mth  a  similar  sphere  against  the  first  of  these  spheres, 
that  the  motion  passes  as  in  an  instant  to  the  last  of  them,  which  separates 
itself  from  the  row,  without  one’s  being  able  to  perceive  that  the  others  have 


Chapter  I  559 

been  stirred.  And  even  that  one  which  was  used  to  strike  remains  motionless 
svith  them.  Whence  one  sees  that  the  movement  passes  with  an  extreme  velocity 
which  is  the  greater,  the  greater  the  hardness  of  the  substance  of  the  spheres. 

But  it  is  still  certain  that  this  progression  of  motion  is  not  instantaneous, 
but  successive,  and  therefore  must  take  time.  For  if  the  movement,  or  the 
disposition  to  movement,  if  you  will  have  it  so,  did  not  pass  successively 
through  all  these  spheres,  they  would  all  acquire  the  movement  at  the  same 
time,  and  hence  would  all  advance  together;  which  does  not  happen.  For  the 
last  one  leaves  the  whole  row  and  acquires  the  speed  of  the  one  which  was 
pushed.  Moreover  there  are  experiments  which  demonstrate  that  all  the  bodies 
which  we  reckon  of  the  hardest  kind,  such  as  quenched  steel,  glass,  and  agate, 
act  as  springs  and  bend  somehow,  not  only  when  extended  as  rods  but  also 
when  they  are  in  the  form  of  spheres  or  of  other  shapes.  That  is  to  say,  they 
yield  a  little  in  themselves  at  the  place  where  they  are  struck,  and  immediately 
regain  their  former  figure.  For  I  have  found  that  on  striking  with  a  ball  of  glass 
or  of  agate  against  a  large  and  quite  thick  piece  of  the  same  substance  which 
had  a  flat  surface,  slightly  soiled  with  breath  or  in  some  other  way,  there  re¬ 
mained  round  marks,  of  smaller  or  larger  size  according  as  the  blow  had  been 
weak  or  strong.  This  makes  it  evident  that  these  substances  yield  where  they 
meet,  and  spring  back:  and  for  this  time  must  be  required. 

Now  in  applying  this  kind  of  movement  to  that  which  produces  light  there 
is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  estimating  the  particles  of  the  ether  to  be  of  a 
substance  as  nearly  approaching  to  perfect  hardness  and  possessing  a  springi¬ 
ness  as  prompt  as  we  choose.  It  is  not  necessary  to  examine  here  the  causes  of 
this  hardness,  or  of  that  springiness,  the  consideration  of  which  would  lead  us 
too  far  from  our  subject.  I  will  say,  however,  in  passing  that  we  may  conceive 
that  the  particles  of  the  ether,  notwithstanding  their  smallness,  are  in  turn 
composed  of  other  parts  and  that  their  springiness  consists  in  the  very  rapid 
movement  of  a  subtle  matter  which  penetrates  them  from  every  side  and  con¬ 
strains  their  structure  to  assume  such  a  disposition  as  to  give  to  this  fluid 
matter  the  most  overt  and  easy  passage  possible.  This  accords  with  the  expla¬ 
nation  which  M.  Descartes  gives  for  the  spring,  though  I  do  not,  like  him, 
suppose  the  pores  to  be  in  the  form  of  round  hollow  canals.  And  it  must  not  be 
thought  that  in  this  there  is  anything  absurd  or  impossible,  it  being  on  the 
contrary  quite  credible  that  it  is  this  infinite  series  of  different  sizes  of  cor¬ 
puscles,  having  different  degrees  of  velocity,  of  which  Nature  makes  use  to 
produce  so  many  marvellous  effects. 

But  though  we  shall  ignore  the  true  cause  of  springiness  we  still  see  that  there 
are  many  bodies  which  possess  this  property;  and  thus  there  is  nothing  strange 
in  supposing  that  it  exists  also  in  little  invisible  bodies  like  the  particles  of  the 
ether.  Also,  if  one  wishes  to  seek  for  any  other  way  in  which  the  movement  of 
light  is  successively  communicated,  one  mil  find  none  which  agrees  better, 
with  uniform  progression,  as  seems  to  be  necessary,  than  the  property  of  spring¬ 
iness  ;  because  if  this  movement  should  grow  slower  in  proportion  as  it  is  shared 
over  a  greater  quantity  of  matter,  in  moving  away  from  the  source  of  the  light, 
it  could  not  conserve  this  great  velocity  over  great  distances.  But  by  supposing 
springiness  in  the  ethereal  matter,  its  particles  will  have  the  property  of  equally 
rapid  restitution  whether  they  are  pushed  strongly  or  feebly;  and  thus  the 
propagation  of  light  will  always  go  on  with  an  equal  velocity. 


560  Treatise  on  Light 

And  it  must  be  known  that,  although  the  particles  of  the  ether  are  not 
ranged  thus  in  straight  lines,  as  in  our  row  of  spheres,  but  confusedly,  so  that 
one  of  them  touches  several  others,  this  does  not  hinder  them  from  transmit¬ 
ting  their  movement  and  from  spreading  it  always  forward.  As  to  this,  it  is  to 
^ be  remarked  that  there  is  a  law  of  motion  serving  for  this 
(  B  )  propagation,  and  verifiable  by  experiment.  It  is  that  when 

a  sphere,  such  as  A  here,  touches  several  other  similar 
spheres  CCC,  if  it  is  struck  by  another  sphere  B  in  such  a 
way  as  to  exert  an  impulse  against  all  the  spheres  CCC 
which  touch  it,  it  transmits  to  them  the  whole  of  its  move¬ 
ment,  and  remains  after  that  motionless  like  the  sphere  B. 
And  without  supposing  that  the  ethereal  particles  are  of 
spherical  form  (for  I  see  indeed  no  need  to  suppose  them 
so)  one  may  well  understand  that  this  property  of  com¬ 
municating  an  impulse  does  not  fail  to  contribute  to  the 
aforesaid  propagation  of  movement. 

Equality  of  size  seems  to  be  more  necessary,  because  othermse  there  ought 
to  be  some  reflexion  of  movement  backwards  when  it  passes  from  a  smaller 
particle  to  a  larger  one,  according  to  the  Laws  of  Percussion  which  I  published 
some  years  ago. 

However,  one  will  see  hereafter  that  we  have  to  suppose  such  an  equality 
not  so  much  as  a  necessity  for  the  propagation  of  light  as  for  rendering  that 
propagation  easier  and  more  powerful;  for  it  is  not  beyond  the  limits  of  prob¬ 
ability  that  the  particles  of  the  ether  have  been  made  equal  for  a  purpose  so 
important  as  that  of  light,  at  least  in  that  vast  space  which  is  beyond  the 
region  of  atmosphere  and  which  seems  to  serve  only  to  transmit  the  light  of  the 
sun  and  the  stars. 

I  have  then  shown  in  what  manner  one  may  conceive  light  to  spread  suc¬ 
cessively,  by  spherical  waves,  and  ho\v  it  is  possible  that  this  spreading  is 
accomplished  with  as  great  a  velocity  as  that  which 
experiments  and  celestial  observations  demand. 

Whence  it  may  be  further  remarked  that,  although 
the  particles  are  supposed  to  be  in  continual  move¬ 
ment  (for  there  are  many  reasons  for  this),  the  succes¬ 
sive  propagation  of  the  weaves  cannot  be  hindered  by 
this;  because  the  propagation  consists  novdse  in  the 
transport  of  those  particles  but  merely  in  a  small 
agitation  which  they  cannot  help  communicating  to 
those  surrounding,  notwithstanding  any  movement 
wEich  may  act  on  them  causing  them  to  be  changing 
positions  amongst  themselves. 

But  we  must  consider  still  more  particularly  the 
origin  of  these  waves,  and  the  manner  in  which  they 
spread.  And,  first,  it  follows  from  what  has  been  said 
on  the  production  of  light,  that  each  little  region  of  a 
luminous  body,  such  as  the  sun,  a  candle,  or  a  burn¬ 
ing  coal,  generates  its  own  waves  of  which  that  region  is  the  centre.  Thus,  in 
the  flame  of  a  candle,  having  distinguished  the  points  A,  B,  C,  concentric  circles 
described  about  each  of  these  points  represent  the  waves  which  come  from 


Chapter  I  561 

them.  And  one  must  imagine  the  same  about  every  point  of  the  surface  and  of 
the  part  within  the  flame. 

But  as  the  percussions  at  the  centres  of  these  waves  possess  no  regular  suc¬ 
cession,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  waves  themselves  follow  one  another 
at  equal  distances:  and  if  the  distances  marked  in  the  figure  appear  to  be  such, 
it  is  rather  to  mark  the  progression  of  one  and  the  same  wave  at  equal  intervals 
of  time  than  to  represent  several  of  them  issuing  from  one  and  the  same  centre. 

After  all,  this  prodigious  quantity  of  waves  which  traverse  one  another  with¬ 
out  confusion  and  vdthout  effacing  one  another  must  not  be  deemed  incon¬ 
ceivable;  it  being  certain  that  one  and  the  same  particle  of  matter  can  serve 
for  many  waves  coming  from  different  sides  or  even  from  contrary  directions, 
not  only  if  it  is  struck  by  blows  which  follow  one  another  closely  but  even  for 
those  which  act  on  it  at  the  same  instant.  It  can  do  so  because  the  spreading  of 
the  movement  is  successive.  This  may  be  proved  by  the  row  of  equal  spheres 


of  hard  matter,  spoken  of  above.  If  against  this  row  there  are  pushed  from  two 
opposite  sides  at  the  same  time  two  similar  spheres  A  and  D,  one  mil  see  each 
of  them  rebound  mth  the  same  velocity  which  it  had  in  striking,  yet  the  whole 
row  will  remain  in  its  place,  although  the  movement  has  passed  along  its  whole 
length  tmce  over.  And  if  these  contrary  movements  happen  to  meet  one  an¬ 
other  at  the  middle  sphere,  B,  or  at  some  other  such  as  C,  that  sphere  mil  yield 
and  act  as  a  spring  at  both  sides,  and  so  mil  serve  at  the  same  instant  to 
transmit  these  two  movements. 

But  what  may  at  first  appear  full  strange  and  even  incredible  is  that  the  un¬ 
dulations  produced  by  such  small  movements  and  corpuscles  should  spread  to 
such  immense  distances;  as  for  example,  from  the  sun  or  from  the  stars  to  us. 
For  the  force  of  these  waves  must  grow  feeble  in  proportion  as  they  move  away 
from  their  origin,  so  that  the  action  of  each  one  in  particular  will  without  doubt 
become  incapable  of  making  itself  felt  to  our  sight.  But  one  mil  cease  to  be 
astonished  by  considering  how  at  a  great  distance  from  the  luminous  body  an 
infinitude  of  waves,  though  they  have  issued  from  different  points  of  this  body, 
unite  together  in  such  a  way  that  they  sensibly  compose  one  single  wave  only, 
which,  consequently,  ought  to  have  enough  force  to  make  itself  felt.  Thus,  this 
infinite  number  of  waves  which  originate  at  the  same  instant  from  all  points 
of  a  fixed  star,  big  it  may  be  as  the  sun,  make  practically  only  one  single  wave 
which  may  well  have  force  enough  to  produce  an  impression  on  our  eyes.  More¬ 
over,  from  each  luminous  point  there  may  come  many  thousands  of  waves  in 
the  smallest  imaginable  time,  by  the  frequent  percussion  of  the  corpuscles 
which  strike  the  ether  at  these  points :  which  further  contributes  to  rendering 
their  action  more  sensible. 

There  is  the  further  consideration  in  the  emanation  of  these  waves,  that 
each  particle  of  matter,  in  which  a  wave  spreads,  ought  not  to  communicate 
its  motion  only  to  the  next  particle  which  is  in  the  straight  line  drawn  from 
the  luminous  point,  but  that  it  also  imparts  some  of  it  necessarily  to  all  the 
others  which  touch  it  and  which  oppose  themselves  to  its  movement.  So  it 
arises  that  around  each  particle  there  is  made  a  wave  of  which  that  particle 


562  Treatise  ox  Light 

is  the  centre.  Thus,  if  DCF  is  a  wave  emanating  from  the  luminous  point  A, 
which  is  its  centre,  the  particle  B,  one  of  those  comprised  within  the  sphere 
DCF,  will  have  made  its  particular 
or  partial  wave  KCL,  which  will 
touch  the  wave  DCF  at  C  at  the 
same  moment  that  the  principal 
wave  emanating  from  the  point  A 
has  arrived  at  DCF ;  and  it  is  clear 
that  it  will  be  only  the  region  C  of 
the  wave  KCL  which  will  touch 
the  wave  DCF,  to  wit,  that  which 
is  in  the  straight  line  drawn  through 
AB.  Similarly  the  other  particles  of 
the  sphere  DCF,  such  as  55,  dd, 
etc.,  will  each  make  its  own  wave. 

But  each  of  these  waves  can  be  in¬ 
finitely  feeble  only  as  compared 
with  the  wave  DCF,  to  the  composition  of  which  all  the  others  contribute  by 
the  part  of  their  surface  which  is  most  distant  from  the  centre  A. 

One  sees,  in  addition,  that  the  wave  DCF  is  determined  by  the  distance 
attained  in  a  certain  space  of  time  by  the  movement  which  started  from  the 
point  A;  there  being  no  movement  beyond  this  wave,  though  there  will  be  in 
the  space  which  it  encloses,  namely,  in  parts  of  the  particular  waves,  those 
parts  which  do  not  touch  the  sphere  DCF.  And  all  this  ought  not  to  seem 
fraught  vTth  too  much  minuteness  or  subtlety,  since  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel 
that  all  the  properties  of  light,  and  everything  pertaining  to  its  reflexion  and 
its  refraction,  can  be  explained  in  principle  by  this  means.  This  is  a  matter 
which  has  been  quite  unknown  to  those  who  hitherto  have  begun  to  consider 
the  waves  of  light,  amongst  whom  are  Mr.  Hooke  in  his  Micrographia,  and 
Father  Pardies,  who,  in  a  treatise  of  which  he  let  me  see  a  portion,  and  which 
he  was  unable  to  complete  as  he  died  shortly  afterward,  had  undertaken  to 
prove  by  these  waves  the  effects  of  reflexion  and  refraction.  But  the  chief  foun¬ 
dation,  which  consists  in  the  remark  I  have  just  made,  was  lacking  in  his  dem¬ 
onstrations;  and  for  the  rest  he  had  opinions  very  different  from  mine,  as  may 
be  will  appear  some  day  if  his  writing  has  been  preserved. 

To  come  to  the  properties  of  light.  We  remark  first  that  each  portion  of  a 
wave  ought  to  spread  in  such  a  way  that  its  extremities  lie  ahvays  between  the 
same  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  luminous  point.  Thus,  the  portion  BG  of 
the  w  ave,  having  the  luminous  point  A  as  its  centre,  will  spread  into  the  arc 
CE  bounded  by  the  straight  lines  ABC,  AGE.  For  although  the  particular 
waves  produced  by  the  particles  comprised  within  the  space  CAE  spread  also 
outside  this  space,  they  yet  do  not  concur  at  the  same  instant  to  compose  a 
w'ave  which  terminates  the  movement,  as  they  do  precisely  at  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  CE,  which  is  their  common  tangent. 

And  hence  one  sees  the  reason  wKy  light,  at  least  if  its  rays  are  not  reflected 
or  broken,  spreads  only  by  straight  lines,  so  that  it  illuminates  no  object  ex¬ 
cept  w'hen  the  path  from  its  source  to  that  object  is  open  along  such  lines.  For 
if,  for  example,  there  w'ere  an  opening  BG,  limited  by  opaque  bodies  BH,  GI, 
the  wave  of  light  which  issues  from  the  point  A  wall  always  be  terminated  by 


A 


Chapter  II  563 

the  straight  lines  AC,  AE,  as  has  just  been  shown;  the  parts  of  the  partial 
waves  which  spread  outside  the  space  ACE  being  too  feeble  to  produce  light 
there. 

Now,  however  small  we  make  the  opening  BG,  there  is  always  the  same 
reason  causing  the  light  there  to  pass  between  straight  lines;  since  this  opening 
is  always  large  enough  to  contain  a  great  number  of  particles  of  the  ethereal 
matter,  which  are  of  an  inconceivable  smallness;  so  that  it  appears  that  each 
little  portion  of  the  wave  necessarily  advances  following  the  straight  line  which 
comes  from  the  luminous  point.  Thus,  then,  we  may  take  the  rays  of  light  as 
if  they  were  straight  lines. 

It  appears,  moreover,  by  what  has  been  remarked  touching  the  feebleness 
of  the  particular  waves,  that  it  is  not  needful  that  all  the  particles  of  the  ether 
should  be  equal  amongst  themselves,  though  equality  is  more  apt  for  the  prop¬ 
agation  of  the  movement.  For  it  is  true  that  inequality  will  cause  a  particle,  by 
pushing  against  another  larger  one,  to  strive  to  recoil  with  a  part  of  its  move¬ 
ment;  but  it  will  thereby  merely  generate  backw^ards  towards  the  luminous 
point  some  partial  weaves  incapable  of  causing  light,  and  not  a  wave  com¬ 
pounded  of  many  as  CE  was. 

Another  property  of  waves  of  light,  and  one  of  the  most  marvellous,  is  that 
w^hen  some  of  them  come  from  different  or  even  from  opposing  sides,  they 
produce  their  effect  across  one  another  without  any  hindrance.  Whence  also 
it  comes  about  that  a  number  of  spectators  may  view'  different  objects  at  the 
same  time  through  the  same  opening,  and  that  tw'o  persons  can  at  the  same 
time  see  one  another’s  eyes.  Now%  according  to  the  explanation  w^hich  has  been 
given  of  the  action  of  light,  how'  the  weaves  do  not  destroy  nor  interrupt  one 
another  when  they  cross  one  another,  these  effects  which  I  have  just  men¬ 
tioned  are  easily  conceived.  But  in  my  judgement  they  are  not  at  all  easy  to 
explain  according  to  the  view's  of  M.  Descartes,  w'ho  makes  light  to  consist  in 
a  continuous  pressure  merely  tending  to  movement.  For  this  pressure  not  being 
able  to  act  from  tw'o  opposite  sides  at  the  same  time  against  bodies  w'hich  have 
no  inclination  to  approach  one  another,  it  is  impossible  so  to  understand  w'hat 
I  have  been  saying  about  tw'o  persons  mutually  seeing  one  another’s  eyes,  or 
how  two  torches  can  illuminate  one  another. 


CHAPTER  TWO 
On  Reflexion 


Having  explained  the  effects  of  weaves  of  light  which  spread  in  a  homogeneous 
matter,  w'e  will  examine  next  that  w'hich  happens  to  them  on  encountering 
other  bodies.  We  will  first  make  evident  how'  the  reflexion  of  light  is  explained 
by  these  same  weaves,  and  w'hy  it  preserves  equality  of  angles. 

Let  there  be  a  surface  AB;  plane  and  polished,  of  some  metal,  glass,  or  other 
body,  which  at  first  I  w  ill  consider  as  perfectly  uniform  (reserving  to  myself  to 
deal  at  the  end  of  this  demonstration  with  the  inequalities  from  w'hich  it  can- 


B 


564  Treatise  on  Light 

not  be  exempt),  and  let  a  line  AC,  inclined  to  AB,  represent  a  portion  of  a 
wave  of  light,  the  centre  of  which  is  so  distant  that  this  portion  AC  may  be 
considered  as  a  straight  line;  for  I  consider  all  this  as  in  one  plane,  imagining 
to  myself  that  the  plane  in 
which  this  figure  is  cuts  the 
sphere  of  the  wave  through 
its  centre  and  intersects  the 
plane  AB  at  right  angles.  This 
explanation  will  suffice  once 
for  all. 

The  piece  C  of  the  wave 
AC,  will  in  a  certain  space  of 
time  advance  as  far  as  the 
plane  AB  at  B,  following  the 
straight  line  CB,  which  may 
be  supposed  to  come  from  the 
luminous  centre,  and  which 
in  consequence  is  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  AC.  Now  in  this  same 
space  of  time  the  portion  A  of 
the  same  wave,  which  has. 
been  hindered  from  communicating  its  movement  beyond  the  plane  AB,  or  at 
least  partly  so,  ought  to  have  continued  its  movement  in  the  matter  which  is 
above  this  plane,  and  this  along  a  distance  equal  to  CB,  making  its  own  partial 
spherical  wave,  according  to  what  has  been  said  above.  Which  wave  is  here 
represented  by  the  circumference  SNR,  the  centre  of  which  is  A,  and  its  semi¬ 
diameter  AN  equal  to  CB. 

If  one  considers  further  the  other  pieces  H  of  the  wave  AC,  it  appears  that 
they  will  not  only  have  reached  the  surface  AB  by  straight  lines  HK  parallel 
to  CB,  but  that  in  addition  they  mil  have  generated  in  the  transparent  air, 
from  the  centres  K,  K,  K,  particular  spherical  waves,  represented  here  by  cir¬ 
cumferences  the  semi-diameters  of  which  are  equal  to  KM,  that  is  to  say,  to 
the  continuations  of  HK  as  far  as  the  line  BG  parallel  to  AC.  But  all  these  cir¬ 
cumferences  have  as  a  common  tangent  the  straight  line  BN,  namely,  the  same 
which  is  drawn  from  B  as  a  tangent  to  the  first  of  the  circles,  of  which  A  is  the 
centre,  and  AN  the  semi-diameter  equal  to  BC,  as  is  easy  to  see. 

It  is  then  the  line  BN  (comprised  between  B  and  the  point  N  where  the 
perpendicular  from  the  point  A  falls)  which  is,  as  it  were,  formed  by  all  these 
circumferences,  and  which  terminates  the  movement  which  is  made  by  the 
reflexion  of  the  wave  AC;  and  it  is  also  the  place  where  the  movement  occurs 
in  much  greater  quantity  than  anywhere  else.  Wherefore,  according  to  that 
which  has  been  explained,  BN  is  the  propagation  of  the  wave  AC  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  when  the  piece  C  of  it  has  arrived  at  B.  For  there  is  no  other  line  which 
like  BN  is  a  common  tangent  to  all  the  aforesaid  circles,  except  BG  below  the 
plane  AB ;  which  line  BG  would  be  the  propagation  of  the  wave  if  the  move¬ 
ment  could  have  spread  in  a  medium  homogeneous  with  that  which  is  above 
the  plane.  And  if  one  wishes  to  see  how  the  wave  AC  has  come  successively  to 
BN,  one  has  only  to  draw  in  the  same  figure  the  straight  lines  KO  parallel  to 
BN,  and  the  straight  lines  KL  parallel  to  AC.  Thus  one  will  see  that  the  straight 


Chapter  II  565 

wave  AC  has  become  broken  up  into  all  the  OKL  parts  successively,  and  that 
it  has  become  straight  again  at  NB. 

Now  it  is  apparent  here  that  the  angle  of  reflexion  is  made  equal  to  the  angle 
of  incidence.  For  the  triangles  ACB,  BNA,  being  rectangular  and  having  the 
side  AB  common,  and  the  side  CB  equal  to  NA,  it  follows  that  the  angles 
opposite  to  these  sides  vill  be  equal,  and  therefore  also  the  angles  CBA,  NAB. 
But  as  CB,  perpendicular  to  CA,  marks  the  direction  of  the  incident  ray,  so 
AN,  perpendicular  to  the  wave  BN,  marks  the  direction  of  the  reflected  ray; 
hence  these  rays  are  equally  inclined  to  the  plane  AB. 

But  in  considering  the  preceding  demonstration,  one  might  aver  that  it  is 
indeed  true  that  BN  is  the  common  tangent  of  the  circular  waves  in  the  plane 
of  this  figure,  but  that  these  waves,  being  in  truth  spherical,  have  still  an  in¬ 
finitude  of  similar  tangents,  namely,  all  the  straight  lines  which  are  drawn 
from  the  point  B  in  the  surface  generated  by  the  straight  line  BN  about  the 
axis  BA.  It  remains,  therefore,  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  difficulty  herein: 
and  by  the  same  argument  one  vnW  see  why  the  incident  ray  and  the  reflected 
ray  are  always  in  one  and  the  same  plane  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting  plane. 
I  say  then  that  the  wave  AC,  being  regarded  only  as  a  line,  produces  no  light. 
For  a  visible  ray  of  light,  however  narrow  it  may  be,  has  always  some  vidth, 
and  consequently  it  is  necessary,  in  representing  the  wave  whose  progression 
constitutes  the  ray,  to  put  instead  of  a  line  AC  some  plane  figure  such  as  the 
circle  HC  in  the  following  figure,  by  supposing,  as  we  have  done,  the  luminous 
point  to  be  infinitely  distant.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see,  followng  the  preceding 
demonstration,  that  each  small  piece  of  this  wave  HC  having  arrived  at  the 
plane  AB,  and  there  generating  each  one  its  particular  wave,  these  mil  all 
have,  when  C  arrives  at  B,  a  common  plane  which  mil  touch  them,  namely,  a 
circle  BN  similar  to  CH;  and  this  mil  be  intersected  at  its  middle  and  at  right 


angles  by  the  same  plane  which  likemse  intersects  the  circle  CH  and  the  ellipse 
AB. 

One  sees  also  that  the  said  spheres  of  the  partial  waves  cannot  have  any 
common  tangent  plane  other  than  the  circle  BN ;  so  that  it  mil  be  this  plane 
where  there  mil  be  more  reflected  movement  than  anywhere  else,  and  which 
will  therefore  carry  on  the  light  in  continuance  from  the  wave  CH. 

I  have  also  stated  in  the  preceding  demonstration  that  the  movement  of  the 
piece  A  of  the  incident  wave  is  not  able  to  communicate  itself  beyond  the 
plane  AB,  or  at  least  not  wholly.  Whence  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  though  the 


566  Treatise  on  Light 

movement  of  the  ethereal  matter  might  communicate  itself  partly  to  that  of 
the  reflecting  body,  this  could  in  nothing  alter  the  velocity  of  progression  of 
the  waves  on  which  the  angle  of  reflexion  depends.  For  a  slight  percussion  ought 
to  generate  waves  as  rapid  as  strong  percussion  in  the  same  matter.  This  comes 
about  from  the  property  of  bodies  which  act  as  springs,  of  which  we  have 
spoken  above;  namely,  that  whether  compressed  little  or  much  they  recoil  in 
equal  times.  Equally  so  in  every  reflexion  of  the  light,  against  whatever  body 
it  may  be,  the  angles  of  reflexion  and  incidence  ought  to  be  equal  notwith¬ 
standing  that  the  body  might  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it  takes  away  a  portion 
of  the  movement  made  by  the  incident  light.  And  experiment  shows  that  in 
fact  there  is  no  polished  body  the  reflexion  of  which  does  not  follow  this  rule. 

But  the  thing  to  be  above  all  remarked  in  our  demonstration  is  that  it  does 
not  require  that  the  reflecting  surface  should  be  considered  as  a  uniform  plane, 
as  has  been  supposed  by  all  those  who  have  tried  to  explain  the  effects  of 
reflexion ;  but  only  an  evenness  such  as  may  be  attained  by  the  particles  of  the 
matter  of  the  reflecting  body  being  set  near  to  one  another;  which  particles 
are  larger  than  those  of  the  ethereal  matter,  as  vdll  appear  by  what  we  shall 
say  in  treating  of  the  transparency  and  opacity  of  bodies.  For  the  surface  con¬ 
sisting  thus  of  particles  put  together,  and  the  ethereal  particles  being  above, 
and  smaller,  it  is  evident  that  one  could  not  demonstrate  the  equality  of  the 
angles  of  incidence  and  reflexion  by  similitude  to  that  which  happens  to  a  ball 
thrown  against  a  wall,  of  which  writers  have  always  made  use.  In  our  way,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  thing  is  explained  without  difficulty.  For  the  smallness  of 
the  particles  of  quicksilver,  for  example,  being  such  that  one  must  conceive 
millions  of  them,  in  the  smallest  visible  surface  proposed,  arranged  like  a  heap 
of  grains  of  sand  which  has  been  flattened  as  much  as  it  is  capable  of  being, 
this  surface  then  becomes  for  our  purpose  as  even  as  a  polished  glass  is:  and, 
although  it  always  remains  rough  vdth  respect  to  the  particles  of  the  ether  it  is 
evident  that  the  centres  of  all  the  particular  spheres  of  reflexion,  of  which  we 
have  spoken,  are  almost  in  one  uniform  plane,  and  that  thus  the  common  tan¬ 
gent  can  fit  to  them  as  perfectly  as  is  requisite  for  the  production  of  light.  And 
this  alone  is  requisite,  in  our  method  of  demonstration,  to  cause  equality  of 
the  said  angles  without  the  remainder  of  the  movement  reflected  from  all  parts 
being  able  to  produce  any  contrary  effect. 


CHAPTER  THREE 
On  Refraction 

In  the  same  way  as  the  effects  of  reflexion  have  been  explained  by  waves  of 
light  reflected  at  the  surface  of  polished  bodies,  we  vill  explain  transparency 
and  the  phenomena  of  refraction  by  waves  which  spread  within  and  across 
diaphanous  bodies,  both  solids,  such  as  glass,  and  liquids,  such  as  water,  oils, 
etc.  But  in  order  that  it  may  not  seem  strange  to  suppose  this  passage  of  waves 
in  the  interior  of  these  bodies,  I  will  first  show  that  one  may  conceive  it  pos¬ 
sible  in  more  than  one  mode. 


Chapter  III  567 

First,  then,  if  the  ethereal  matter  cannot  penetrate  transparent  bodies  at 
all,  their  own  particles  would  be  able  to  communicate  successively  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  waves,  the  same  as  do  those  of  the  ether,  supposing  that,  like 
those,  they  are  of  a  nature  to  act  as  a  spring.  And  this  is  easy  to  conceive  as 
regards  water  and  other  transparent  liquids,  they  being  composed  of  detached 
particles.  But  it  may  seem  more  difficult  as  regards  glass  and  other  transparent 
and  hard  bodies,  because  their  solidity  does  not  seem  to  permit  them  to  receive 
movement  except  in  their  whole  mass  at  the  same  time.  This,  however,  is  not 
necessary  because  this  solidity  is  not  such  as  it  appears  to  us,  it  being  probable 
rather  that  these  bodies  are  composed  of  particles  merely  placed  close  to  one 
another  and  held  together  by  some  pressure  from  without  of  some  other  mat¬ 
ter,  and  by  the  irregularity  of  their  shapes.  For  primarily  their  rarity  is  shown 
by  the  facility  wdth  which  there  passes  through  them  the  matter  of  the  vortices 
of  the  magnet,  and  that  which  causes  gravity.  Further,  one  cannot  say  that 
these  bodies  are  of  a  texture  similar  to  that  of  a  sponge  or  of  light  bread, 
because  the  heat  of  the  fire  makes  them  flow  and  thereby  changes  the  situation 
of  the  particles  amongst  themselves.  It  remains  then  that  they  are,  as  has  been 
said,  assemblages  of  particles  which  touch  one  another  vdthout  constituting  a 
continuous  solid.  This  being  so,  the  movement  which  these  particles  receive  to 
carry  on  the  waves  of  light,  being  merely  communicated  from  some  of  them  to 
others,  without  their  going  for  that  purpose  out  of  their  places  or  mthout  de¬ 
rangement,  it  may  very  well  produce  its  effect  without  prejudicing  in  any  way 
the  apparent  solidity  of  the  compound. 

By  pressure  from  without,  of  wffiich  I  have  spoken,  must  not  be  understood 
that  of  the  air,  wffiich  wmuld  not  be  sufficient,  but  that  of  some  other  more 
subtle  matter,  a  pressure  which  I  chanced  upon  by  experiment  long  ago,  name¬ 
ly,  in  the  case  of  water  freed  from  air,  which  remains  suspended  in  a  tube  open 
at  its  low'er  end,  notwithstanding  that  the  air  has  been  removed  from  the  vessel 
in  wffiich  this  tube  is  enclosed. 

One  can  then  in  this  way  conceive  of  transparency  in  a  solid  without  any 
necessity  that  the  ethereal  matter  wffiich  serves  for  light  should  pass  through 
it,  or  that  it  should  find  pores  in  wffiich  to  insinuate  itself.  But  the  truth  is  that 
this  matter  not  only  passes  through  solids,  but  does  so  even  with  great  facility; 
of  w'hich  the  experiment  of  Torricelli,  above  cited,  is  already  a  proof.  Because 
on  the  quicksilver  and  the  w'ater  quitting  the  upper  part  of  the  glass  tube,  it 
appears  that  it  is  immediately  filled  with  ethereal  matter,  since  light  passes 
across  it.  But  here  is  another  argument  wffiich  proves  this  ready  penetrability, 
not  only  in  transparent  bodies  but  also  in  all  others. 

\\Tien  light  passes  across  a  hollow  sphere  of  glass,  closed  on  all  sides,  it  is 
certain  that  it  is  full  of  ethereal  matter,  as  much  as  the  spaces  outside  the 
sphere.  And  this  ethereal  matter,  as  has  been  showm  above,  consists  of  par¬ 
ticles  which  just  touch  one  another.  If,  then,  it  w-ere  enclosed  in  the  sphere  in 
such  a  way  that  it  could  not  get  out  through  the  pores  of  the  glass,  it  wmuld  be 
obliged  to  follow  the  movement  of  the  sphere  when  one  changes  its  place:  and 
it  would  require,  consequently,  almost  the  same  force  to  impress  a  certain 
velocity  on  this  sphere,  Avhen  placed  on  a  horizontal  plane,  as  if  it  w^ere  full  of 
water  or  perhaps  of  quicksilver :  because  every  body  resists  the  velocity  of  the 
motion  which  one  would  give  to  it,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter 
which  it  contains,  and  wffiich  is  obliged  to  follow  this  motion.  But,  on  the  con- 


568  Treatise  on  Light 

trary,  one  finds  that  the  sphere  resists  the  impress  of  movement  only  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  quantity  of  matter  of  the  glass  of  which  it  is  made.  Then  it  must 
be  that  the  ethereal  matter  which  is  inside  is  not  shut  up,  but  flows  through  it 
with  very  great  freedom.  We  shall  demonstrate  hereafter  that  by  this  process 
the  same  penetrability  may  be  inferred  also  as  relating  to  opaque  bodies. 

The  second  mode,  then,  of  explaining  transparency,  and  one  which  appears 
more  probably  true,  is  by  saying  that  the  waves  of  light  are  carried  on  in  the 
ethereal  matter,  which  continuously  occupies  the  interstices  or  pores  of  trans¬ 
parent  bodies.  For  since  it  passes  through  them  continuously  and  freely,  it 
follows  that  they  are  always  full  of  it.  And  one  may  even  show  that  these 
interstices  occupy  much  more  space  than  the  coherent  particles  which  consti¬ 
tute  the  bodies.  For  if  what  we  have  just  said  is  true:  that  force  is  required  to 
impress  a  certain  horizontal  velocity  on  bodies  in  proportion  as  they  contain 
coherent  matter;  and  if  the  proportion  of  this  force  follows  the  law  of  weights, 
as  is  confirmed  by  experiment,  then  the  quantity  of  the  constituent  matter  of 
bodies  also  follows  the  proportion  of  their  weights.  Now  we  see  that  water 
weighs  only  one-fourteenth  part  as  much  as  an  equal  portion  of  quicksilver: 
therefore,  the  matter  of  the  water  does  not  occupy  the  fourteenth  part  of  the 
space  which  its  mass  obtains.  It  must  even  occupy  much  less  of  it,  since  quick¬ 
silver  is  less  heavy  than  gold,  and  the  matter  of  gold  is  by  no  means  dense,  as 
follows  from  the  fact  that  the  matter  of  the  vortices  of  the  magnet  and  of  that 
which  is  the  cause  of  gravity  pass  very  freely  through  it. 

But  it  may  be  objected  here  that  if  water  is  a  body  of  so  great  rarity,  and  if 
its  particles  occupy  so  small  a  portion  of  the  space  of  its  apparent  bulk,  it  is 
very  strange  how  it  yet  resists  compression  so  strongly  wthout  permitting  it¬ 
self  to  be  condensed  by  any  force  which  one  has  hitherto  essayed  to  employ, 
preserving  even  its  entire  liquidity  while  subjected  to  this  pressure. 

This  is  no  small  difficulty.  It  may,  however,  be  resolved  by  saying  that  the 
very  violent  and  rapid  motion  of  the  subtle  matter  which  renders  water 
liquid,  by  agitating  the  particles  of  which  it  is  composed,  maintains  this  liq¬ 
uidity  in  spite  of  the  pressure  which  hitherto  any  one  has  been  minded  to 
apply  to  it. 

The  rarity  of  transparent  bodies  being  then  such  as  we  have  said,  one  easily 
conceives  that  the  waves  might  be  carried  on  in  the  ethereal  matter  which 
fills  the  interstices  of  the  particles.  And,  moreover,  one  may  believe  that  the 
progression  of  these  waves  ought  to  be  a  little  slower  in  the  interior  of  bodies, 
by  reason  of  the  small  detours  which  the  same  particles  cause.  In  which  differ¬ 
ent  velocity  of  light  I  shall  show  the  cause  of  refraction  to  consist. 

Before  doing  so,  I  will  indicate  the  third  and  last  mode  in  which  transpar¬ 
ency  may  be  conceived;  which  is  by  supposing  that  the  movement  of  the  waves 
of  light  is  transmitted  indifferently  both  in  the  particles  of  the  ethereal  matter 
which  occupy  the  interstices  of  bodies,  and  in  the  particles  which  compose 
them,  so  that  the  movement  passes  from  one  to  the  other.  And  it  wll  be  seen 
hereafter  that  this  hypothesis  serves  excellently  to  explain  the  double  refrac¬ 
tion  of  certain  transparent  bodies. 

Should  it  be  objected  that  if  the  particles  of  the  ether  are  smaller  than  those 
of  transparent  bodies  (since  they  pass  through  their  intervals),  it  would  follow 
that  they  can  communicate  to  them  but  little  of  their  movement,  it  may  be 
replied  that  the  particles  of  these  bodies  are  in  turn  composed  of  still  smaller 


Chapter  III  569 

particles,  and  so  it  ^nll  be  these  secondary  particles  which  Avill  receive  the 
movement  from  those  of  the  ether. 

Furthermore,  if  the  particles  of  transparent  bodies  have  a  recoil  a  little  less 
prompt  than  that  of  the  ethereal  particles,  which  nothing  hinders  us  from  sup¬ 
posing,  it  vill  again  follow  that  the  progression  of  the  waves  of  light  will  be 
slower  in  the  interior  of  such  bodies  than  it  is  outside  in  the  ethereal  matter. 

All  this  I  have  found  as  most  probable  for  the  mode  in  which  the  waves  of 
light  pass  across  transparent  bodies.  To  which  it  must  further  be  added  in 
what  respect  these  bodies  differ  from  those  which  are  opaque;  and  the  more  so 
since  it  might  seem  because  of  the  easy  penetration  of  bodies  by  the  ethereal 
matter,  of  which  mention  has  been  made,  that  there  would  not  be  any  body 
that  was  not  transparent.  For  by  the  same  reasoning  about  the  hollow  sphere 
which  I  have  employed  to  prove  the  smallness  of  the  density  of  glass  and  its 
easy  penetrability  by  the  ethereal  matter,  one  might  also  prove  that  the  same 
penetrability  obtains  for  metals  and  for  every  other  sort  of  body.  For  this 
sphere  being,  for  example,  of  silver,  it  is  certain  that  it  contains  some  of  the 
ethereal  matter  which  serves  for  light,  since  this  was  there  as  well  as  in  the  air 
when  the  opening  of  the  sphere  was  closed.  Yet,  being  closed  and  placed  upon 
a  horizontal  plane,  it  resists  the  movement  which  one  vdshes  to  give  to  it, 
merely  according  to  the  quantity  of  silver  of  which  it  is  made ;  so  that  one  must 
conclude,  as  above,  that  the  ethereal  matter  which  is  enclosed  does  not  follow 
the  movement  of  the  sphere;  and  that,  therefore,  silver,  as  well  as  glass,  is  very 
easily  penetrated  by  this  matter.  Some  of  it  is  therefore  present  continuously 
and  in  quantities  between  the  particles  of  silver  and  of  all  other  opaque  bodies: 
and  since  it  serves  for  the  propagation  of  light  it  would  seem  that  these  bodies 
ought  also  to  be  transparent,  which,  however,  is  not  the  case. 

Whence  then,  one  mil  say,  does  their  opacity  come?  Is  it  because  the  par¬ 
ticles  which  compose  them  are  soft;  that  is  to  say,  these  particles  being  com¬ 
posed  of  others  that  are  smaller,  are  they  capable  of  changing  their  figure  on 
receiving  the  pressure  of  the  ethereal  particles,  the  motion  of  which  they  there¬ 
by  damp,  and  so  hinder  the  continuance  of  the  waves  of  light?  That  cannot  be: 
for  if  the  particles  of  the  metals  are  soft,  how  is  it  that  polished  silver  and  mer¬ 
cury  reflect  fight  so  strongly?  What  I  find  to  be  most  probable  herein  is  to  say 
that  metallic  bodies,  which  are  almost  the  only  really  opaque  ones,  have  mixed 
amongst  their  hard  particles  some  soft  ones;  so  that  some  serve  to  cause  re¬ 
flexion  and  the  others  to  hinder  transparency;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  trans¬ 
parent  bodies  contain  only  hard  particles  which  have  the  faculty  of  recoil,  and 
serve  together  mth  those  of  the  ethereal  matter  for  the  propagation  of  the 
waves  of  fight,  as  has  been  said. 

Let  us  pass  now  to  the  explanation  of  the  effects  of  refraction,  assuming,  as 
we  have  done,  the  passage  of  waves  of  fight  through  transparent  bodies,  and 
the  diminution  of  velocity  which  these  same  waves  suffer  in  them. 

The  chief  property  of  refraction  is  that  a  ray  of  fight,  such  as  AB,  being  in 
the  air,  and  falling  obliquely  upon  the  polished  surface  of  a  transparent  body, 
such  as  FG,  is  broken  at  the  point  of  incidence  B  in  such  a  way  that,  mth  the 
straight  fine  DBE  which  cuts  the  surface  perpendicularly,  it  makes  an  angle 
CBE  less  than  ABD  which  it  made  mth  the  same  perpendicular  when  in  the 
air.  And  the  measure  of  these  angles  is  found  by  describing,  about  the  point  B, 
a  circle  which  cuts  the  radii  AB,  BC.  For  the  perpendiculars  AD,  CE,  let  fall 


570  Treatise  on  Light 

from  the  points  of  intersection  upon  the  straight  line  DE,  which  are  called  the 
sines  of  the  angles  ABD,  CBE,  have  a  certain  ratio  between  themselves;  which 

ratio  is  always  the  same  for  all  inclinations 
of  the  incident  ray,  at  least  for  a  given  trans¬ 
parent  body.  This  ratio  is,  in  glass,  very 
nearly  as  3  to  2;  and  in  water  very  nearly 
as  4  to  3;  and  is  likewise  different  in  other 
diaphanous  bodies. 

Another  property,  similar  to  this,  is  that 
the  refractions  are  reciprocal  betiveen  the 
rays  entering  into  a  transparent  body  and 
those  which  are  leaving  it.  That  is  to  say, 
that  if  the  ray  AB  in  entering  the  transpar¬ 
ent  body  is  refracted  into  BC,  then  likemse 
CB  being  taken  as  a  ray  in  the  interior  of  this  body  vill  be  refracted,  on  pass¬ 
ing  out,  into  BA. 

To  explain  then  the  reasons  of  these  phenomena  according  to  our  principles, 
let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  represents  a  plane  surface  bounding  the  trans¬ 
parent  substances  which  lie  towards  C  and  towards  N.  When  I  say  plane,  that 
does  not  signify  a  perfect  even¬ 
ness,  but  such  as  has  been  un¬ 
derstood  in  treating  of  reflex¬ 
ion,  and  for  the  same  reason. 

Let  the  line  AC  represent  a 
portion  of  a  wave  of  light,  the 
centre  of  which  is  supposed  so 
distant  that  this  portion  may 
be  considered  as  a  straight  line. 

The  piece  C,  then,  of  the  wave 
AC,  mil  in  a  certain  space  of 
time  have  advanced  as  far  as 
the  plane  AB  follomng  the 
straight  line  CB,  which  may  be 
imagined  as  coming  from  the 
luminous  centre,  and  which 
consequently  vill  cut  AC  at  right  angles.  Now  in  the  same  time  the  piece 
A  would  have  come  to  G  along  the  straight  line  AG,  equal  and  parallel  to 
CB;  and  all  the  portion  of  wave  AC  would  be  at  GB  if  the  matter  of  the 
transparent  body  transmitted  the  movement  of  the  wave  as  quickly  as  the 
matter  of  the  ether.  But  let  us  suppose  that  it  transmits  this  movement  less 
quickly,  by  one-third,  for  instance.  Movement  mil  then  be  spread  from  the 
point  A,  in  the  matter  of  the  transparent  body  through  a  distance  equal  to 
two-thirds  of  CB,  making  its  own  particular  spherical  wave  according  to  what 
has  been  said  before.  This  wave  is  then  represented  by  the  circumference  SNR, 
the  centre  of  which  is  A,  and  its  semi-diameter  equal  to  two-thirds  of  CB.  Then 
if  one  considers  in  order  the  other  pieces  H  of  the  wave  AC,  it  appears  that  in 
the  same  time  that  the  piece  C  reaches  B  they  will  not  only  have  arrived  at 
the  surface  AB  along  the  straight  lines  HK  parallel  to  CB,  but  that,  in  addi¬ 
tion,  they  will  have  generated  in  the  diaphanous  substance  from  the  centres  K, 


Chapter  III  571 

partial  waves,  represented  here  by  circumferences  the  semi-diameters  of  which 
are  equal  to  two-thirds  of  the  lines  KM,  that  is  to  say,  to  two-thirds  of  the 
prolongations  of  HK  down  to  the  straight  line  BG;  for  these  semi-diameters 
would  have  been  equal  to  entire  lengths  of  KM  if  the  two  transparent  sub¬ 
stances  had  been  of  the  same  penetrability. 

Now  all  these  circumferences  have  for  a  common  tangent  the  straight  line 
BN ;  namely,  the  same  line  which  is  drawn  as  a  tangent  from  the  point  B  to  the 
circumference  SNR,  which  we  considered  first.  For  it  is  easy  to  see  that  all  the 
other  circumferences  will  touch  the  same  BN,  from  B  up  to  the  point  of  con¬ 
tact  N,  which  is  the  same  point  where  AN  falls  perpendicularly  on  BN. 

It  is  then  BN,  which  is  formed  by  small  arcs  of  these  circumferences,  which 
terminates  the  movement  that  the  wave  AC  has  communicated  within  the 
transparent  body,  and  where  this  movement  occurs  in  much  greater  amount 
than  anywhere  else.  And  for  that  reason  this  line,  in  accordance  with  what  has 
been  said  more  than  once,  is  the  propagation  of  the  wave  AC  at  the  moment 
when  its  piece  C  has  reached  B.  For  there  is  no  other  line  below  the  plane  AB 
which  is,  like  BN,  a  common  tangent  to  all  these  partial  waves.  And  if  one 
would  know  how  the  wave  AC  has  come  progressively  to  BN,  it  is  necessary 
only  to  draw  in  the  same  figure  the  straight  lines  KO  parallel  to  BN,  and  all 
the  lines  KL  parallel  to  AC.  Thus,  one  vdll  see  that  the  wave  CA,  from  being 
a  straight  line,  has  become  broken  in  all  the  positions  LKO  successively,  and 
that  it  has  again  become  a  straight  line  at  BN.  This  being  evident  by  what  has 
already  been  demonstrated,  there  is  no  need  to  explain  it  further. 

Now,  in  the  same  figure,  if  one  draws  EAF,  which  cuts  the  plane  AB  at  right 
angles  at  the  point  A,  since  AD  is  perpendicular  to  the  wave  AC,  it  udll  be  DA 
which  mil  mark  the  ray  of  incident  light,  and  AN  which  was  perpendicular  to 
BN,  the  refracted  ray:  since  the  rays  are  nothing  else  than  the  straight  lines 
along  which  the  portions  of  the  waves  advance. 

Whence  it  is  easy  to  recognize  this  chief  property  of  refraction,  namely  that 
the  sine  of  the  angle  DAE  has  always  the  same  ratio  to  the  sine  of  the  angle 
NAF,  whatever  be  the  inclination  of  the  ray  DA :  and  that  this  ratio  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  velocity  of  the  waves  in  the  transparent  substance  which  is  to¬ 
wards  AE  to  their  velocity  in  the  transparent  substance  towards  AF.  For, 
considering  AB  as  the  radius  of  a  circle,  the  sine  of  the  angle  BAG  is  BC,  and 
the  sine  of  the  angle  ABN  is  AN.  But  the  angle  BAG  is  equal  to  DAE,  since 
each  of  them  added  to  CAE  makes  a  right  angle.  And  the  angle  ABN  is  equal 
to  NAF,  since  each  of  them  with  BAN  makes  a  right  angle.  Then,  also,  the 
sine  of  the  angle  DAE  is  to  the  sine  of  NAF  as  BC  is  to  AN.  But  the  ratio  of 
BC  to  AN  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  velocities  of  light  in  the  substance  which 
is  towards  AE  and  in  that  which  is  towards  AF ;  therefore,  also,  the  sine  of  the 
angle  DAE  mil  be  to  the  sine  of  the  angle  NAF  the  same  as  the  said  velocities 
of  light. 

To  see,  consequently,  what  the  refraction  will  be  when  the  waves  of  light 
pass  into  a  substance  in  which  the  movement  travels  more  quickly  than  in  that 
from  which  they  emerge  (let  us  again  assume  the  ratio  of  3  to  2),  it  is  only 
necessary  to  repeat  all  the  same  construction  and  demonstration  which  we 
have  just  used,  merely  substituting  everywhere  3^  instead  of  And  it  will  be 
found  by  the  same  reasoning,  in  this  other  figure,  that  when  the  piece  C  of  the 
wave  AC  shall  have  reached  the  surface  AB  at  B,  all  the  portions  of  the  wave 


572  Treatise  on  Light 

AC  will  have  advanced  as  far  as  BN,  so  that  BC,  the  perpendicular  on  AC,  is 
to  AN,  the  perpendicular  on  BN,  as  2  to  3.  And  there  will  finally  be  this  same 
ratio  of  2  to  3  between  the  sine  of  the  angle  EAD  and  the  sine  of  the  angle  FAN. 

Hence,  one  sees  the  reciprocal  relation  of  the  refractions  of  the  ray  on  enter¬ 
ing  and  on  leaving  one  and  the  same  transparent  body:  namely,  that  if  NA 


falling  on  the  external  surface  AB  is  refracted  into  the  direction  AD,  so  the  ray 
AD  m\\  be  refracted  on  leaving  the  transparent  body  into  the  direction  AN. 

One  sees  also  the  reason  for  a  noteworthy  accident  which  happens  in  this 
refraction:  which  is  this,  that  after  a  certain  obliquity  of  the  incident  ray  DA, 
it  begins  to  be  quite  unable  to  penetrate  into  the  other  transparent  substance. 
For  if  the  angle  DAQ  or  CBA  is  such  that  in  the  triangle  ACB,  CB  is  equal  to 
of  AB,  or  is  greater,  then  AN  cannot  form  one  side  of  the  triangle  ANB, 
since  it  becomes  equal  to  or  greater  than  AB :  so  that  the  portion  of  wave  BN 
cannot  be  found  anywhere,  neither  consequently  can  AN,  which  ought  to  be 
perpendicular  to  it.  And  thus  the  incident  ray  DA  does  not  then  pierce  the 
surface  AB. 

When  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  of  the  waves  is  as  2  to  3,  as  in  our  example, 
which  is  that  which  obtains  for  glass  and  air,  the  angle  DAQ  must  be  more  than 
48  degrees  1 1  minutes  in  order  that  the  ray  DA  may  be  able  to  pass  by  refrac¬ 
tion.  And  when  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  is  as  3  to  4,  as  it  is  very  nearly  in 
water  and  air,  this  angle  DAQ  must  exceed  41  degrees  24  minutes.  And  this 
accords  perfectly  with  experiment. 

But  it  might  here  be  asked:  since  the  meeting  of  the  wave  AC  against  the 
surface  AB  ought  to  produce  movement  in  the  matter  which  is  on  the  other 
side,  why  does  no  light  pass  there?  To  which  the  reply  is  easy  if  one  remembers 
what  has  been  said  before.  For  although  it  generates  an  infinitude  of  partial 
waves  in  the  matter  which  is  at  the  other  side  of  AB,  these  waves  never  have 
a  common  tangent  line  (either  straight  or  curved)  at  the  same  moment;  and 
so  there  is  no  line  terminating  the  propagation  of  the  wave  AC  beyond  the 
plane  AB,  nor  any  place  where  the  movement  is  gathered  together  in  suffi¬ 
ciently  great  quantity  to  produce  light.  And  one  will  easily  see  the  truth  of 
this,  namely,  that  CB  being  larger  than  3^  of  AB,  the  waves  excited  beyond  the 
plane  AB  will  have  no  common  tangent  if  about  the  centres  K  one  then  draws 


Chapter  III  573 

circles  having  radii  equal  to  3^  of  the  lengths  LB  to  which  they  correspond.  For 
all  these  circles  vill  be  enclosed  in  one  another  and  will  all  pass  beyond  the 
point  B. 

Now  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  from  the  moment  when  the  angle  DAQ  is 
smaller  than  is  requisite  to  permit  the  refracted  ray  DA  to  pass  into  the  other 
transparent  substance,  one  finds  that  the  interior  reflexion  which  occurs  at  the 
surface  AB  is  much  augmented  in  brightness,  as  is  easy  to  realize  by  experi¬ 
ment  vdth  a  triangular  prism;  and  for  this  our  theory  can  afford  this  reason. 
When  the  angle  DAQ  is  still  large  enough  to  enable  the  ray  DA  to  pass,  it  is 
evident  that  the  light  from  the  portion  AC  of  the  wave  is  collected  in  a  mini¬ 
mum  space  when  it  reaches  BN.  It  appears  also  that  the  wave  BN  becomes  so 
much  the  smaller  as  the  angle  CBA  or  DAQ  is  made  less,  until  when  the  latter 
is  diminished  to  the  limit  indicated  a  little  previously,  this  wave  BN  is  col¬ 
lected  together  always  at  one  point.  That  is  to  say,  that  when  the  piece  C  of 
the  wave  AC  has  then  arrived  at  B,  the  wave  BN  which  is  the  propagation  of 
AC  is  entirely  reduced  to  the  same  point  B.  Similarly,  when  the  piece  H  has 
reached  K,  the  part  AH  is  entirely  reduced  to  the  same  point  K.  This  makes  it 
evident  that  in  proportion  as  the  wave  CA  comes  to  meet  the  surface  AB,  there 
occurs  a  great  quantity  of  movement  along  that  surface;  which  movement 
ought  also  to  spread  vfithin  the  transparent  body  and  ought  to  have  much 
re-enforced  the  partial  waves  which  produce  the  interior  reflexion  against  the 
surface  AB,  according  to  the  laws  of  reflexion  previously  explained. 

And  because  a  slight  diminution  of  the  angle  of  incidence  DAQ  causes  the 
wave  BN,  however  great  it  was,  to  be  reduced  to  zero,  (for  this  angle  being 
49  degrees  11  minutes  in  the  glass,  the  angle  BAN  is  still  11  degrees  21  minutes, 
and  the  same  angle  being  reduced  by  one  degree  only  the  angle  BAN  is  reduced 
to  zero,  and  so  the  wave  BN  reduced  to  a  point)  thence  it  comes  about  that 
the  interior  reflexion  from  being  obscure  becomes  suddenly  bright,  so  soon  as 
the  angle  of  incidence  is  such  that  it  no  longer  gives  passage  to  the  refraction. 

Now  as  concerns  ordinary  external  reflexion,  that  is  to  say  which  occurs 
when  the  angle  of  incidence  DAQ  is  still  large  enough  to  enable  the  refracted 
ray  to  penetrate  beyond  the  surface  AB,  this  reflexion  should  occur  against 
the  particles  of  the  substance  which  touches  the  transparent  body  on  its  out¬ 
side.  And  it  apparently  occurs  against  the  particles  of  the  air  or  others  mingled 
vith  the  ethereal  particles  and  larger  than  they.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
external  reflexion  of  these  bodies  occurs  against  the  particles  which  compose 
them,  and  which  are  also  larger  than  those  of  the  ethereal  matter,  since  the 
latter  flows  in  their  interstices.  It  is  true  that  there  remains  here  some  difficulty 
in  those  experiments  in  which  this  interior  reflexion  occurs  vdthout  the  par¬ 
ticles  of  air  being  able  to  contribute  to  it,  as  in  vessels  or  tubes  from  which  the 
air  has  been  extracted. 

Experience,  moreover,  teaches  us  that  these  two  reflexions  are  of  nearly 
equal  force,  and  that  in  different  transparent  bodies  they  are  so  much  the 
stronger  as  the  refraction  of  these  bodies  is  the  greater.  Thus,  one  sees  mani¬ 
festly  that  the  reflexion  of  glass  is  stronger  than  that  of  water,  and  that  of 
diamond  stronger  than  that  of  glass. 

I  vill  finish  this  theory  of  refraction  by  demonstrating  a  remarkable  prop¬ 
osition  which  depends  on  it;  namely,  that  a  ray  of  light  in  order  to  go  from  one 
point  to  another,  when  these  points  are  in  different  media,  is  refracted  in  such 


574  Treatise  on  Light 

\\'ise  at  the  plane  surface  which  joins  these  two  media  that  it  employs  the  least 
possible  time :  and  exactly  the  same  happens  in  the  case  of  reflexion  against  a 
plane  surface.  M.  Fermat  was  the  first  to  propound  this  property  of  refraction, 
holding  with  us,  and  directly  counter  to  the  opinion  of  M.  Descartes,  that  light 
passes  more  slowly  through  glass  and  water  than  through  air.  But  he  assumed 
besides  this  a  constant  ratio  of  sines,  which  we  have  just  proved  by  these  dif¬ 
ferent  degrees  of  velocity  alone :  or  rather,  what  is  equivalent,  he  assumed  not 
only  that  the  velocities  were  different  but  that  the  light  took  the  least  time 
possible  for  its  passage,  and  thence  deduced  the  constant  ratio  of  the  sines. 
His  demonstration,  which  may  be  seen  in  his  printed  works,  and  in  the  volume 
of  letters  of  M.  Descartes,  is  very  long;  wherefore  I  give  here  another  which  is 
simpler  and  easier. 

Let  KF  be  the  plane  surface;  A  the  point  in  the  medium  which  the  light 
traverses  more  easily,  as  the  air;  C  the  point  in  the  other  which  is  more  difficult 
to  penetrate,  as  water.  And  suppose 
that  a  ray  has  come  from  A,  by  B,  to  C, 
having  been  refracted  at  B  according  to 
the  law  demonstrated  a  little  before; 
that  is  to  say  that,  having  drawn  PBQ, 
which  cuts  the  plane  at  right  angles, 
let  the  sine  of  the  angle  ABP  have  to 
the  sine  of  the  angle  CBQ  the  same 
ratio  as  the  velocity  of  light  in  the  me¬ 
dium  where  A  is  to  the  velocity  of  light 
in  the  medium  where  C  is.  It  is  to  be 
shown  that  the  time  of  passage  of  light 
along  AB  and  BC  taken  together  is  the 
shortest  that  can  be.  Let  us  assume 
that  it  may  have  come  by  other  lines, 
and,  in  the  first  place,  along  AF,  FC, 
so  that  the  point  of  refraction  F  maybe  farther  from  B  than  the  point  A;  and 
let  AO  be  a  line  perpendicular  to  AB,  and  FO  parallel  to  AB;  BH  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  FO,  and  FG  to  BC. 

Since  then  the  angle  HBF  is  equal  to  PBA,  and  the  angle  BFG  equal  to 
QBC,  it  follows  that  the  sine  of  the  angle  HBF  wall  also  have  the  same  ratio  to 
the  sine  of  BFG,  as  the  velocity  of  light  in  the  medium  A  is  to  its  velocity  in 
the  medium  C.  But  these  sines  are  the  straight  lines  HF,  BG,  if  we  take  BF  as 
the  semi-diameter  of  a  circle.  Then  these  lines  HF,  BG,  will  bear  to  one  another 
the  said  ratio  of  the  velocities.  And,  therefore,  the  time  of  the  light  along  HF, 
supposing  that  the  ray  had  been  OF,  would  be  equal  to  the  time  along  BG  in 
the  interior  of  the  medium  C.  But  the  time  along  AB  is  equal  to  the  time  along 
OH;  therefore,  the  time  along  OF  is  equal  to  the  time  along  AB,  BG.  Again 
the  time  along  FC  is  greater  than  that  along  GC;  then  the  time  along  OFC 
uill  be  longer  than  that  along  ABC.  But  AF  is  longer  than  OF,  then  the  time 
along  AFC  will  by  just  so  much  more  exceed  the  time  along  ABC. 

Now  let  us  assume  that  the  ray  has  come  from  A  to  C  along  AK,  KC;  the 
point  of  refraction  K  being  nearer  to  A  than  the  point  B  is;  and  let  CN  be  the 
perpendicular  upon  BC,  KN  parallel  to  BC:  BM  perpendicular  upon  KN,  and 
KL  upon  BA. 


O  P 


Chapter  IV  575 

Here  BL  and  KM  are  the  sines  of  angles  BKL,  KBM;  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
angles  PBA,  QBC;  and,  therefore,  they  are  to  one  another  as  the  velocity  of 
light  in  the  medium  A  is  to  the  velocity  in  the  medium  C.  Then  the  time  along 
LB  is  equal  to  the  time  along  KM ;  and  since  the  time  along  BC  is  equal  to  the 
time  along  MX,  the  time  along  LBC  vill  be  equal  to  the  time  along  lOIX". 
But  the  time  along  AK  is  longer  than  that  along  AL:  hence,  the  time  along 
AKX  is  longer  than  that  along  ABC.  And  KC  being  longer  than  KX,  the  time 
along  AKC  vdll  exceed,  by  as  much  more,  the  time  along  ABC.  Hence,  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  the  time  along  ABC  is  the  shortest  possible;  vhich  was  to  be  proven. 


CHAPTER  FOUR 
On  the  Refraction  of  the  Air 

We  have  shown  how  the  movement  which  constitutes  light  spreads  hy  spher¬ 
ical  waves  in  any  homogeneous  matter.  And  it  is  e^ddent  that  when  the  matter 
is  not  homogeneous,  but  of  such  a  constitution  that  the  movement  is  communi¬ 
cated  in  it  more  rapidly  toward  one  side  than  toward  another,  these  waves 
cannot  be  spherical;  but  that  they  must  acquire  their  figure  according  to  the 
different  distances  over  which  the  successive  movement  passes  in  equal  times. 

It  is  thus  that  we  shall  in  the  first  place  explain  the  refractions  which  occur 
in  the  air,  which  extends  from  here  to  the  clouds  and  beyond.  The  effects  of 
which  refractions  are  very  remarkable;  for  by  them  we  often  see  objects  which 
the  rotundity  of  the  earth  ought  other\Hse  to  hide;  such  as  islands,  and  the 
tops  of  mountains  when  one  is  at  sea.  Because  also  of  them  the  sun  and  the 
moon  appear  as  risen  before  in  fact  they  have,  and  appear  to  set  later:  so  that 
at  times  the  moon  has  been  seen  eclipsed  while  the  sun  appeared  still  above  the 
horizon.  And  so  also  the  heights  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon,  and  those  of  all 
the  stars,  always  appear  a  little  greater  than  they  are  in  realit}",  because  of 
these  same  refractions,  as  astronomers  know.  But  there  is  one  experiment 
which  renders  this  refraction  veiA^  e^ddent;  which  is  that  of  fixing  a  telescope 
on  some  spot  so  that  it  %dews  an  object,  such  as  a  steeple  or  a  house,  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  half  a  league  or  more.  If  then  3mu  look  through  it  at  different  hours  of 
the  daj",  lea^dng  it  alwaj^s  fixed  in  the  same  wax’,  x’ou  vdll  see  that  the  same 
spots  of  the  object  vdll  not  ahva3’s  appear  at  the  middle  of  the  aperture  of  the 
telescope,  but  that  general^  in  the  morning  and  in  the  ex’ening,  when  there 
are  more  vapours  near  the  earth,  these  objects  seem  to  rise  higher,  so  that  the 
half  or  more  of  them  vdll  no  longer  be  xdsible;  and  so  that  they  seem  loxver 
toward  mid-day  xvhen  these  x’apours  are  dissipated. 

Those  who  consider  refraction  to  occur  onh’  in  the  surfaces  which  separate 
transparent  bodies  of  different  nature,  would  find  it  difficult  to  gix’e  a  reason 
for  all  that  I  hax’e  just  related;  but  according  to  our  theor3"  the  thing  is  quite 
eas3’.  It  is  known  that  the  air  which  surrounds  us,  besides  the  particles  xvhich 
are  proper  to  it  and  which  float  in  the  ethereal  matter  as  has  been  explained, 
is  full  also  of  particles  of  water  which  are  raised  b3’  the  action  of  heat;  and  it  has 
been  ascertained  further  b3’  some  ver3’  definite  experiments  that  as  one  mounts 


576  Treatise  on  Light 

up  higher  the  density  of  air  diminishes  in  proportion.  Now,  whether  the  par¬ 
ticles  of  water  and  those  of  air  take  part,  by  means  of  the  particles  of  ethereal 
matter,  in  the  movement  which  constitutes  light,  but  have  a  less  prompt  recoil 
than  these,  or  whether  the  encounter  and  hindrance  which  these  particles  of 
air  and  water  offer  to  the  propagation  of  movement  of  the  ethereal  progress 
retard  the  progression,  it  follows  that  both  kinds  of  particles  flying  amidst  the 
ethereal  particles  must  render  the  air,  from  a  great  height  down  to  the  earth, 
gradually  less  easy  for  the  spreading  of-  the  waves  of  light. 

Whence  the  configuration  of  the  waves  ought  to  become  nearly  such  as  this 


figure  represents:  namely,  if  A  is  a  light,  or  the  visible  point  of  a  steeple,  the 
waves  which  start  from  it  ought  to  spread  more  widely  upwards  and  less  widely 
downwards,  but  in  other  directions  more  or  less  as  they  approximate  to  these 
two  extremes.  This  being  so,  it  necessarily  follows  that  every  line  intersecting 
one  of  these  waves  at  right  angles  mil  pass  above  the  point  A,  always  excepting 
the  one  line  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  horizon. 

Let  BC  be  the  wave  which  brings  the  light  to  the  spectator  who  is  at  B,  and 
let  BD  be  the  straight  line  which  intersects  this  wave  at  right  angles.  Now 
because  the  ray  or  straight  line  by  which  we  judge  the  spot  where  the  object 
appears  to  us  is  nothing  else  than  the  perpendicular  to  the  wave  that  reaches 
our  eye,  as  will  be  understood  by  what  was  said  above,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
point  A  will  be  perceived  as  being  in  the  line  BD,  and  therefore  higher  than 
in  fact  it  is. 

Similarly  if  the  earth  be  AB,  and  the  top  of  the  atmosphere  CD,  which 
probably  is  not  a  well  defined  spherical  surface  (since  we  know  that  the  air 
becomes  rare  in  proportion  as  one  ascends,  for  above  there  is  so  much  less  of 
it  to  press  down  upon  it),  the  waves  of  light  from  the  sun  coming,  for  instance, 
in  such  a  way  that  so  long  as  they  have  not  reached  the  atmosphere  CD  the 
straight  line  AE  intersects  them  perpendicularly,  they  ought,  when  they  enter 
the  atmosphere,  to  advance  more  quickly  in  elevated  regions  than  in  regions 
nearer  to  the  earth.  So  that  if  CA  is  the  wave  which  brings  the  light  to  the 


Chapter  IV 


577 


spectator  at  A,  its  region  C  will  be  the  farthest  advanced;  and  the  straight  line 
AF,  which  intersects  this  wave  at  right  angles,  and  which  determines  the  ap¬ 
parent  place  of  the  sun,  vnW  pass  above  the  real  sun,  which  vtII  be  seen  along  the 
line  AE.  And  so  it  may  occur  that  when  it  ought  not  to  be  visible  in  the  absence 
of  vapours,  because  the  line  AE  encounters  the  rotundity  of  the  earth,  it  will 
be  perceived  in  the  line  AF  by  refraction.  But  this  angle  EAF  is  scarcely  ever 
more  than  half  a  degree  because  the  attenuation  of  the  vapours  alters  the 
waves  of  light  but  little.  Furthermore,  these  refractions  are  not  altogether  con¬ 
stant  in  all  weathers,  particularly  at  small  elevations  of  2  or  3  degrees;  which 
results  from  the  different  quantity  of  aqueous  vapours  rising  above  the  earth. 

And  this  same  thing  is  the  cause  why  at  certain  times  a  distant  object  'svill 
be  hidden  behind  another  less  distant  one,  and  yet  may  at  another  time  be  able 
to  be  seen,  although  the  spot  from  which  it  is  viewed  is  always  the  same.  But 
the  reason  for  this  effect  'will  be  still  more  e’^ddent  from  what  we  are  going  to 
remark  touching  the  curvature  of  rays.  It  appears  from  the  things  explained 
above  that  the  progression  or  propagation  of  a  small  part  of  a  wave  of  light  is 
properly  what  one  calls  a  ray.  Now  these  rays,  instead  of  being  straight  as  they 
are  in  homogeneous  media,  ought  to  be  curved  in  an  atmosphere  of  unequal 
penetrability.  For  they  necessarily  follow’  from  the  object  to  the  eye  the  line 
which  intersects  at  right  angles  all  the  progressions  of  the  waves,  as  in  the  first 
figure  [p.  576]  the  line  AEB  does,  as  wll  be  showm  hereafter;  and  it  is  this  line 
w^hich  determines  what  interposed  bodies  would  or  w’ould  not  hinder  us  from 
seeing  the  object.  For  although  the  point  of  the  steeple  A  appears  raised  to  D, 
it  w’ould  yet  not  appear  to  the  eye  B  if  the  tow’er  H  was  betw’een  the  tw’o, 
because  it  crosses  the  curve  AEB.  But  the  tow’er  E,  w’hich  is  beneath  this 
curve,  does  not  hinder  the  point  A  from  being  seen.  Now  according  as  the  air 
near  the  earth  exceeds  in  density  that  w’hich  is  higher,  the  curvature  of  the 
ray  AEB  becomes  greater :  so  that  at  certain  times  it  passes  above  the  summit 
E,  W’hich  allow’s  the  point  A  to  be  perceived  by  the  eye  at  B ;  and  at  other  times 
it  is  intercepted  by  the  same  tow’er  E  w'hich  hides  A  from  this  same  eye. 


578  Treatise  on  Light 

But  to  demonstrate  this  curva¬ 
ture  of  the  rays  conformably  to 
all  our  preceding  theory,  let  us 
imagine  that  AB  is  a  small  portion 
of  a  wave  of  light  coming  from  the 
side  C,  which  we  may  consider  as 
a  straight  line.  Let  us  also  suppose 
that  it  is  perpendicular  to  the  hor¬ 
izon,  the  portion  B  being  nearer 
to  the  earth  than  the  portion  A; 
and  that,  because  the  vapours  are 
less  hindering  at  A  than  at  B,  the 
particular  wave  which  comes  from 
the  point  A  spreads  through  a  cer¬ 
tain  space  AD  while  the  particular 
wave  which  starts  from  the  point 
B  spreads  through  a  shorter  space 
BE;  AD  and  BE  being  parallel  to  the  horizon.  Further,  supposing  the  straight 
lines  FG,  HI,  etc.,  to  be  drawn  from  an  infinitude  of  points  in  the  straight 
line  AB  and  to  terminate  on  the  line  DE  (which  is  straight  or  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  such),  let  the  different  penetrabilities  at  the  different  heights  in 
the  air  between  A  and  B  be  represented  by  all  these  lines;  so  that  the  par¬ 
ticular  wave,  originating  from  the  point  F,  ^vill  spread  across  the  space  FG, 
and  that  from  the  point  H  across  the  space  HI,  while  that  from  the  point  A 
spreads  across  the  space  AD. 

Now  if  about  the  centres  A,  B,  one  describes  the  circles  DK,  EL,  which 
represent  the  spreading  of  the  waves  which  originate  from  these  two  points, 
and  if  one  draws  the  straight  line  KL  which  touches  these  two  circles,  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  this  same  line  will  be  the  common  tangent  to  all  the  other  circles 
drawn  about  the  centres F,  H,  etc.;  and  that  all  the  points  of  contact  will  fall 
within  that  part  of  this  line  which  is  comprised  between  the  perpendiculars 
AK,  BL.  Then  it  will  be  the  line  KL  which  will  terminate  the  movement  of  the 
particular  waves  originating  from  the  points  of  the  wave  AB ;  and  this  move¬ 
ment  vill  be  stronger  between  the  points  KL,  than  anywhere  else  at  the  same 
instant,  since  an  infinitude  of  circumferences  concur  to  form  this  straight  line; 
and  consequently  KL  will  be  the  propagation  of  the  portion  of  wave  AB,  as 
has  been  said  in  explaining  reflexion  and  ordinary  refraction.  Now  it  appears 
that  AK  and  BL  dip  down  toward  the  side  where  the  air  is  less  easy  to  pene¬ 
trate;  for  AK  being  longer  than  BL,  and  parallel  to  it,  it  follows  that  the  lines 
AB  and  KL,  being  prolonged,  would  meet  at  the  side  L.  But  the  angle  K  is  a 
right  angle:  hence  KAB  is  necessarily  acute,  and  consequently  less  than  DAB. 
If  one  investigates  in  the  same  way  the  progression  of  the  portion  of  the  wave 
KL,  one  mil  find  that  after  a  further  time  it  has  arrived  at  MN  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  that  the  perpendiculars  KM,  LN  dip  down  even  more  than  do  AK,  BL. 
And  this  suffices  to  show  that  the  ray  mil  continue  along  the  curved  line  which 
intersects  all  the  waves  at  right  angles,  as  has  been  said. 


Chapter  V 


579 


CHAPTER  FIVE 

On  the  Strange  Refractions  of  Iceland  Crystal 

1.  There  is  brought  from  Iceland,  which  is  an  island  in  the  North  Sea,  in  the 
latitude  of  66  degrees,  a  kind  of  crystal  or  transparent  stone,  very  remarkable 
for  its  figure  and  other  qualities,  but  above  all  for  its  strange  refractions.  The 
causes  of  this  have  seemed  to  me  to  be  worthy  of  being  carefully  investigated, 
the  more  so  because  amongst  transparent  bodies  this  one  alone  does  not  fol¬ 
low  the  ordinary  rules  mth  respect  to  rays  of  light.  I  have  even  been  under 
some  necessity  to  make  this  research,  because  the  refractions  of  this  crystal 
seemed  to  overturn  our  preceding  explanation  of  regular  refraction;  which  ex¬ 
planation,  on  the  contrary,  they  strongly  confirm,  as  vill  be  seen  after  they 
have  been  brought  under  the  same  principle.  In  Iceland  are  found  great  lumps 
of  this  crystal,  some  of  which  I  have  seen  of  4  or  5  pounds.  But  it  occurs  also  in 
other  countries,  for  I  have  had  some  of  the  same  sort  which  had  been  found  in 
France  near  the  town  of  Troyes  in  Champagne,  and  some  others  which  came 
from  the  island  of  Corsica,  though  both  were  less  clear  and  only  in  little  bits, 
scarcely  capable  of  letting  any  effect  of  refraction  be  observed. 

2.  The  first  knowledge  which  the  public  has  had  about  it  is  due  to  Mr.  Eras¬ 
mus  Bartholinus,  who  has  given  a  description  of  Iceland  crystal  and  of  its 
chief  phenomena.  But  here  I  shall  not  desist  from  giving  my  ovm,  both  for  the 
instruction  of  those  who  may  not  have  seen  his  book,  and  because  as  respects 
some  of  these  phenomena  there  is  a  shght  difference  between  his  observations 
and  those  which  I  have  made :  for  I  have  applied  myself  mth  great  exactitude 
to  examine  these  properties  of  refraction,  in  order  to  be  quite  sure  before  under¬ 
taking  to  explain  the  causes  of  them. 

3.  As  regards  the  hardness  of  this  stone  and  the  property  which  it  has  of 
being  easily  split,  it  must  be  considered  rather  as  a  species  of  talc  than  of 
crystal.  For  an  iron  spike  effects  an  entrance  into  it  as  easily  as  into  any  other 
talc  or  alabaster,  to  which  it  is  equal  in  gravity. 

4.  The  pieces  of  it  which  are  found  have 
the  figure  of  an  oblique  parallelepiped; 
each  of  the  six  faces  being  a  parallelogram; 
and  it  admits  of  being  split  in  three  direc¬ 
tions  parallel  to  two  of  these  opposed 
faces.  Even  in  such  -svise,  if  you  vill,  that 
all  the  six  faces  are  equal  and  similar 
rhombuses.  The  figTire  here  added  repre¬ 
sents  a  piece  of  this  crystal.  The  obtuse 
angles  of  all  the  parallelograms,  as  C,  D, 
here,  are  angles  of  101  degrees  52  minutes, 
and  consequently  the  acute  angles,  such  as 
A  and  B,  are  of  78  degrees  8  minutes. 

5.  Of  the  solid  angles,  there  are  two  opposite  to  one  another,  such  as  C  and 
E,  which  are  each  composed  of  three  equal  obtuse  plane  angles.  The  other  six 
are  composed  of  two  acute  angles  and  one  obtuse.  All  that  I  have  just  said  has 


580  Treatise  on  Light 

been  likewse  remarked  by  Mr.  Bartholinus  in  the  aforesaid  treatise;  if  we 
differ  it  is  only  slightly  about  the  values  of  the  angles.  He  recounts,  moreover, 
some  other  properties  of  this  crystal;  to  wit,  that  when  rubbed  against  cloth 
it  attracts  straws  and  other  light  things  as  do  amber,  diamond,  glass,  and 
Spanish  wax.  Let  a  piece  be  covered  with  water  for  a  day  or  more,  the  surface 
loses  its  natural  polish.  When  aquafortis  is  poured  on  it,  it  produces  ebullition, 
especially,  as  I  have  found,  if  the  crystal  has  been  pulverized.  I  have  also  found 
by  experiment  that  it  may  be  heated  to  redness  in  the  fire  without  being  in 
anywise  altered  or  rendered  less  transparent;  but  a  very  violent  fire  calcines 
it,  nevertheless.  Its  transparency  is  scarcely  less  than  that  of  water  or  of  rock 
crystal,  and  devoid  of  colour.  But  rays  of  light  pass  through  it  in  another 
fashion  and  produce  those  marvellous  refractions  the  causes  of  which  I  am 
now  going  to  try  to  explain;  reserving  for  the  end  of  this  treatise  the  statement 
of  my  conjectures  touching  the  formation  and  extraordinary  configuration  of 
this  crystal. 

6.  In  all  other  transparent  bodies  that  we  know  there  is  but  one  sole  and 
simple  refraction;  but  in  this  substance  there  are  two  different  ones.  The  effect 
is  that  objects  seen  through  it,  especially  such  as  are  placed  right  against  it, 
appear  double;  and  that  a  ray  of  sunlight,  falling  on  one  of  its  surfaces,  parts 
itself  into  two  rays  and  traverses  the  crystal  thus. 

7.  It  is  again  a  general  law  in  all  other  transparent  bodies  that  the  ray  which 
falls  perpendicularly  on  their  surface  passes  straight  on  without  suffering  re¬ 
fraction,  and  that  an  oblique  ray  is  always  refracted.  But  in  this  crystal  the 
perpendicular  ray  suffers  refraction,  and  there  are  oblique  rays  which  pass 
through  it  quite  straight. 


8.  But  in  order  to  explain  these  phenomena  more  particularly,  let  there  be, 
in  the  first  place,  a  piece  ABFE  of  the  same  crystal,  and  let  the  obtuse  angle 
ACB,  one  of  the  three  which  constitute  the  equilateral  solid  angle  C,  be  di- 


Chapter  V  581 

vided  into  two  equal  parts  by  the  straight  line  CG.  and  let  it  be  conceived  that 
the  crystal  is  intersected  by  a  plane  which  passes  through  this  line  and  through 
the  side  CF,  which  plane  wiW  necessarily  be  perpendicular  to  the  surface  AB ; 
and  its  section  in  the  crystal  will  form  a  parallelogram  GCFH.  We  will  call 
this  section  the  principal  section  of  the  crystal. 

9.  Now,  if  one  covers  the  surface  AB,  leaving  there  only  a  small  aperture  at 
the  point  K,  situated  in  the  straight  line  CG,  and  if  one  exposes  it  to  the  sun, 
so  that  his  rays  face  it  perpendicularly  above,  then  the  ray  IK  will  divide  itself 
at  the  point  K  into  two,  one  of  which  will  continue  to  go  on  straight  by  KL,  and 
the  other  will  separate  itself  along  the  straight  line  KM,  which  is  in  the  plane 
GCFH,  and  which  makes  with  KL  an  angle  of  about  6  degrees  40  minutes, 
tending  from  the  side  of  the  solid  angle  C;  and  on  emerging  from  the  other  side 
of  the  crystal  it  will  turn  again  parallel  to  IK,  along  MZ.  And  as,  in  this  ex¬ 
traordinary  refraction,  the  point  M  is  seen  by  the  refracted  ray  MKI,  which  I 
consider  as  going  to  the  eye  at  I,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the  point  L,  by 
virtue  of  the  same  refraction,  mil  be  seen  by  the  refracted  ray  LRI,  so  that 
LR  will  be  parallel  to  MK  if  the  distance  from  the  eye  KI  is  supposed  very 
great.  The  point  L  appears  then  as  being  in  the  straight  line  IRS;  but  the  same 
point  appears  also,  by  ordinary  refraction,  to  be  in  the  straight  line  IK,  hence, 
it  is  necessarily  judged  to  be  double.  And,  similarly,  if  L  be  a  small  hole  in  a 
sheet  of  paper  or  other  substance  which  is  laid  against  the  crystal,  it  will  appear 
when  turned  towards  daylight  as  if  there  were  two  holes,  which  will  seem  the 
wider  apart  from  one  another  the  greater  the  thickness  of  the  crystal. 

10.  Again,  if  one  turns  the  crystal  in  such  wise  that  an  incident  ray  NO,  of 
sunlight,  which  I  suppose  to  be  in  the  plane  continued  from  GCFH,  makes 
with  GC  an  angle  of  73  degrees  and  20  minutes,  and  is  consequently  nearly 
parallel  to  the  edge  CF,  which  makes  mth  FH  an  angle  of  70  degrees  57  min¬ 
utes,  according  to  the  calculation  which  I  shall  put  at  the  end,  it  will  divide 
itself  at  the  point  O  into  two  rays,  one  of  which  will  continue  along  OP  in  a 
straight  line  with  NO,  and  will  similarly  pass  out  of  the  other  side  of  the  crystal 
without  any  refraction;  but  the  other  will  be  refracted  and  will  go  along  OQ. 
And  it  must  be  noted  that  it  is  special  to  the  plane  through  GCF  and  to  those 
which  are  parallel  to  it,  that  all  incident  rays  which  are  in  one  of  these  planes 
continue  to  be  in  it  after  they  have  entered  the  crystal  and  have  become  dou¬ 
ble;  for  it  is  quite  otherwise  for  rays  in  all  other  planes  which  intersect  the 
crystal,  as  we  shall  see  afterwards. 

11.  I  recognized  at  first  by  these  experiments  and  by  some  others  that  of 
the  two  refractions  which  the  ray  suffers  in  this  crystal,  there  is  one  which 
follows  the  ordinary  rules;  and  it  is  this  to  which  the  rays  KL  and  OQ  belong. 
This  is  why  I  have  distinguished  this  ordinary  refraction  from  the  other;  and 
having  measured  it  by  exact  observation,  I  found  that  its  proportion,  con¬ 
sidered  as  to  the  sines  of  the  angles  which  the  incident  and  refracted  rays  make 
with  the  perpendicular,  was  very  precisely  that  of  5  to  3,  as  was  found  also  by 
Mr.  Bartholinus,  and  consequently  much  greater  than  that  of  rock  crystal,  or 
of  glass,  which  is  nearly  3  to  2. 

12.  The  mode  of  making  these  observations  exactly  is  as  follows.  Upon  a 
leaf  of  paper  fixed  on  a  thoroughly  flat  table  there  is  traced  a  black  line  AB, 
and  two  others,  CED  and  KML,  which  cut  it  at  right  angles  and  are  more  or 
less  distant  from  one  another  according  as  it  is  desired  to  examine  a  ray  that  is 


582 


Treatise  on  Light 


more  or  less  oblique.  Then  place  the  crystal  upon  the  intersection  E  so  that 
the  line  AB  concurs  mth  that  which  bisects  the  obtuse  angle  of  the  lower  sur¬ 
face,  or  ^\ith  some  line  parallel  to  it.  Then  by  placing  the  eye  directly  above  the 
line  AB  it  will  appear  single  only;  and  one  will  see  that  the  portion  viewed 
through  the  crystal  and  the  portions  which  appear  outside  it,  meet  together 
in  a  straight  line :  but  the  line  CD  vill  appear  double,  and  one  can  distinguish 
the  image  which  is  due  to  regular  refraction  by  the  circumstance  that  when 
one  views  it  vith  both  eyes  it  seems  raised  up  more  than  the  other,  or  again  by 
the  circumstance  that,  when  the  crystal  is  turned  around  on  the  paper,  this 
image  remains  stationary,  whereas  the  other  image  shifts  and  moves  entirely 
around.  Afterwards  let  the  eye  be  placed  at  I  (remaining  always  in  the  plane 
perpendicular  through  AB)  so  that  it  views  the  image  which  is  formed  by 
regular  refraction  of  the  line  CD  making  a  straight  line  with  the  remainder 
of  that  line  which  is  outside  the  crystal.  And  then,  marking  on  the  surface  of 
the  crystal  the  point  H  where  the  intersection  E  appears,  this  point  will  be 
directly  above  E.  Then  draw  back  the  eye  towards  0,  keeping  always  in  the 
plane  perpendicular  through  AB,  so  that  the  image  of  the  line  CD,  which  is 
formed  by  ordinary  refraction,  may  appear  in  a  straight  line  vith  the  line  KL 
viewed  without  refraction ;  and  then  mark  on  the  crystal  the  poin^  N  where  the 
point  of  intersection  E  appears. 

13.  Then  one  wall  know  the  length  and  position  of  the  lines  NH,  EM,  and  of 
HE,  which  is  the  thickness  of  the  crystal:  which  lines  being  traced  separately 
upon  a  plan,  and  then  joining  NE  and  NM  which  cuts  HE  at  P,  the  proportion 
of  the  refraction  ^vill  be  that  of  EN  to  NP,  because  these  lines  are  to  one  an¬ 
other  as  the  sines  of  the  angles  NPH,  NEP,  which  are  equal  to  those  which  the 
incident  ray  ON  and  its  refraction  NE  make  with  the  perpendicular  to  the 
surface.  This  proportion,  as  I  have  said,  is  sufficiently  precisely  as  5  to  3,  and 
is  always  the  same  for  all  inclinations  of  the  incident  ray. 

14.  The  same  mode  of  observation  has  also  served  me  for  examining  the 
extraordinary  or  irregular  refraction  of  this  crystal.  For,  the  point  H  having 
been  found  and  marked,  as  aforesaid,  directly  above  the  point  E,  I  observed 
the  appearance  of  the  line  CD,  which  is  made  by  the  extraordinary  refraction; 


Chapter  V  583 

and  having  placed  the  eye  at  Q,  so  that  this  appearance  made  a  straight  line 
with  the  line  KL  viewed  without  refraction,  I  ascertained  the  triangles  REH, 
RES,  and  consequently  the  angles  RSH,  RES,  which  the  incident  and  the 
refracted  ray  make  with  the  perpendicular. 

15.  But  I  found  in  this  refraction  that  the  ratio  of  FR  to  RS  was  not  con¬ 
stant,  like  the  ordinary  refraction,  but  that  it  varied  with  the  varying  obliquity 

of  the  incident  ray. 

16.  I  found  also  that  when 
QRE  made  a  straight  line,  that 
is,  when  the  incident  ray  en¬ 
tered  the  crystal  without  being 
refracted  (as  I  ascertained  by 
the  circumstance  that  then  the 
point  E  viewed  by  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  refraction  appeared 
in  the  line  CD,  as  seen  without 
refraction)  I  found,  I  say,  then 
that  the  angle  QRG  was  73  de¬ 
grees  20  minutes,  as  has  been 
already  remarked ;  and  so  it  is 
not  the  ray  parallel  to  the  edge 
of  the  crystal  which  crosses  it 
in  a  straight  line  Avithout  being 
refracted,  as  Mr.  Bartholinus 
believed,  since  that  inclination  is  only  70  degrees  57  minutes,  as  was  stated 
above.  And  this  is  to  be  noted,  in  order  that  no  one  may  search  in  vain  for 
the  cause  of  the  singular  property  of  this  ray  in  its  parallelism  to  the  edges 
mentioned. 

17.  Finally,  continuing  my  observations  to  discover  the  nature  of  this  refrac¬ 
tion,  I  learned  that  it  obeyed  the  following  remarkable  rule.  Let  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  GCFH,  made  by  the  principal  section  of  the  crystal,  as  previously  de¬ 
termined,  be  traced  separately.  I  found  then  that  always,  when  the  inclinations 
of  two  rays  which  come  from  opposite  sides,  as  VK,  SK  here,  are  equal,  their 
refractions  KX  and  KT  meet  the  bottom  line  HF  in  such  \vise  that  points  X 
and  T  are  equally  distant  from  the  point  M,  where  the  refraction  of  the  per¬ 
pendicular  ray  IK  falls;  and  this  occurs  also  for  refractions  in  other  sections  of 
this  crystal.  But  before  speaking  of  those,  which  have  also  other  particular 
properties,  we  mil  investigate  the  causes  of  the  phenomena  which  I  have  al¬ 
ready  reported. 

It  was  after  having  explained  the  refraction  of  ordinary  transparent  bodies 
by  means  of  the  spherical  emanations  of  light,  as  above,  that  I  resumed  my 
examination  of  the  nature  of  this  crystal,  wherein  I  had  previously  been  unable 
to  discover  anything. 

18.  As  there  were  two  different  refractions,  I  conceived  that  there  were  also 
two  different  emanations  of  waves  of  light,  and  that  one  could  occur  in  the 
ethereal  matter  extending  through  the  body  of  the  crystal.  Which  matter, 
being  present  in  much  larger  quantity  than  is  that  of  the  particles  which  com¬ 
pose  it,  was  alone  capable  of  causing  transparency,  according  to  what  has  been 
explained  heretofore.  I  attributed  to  this  emanation  of  waves  the  regular  re- 


584 


Treatise  ox  Light 

fraction  wMch  is  observed  in  this  stone,  by  supposing  these  waves  to  be  ordi¬ 
narily  of  spherical  form,  and  having  a  slower  progression  udthin  the  crystal 
than  they  have  outside  it;  whence  proceeds  refraction  as  I  have  demonstrated. 

19.  As  to  the  other  emanation  which  should  produce  the  irregular  refraction, 
I  wished  to  try  what  elliptical  waves,  or  rather  spheroidal  waves,  would  do; 
and  these  I  supposed  would  spread  indifferently  both  in  the  ethereal  matter 
diffused  throughout  the  crystal  and  in  the  particles  of  which  it  is  composed, 
according  to  the  last  mode  in  which  I  have  explained  transparency.  It  seemed 
to  me  that  the  disposition  or  regular  arrangement  of  these  particles  could  con¬ 
tribute  to  form  spheroidal  waves  (nothing  more  being  required  for  this  than 
that  the  successive  movement  of  light  should  spread  a  little  more  quickly  in 
one  direction  than  in  the  other)  and  I  scarcely  doubted  that  there  were  in  this 
crystal  such  an  arrangement  of  equal  and  similar  particles,  because  of  its  figure 
and  of  its  angles  with  their  determinate  and  invariable  measure.  Touching 
which  particles,  and  their  form  and  disposition,  I  shall,  at  the  end  of  this 
treatise,  propound  my  conjectures  and  some  experiments  which  confirm  them. 

20.  The  double  emission  of  waves  of  light,  which  I  had  imagined,  became 
more  probable  to  me  after  I  had  observed  a  certain  phenomenon  in  the  ordi¬ 
nary  [rock]  crystal,  which  occurs  in  hexagonal  form,  and  which,  because  of 
this  regularity,  seems  also  to  be  composed  of  particles,  of  definite  figure,  and 
ranged  in  order.  This  was,  that  this  crystal,  as  well  as  that  from  Iceland,  has  a 
double  refraction,  though  less  evident.  For  having  had  cut  from  it  some  well- 
polished  prisms  of  different  sections,  I  remarked  in  all,  in  vievdng  through  them 
the  flame  of  a  candle  or  the  lead  of  window  panes,  that  everything  appeared 
double,  though  udth  images  not  very  distant  from  one  another.  Whence  I 
understood  the  reason  why  this  substance,  though  so  transparent,  is  useless 
for  telescopes,  when  they  have  ever  so  little  length. 

21.  Now  this  double  refraction,  according  to  my  theory  hereinbefore  estab¬ 
lished,  seemed  to  demand  a  double  emission  of  waves  of  light,  both  of  them 
spherical  (for  both  the  refractions  are  regular)  and  those  of  one  series  a  little 
slower  only  than  the  others.  For  thus  the  phenomenon  is  quite  naturally  ex¬ 
plained,  by  postulating  substances  which  serve  as  vehicle  for  these  waves,  as 
I  have  done  in  the  case  of  Iceland  crystal.  I  had  then  less  trouble  after  that  in 
admitting  two  emissions  of  waves  in  one  and  the  same  body.  And  since  it 
might  have  been  objected  that  in  composing  these  two  kinds  of  crystal  of 
equal  particles  of  a  certain  figure,  regularly  piled,  the  interstices  which  these 
particles  leave  and  which  contain  the  ethereal  matter  would  scarcely  suffice 
to  transmit  the  waves  of  light  which  I  have  localized  there,  I  removed  this 
difficulty  by  regarding  these  particles  as  being  of  a  very  rare  texture,  or  rather 
as  composed  of  other  much  smaller  particles,  between  which  the  ethereal  mat¬ 
ter  passes  quite  freely.  This,  moreover,  necessarily  follows  from  that  which 
has  been  already  demonstrated  touching  the  small  quantity  of  matter  of  which 
the  bodies  are  built  up. 

22.  Supposing,  then,  these  spheroidal  waves  besides  the  spherical  ones,  I 
began  to  examine  whether  they  could  serve  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the 
irregular  refraction,  and  how  by  these  same  phenomena  I  could  determine  the 
figure  and  position  of  the  spheroids :  as  to  which  I  obtained  at  last  the  desired 
success,  by  proceeding  as  follows. 

23.  I  considered  first  the  effect  of  waves  so  formed,  as  respects  the  ray  Avhich 


Chapter  V  585 

falls  perpendicularly  on  the  flat  surface  of  a  transparent  body  in  which  they 
should  spread  in  this  manner.  I  took  AB  for  the  exposed  region  of  the  surface. 
And,  since  a  ray  perpendicular  to  a  plane,  and  coming  from  a  very  distant 

source  of  light,  is  nothing  else,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  precedent  theory,  than 
the  incidence  of  a  portion  of  the  wave 
parallel  to  that  plane,  I  supposed  the 
straight  line  RC,  parallel  and  equal  to 
AB,  to  be  a  portion  of  a  wave  of  light, 
in  which  an  infinitude  of  points  such 
as  RH/iC  come  to  meet  the  surface  AB 
at  the  points  AKA’B.  Then  instead  of 
the  hemispherical  partial  waves  which 
in  a  body  of  ordinary  refraction  would 
spread  from  each  of  these  last  points, 
as  we  have  above  explained  in  treating 
of  refraction,  these  must  here  be  hemi-spheroids.  The  axes  (or  rather  the  ma¬ 
jor  diameters)  of  these  I  supposed  to  be  oblique  to  the  plane  AB,  as  is  AV 
the  semi-axis  or  semi-major  diameter  of  the  spheroid  SVT,  which  represents 
the  partial  wave  coming  from  the  point  A,  after  the  wave  RC  has  reached 
AB.  I  say  axis  or  major  diameter,  because  the  same  ellipse  SVT  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  section  of  a  spheroid  of  which  the  axis  is  AZ  perpendicular  to 
AV.  But,  for  the  present,  vdthout  yet  deciding  one  or  other,  we  vill  consider 
these  spheroids  only  in  those  sections  of  them  which  make  ellipses  in  the  plane 
of  this  figure.  Now  taking  a  certain  space  of  time  during  which  the  wave  SVT 
has  spread  from  A,  it  would  needs  be  that  from  all  the  other  points  KArB  there 
should  proceed,  in  the  same  time,  waves  similar  to  SVT  and  similarly  situated. 
And  the  common  tangent  NQ  of  all  these  semi -ellipses  would  be  the  propagation 
of  the  wave  RC  which  fell  on  AB,  and  would  be  the  place  where  this  movement 
occurs  in  much  greater  amount  than  anywhere  else,  being  made  up  of  arcs  of 
an  infinity  of  ellipses,  the  centres  of  which  are  along  the  line  AB. 

24.  Now  it  appeared  that  this  common  tangent  NQ  was  parallel  to  AB, 
and  of  the  same  length,  but  that  it  was  not  directly  opposite  to  it,  since  it  was 
comprised  between  the  lines  AN,  BQ,  which  are  diameters  of  ellipses  having 
A  and  B  for  centres,  conjugate  with  respect  to  diameters  which  are  not  in  the 
straight  line  AB.  And  in  this  way  I  comprehended,  a  matter  which  had  seemed 
to  me  very  difficult,  how  a  ray  perpendicular  to  a  surface  could  suffer  refrac¬ 
tion  on  entering  a  transparent  body;  seeing  that  the  w'ave  RC,  having  come 
to  the  aperture  AB,  went  on  for\vard  thence,  spreading  betAveen  the  parallel 
lines  AN,  BQ,  yet  itself  remaining  ahvays  parallel  to  AB,  so  that  here  the  light 
does  not  spread  along  lines  perpendicular  to  its  weaves,  as  in  ordinary  refrac¬ 
tion,  but  along  lines  cutting  the  weaves  obliquely. 

25.  Inquiring  subsequently  what  might  be  the  position  and  form  of  these 
spheroids  in  the  crystal,  I  considered  that  all  the  six  faces  produced  precisely 
the  same  refractions.  Taking,  then,  the  parallelepiped  AFB,  of  which  the  ob¬ 
tuse  solid  angle  C  is  contained  between  the  three  equal  plane  angles,  and  im¬ 
agining  in  it  the  three  principal  sections,  one  of  which  is  perpendicular  to  the 
face  DC  and  passes  through  the  edge  CF,  another  perpendicular  to  the  face 
BF  passing  through  the  edge  CA,  and  the  third  perpendicular  to  the  face  AF 


586  Treatise  on  Light 

passing  through  the  edge  BC;  I  knew  that  the  refractions  of  the  incident  rays 
belonging  to  these  three  planes  were  all  similar.  But  there  could  be  no  position 
of  the  spheroid  which  would  have  the  same 
relation  to  these  three  sections  except  that 
in  which  the  axis  was  also  the  axis  of  the 
solid  angle  C.  Consequently  I  saw  that  the 
axis  of  this  angle,  that  is  to  say,  the  straight 
line  which  traversed  the  crystal  from  the 
point  C  with  equal  inclination  to  the  edges 
CF,  CA,  CB  was  the  line  which  determined 
the  position  of  the  axis  of  all  the  spheroidal 
waves  which  one  imagined  to  originate  from 
some  point,  taken  within  or  on  the  surface  of 
the  crystal,  since  all  these  spheroids  ought  to  be  alike,  and  have  their  axes 
parallel  to  one  another. 

26.  Considering  after  this  the  plane  of  one  of  these  three  sections,  namely, 
that  through  GCF,  the  angle  of  which  is  109  degrees  3  minutes,  since  the  angle 
F  was  shown  above  to  be  70  degrees  57  minutes;  and,  imagining  a  spheroidal 
wave  about  the  centre  C,  I  knew,  because  I  have  just  explained  it,  that  its 
axis  must  be  in  the  same  plane,  the  half  of  which  axis  I  have  marked  CS  in  the 
next  figure;  and  seeking  by  calculation  (which  ivill  be  given  with  others  at  the 
end  of  this  discourse)  the  value  of  the  angle  CCS,  I  found  it  45  degrees  20 
minutes. 

27.  To  know  from  this  the  form  of  this  spheroid,  that  is  to  say,  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  semi-diameters  CS,  CP,  of  its  elliptical  section,  which  are  per¬ 
pendicular  to  one  another,  I  considered  that  the  point  M  where  the  ellipse  is 
touched  by  the  straight  line  FH,  parallel  to  CG,  ought  to  be  so  situated  that 
CM  makes  with  the  perpendicular  CL  an  angle  of  6  degrees  40  minutes;  since, 
this  being  so,  this  ellipse  satisfies  what  has  been  said  about  the  refraction  of  the 
ray  perpendicular  to  the  surface  CG,  which  is  inclined  to  the  perpendicular  CL 


by  the  same  angle.  This,  then,  being  thus  disposed,  and  taking  CM  at  100,000 
parts,  I  found  by  the  calculation  which  vill  be  given  at  the  end,  the  semi-major 
diameter  CP  to  be  105,032,  and  the  semi-axis  CS  to  be  93,410,  the  ratio  of 
which  numbers  is  very  nearly  9  to  8;  so  that  the  spheroid  was  of  the  kind  which 
resembles  a  compressed  sphere,  being  generated  by  the  revolution  of  an  ellipse 


Chapter  V  587 

about  its  smaller  diameter.  I  found  also  the  value  of  CG  the  semi-diameter 
parallel  to  the  tangent  ML  to  be  98,779. 

28.  Now  passing  to  the  investigation  of  the  refractions  which  obliquely  inci¬ 
dent  rays  must  undergo,  according  to  our  hypothesis  of  spheroidal  waves,  I 
saw  that  these  refractions  depended  on  the  ratio  between  the  velocity  of  move¬ 
ment  of  the  light  outside  the  crystal  in  the  ether,  and  that  mthin  the  crystal. 
For  supposing,  for  example,  this  proportion  to  be  such  that  while  the  light  in 
the  crystal  forms  the  spheroid  GSP,  as  I  have  just  said,  it  forms  outside  a 
sphere  the  semi-diameter  of  which  is  equal  to  the  line  N  which  vail  be  deter¬ 
mined  hereafter,  the  follovang  is  the  way  of  finding  the  refraction  of  the  inci¬ 
dent  rays.  Let  there  be  such  a  ray  RC  falling  upon  the  surface  CK.  Make  CO 
perpendicular  to  RC,  and  across  the  angle  KCO  adjust  OK,  equal  to  N  and 
perpendicular  to  CO;  then  draw  KI,  which  touches  the  ellipse  GSP,  and  from 
the  point  of  contact  I  join  IC,  which  vill  be  the  required  refraction  of  the  ray 
RC.  The  demonstration  of  this  is,  it  will  be  seen,  entirely  similar  to  that  of 
which  we  made  use  in  explaining  ordinary  refraction.  For  the  refraction  of  the 
ray  RC  is  nothing  else  than  the  progression  of  the  portion  C  of  the  wave  CO, 
continued  in  the  crystal.  Now  the  portions  H  of  this  wave,  during  the  time 
that  0  came  to  K,  vail  have  arrived  at  the  surface  CK  along  the  straight  lines 
Kx,  and  vill,  moreover,  have  produced  in  the  crystal  around  the  centres  x  some 
hemi-spheroidal  partial  waves  similar  to  the  hemi-spheroidal  GSPgf,  and  simi¬ 
larly  disposed,  and  of  which  the  major  and  minor  diameters  will  bear  the  same 


proportions  to  the  lines  xv  (the  continuations  of  the  lines  Ht  up  to  KB  parallel 
to  CO)  that  the  diameters  of  the  spheroid  GSPgf  bear  to  the  line  CB,  or  N.  And 
it  is  quite  easy  to  see  that  the  common  tangent  of  all  these  spheroids,  which 
are  here  represented  by  ellipses,  will  be  the  straight  line  IK,  which,  consequent¬ 
ly,  vill  be  the  propagation  of  the  wave  CO ;  and  the  point  I  vail  be  that  of  the 
point  C,  conformably  vith  that  which  has  been  demonstrated  in  ordinary 
refraction. 


588  Treatise  on  Light 

Now  as  to  finding  the  point  of  contact  I,  it  is  known  that  one  must  find  CD 
a  third  proportional  to  the  lines  CK,  CG,  and  draw  DI  parallel  to  CM,  pre¬ 
viously  determined,  which  is  the  conjugate  diameter  to  CG;  for  then,  by  draw¬ 
ing  KI  it  touches  the  ellipse  at  I. 

29.  Now,  as  we  have  found  Cl  the  refraction  of  the  ray  RC,  similarly,  one 
will  find  a  the  refraction  of  the  ray  rC,  which  comes  from  the  opposite  side, 
by  making  Co  perpendicular  to  rC  and  following  out  the  rest  of  the  construc¬ 
tion  as  before.  Whence  one  sees  that  if  the  ray  rC  is  inclined  equally  with  RC, 
the  line  Cd  will  necessarily  be  equal  to  CD,  because  Ck  is  equal  to  CK,  and  Cg 
to  CG.  And,  in  consequence.  If  will  be  cut  at  E  into  equal  parts  by  the  line 
CM,  to  which  DI  and  di  are  parallel.  And  because  CM  is  the  conjugate  diame¬ 
ter  to  CG,  it  follows  that  il  will  be  parallel  to  gG.  Therefore,  if  one  prolongs 
the  refracted  rays  Cl,  Cf,  until  they  meet  the  tangent  ML  at  T  and  t,  the  dis¬ 
tances  MT,  M^,  wall  also  be  equal.  And  so,  by  our  hypothesis,  we  explain 
perfectly  the  phenomenon  mentioned  above;  to  wit,  that  when  there  are  two 
rays  equally  inclined,  but  coming  from  opposite  sides,  as  here  the  rays  RC,  rc, 
their  refractions  diverge  equally  from  the  line  followed  by  the  refraction  of  the 
ray  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  by  considering  these  divergences  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  crystal. 

30.  To  find  the  length  of  the  line  N,  in  proportion  to  CP,  CS,  CG,  it  must  be 
determined  by  observations  of  the  irregular  refraction  which  occurs  in  this 
section  of  the  crystal;  and  I  find  thus  that  the  ratio  of  N  to  GC  is  just  a  little 
less  than  8  to  5.  And  having  regard  to  some  other  observations  and  phenomena 
of  which  I  shall  speak  afterwards,  I  put  N  at  156,962  parts,  of  which  the  semi¬ 
diameter  CG  is  found  to  contain  98,779,  making  this  ratio  8  to  5^29-  Now  this 
proportion,  which  there  is  between  the  line  N  and  CG,  may  be  called  the  Pro¬ 
portion  of  the  Refraction;  similarly  as  in  glass  that  of  3  to  2,  as  will  be  manifest 
when  I  shall  have  explained  a  short  process  in  the  preceding  way  to  find  the 
irregular  refractions. 

31.  Supposing  then,  in  the  next  figure,  as  previously,  the  surface  of  the  crys¬ 
tal  gG,  the  ellipse  GPg^,  and  the  line  N ;  and  CM  the  refraction  of  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  ray  FC,  from  which  it  diverges  by  6  degrees  40  minutes.  Now  let  there 
be  some  other  ray  RC,  the  refraction  of  which  must  be  found. 

About  the  centre  C,  with  semi-diameter  CG,  let  the  circumference  g'RG  be 
described,  cutting  the  ray  RC  at  R;  and  let  RV  be  the  perpendicular  on  CG. 
Then  as  the  line  N  is  to  CG  let  CV  be  to  CD,  and  let  DI  be  drawn  parallel  to 
CM,  cutting  the  ellipse  i/MG  at  I;  then  joining  Cl,  this  will  be  the  required 
refraction  of  the  ray  RC.  Which  is  demonstrated  thus. 

Let  CO  be  perpendicular  to  CR,  and  across  the  angle  OCG  let  OK  be  ad¬ 
justed,  equal  to  N  and  perpendicular  to  CO,  and  let  there  be  drawn  the  straight 
line  KI,  which  if  it  is  demonstrated  to  be  a  tangent  to  the  ellipse  at  I,  it  will  be 
evident  by  the  things  heretofore  explained  that  Cl  is  the  refraction  of  the  ray 
RC.  Now,  since  the  angle  RCO  is  a  right  angle,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  right- 
angled  triangles  RCV,  KCO  are  similar.  As  then,  CK  is  to  KO,  so  also  is  RC 
to  CV.  But  KO  is  equal  to  N,  and  RC  to  CG:  then  as  CK  is  to  N  so  will  CG  be 
to  CV.  But  as  N  is  to  CG,  so,  by  construction,  is  CV  to  CD.  Then  as  CK  is  to 
CG  so  is  CG  to  CD.  And  because  DI  is  parallel  to  CM,  the  conjugate  diameter 
to  CG,  it  follows  that  KI  touches  the  ellipse  at  I;  which  remained  to  be  shown. 

32.  One  sees,  then,  that  as  there  is  in  the  refraction  of  ordinary  media  a 


Chapter  V 


589 


N 


certain  constant  proportion  between  the  sines  of  the  angles  which  the  incident 
ray  and  the  refracted  ray  make  with  the  perpendicular,  so  here  there  is  such 
a  proportion  between  CV  and  CD  or  IE;  that  is  to  say,  between  the  sine  of  the 
angle  which  the  incident  ray  makes  with  the  perpendicular  and  the  horizontal 
intercept,  in  the  ellipse,  between  the  refraction  of  this  ray  and  the  diameter 
CM.  For  the  ratio  of  CV  to  CD  is,  as  has  been  said,  the  same  as  that  of  N  to 
the  semi-diameter  CG. 

33.  I  'vxdll  add  here,  before  passing  away,  that  in  comparing  together  the 
regular  and  irregular  refraction  of  this  crystal,  there  is  this  remarkable  fact, 
that  if  ABPS  be  the  spheroid  by  which  light  spreads  in  the  crystal  in  a  certain 
space  of  time  (which  spreading,  as  has  been  said,  serves  for  the  irregular  re¬ 
fraction),  then  the  inscribed  sphere  BVST  is  the  extension  in  the  same  space 

of  time  of  the  light  which  serves  for  the  regular 
refraction. 

For  we  have  stated  before  this  that  the  line  N 
being  the  radius  of  a  spherical  wave  of  light  in  air, 
while  in  the  crystal  it  spread  through  the  spheroid 
ABPS,  the  ratio  of  N  to  CS  will  be  156,962  to 
93,410.  But  it  has  also  been  stated  that  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  regular  refraction  was  5  to  3 ;  that 
is  to  say,  that  N  being  the  radius  of  a  spherical 
wave  of  light  in  air,  its  extension  in  the  crystal 
would,  in  the  same  space  of  time,  form  a  sphere 
the  radius  of  which  would  be  to  N  as  3  to  5.  Now 
156,962  is  to  93,410  as  5  to  3  less  ]/^\.  So  that 
it  is  sufficiently  nearly,  and  may  be  exactly,  the 


590  Treatise  on  Light 

sphere  BVST,  which  the  light  describes  for  the  regular  refraction  in  the  crys¬ 
tal,  while  it  describes  the  spheroid  BPSA  for  the  irregular  refraction,  and 
while  it  describes  the  sphere  of  radius  N  in  air  outside  the  crystal. 

Although  then  there  are,  according  to  what  we  have  supposed,  two  different 
propagations  of  light  within  the  crystal,  it  appears  that  it  is  only  in  directions 
perpendicular  to  the  axis  BS  of  the  spheroid  that  one  of  these  propagations 
occurs  more  rapidly  than  the  other;  but  that  they  have  an  equal  velocity  in 

N  . 


the  other  direction,  namely,  in  that  parallel  to  the  same  axis  BS,  which  is  also 
the  axis  of  the  obtuse  angle  of  the  crystal. 

34.  The  proportion  of  the  refraction  being  what  we  have  just  seen,  I  will  now 
show  that  there  necessarily  follows  thence  that  notable  property  of  the  ray 
which  falling  obliquely  on  the  surface  of  the  crystal  enters  it  without  suffering 
refraction.  For  supposing  the  same  things  as  before,  and  that  the  ray  RC 
makes  with  the  same  surface  gG  the  angle  RCG  of  73  degrees  20  minutes,  in¬ 
clining  to  the  same  side  as  the  crystal  (of  which  ray  mention  has  been  made 
above) ;  if  one  investigates,  by  the  process  above  explained,  the  refraction  Cl, 
one  will  find  that  it  makes  exactly  a  straight  line  with  RC,  and  that,  thus,  this 
ray  is  not  deviated  at  all,  conformably  with  experiment.  This  is  proved  as 
follows  by  calculation. 

CG  or  CR  being,  as  precedently,  98,779;  CM  being  100,000;  and  the  angle 
RCV  73  degrees  20  minutes,  CV  will  be  28,330.  But  because  Cl  is  the  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  ray  RC,  the  proportion  of  CV  to  CD  is  156,962  to  98,779,  namely, 
that  of  N  to  CG;  then  CD  is  17,828. 

Now  the  rectangle  gfDC  is  to  the  square  of  DI  as  the  square  of  CG  is  to  the 
square  of  CM ;  hence  DI  or  CE  will  be  98,353.  But  as  CE  is  to  El,  so  mil  CM 
be  to  MT,  w’hich  will  then  be  18,127.  And  being  added  to  ML,  which  is  11,609 
(namely  the  sine  of  the  angle  LC^VI,  which  is  6  degrees  40  minutes,  taking  CM 


Chapter  V  591 

100,000  as  radius)  we  get  LT  27,936;  and  this  is  to  LC  99,324  as  CV  to  VR, 
that  is  to  say,  as  29,938,  the  tangent  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  RCV, 
which  is  73  degrees  20  minutes,  is  to  the  radius  of  the  tables.  Whence  it  appears 
that  RCIT  is  a  straight  line;  which  was  to  be  proved. 

35.  Further,  it  vdll  be  seen  that  the  ray  Cl,  in  emerging  through  the  opposite 
surface  of  the  crystal,  ought  to  pass  out  quite  straight,  according  to  the  follow¬ 
ing  demonstration,  which  proves  that  the  reciprocal  relation  of  refraction  ob¬ 
tains  in  this  crystal  the  same  as  in  other  transparent  bodies;  that  is  to  say,  that 
if  a  ray  RC  in  meeting  the  surface  of  the  crystal  CG  is  refracted  as  Cl,  the 
ray  Cl  emerging  through  the  opposite  parallel  surface  of  the  crystal  which  I 
suppose  to  be  IB,  will  have  its  refraction  lA  parallel  to  the  ray  RC. 


Let  the  same  things  be  supposed  as  before;  that  is  to  say,  let  CO,  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  CR,  represent  a  portion  of  a  wave,  the  continuation  of  which  in  the 
crystal  is  IK,  so  that  the  piece  C  will  be  continued  on  along  the  straight  line 
Cl,  while  0  comes  to  K.  Now,  if  one  takes  a  second  period  of  time  equal  to  the 
first,  the  piece  K  of  the  wave  IK  will,  in  this  second  period,  have  advanced 
along  the  straight  line  KB,  equal  and  parallel  to  Cl,  because  every  piece  of  the 
wave  CO,  on  arriving  at  the  surface  CK,  ought  to  go  on  in  the  crystal  the  same 
as  the  piece  C;  and  in  this  same  time  there  vdll  be  formed  in  the  air  from  the 
point  I  a  partial  spherical  wave  having  a  semi-diameter  lA  equal  to  KO,  since 
KO  has  been  traversed  in  an  equal  time.  Similarly,  if  one  considers  some  other 
point  of  the  wave  IK,  such  as  h,  it  will  go  along  hrn,  parallel  to  Cl,  to  meet  the 
surface  IB,  while  the  point  K  traverses  K^  equal  to  hm;  and  while  this  accom¬ 
plishes  the  remainder  IB,  there  vill  start  from  the  point  m  a  partial  wave  the 
semi-diameter  of  which,  mn,  vdll  have  the  same  ratio  to  ^B  as  I A  to  KB. 
Whence  it  is  evident  that  this  wave  of  semi-diameter  mn,  and  the  other  of 
semi-diameter  lA  will  have  the  same  tangent  BA.  And  similarly  for  all  the 
partial  spherical  waves  which  will  be  formed  outside  the  crystal  by  the  impact 
of  all  the  points  of  the  wave  IK  against  the  surface  of  the  ether  IB.  It  is  then 
precisely  the  tangent  BA  which  wall  be  the  continuation  of  the  Avave  IK,  out¬ 
side  the  crystal,  AA’hen  the  piece  K  has  reached  B.  And  in  consequence  I  A, 


592  Treatise  on  Light 

which  is  perpendicular  to  BA,  will  be  the  refraction  of  the  ray  Cl  on  emerging 
from  the  crystal.  Now  it  is  clear  that  I A  is  parallel  to  the  incident  ray  RC, 
since  IB  is  equal  to  CK,  and  lA  equal  to  KO,  and  the  angles  A  and  0  are  right 
angles. 

It  is  seen  then  that,  according  to  our  hypothesis,  the  reciprocal  relation  of 
refraction  holds  good  in  this  crystal  as  well  as  in  ordinary  transparent  bodies; 
as  is  thus  in  fact  found  by  observation. 

36.  I  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  other  sections  of  the  crystal,  and  of 
the  refractions  there  produced,  on  which,  as  will  be  seen,  some  other  very  re¬ 
markable  phenomena  depend. 

Let  ABH  be  a  parallelepiped  of  crystal,  and  let  the  top  surface  AEHF  be  a 
perfect  rhombus,  the  obtuse  angles  of  which  are  equally  divided  by  the  straight 
line  EF,  and  the  acute  angles  by  the  straight  line  AH  perpendicular  to  FE. 

, N 


O 


The  section  which  we  have  hitherto  considered  is  that  which  passes  through 
the  lines  EF,  EB,  and  which  at  the  same  time  cuts  the  plane  AEHF  at  right 
angles.  Refractions  in  this  section  have  this  in  common  with  the  refractions  in 
ordinary  media:  that  the  plane  wLich  is  drawn  through  the  incident  ray  and 
which  also  intersects  the  surface  of  the  crystal  at  right  angles  is  that  in  w'hich 
the  refracted  ray  also  is  found.  But  the  refractions  ■which  appertain  to  every 
other  section  of  this  crystal  have  this  strange  property:  that  the  refracted  ray 
always  quits  the  plane  of  the  incident  ray  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  and 
turns  aW'ay  towards  the  side  of  the  slope  of  the  crystal.  For  w^hich  fact  we  shall 
show  the  reason,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  section  through  AH;  and  we  shall 
show  at  the  same  time  ho^v  one  can  determine  the  refraction,  according  to  our 
hypothesis.  Let  there  be,  then,  in  the  plane  -which  passes  through  AH,  and 
Avhich  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  AFHE,  the  incident  ray  RC;  it  is  required 
to  find  its  refraction  in  the  crystal. 


Chapter  V  593 

37.  About  the  centre  C,  which  I  suppose  to  be  in  the  intersection  of  AH  and 
FE,  let  there  be  imagined  a  hemi-spheroid  QG$gi'M,  such  as  the  light  would 
form  in  spreading  in  the  crystal,  and  let  its  section  by  the  plane  AEHF  form 
the  ellipse  QGgg,  the  major  diameter  of  which  Qg,  which  is  in  the  line  AH,  Avill 
necessarily  be  one  of  the  major  diameters  of  the  spheroid;  because  the  axis  of 
the  spheroid  being  in  the  plane  through  FEB,  to  which  QC  is  perpendicular, 
it  follows  that  QC  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  spheroid,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  QC^  one  of  its  major  diameters.  But  the  minor  diameter  of  this  ellipse, 
Gg,  will  bear  to  Qg  the  proportion  which  has  been  defined  previously.  Article 
27,  between  CG  and  the  major  semi-diameter  of  the  spheroid,  CP,  namely, 
that  of  98,779  to  105,032. 

Let  the  line  N  be  the  length  of  the  travel  of  light  in  air  during  the  time  in 
which,  within  the  crystal,  it  makes,  from  the  centre  C,  the  spheroid  QGggM. 
Then,  having  drawn  CO  perpendicular  to  the  ray  CR  and  situated  in  the  plane 
through  CR  and  AH,  let  there  be  adjusted,  across  the  angle  ACO,  the  straight 
line  OK  equal  to  N  and  perpendicular  to  CO,  and  let  it  meet  the  straight  line 
AH  at  K.  Supposing,  consequently,  that  CL  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of 
the  crystal  AEHF,  and  that  CM  is  the  refraction  of  the  ray  which  falls  per¬ 
pendicularly  on  this  same  surface,  let  there  be  drawn  a  plane  through  the  line 
CM  and  through  KCH,  making  in  the  spheroid  the  semi-ellipse  QMg,  which 
will  be  given,  since  the  angle  MCL  is  given  of  value  6  degrees  40  minutes.  And 
it  is  certain,  according  to  what  has  been  explained  above.  Article  27,  that  a 
plane  which  would  touch  the  spheroid  at  the  point  M,  where  I  suppose  the 
straight  line  CM  to  meet  the  surface,  would  be  parallel  to  the  plane  QGg.  If, 
then,  through  the  point  K  one  now  draws  KS  parallel  to  Gg,  which  will  be 
parallel  also  to  QX,  the  tangent  to  the  ellipse  QGg  at  Q;  and  if  one  conceives 
a  plane  passing  through  KS  and  touching  the  spheroid,  the  point  of  contact 
\vill  necessarily  be  in  the  ellipse  QMg,  because  this  plane  through  KS,  as  well 
as  the  plane  which  touches  the  spheroid  at  the  point  M,  are  parallel  to  QX, 
the  tangent  of  the  spheroid:  for  this  consequence  will  be  demonstrated  at  the 
end  of  this  treatise.  Let  this  point  of  contact  be  at  I,  then  making  KC,  QC, 
DC  proportionals,  draw  DI  parallel  to  CM;  also  join  CL  I  say  that  Cl  will  be 
the  required  refraction  of  the  ray  RC.  This  will  be  manifest  if,  in  considering 
CO,  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  ray  RC,  as  a  portion  of  the  wave  of  light, 
we  can  demonstrate  that  the  continuation  of  its  piece  C  Avill  be  found  in  the 
crystal  at  I,  when  0  has  arrived  at  K. 

38.  Now  as  in  the  chapter  on  reflexion,  in  demonstrating  that  the  incident 
and  reflected  rays  are  always  in  the  same  plane  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting 
surface,  we  considered  the  breadth  of  the  wave  of  light,  so,  similarly,  we  must 
here  consider  the  breadth  of  the  wave  CO  in  the  diameter  Gg.  Taking,  then, 
the  breadth  Cc  on  the  side  toward  the  angle  E,  let  the  parallelogram  COoc  be 
taken  as  a  portion  of  a  wave,  and  let  us  complete  the  parallelograms  CKA*c, 
Glic,  KR’A’,  OKko.  In  the  time,  then,  that  the  line  Go  arrives  at  the  surface  of 
the  crystal  at  K/r,  all  the  points  of  the  wave  COoc  will  have  arrived  at  the 
rectangle  Kc  along  lines  parallel  to  OK;  and  from  the  points  of  their  incidences 
there  will  originate,  beyond  that,  in  the  crystal  partial  hemi-spheroids,  similar 
to  the  hemi-spheroid  QMg,  and  similarly  disposed.  These  hemispheroids  vdll 
necessarily  all  touch  the  plane  of  the  parallelogram  KR'A'  at  the  same  instant 
that  Oo  has  reached  KA’.  Which  is  easy  to  comprehend,  since,  of  these  hemi- 


594 


Treatise  on  Light 

spheroids,  all  those  which  have  their  centres  along  the  line  CK,  touch  this 
plane  in  the  line  KI  (for  this  is  to  be  shown  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  demon¬ 
strated  the  refraction  of  the  oblique  ray  in  the  principal  section  through  EF) 
and  all  those  which  have  their  centres  in  the  line  Cc  will  touch  the  same  plane 
KI  in  the  line  If;  all  these  being  similar  to  the  hemi-spheroid  QMq'.  Since,  then, 
the  parallelogram  Kf  is  that  which  touches  all  these  spheroids,  this  same  paral¬ 
lelogram  will  be  precisely  the  continuation  of  the  wave  COoc  in  the  crystal, 
when  Oo  has  arrived  at  K/r,  because  it  forms  the  termination  of  the  movement 
and  because  of  the  quantity  of  movement  which  occurs  more  there  than  any¬ 
where  else :  and  thus  it  appears  that  the  piece  C  of  the  wave  COoc  has  its  con¬ 
tinuation  at  I;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  ray  RC  is  refracted  as  Cl. 

From  this  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  proportion  of  the  refraction  for  this 
section  of  the  crystal  is  that  of  the  line  N  to  the  semi-diameter  CQ ;  by  which 
one  will  easily  find  the  refractions  of  all  incident  rays,  in  the  same  way  as  we 
have  shown  previously  for  the  case  of  the  section  through  FE;  and  the  demon¬ 
stration  A^^ll  be  the  same.  But  it  appears  that  the  said  proportion  of  the  refrac¬ 
tion  is  less  here  than  in  the  section  through  FEB;  for  it  Avas  there  the  same  as 
the  ratio  of  N  to  CG,  that  is  to  say,  as  156,962  to  98,779,  very  nearly  as  8  to  5; 
and  here  it  is  the  ratio  of  N  to  CQ  the  major  semi-diameter  of  the  spheroid, 
that  is  to  say,  as  156,962  to  105,032,  very  nearly  as  3  to  2,  but  just  a  little  less. 
Which  still  agrees  perfectly  Avith  AA^at  one  finds  by  observation. 

39.  For  the  rest,  this  diversity  of  proportion  of  refraction  produces  a  very 
singular  effect  in  this  crystal ;  Avhich  is  that  Avhen  it  is  placed  upon  a  sheet  of 
paper  on  Avhich  there  are  letters  or  anything  else  marked,  if  one  vieAvs  it  from 
above  Avith  the  tAvo  eyes  situated  in  the  plane  of  the  section  through  EF,  one 
sees  the  letters  raised  up  by  this  irregular  refraction  more  than  Avhen  one  puts 
one’s  eyes  in  the  plane  of  section  through  AH:  and  the  difference  of  these 
elevations  appears  by  comparison  Avith  the  other  ordinary  refraction  of  the 
crystal,  the  proportion  of  AA^ich  is  as  5  to  3,  and  Avhich  ahvays  raises  the  letters 
equally,  and  higher  than  the  irregular  refraction  does.  For  one  sees  the  letters 
and  the  paper  on  which  they  are  Avritten,  as  on  tAvo  different  stages  at  the  same 
time ;  and  in  the  first  position  of  the  eyes,  namely,  Avhen  they  are  in  the  plane 
through  AH  these  tAvo  stages  are  four  times  more  distant  from  one  another 
than  AA’hen  the  eyes  are  in  the  plane  through  EF. 

We  Avill  shoAv  that  this  effect  folloAvs  from  the  refractions;  and  it  Avill  enable 
us  at  the  same  time  to  ascertain  the  apparent  place  of  a  point  of  an  object 
placed  immediately  under  the  crystal,  according  to  the  different  situation  of 
the  eyes. 

40.  Let  us  see  first  by  hoAv  much  the  irregular  refraction  of  the  plane  through 
AH  ought  to  lift  the  bottom  of  the  crystal.  Let  the  plane  of  this  figure  represent 
separately  the  section  through  Qq  and  CL,  in  AA^hich  section  there  is  also  the 
ray  RC,  and  let  the  semi-elliptic  plane  through  Qg'  and  CM  be  inclined  to  the 
former,  as  previously,  by  an  angle  of  6  degrees  40  minutes;  and  in  this  plane 
Cl  is  then  the  refraction  of  the  ray  RC. 

If  noAv  one  considers  the  point  I  as  at  the  bottom  of  the  crystal,  and  that  it 
is  vieAA'ed  by  the  rays  ICR,  Icr,  refracted  equally  at  the  points  Cc,  AA'hich  should 
be  equally  distant  from  D,  and  that  these  rays  meet  the  tAvo  eyes  at  Rr;  it  is 
certain  that  the  point  I  AA’ill  appear  raised  to  S  AA’here  the  straight  lines  RC,  rc, 
meet;  AA^hich  point  S  is  in  DP,  perpendicular  to  Qq.  And  if  upon  DP  there  is 


Chapter  V 


595 

drawn  the  perpendicular  IP, 
which  will  lie  at  the  bottom  of 
the  crystal,  the  length  SP  will 
be  the  apparent  elevation  of  the 
point  I  above  the  bottom. 

Let  there  be  described  on  Qg  a 
semicircle  cutting  the  ray  CR  at 
B,from  which  BV  is  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  Qg;  and  let  the 
proportion  of  the  refraction  for 
this  section  be,  as  before,  that 
of  the  line  N  to  the  semi-diam¬ 
eter  CQ. 

Then  as  N  is  to  CQ  so  is  VC 
to  CD,  as  appears  by  the  method 
of  finding  the  refraction  which 
we  have  shoAvn  above.  Article 
31;  but  as  VC  is  to  CD,  so  is 
VB  to  DS.  Then  as  N  is  to  CQ,  so  is  VB  to  DS.  Let  ML  be  perpendicular  to 

CL.  And  because  I  suppose  the  eyes  Rr  to  be  distant  about  a  foot  or  so  from 
the  crystal,  and  consequently  the  angle  RSr  very  small,  VB  may  be  considered 
as  equal  to  the  semi-diameter  CQ,  and  DP  as  equal  to  CL;  then  as  N  is  to  CQ 
so  is  CQ  to  DS.  But  N  is  valued  at  156,962  parts,  of  which  CM  contains  100,000 
and  CQ  105,032.  Then  DS  -will  have  70,283.  But  CL  is  99,324,  being  the  sine  of 
the  complement  of  the  angle  MCL  which  is  6  degrees  40  minutes;  CM  being 
supposed  as  radius.  Then  DP,  considered  as  equal  to  CL,  will  be  to  DS  as 
99,324  to  70,283.  And  so  the  elevation  of  the  point  I  by  the  refraction  of  this 
section  is  known. 

41.  Now  let  there  be  represented  the  other  section  through  EF  in  the  figure 
before  the  preceding  one;  and  let  CMg  be  the  semi-ellipse,  considered  in  Arti¬ 
cles  27  and  28,  which  is  made  by  cutting  a  spheroidal  wave  having  centre  C. 
Let  the  point  I,  taken  in  this  ellipse, 
be  imagined  again  at  the  bottom 
of  the  crystal;  and  let  it  be  viewed 
by  the  refracted  rays  ICR,  Icr, 
which  go  to  the  two  eyes;  CR  and 
cr  being  equally  inclined  to  the 
surface  of  the  crystal  Gg.  This  being 
so,  if  one  draws  ID  parallel  to  CM, 
which  I  suppose  to  be  the  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  perpendicular  ray  inci¬ 
dent  at  the  point  C,  the  distances 

DC,  Dc,  vill  be  equal,  as  is  easy 
to  see  by  that  which  has  been  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  Article  28.  Now  it 
is  certain  that  the  point  I  should 
appear  at  S  where  the  straight  lines 
RC,  rc  meet  when  prolonged;  and 
that  this  point  will  fall  in  the  line 


N 


596  Treatise  on  Light 

DP  perpendicular  to  Gfir.  If  one  draws  IP  perpendicular  to  this  DP,  it  will  be 
the  distance  PS  which  will  mark  the  apparent  elevation  of  the  point  I.  Let 
there  be  described  on  Gg  a  semicircle  cutting  CR  at  B,  from  which  let  BV  be 
drawn  perpendicular  to  G^;  and  let  N  to  GC  be  the  proportion  of  the  refraction 
in  this  section,  as  in  Article  28.  Since  then  Cl  is  the  refraction  of  the  radius 
BC,  and  DI  is  parallel  to  CM,  VC  must  be  to  CD  as  N  to  GC,  according  to 
what  has  been  demonstrated  in  Article  31.  But  as  VC  is  to  CD  so  is  BV  to  DS. 
Let  ML  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  CL.  And  because  I  consider,  again,  the 
eyes  to  be  distant  above  the  crystal,  BV  is  deemed  equal  to  the  semi-diameter 
CG ;  and  hence  DS  vill  be  a  third  proportional  to  the  lines  N  and  CG :  also  DP 
will  be  deemed  equal  to  CL.  Now  CG  consisting  of  98,778  parts,  of  which  CM 
contains  100,000,  N  is  taken  as  156,962.  Then  DS  will  be  62,163.  But  CL  is 
also  determined,  and  contains  99,324  parts,  as  has  been  said  in  Articles  34  and 
40.  Then  the  ratio  of  PD  to  DS  will  be  as  99,324  to  62,163.  And  thus  one  knows 
the  elevation  of  the  point  at  the  bottom  I  by  the  refraction  of  this  section;  and 
it  appears  that  this  elevation  is  greater  than  that  by  the  refraction  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  section,  since  the  ratio  of  PD  to  DS  was  there  as  99,324  to  70,283. 

But  by  the  regular  refraction  of  the  crystal,  of  which  we  have  above  said 
that  the  proportion  is  5  to  3,  the  elevation  of  the  point  I,  or  P,  from  the  bottom, 
will  be  >4  of  the  height  DP;  as  appears  by  this  figure,  where 
the  point  P  being  viewed  by  the  rays  PCR,  Per,  refracted 
equally  at  the  surface  Cc,  this  point  must  needs  appear  to 
be  at  S,  in  the  perpendicular  PD  where  the  lines  RC,  rc 
meet  when  prolonged:  and  one  knows  that  the  line  PC  is  to 
CS  as  5  to  3,  since  they  are  to  one  another  as  the  sine  of  the 
angle  CSP  or  DSC  is  to  the  sine  of  the  angle  SPC.  And  be¬ 
cause  the  ratio  of  PD  to  DS  is  deemed  the  same  as  that  of 
PC  to  CS,  the  two  eyes  Rr  being  supposed  very  far  above 
the  crystal,  the  elevation  PS  wall  thus  be  3^  of  PD. 

42.  If  one  takes  a  straight  line  AB  for  the  thickness  of 
the  crystal,  its  point  B  being  at  the  bottom,  and  if  one  di- 

A  vides  it  at  the  points  C,  D,  E,  according  to  the  pro¬ 
portions  of  the  elevations  found,  making  AE  3^  of  AB,  AB  to  AC  as  99,324 
to  70,283,  and  AB  to  AD  as  99,324  to  62,163,  these  points  mil  divide  AB 
as  in  this  figure.  And  it  mil  be  found  that  this  agrees  perfectly  with  ex¬ 
periment;  that  is  to  say,  by  placing  the  eyes  above  in  the  plane  which 
cuts  the  crystal  according  to  the  shorter  diameter  of  the  rhombus,  the 
regular  refraction  will  lift  up  the  letters  to  E;  and  one  will  see  the  bot¬ 
tom,  and  the  letters  over  which  it  is  placed,  lifted  up  to  D  by  the  irregu- 
I  lar  refraction.  But  by  placing  the  eyes  above  in  the  plane  which  cuts  the 
crystal  according  to  the  longer  diameter  of  the  rhombus,  the  regular  re¬ 
fraction  will  lift  the  letters  to  E  as  before;  but  the  irregular  refraction 
mil  make  them,  at  the  same  time,  appear  lifted  up  only  to  C;  and  in  such 
a  way  that  the  interval  CE  mil  be  quadruple  the  interval  ED,  which 
B  one  previously  saw. 

43.  I  have  only  to  make  the  remark  here  that  in  both  the  positions  of  the 
eyes  the  images  caused  by  the  irregular  refraction  do  not  appear  directly  below 
those  which  proceed  from  the  regidar  refraction,  but  they  are  separated  from 
them  by  being  more  distant  from  the  equilateral  solid  angle  of  the  crystal. 


Chapter  V  597 

That  follows,  indeed,  from  all  that  has  been  hitherto  demonstrated  about  the 
irregular  refraction;  and  it  is  particularly  shown  by  these  last  demonstrations, 
from  which  one  sees  that  the  point  I  appears  by  irregular  refraction  at  S  in  the 
perpendicular  line  DP,  in  which  line  also  the  image  of  the  point  P  ought  to 
appear  by  regular  refraction,  but  not  the  image  of  the  point  I,  which  -sdll  be 
almost  directly  above  the  same  point,  and  higher  than  S. 

But  as  to  the  apparent  elevation  of  the  point  I  in  other  positions  of  the  eyes 
above  the  crystal,  besides  the  two  positions  which  we  have  just  examined,  the 
image  of  that  point  by  the  irregular  refraction  will  always  appear  between  the 
two  heights  of  D  and  C,  passing  from  one  to  the  other  as  one  turns  one’s  self 
around  about  the  immovable  crystal,  while  looking  down  from  above.  And  all 
this  is  still  found  conformable  to  our  hypothesis,  as  any  one  can  assure  himself 
after  I  shall  have  shown  here  the  way  of  finding  the  irregular  refractions  which 
appear  in  all  other  sections  of  the  crystal,  besides  the  two  which  we  have  con¬ 
sidered.  Let  us  suppose  one  of  the  faces  of  the  crystal,  in  which  let  there  be 
the  ellipse  HDE,  the  centre  C  of  which  is  also  the  centre  of  the  spheroid  HME 
in  which  the  light  spreads,  and  of  which  the  said  ellipse  is  the  section.  And  let 
the  incident  ray  be  RC,  the  refraction  of  which  it  is  required  to  find. 

Let  there  be  taken  a  plane  passing  through  the  ray  RC  and  which  is  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
BCK;  and  having  in  the  same 
plane  through  RC  made  CO 
perpendicular  to  CR,  let  OK  be 
adjusted  across  the  angle  OCK, 
so  as  to  be  perpendicular  to 
OC  and  equal  to  the  line  N, 
which  I  suppose  to  measure 
the  travel  of  the  light  in  air 
during  the  time  that  it  spreads 
in  the  crystal  through  the 
spheroid  HD  EM.  Then  in  the 
plane  of  the  ellipse  HDE  let 
KT  be  dravm,  through  the 
point  K,  perpendicular  to  BCK. 

Now  if  one  conceives  a  plane 
drawn  through  the  straight  Hi 
the  straight  line  Cl  vill  be  the  refraction  of  the  ray  RC,  as  is  easy  to  deduce 
from  that  which  has  been  demonstrated  in  Article  36. 

But  it  must  be  shovm  how  one  can  determine  the  point  of  contact  I.  Let  there 
be  drawn  parallel  to  the  line  KT  a  line  HE  which  touches  the  ellipse  HDE,  and 
let  this  point  of  contact  be  at  H.  And  having  dravm  a  straight  line  along  CH 
to  meet  KT  at  T,  let  there  be  imagined  a  plane  passing  through  the  same  CH 
and  through  CM  (which  I  suppose  to  be  the  refraction  of  the  perpendicular 
ray),  which  makes  in  the  spheroid  the  elliptical  section  HME.  It  is  certain  that 
the  plane  which  vill  pass  through  the  straight  line  KT,  and  which  vill  touch 
the  spheroid,  vdll  touch  it  at  a  point  in  the  ellipse  HME,  according  to  the 
Lemma  which  vill  be  demonstrated  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Now  this  point 
is  necessarily  the  point  I  which  is  sought,  since  the  plane  drawn  through  TK 
can  touch  the  spheroid  at  one  point  only.  And  this  point  I  is  easy  to  determine, 


ellipse  HDE,  cutting  it  along  the  straight  line 
. _ N _ . 


598  Treatise  on  Light 

since  it  is  needful  only  to  draw  from  the  point  T,  which  is  in  the  plane  of  this 
ellipse,  the  tangent  TI,  in  the  way  shown  previously.  For  the  ellipse  HME  is 
given,  and  its  conjugate  semi-diameters  are  CH  and  CM;  because  a  straight 
line  drawn  through  M,  parallel  to  HE,  touches  the  ellipse  HME,  as  follows 
from  the  fact  that  a  plane  taken  through  M,  and  parallel  to  the  plane  HDE, 
touches  the  spheroid  at  that  point  M,  as  is  seen  from  Articles  27  and  23.  For 
the  rest,  the  position  of  this  ellipse,  with  respect  to  the  plane  through  the  ray 
RC  and  through  CK,  is  also  given;  from  which  it  will  be  easy  to  find  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  Cl,  the  refraction  corresponding  to  the  ray  RC. 

Now  it  must  be  noted  that  the  same  ellipse  HME  serves  to  find  the  refrac¬ 
tions  of  any  other  ray  which  may  be  in  the  plane  through  RC  and  CK.  Because 
every  plane,  parallel  to  the  straight  line  HF,  or  TK,  which  will  touch  the 
spheroid,  will  touch  it  in  this  ellipse,  according  to  the  Lemma  quoted  a  little 
before. 

I  have  investigated  thus,  in  minute  detail,  the  properties  of  the  irregular 
refraction  of  this  crystal,  in  order  to  see  whether  each  phenomenon  that  is  de¬ 
duced  from  our  hypothesis  accords  with  that  which  is  observed  in  fact.  And 
this  being  so,  it  affords  no  slight  proof  of  the  truth  of  our  suppositions  and 
principles.  But  what  I  am  going  to  add  here  confirms  them  again  marvellously. 
It  is  this:  that  there  are  different  sections  of  this  crystal,  the  surfaces  of  which, 
thereby  produced,  give  rise  to  refractions  precisely  such  as  they  ought  to  be, 
and  as  I  had  foreseen  them,  according  to  the  preceding  theory. 

In  order  to  explain  what  these  sections  are,  let  ABKF  be  the  principal  sec¬ 
tion  through  the  axis  of  the  crystal  ACK,  in  which  there  will  also  be  the  axis 
SS  of  a  spheroidal  wave  of  light 
spreading  in  the  crystal  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  C ;  and  the  straight  line  which  cuts 
SS  through  the  middle  and  at  right 
angles,  namely,  PP,  will  be  one  of  the 
major  diameters. 

Now  as  in  the  natural  section  of  the 
crystal,  made  by  a  plane  parallel  to 
two  opposite  faces,  which  plane  is 
here  represented  by  the  line  GG,  the 
refraction  of  the  surfaces  which  are 
produced  by  it  mil  be  governed  by  the 
hemi-spheroids  GNG,  according  to  what  has  been  explained  in  the  preceding 
theory.  Similarly,  cutting  the  crystal  through  NN,  by  a  plane  perpendicular  to 
the  parallelogram  ABKF,  the  refraction  of  the  surfaces  will  be  governed  by  the 
hemi-spheroids  NGN.  And  if  one  cuts  it  through  PP,  perpendicularly  to  the 
said  parallelogram,  the  refraction  of  the  surfaces  ought  to  be  governed  by  the 
hemi-spheroids  PSP,  and  so  for  others.  But  I  saw  that  if  the  plane  NN  was 
almost  perpendicular  to  the  plane  GG,  making  the  angle  NCG,  which  is  on 
the  side  A,  an  angle  of  90  degrees  40  minutes,  the  hemi-spheroids  NGN  would 
become  similar  to  the  hemi-spheroids  GNG,  since  the  planes  NN  and  GG  were 
equally  inclined  by  an  angle  of  45  degrees  20  minutes  to  the  axis  SS.  In  con¬ 
sequence  it  must  needs  be,  if  our  theory  is  true,  that  the  surfaces  which  the 
section  through  NN  produces  should  effect  the  same  refractions  as  the  surfaces 
of  the  section  through  GG.  And  not  only  the  surfaces  of  the  section  NN  but 


Chapter  V  599 

all  other  sections  produced  by  planes  which  might  be  inclined  to  the  axis  at  an 
angle  equal  to  45  degrees  20  minutes.  So  that  there  are  an  infinitude  of  planes 
which  ought  to  produce  precisely  the  same  refractions  as  the  natural  surfaces 
of  the  crystal,  or  as  the  section  parallel  to  any  one  of  those  surfaces  which  are 
made  by  cleavage. 

I  saw  also  that  by  cutting  it  by  a  plane  taken  through  PP,  and  perpendicular 
to  the  axis  SS,  the  refraction  of  the  surfaces  ought  to  be  such  that  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  ray  should  suffer  thereby  no  deviation;  and  that  for  oblique  rays  there 
would  always  be  an  irregular  refraction,  differing  from  the  regular,  and  by 
which  objects  placed  beneath  the  crystal  would  be  less  elevated  than  by  that 
other  refraction. 

That,  similarly,  by  cutting  the  crystal  by  any  plane  through  the  axis  SS, 
such  as  the  plane  of  the  figure  is,  the  perpendicular  ray  ought  to  suffer  no 
refraction;  and  that  for  oblique  rays  there  were  different  measures  for  the  ir¬ 
regular  refraction  according  to  the  situation  of  the  plane  in  which  the  incident 
ray  was. 

Now  these  things  were  found  in  fact  so;  and,  after  that,  I  could  not  doubt 
that  a  similar  success  could  be  met  with  everywhere.  Whence  I  concluded  that 
one  might  form  from  this  crystal  solids  similar  to  those  Avhich  are  its  natural 
forms,  which  should  produce,  at  all  their  surfaces,  the  same  regular  and  irregu¬ 
lar  refractions  as  the  natural  surfaces,  and  which,  nevertheless,  would  cleave 
in  quite  other  ways,  and  not  in  directions  parallel  to  any  of  their  faces.  That 
out  of  it  one  would  be  able  to  fashion  pyramids,  having  their  base  square, 
pentagonal,  hexagonal,  or  Avith  as  many  sides  as  one  desired,  all  the  surfaces 
of  which  should  have  the  same  refractions  as  the  natural  surfaces  of  the  crys¬ 
tal,  except  the  base,  which  will  not  refract  the  perpendicular  ray.  These  sur¬ 
faces  will  each  make  an  angle  of  45  degrees  20  minutes  with  the  axis  of  the 
crystal,  and  the  base  will  be  the  section  perpendicular  to  the  axis. 

That,  finally,  one  could  also  fashion  out  of  it  triangular  prisms,  or  prisms 
with  as  many  sides  as  one  would,  of  which  neither  the  sides  nor  the  bases 
would  refract  the  perpendicular  ray,  although  they  would  yet  all  cause  double 
refraction  for  oblique  rays.  The  cube  is  included  amongst  these  prisms,  the 
bases  of  which  are  sections  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  crystal,  and  the 
sides  are  sections  parallel  to  the  same  axis. 

From  all  this  it  further  appears  that  it  is  not  at  all  in  the  disposition  of  the 
layers  of  which  this  crystal  seems  to  be  composed,  and  according  to  which  it 
splits  in  three  different  senses,  that  the  cause  resides  of  its  irregular  refraction; 
and  that  it  would  be  in  vain  to  wish  to  seek  it  there. 

But  in  order  that  any  one  who  has  some  of  this  stone  may  be  able  to  find, 
by  his  own  experience,  the  truth  of  what  I  have  just  advanced,  I  will  state  here 
the  process  of  which  I  have  made  use  to  cut  it  and  to  polish  it.  Cutting  is  easy 
by  the  slicing  wheels  of  lapidaries,  or  in  the  way  in  which  marble  is  sawn;  but 
polishing  is  very  difficult,  and  by  employing  the  ordinary  means  one  more  often 
depolishes  the  surfaces  than  makes  them  lucent. 

After  many  trials,  I  have  at  last  found  that  for  this  service  no  plate  of  metal 
must  be  used,  but  a  piece  of  mirror  glass  made  matt  and  depolished.  Upon 
this,  with  fine  sand  and  water,  one  smooths  the  crystal  little  by  little,  in  the 
same  way  as  spectacle  glasses,  and  polishes  it  simply  by  continuing  the  work, 
but  ever  reducing  the  material.  I  have  not,  however,  been  able  to  give  it  per- 


600  Treatise  on  Light 

feet  clarity  and  transparency;  but  the  evenness  which  the  surfaces  acquire  en¬ 
ables  one  to  observe  in  them  the  effects  of  refraction  better  than  in  those  made 
by  cleaving  the  stone,  which  always  have  some  inequality. 

Even  when  the  surface  is  only  moderately  smoothed,  if  one  rubs  it  over  mth 
a  little  oil  or  white  of  egg,  it  becomes  quite  transparent,  so  that  the  refraction 
is  discerned  in  it  quite  distinctly.  And  this  aid  is  specially  necessary  when  it  is 
wished  to  polish  the  natural  surfaces  to  remove  the  inequalities;  because  one 
cannot  render  them  lucent  equally  with  the  surfaces  of  other  sections,  which 
take  a  polish  so  much  the  better  the  less  nearly  they  approximate  to  these 
natural  planes. 

Before  finishing  the  treatise  on  this  crystal,  I  will  add  one  more  marvellous 
phenomenon  which  I  discovered  after  having  written  all  the  foregoing.  For 
though  I  have  not  been  able  till  now  to  find  its  cause,  I  do  not  for  that  reason 
wish  to  desist  from  describing  it,  in  order  to  give  opportunity  to  others  to 
investigate  it.  It  seems  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  still  further  supposi¬ 
tions  besides  those  which  I  have  made;  but  these  will  not,  for  all  that,  cease  to 
keep  their  probability  after  having  been  confirmed  by  so  many  tests. 

The  phenomenon  is,  that  by  taking  two  pieces  of  this  crystal  and  applying 
them  one  over  the  other,  or  rather  holding  them  wth  a  space  between  the  two, 
if  all  the  sides  of  one  are  parallel  to  those  of  the  other,  then  a  ray  of  light,  such 
as  AB,  is  divided  into  two  in  the  first  piece,  namely  into  BD  and  BC,  following 


the  two  refractions,  regular  and  irregular.  On  penetrating  thence  into  the  other 
piece  each  ray  will  pass  there  without  further  dividing  itself  in  two;  but  that 
one  which  underwent  the  regular  refraction,  as  here  DG,  will  undergo  again 
only  a  regular  refraction  at  GH ;  and  the  other,  CE,  an  irregular  refraction  at 
EF.  And  the  same  thing  occurs  not  only  in  this  disposition,  but  also  in  all  those 
cases  in  which  the  principal  section  of  each  of  the  pieces  is  situated  in  one  and 
the  same  plane,  without  it  being  needful  for  the  two  neighbouring  surfaces  to 
be  parallel.  Now  it  is  marvellous  why  the  rays  CE  and  DG,  incident  from  the 
air  on  the  lower  crystal,  do  not  divide  themselves  the  same  as  the  first  ray  AB. 


Chapter  V  601 

One  would  say  that  it  must  be  that  the  ray  DG  in  passing  through  the  upper 
piece  has  lost  something  which  is  necessary  to  move  the  matter  which  serves 
for  the  irregular  refraction:  and  that  likewise  CE  has  lost  that  which  was 
necessary  to  move  the  matter  which  serves  for  regular  refraction :  but  there  is 
yet  another  thing  which  upsets  this  reasoning.  It  is  that  when  one  disposes  the 
two  crystals  in  such  a  way  that  the  planes  which  constitute  the  principal  sec¬ 
tions  intersect  one  another  at  right  angles,  whether  the  neighbouring  surfaces 
are  parallel  or  not,  then  the  ray  which  has  come  by  the  regular  refraction,  as 
DG,  undergoes  only  an  irregular  refraction  in  the  lower  piece ;  and  on  the  con¬ 
trary  the  ray  which  has  come  by  the  irregular  refraction,  as  CE,  undergoes  only 
a  regular  refraction. 

But  in  all  the  infinite  other  positions,  besides  those  which  I  have  just  stated, 
the  rays  DG,  CE,  divide  themselves  anew  each  one  into  two,  by  refraction  in 
the  lower  crystal,  so  that  from  the  single  ray  AB  there  are  four,  sometimes  of 
equal  brightness,  sometimes  some  much  less  bright  than  others,  according  to 
the  varying  agreement  in  the  positions  of  the  crystals :  but  they  do  not  appear 
to  have  all  together  more  light  than  the  single  ray  AB. 

When  one  considers  here  how,  while  the  rays  CE,  DG  remain  the  same,  it 
depends  on  the  position  that  one  gives  to  the  lower  piece  whether  it  divides 
them  both  in  two,  or  whether  it  does  not  divide  them,  and  yet  how  the  ray  AB 
above  is  always  divided;  it  seems  that  one  is  obliged  to  conclude  that  the  waves 
of  light,  after  having  passed  through  the  first  crystal,  acquire  a  certain  form  or 
disposition  in  virtue  of  which,  when  meeting  the  texture  of  the  second  crystal, 
in  certain  positions,  they  can  move  the  two  different  kinds  of  matter  which 
serve  for  the  two  species  of  refraction;  and  when  meeting  the  second  crystal  in 
another  position  are  able  to  move  only  one  of  these  kinds  of  matter.  But  to 
tell  how  this  occurs,  I  have  hitherto  found  nothing  which  satisfies  me. 

Leaving,  then,  to  others  this  research,  I  pass  to  Avhat  I  have  to  say  touching 
the  cause  of  the  extraordinary  figure  of  this  crystal,  and  why  it  cleaves  easily 
in  three  different  senses,  parallel  to  any  one  of  its  surfaces. 

There  are  many  bodies,  vegetable,  mineral,  and  congealed  salts,  which  are 
formed  with  certain  regular  angles  and  figures.  Thus,  among  flowers  there  are 
many  which  have  their  leaves  disposed  in  ordered  polygons,  to  the  number  of 
3,  4,  5,  or  6  sides,  but  not  more.  This  well  deserves  to  be  investigated,  both  as 
to  the  polygonal  figure,  and  as  to  why  it  does  not  exceed  the  number  6. 

Rock  crystal  grows  ordinarily  in  hexagonal  bars,  and  diamonds  are  found 
which  occur  with  a  square  point  and  polished  surfaces.  There  is  a  species  of 
small  flat  stones,  piled  up  directly  upon  one  another,  w'hich  are  all  of  pen¬ 
tagonal  figure  with  rounded  angles,  and  the  sides  a  little  folded  inw’ards.  The 
grains  of  gray  salt  w'hich  are  formed  from  sea  water  affect  the  figure,  or  at  least 
the  angle,  of  the  cube;  and  in  the  congelations  of  other  salts,  and  in  that  of 
sugar,  there  are  found  other  solid  angles  with  perfectly  flat  faces.  Small  snow¬ 
flakes  almost  abvays  fall  in  little  stars  with  6  points,  and  sometimes  in  hexa¬ 
gons  with  straight  sides.  And  I  have  often  observed,  in  w’ater  which  is  begin¬ 
ning  to  freeze,  a  kind  of  flat  and  thin  foliage  of  ice,  the  middle  ray  of  which 
throws  out  branches  inclined  at  an  angle  of  60  degrees.  All  these  things  are 
w^orthy  of  being  carefully  investigated  to  ascertain  how'  and  by  wLat  artiflce 
Nature  there  operates.  But  it  is  not  now'  my  intention  to  treat  fully  of  this 
matter.  It  seems  that  in  general  the  regularity  which  occurs  in  these  produc- 


602 


Treatise  on  Light 


B 


tions  comes  from  the  arrangement  of  the  small  invisible  equal  particles  of 
which  they  are  composed.  And,  coming  to  our  Iceland  crystal,  I  say  that  if 
there  Avere  a  pyramid  such  as  ABCD,  composed  of  small  rounded  corpuscles, 
not  spherical  but  flattened  spheroids,  such  as  would  be  made  by  the  rotation 
of  the  ellipse  GH  around  its  lesser  diameter  EF  (of  which  the  ratio  to  the  greater 
diameter  is  very  nearly  that  of  1  to  the  square  root 
of  8) — I  say  that  then  the  solid  angle  of  the  point 
D  would  be  equal  to  the  obtuse  and  equilateral 
angle  of  this  crystal.  I  say,  further,  that  if  these 
corpuscles  were  lightly  stuck  together,  on  breaking 
this  pyramid  it  would  break  along  faces  parallel  to 
those  that  make  its  point:  and  by  this  means,  as  it 
is  easy  to  see,  it  would  produce  prisms  similar  to 
those  of  the  same  crystal  as  this  other  figure  repre¬ 
sents.  The  reason  is  that  when  broken  in  this  fashion 
a  whole  layer  separates  easily  from  its  neighbouring 
layer,  since  each  spheroid  has  to  be  detached  only 
from  the  three  spheroids  of  the  next  layer;  of  which 
three  there  is  but  one  which  touches  it  on  its  flat¬ 
tened  surface,  and  the  other  tw’o  at  the  edges.  And 
the  reason  that  the  surfaces  separate  sharp  and  polished  is  that  if  any  spheroid 
of  the  neighbouring  surface  Avould  come  out  by  attaching  itself  to  the  sur¬ 
face  which  is  being  separated,  it  would  be  needful  for  it  to  detach  itself  from 
six  other  spheroids  which  hold  it  locked,  and  four  of  Avhich  press  it  by  these  flat¬ 
tened  surfaces.  Since,  then,  not  only  the  angles  of  our  crystal  but  also  the 
manner  in  which  it  splits  agree  precisely  A\dth  what  is  observed  in  the  assem¬ 
blage  composed  of  such  spheroids,  there  is  great  reason  to  believe  that  the 
particles  are  shaped  and  ranged  in  the  same  way. 

There  is  even  probability  enough  that  the  prisms  of  this  crystal  are  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  breaking  up  of  pyramids,  since  Mr.  Bartholinus  relates  that  he 
occasionally  found  some  pieces  of  triangularly  pyramidal  figure.  But  when  a 
mass  is  composed  interiorly  only  of  these  little  spheroids  thus  piled  up,  Avhat- 
ever  form  it  may  have  exteriorly,  it  is  certain,  by  the  same  reasoning  which 
I  have  just  explained,  that  if  broken  it  would  produce  similar  prisms.  It  re¬ 
mains  to  be  seen  whether  there  are  other  reasons  which  confirm  our  conjecture, 
and  whether  there  are  none  which  are  repugnant  to  it. 

It  may  be  objected  that  this  crystal, 
being  so  composed,  might  be  capable 
of  cleavage  in  yet  Gvo  more  fashions; 
one  of  Avhich  Avould  be  along  planes 
parallel  to  the  base  of  the  pyramid, 
that  is  to  say  to  the  triangle  ABC ;  the 
other  would  be  parallel  to  a  plane  the 
trace  of  which  is  marked  by  the  lines 
GH,  HK,  KL.  To  Avhich  I  say  that  both 
the  one  and  the  other,  though  prac¬ 
ticable,  are  more  difficult  than  those 
which  Avere  parallel  to  any  one  of  the 
three  planes  of  the  pyramid;  and  that. 


Chapter  V  603 

therefore,  when  striking  on  the  crystal  in  order  to  break  it,  it  ought  always 
to  split  rather  along  these  three  planes  than  along  the  two  others.  When  one 
has  a  number  of  spheroids  of  the  form  above  described,  and  ranges  them  in  a 
pyramid,  one  sees  why  the  two  methods  of  division  are  more  difficult.  For  in 
the  case  of  that  division  which  would  be  parallel  to  the  base,  each  spheroid 
would  be  obliged  to  detach  itself  from  three  others  which  it  touches  upon  their 
flattened  surfaces,  which  hold  more  strongly  than  the  contacts  at  the  edges. 
And  besides  that,  this  division  vdll  not  occur  along  entire  layers,  because  each 
of  the  spheroids  of  a  layer  is  scarcely  held  at  all  by  the  6  of  the  same  layer  that 
surround  it,  since  they  only  touch  it  at  the  edges ;  so  that  it  adheres  readily  to 
the  neighbouring  layer,  and  the  others  to  it,  for  the  same  reason;  and  this 
causes  uneven  surfaces.  Also  one  sees  by  experiment  that  when  grinding  down 
the  crystal  on  a  rather  rough  stone,  directly  on  the  equilateral  solid  angle,  one 
verily  finds  much  facility  in  reducing  it  in  this  direction,  but  much  difficulty 
afterwards  in  polishing  the  surface  which  has  been  flattened  in  this  manner. 

As  for  the  other  method  of  division  along  the  plane  GHKL,  it  will  be  seen 
that  each  spheroid  would  have  to  detach  itself  from  four  of  the  neighbouring 
layer,  two  of  which  touch  it  on  the  flattened  surfaces,  and  two  at  the  edges. 
So  that  this  division  is  likewise  more  difficult  than  that  which  is  made  parallel 
to  one  of  the  surfaces  of  the  crystal;  where,  as  we  have  said,  each  spheroid  is 
detached  from  only  three  of  the  neighbouring  layer :  of  which  three  there  is  one 
only  which  touches  it  on  the  flattened  surface,  and  the  other  two  at  the  edges 
only. 

However,  that  which  has  made  me  know  that  in  the  crystal  there  are  layers 
in  this  last  fashion  is  that  in  a  piece  weighing  half  a  pound  which  I  possess, 
one  sees  that  it  is  split  along  its  length,  as  is  the  above-mentioned  prism  by  the 
plane  GHKL;  as  appears  by  colours  of  the  iris  extending  throughout  this 
whole  plane,  although  the  two  pieces  still  hold  together.  All  this  proves,  then, 
that  the  composition  of  the  crystal  is  such  as  we  have  stated.  To  which  I  again 
add  this  experiment;  that  if  one  passes  a  knife  scraping  along  any  one  of  the 
natural  surfaces,  and  downwards  as  it  were  from  the  equilateral  obtuse  angle, 
that  is  to  say,  from  the  apex  of  the  pyramid,  one  finds  it  quite  hard;  but  by 
scraping  in  the  opposite  sense  an  incision  is  easily  made.  This  follows  mani¬ 
festly  from  the  situation  of  the  small  spheroids;  over  which,  in  the  first  manner, 
the  knife  glides;  but  in  the  other  manner  it  seizes  them  from  beneath  almost  as 
if-  they  were  the  scales  of  a  fish. 

I  will  not  undertake  to  say  anything  touching  the  way  in  which  so  many 
corpuscles  all  equal  and  similar  are  generated,  nor  how  they  are  set  in  such 
beautiful  order;  whether  they  are  formed  first  and  then  assembled,  or  whether 
they  arrange  themselves  thus  in  coming  into  being  and  as  fast  as  they  are 
produced,  which  seems  to  me  more  probable.  To  develop  truths  so  recondite 
there  would  be  needed  a  knowledge  of  nature  much  greater  than  that  which 
we  have.  I  'will  add  only  that  these  little  spheroids  could  well  contribute  to 
form  the  spheroids  of  the  waves  of  light,  here  above  supposed,  these  as  well 
as  those  being  similarly  situated,  and  with  their  axes  parallel. 

Calculations  which  have  been  supposed  in  this  chapter 

Mr.  Bartholinus,  in  his  treatise  of  this  crystal,  puts  at  101  degrees  the  obtuse 
angles  of  the  faces,  which  I  have  stated  to  be  101  degrees  52  minutes.  He  states 


B 


604  Treatise  on  Light 

that  he  measured  these  angles 
directly  on  the  crystal,  which 
is  difficult  to  do  with  ultimate 
exactitude,  because  the  edges 
such  as  CA,  CB,  in  this  figure, 
are  generally  worn,  and  not 
quite  straight.  For  more  cer¬ 
tainty,  therefore,  I  preferred 
to  measure  actually  the  obtuse 
angle  by  which  the  faces 
CBDA,  CBVF  are  inclined  to 
one  another,  namely,  the  angle 
OCN  formed  by  drawing  CN  perpendicular  to  FV,  and  CO  perpendicular  to 
DA.  This  angle  OCN  I  found  to  be  105  degrees;  and  its  supplement  CNP  to 
be  75  degrees,  as  it  should  be. 

To  find  from  this  the  obtuse  angle  BCA,  I  imagined  a  sphere  having  its 
centre  at  C,  and  on  its  surface  a  spherical  triangle,  formed  by  the  intersection 
^  of  three  planes  which  enclose  the  solid  angle  C.  In  this 

equilateral  triangle,  which  is  ABF  in  this  other  figure,  I 
see  that  each  of  the  angles  should  be  105  degrees,  namely, 
equal  to  the  angle  OCN;  and  that  each  of  the  sides 
should  be  of  as  many  degrees  as  the  angle  ACB,  or  ACF, 
or  BCF.  Having  then  draAvn  the  arc  FQ  perpendicular  to 
the  side  AB,  which  it  divides  equally  at  Q,  the  triangle 
FQA  has  a  right  angle  at  Q,  the  angle  A  105  degrees, 
and  F  half  as  much,  namely  52  degrees  30  minutes; 
whence  the  hypotenuse  AF  is  found  to  be  101  degrees  52  minutes.  And  this 
arc  AF  is  the  measure  of  the  angle  ACF  in  the  figure  of  the  crystal . 

In  the  same  figure,  if  the  plane  CGHF  cuts  the  crystal  so  that  it  divides  the 
obtuse  angles  ACB,  MHV  in  the  middle,  it  is  stated,  in  Article  10,  that  the 
angle  CFH  is  70  degrees  57  minutes.  This  again  is  easily  shown  in  the  same 
spherical  triangle  ABF,  in  which  it  appears  that  the  arc  FQ  is  as  many  degrees 
as  the  angle  GCF  in  the  crystal,  the  supplement  of  which  is  the  angle  CFH. 
Now  the  arc  FQ  is  found  to  be  109  degrees  3  minutes.  Then  its  supplement, 
70  degrees  57  minutes,  is  the  angle  CFH. 

It  was  stated,  in  Article  26,  that  the  straight  line  CS,  which  in  the  preceding 
figure  is  CH,  being  the  axis  of  the  crystal,  that  is  to  say,  being  equally  inclined 
to  the  three  sides  CA,  CB,  CF,  the  angle  GCH  is  45  degrees  20  minutes.  This 
is  also  easily  calculated  by  the  same  spherical  triangle.  For  by  drawing  the 
other  arc  AD  wffiich  cuts  BF  equally,  and  intersects  FQ  at  S,  this  point  will  be 
the  centre  of  the  triangle.  And  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  arc  SQ  is  the  measure 
of  the  angle  GCH  in  the  figure  which  represents  the  crystal.  Now'  in  the  tri¬ 
angle  QAS,  which  is  right-angled,  one  know's  also  the  angle  A,  w'hich  is  52 
degrees  30  minutes,  and  the  side  AQ  50  degrees  56  minutes;  w'hence  the  side 
SQ  is  found  to  be  45  degrees  20  minutes. 

In  Article  27  it  w'as  required  to  show'  that  PMS,  being  an  ellipse  the  centre 
of  which  is  C,  and  which  touches  the  straight  line  MD  at  M  so  that  the  angle 
MCL  w'hich  CM  makes  with  CL,  perpendicular  on  DM,  is  6  degrees  40  min¬ 
utes,  and  its  semi-minor  axis  CS  making  wdth  CG  (w'hich  is  parallel  to  MD) 


Chapter  V  605 

an  angle  GCS  of  45  degrees  20  minutes, — it  was  required  to  show,  I  say,  that, 
CM  being  100,000  parts,  PC  the  semi-major  diameter  of  this  ellipse  is  105,032 
parts,  and  CS,  the  semi-minor  diameter,  93,410. 

Let  CP  and  CS  be  prolonged  and  meet  the  tangent  DM  at  D  and  Z;  and 
from  the  point  of  contact  M  let  MX  and  MO  be  drawn  as  perpendiculars  to 

CP  and  CS.  Now  because  the  angles  SCP, 
GCL,  are  right  angles,  the  angle  PCL  \yi\\  be 
equal  to  GCS  which  was  45  degrees  20  min¬ 
utes.  And  deducting  the  angle  LCM,  which  is 
6  degrees  40  minutes,  from  LCP,  which  is  45 
degrees  20  minutes,  there  remains  MCP,  38 
degrees  40  minutes.  Considering,  then,  CM 
as  a  radius  of  100,000  parts,  MN,  the  sine  of 
38  degrees  40  minutes,  will  be  62,479.  And  in 
the  right-angled  triangle  MND,  MN  mil  be 
to  ND  as  the  radius  of  the  tables  is  to  the 
tangent  of  45  degrees  20  minutes  (because 
the  angle  NMD  is  equal  to  DCL,  or  GCS); 
that  is  to  say,  as  100,000  to  101,170:  whence 
results  ND,  63,210.  But  NC  is  78,079  of  the  same  parts,  CM  being  100,000, 
because  NC  is  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  MCP,  which  was  38 
degrees  40  minutes.  Then  the  whole  line  DC  is  141,289;  and  CP,  which  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  DC  and  CN,  since  MD  touches  the  ellipse,  mil 
be  105,032. 

Similarly,  because  the  angle  OMZ  is  equal  to  CDZ,  or  LCZ,  which  is  44 
degrees  40  minutes,  being  the  complement  of  GCS,  it  follows  that,  as  the  radius 
of  the  tables  is  to  the  tangent  of  44  degrees  40  minutes,  so  mil  OM  78,079  be 
to  OZ  77,176.  But  OC  is  62,479  of  these  same  parts  of  which  CM  is  100,000, 
because  it  is  equal  to  MN,  the  sine  of  the  angle  MCP,  which  is  38  degrees  40 
minutes.  Then  the  whole  line  CZ  is  139,655;  and  CS,  which  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  CZ  and  CO  mil  be  93,410. 

At  the  same  place  it  was  stated  that  GC  w^as  found  to  be  98,779  parts.  To 
prove  this,  let  PE  be  drawn  in  the  same  figure  parallel  to  DM,  and  meeting 
CM  at  E.  In  the  right-angled  triangle  CLD  the  side  CL  is  99,324  (CM  being 
100,000),  because  CL  is  the  sine  of  the  complement  of  the  angle  LCM,  which 
is  6  degrees  40  minutes.  And  since  the  angle  LCD  is  45  degrees  20  minutes, 
being  equal  to  GCS,  the  side  LD  is  found  to  be  100,486:  Avhence,  deducting 
ML  11,609  there  mil  remain  MD  88,877.  Now  as  CD  (which  was  141,289)  is 
to  DM  88,877,  so  mil  CP  105,032  be  to  PE  66,070.  But  as  the  rectangle  MEH 
(or  rather  the  difference  of  the  squares  on  CM  and  CE)  is  to  the  square  on 
MC,  so  is  the  square  on  PE  to  the  square  on  C^;  then  also  as  the  difference  of 
the  squares  on  DC  and  CP  to  the  square  on  CD,  so  also  is  the  square  on  PE 
to  the  square  on  gC.  But  DP,  CP,  and  PE  are  knoum;  hence,  also  one  knows 
GC,  which  is  98,779. 

Lemma  which  has  been  supposed 

If  a  spheroid  is  touched  by  a  straight  line,  and  also  by  two  or  more  planes 
which  are  parallel  to  this  line,  though  not  parallel  to  one  another,  all  the  points 
of  contact  of  the  line,  as  well  as  of  the  planes,  will  be  in  one  and  the  same  ellipse 
made  by  a  plane  which  passes  through  the  centre  of  the  spheroid. 


H 


606  Treatise  on  Light 

Let  LED  be  the  spheroid  touched  by  the  line  BM  at  the  point  B,  and  also 
by  the  planes  parallel  to  this  line  at  the  points  0  and  A.  It  is  required  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  that  the  points  B,  0,  and  A  are  in  one  and  the  same  ellipse  made  in 
the  spheroid  by  a  plane  which  passes  through  its  centre. 

Through  the  line  BM,  and  through  the  points  0  and  A,  let  there  be  drawn 
planes  parallel  to  one  another,  which,  in  cutting  the  spheroid  make  the  ellipses 
LBD,  POP,  QAQ;  which  will  all  be  similar 
and  similarly  disposed,  and  will  have  their 
centres  K,  N,  R,  in  one  and  the  same  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  spheroid,  which  will  also  be 
the  diameter  of  the  ellipse  made  by  the  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  plane  that  passes  through  the 
centre  of  the  spheroid,  and  which  cuts  the 
planes  of  the  three  said  ellipses  at  right 
angles:  for  all  this  is  manifest  by  Proposi¬ 
tion  15  of  the  book  of  Conoids  and  Spheroids 
of  Archimedes.  Further,  the  two  latter 
planes,  which  are  drawn  through  the  points 
O  and  A,  will  also,  by  cutting  the  planes 
which  touch  the  spheroid  in  these  same 
points,  generate  straight  lines,  as  OH  and 
AS,  which  will,  as  is  easy  to  see,  be  parallel 
to  BM;  and  all  three,  BM,  OH,  AS,  will 
touch  the  ellipses  LBD,  POP,  QAQ  in  these 
the  planes  of  these  ellipses,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  planes  which  touch  the 
spheroid.  If  now  from  these  points  B,  0,  A,  there  are  drawn  the  straight  lines 
BK,  ON,  AR,  through  the  centres  of  the  same  ellipses,  and  if  through  these 
centres  there  are  drawn  also  the  diameters  LD,  PP,  QQ,  parallel  to  the  tan¬ 
gents  BM,  OH,  AS;  these  wdll  be  conjugate  to  the  aforesaid  BK,  ON,  AR.  And 
because  the  three  ellipses  are  similar  and  similarly  disposed,  and  have  their  di¬ 
ameters  LD,  PP,  QQ  parallel,  it  is  certain  that  their  conjugate  diameters  BK, 
ON,  AR,  will  also  be  parallel.  And  the  centres  K,  N,  R  being,  as  has  been 
stated,  in  one  and  the  same  diameter  of  the  spheroid,  these  parallels  BK,  ON, 
AR  wall  necessarily  be  in  one  and  the  same  plane,  which  passes  through  this 
diameter  of  the  spheroid,  and,  in  consequence,  the  points  R,  0,  A  are  in  one 
and  the  same  ellipse  made  by  the  intersection  of  this  plane.  Which  was  to  be 
proved.  And  it  is  manifest  that  the  demonstration  would  be  the  same  if, 
besides  the  points  0,  A,  there  had  been  others  in  which  the  spheroid  had  been 
touched  by  planes  parallel  to  the  straight  line  BM. 


points,  B,  0,  A;  since  they  are  in 


Chapter  VI 


607 


CHAPTER  SIX 

On  the  Figures  of  the  Transparent  Bodies 

Which  serve  for  refraction  and  for  reflexion 


After  having  explained  how  the  properties  of  reflexion  and  refraction  follow 
from  what  we  have  supposed  concerning  the  nature  of  light  and  of  opaque 
bodies  and  of  transparent  media,  I  ^vill  here  set  forth  a  very  easy  and  natural 
way  of  deducing,  from  the  same  principles,  the  true  figures  which  serve,  either 
by  reflexion  or  by  refraction,  to  collect  or  disperse  the  rays  of  light,  as  may  be 
desired.  For  though  I  do  not  see  yet  that  there  are  means  of  making  use  of 
these  figures,  so  far  as  relates  to  refraction,  not  only  because  of  the  difficulty 
of  shaping  the  glasses  of  telescopes  vfith  the  requisite  exactitude  according  to 
these  figures,  but  also  because  there  exists  in  refraction  itself  a  property  which 
hinders  the  perfect  concurrence  of  the  rays,  as  Mr.  Newton  has  very  well 
proved  by  experiment,  I  mil  yet  not  desist  from  relating  the  invention,  since 
it  offers  itself,  so  to  speak,  of  itself,  and  because  it  further  confirms  our  theory 
of  refraction,  by  the  agreement  which  here  is  found  between  the  refracted  ray 
and  the  reflected  ray.  Besides,  it  may  occur  that  some  one  in  the  future  will 
discover  in  it  utilities  which  at  present  are  not  seen. 

To  proceed,  then,  to  these  figures,  let  us  suppose  first  that  it  is  desired  to 
find  a  surface  CDE  which  shall  reassemble  at  a  point  B  rays  coming  from  an¬ 
other  point  A;  and  that  the  summit  of  the  surface  shall  be  the  given  point  D 
in  the  straight  line  AB.  I  say  that,  whether  by  reflexion  or  by  refraction,  it  is 


only  necessary  to  make  this  surface  such  that  the  path  of  the  light  from  the 
point  A  to  all  points  of  the  curved  line  CDE,  and  from  these  to  the  point  of 
concurrence  (as  here  the  path  along  the  straight  lines  AC,  CB,  along  AL,  LB, 
and  along  AD,  DB),  shall  be  everywhere  traversed  in  equal  times:  by  which 
principle  the  finding  of  these  curves  becomes  very  easy. 

So  far  as  relates  to  the  reflecting  surface,  since  the  sum  of  the  lines  AC,  CB 
ought  to  be  equal  to  that  of  AD,  DB,  it  appears  that  DCE  ought  to  be  an 
ellipse;  and  for  refraction,  the  ratio  of  the  velocities  of  waves  of  light  in  the 
media  A  and  B  being  supposed  to  be  known,  for  example  that  of  3  to  2  (which 
is  the  same,  as  we  have  shoum,  as  the  ratio  of  the  sines  in  the  refraction),  it  is 


608 


Treatise  on  Light 


only  necessary  to  make  DH  equal  to  | 
of  DB ;  and  having  after  that  described 
from  the  centre  A  some  arc  FC,  cutting 
DB  at  F,  then  describe  another  from 
centre  B  vdth  its  semi-diameter  BX 
equal  to  %  of  FH ;  and  the  point  of  in¬ 
tersection  of  the  two  arcs  will  be  one 
of  the  points  required,  through  which 
the  curve  should  pass.  For  this  point, 
having  been  found  in  this  fashion,  it  is 
easy  forthwith  to  demonstrate  that  the 
time  along  AC,  CB  will  be  equal  to  the 
time  along  AD,  DB. 

For,  assuming  that  the  line  AD  represents  the  time  which  the  light  takes  to 
traverse  this  same  distance  AD  in  air,  it  is  evident  that  DH,  equal  to  of  DB, 
vnW  represent  the  time  of  the  light  along  DB  in  the  medium,  because  it  needs 
here  more  time  in  proportion  as  its  speed  is  slower.  Therefore,  the  whole  line 
AH  will  represent  the  time  along  AD,  DB.  Similarly,  the  line  AC  or  AF  mil 
represent  the  time  along  AC;  and  FH,  being  by  construction  equal  to  ^  of  CB, 
it  will  represent  the  time  along  CB  in  the  medium;  and,  in  consequence,  the 
whole  line  AH  will  represent  also  the  time  along  AC,  CB.  Whence  it  appears 
that  the  time  along  AC,  CB  is  equal  to  the  time  along  AD,  DB.  And,  similarly, 
it  can  be  shown,  if  L  and  K  are  other  points  in  the  curve  CDE,  that  the  times 
along  AL,  LB,  and  along  AK,  KB,  are  always  represented  by  the  line  AH,  and, 
therefore,  equal  to  the  said  time  along  AD,  DB. 

In  order  to  show  further  that  the  surfaces  which  these  curves  mil  generate 
by  revolution  mil  direct  all  the  rays  which  reach  them  from  the  point  A  in 
such  wise  that  they  tend  towards  B,  let  there  be  supposed  a  point  K  in  the 
curve,  farther  from  D  than  C  is,  but  such  that  the  straight  line  AK  falls  from 
outside  upon  the  curve  which  serves  for  the  refraction;  and  from  the  centre 
B  let  the  arc  KS  be  described,  cutting  BD  at  S,  and  the  straight  line  CB  at  R; 
and  from  the  centre  A  describe  the  arc  DN  meeting  AK  at  N. 

Since  the  sums  of  the  times  along  AK,  KB,  and  along  AC,  CB  are  equal,  if 
from  the  former  sum  one  deducts  the  time  along  KB,  and  if  from  the  other  one 
deducts  the  time  along  RB,  there  mil  remain  the  time  along  AK  as  equal  to  the 
time  along  the  two  parts  AC,  CR.  Consequently,  in  the  time  that  the  light  has 
come  along  AK  it  mil  also  have  come  along  AC  and  will  in  addition  have 
made,  in  the  medium  from  the  centre  C,  a  partial  spherical  wave,  having  a 
semi-diameter  equal  to  CR.  And  this  wave  mil  necessarily  touch  the  circum¬ 
ference  KS  at  R,  since  CB  cuts  this  circumference  at  right  angles.  Similarly, 
having  taken  any  other  point  L  in  the  curve,  one  can  show  that  in  the  same 
time  as  the  light  passes  along  AL  it  mil  also  have  come  along  AL  and  in  addi¬ 
tion  mil  have  made  a  partial  wave,  from  the  centre  L,  which  mil  touch  the 
same  circumference  KS.  And  so  mth  all  other  points  of  the  curve  CDE.  Then, 
at  the  moment  that  the  light  reaches  K  the  arc  KRS  mil  be  the  termination 
of  the  movement,  which  has  spread  from  A  through  DCK.  And  thus  this  same 
arc  will  constitute  in  the  medium  the  propagation  of  the  wave  emanating  from 
A;  which  wave  may  be  represented  by  the  arc  DN,  or  by  any  other  nearer  the 
centre  A.  But  all  the  pieces  of  the  arc  KRS  are  propagated  successively  along 


Chapter  VI  609 

straight  lines  which  are  perpendicular  to  them,  that  is  to  say,  which  tend  to 
the  centre  B  (for  that  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  proved 
above  that  the  pieces  of  spherical  waves  are  propagated  along  the  straight  lines 
coming  from  their  centre),  and  these  progressions  of  the  pieces  of  the  waves 
constitute  the  rays  themselves  of  light.  It  appears,  then,  that  all  these  rays 
tend  here  towards  the  point  B. 

One  might  also  determine  the  point  C,  and  all  the  others,  in  this  curve  which 
serves  for  the  refraction,  by  dividing  DA  at  G  in  such  a  w'ay  that  DG  is  %  of 
DA,  and  describing  from  the  centre  B  any  arc  CX  w^hich  cuts  BD  at  X,  and 
another  from  the  centre  A  with  its  semi-diameter  AF  equal  to  of  GX;  or 
rather,  having  described,  as  before,  the  arc  CX,  it  is  only  necessary  to  make 
DF  equal  to^  of  DX,  and  from  the  centre  A  to  strike  the  arc  FC;  for  these  two 


E 


constructions,  as  may  be  easily  knovm,  come  back  to  the  first  one  which  was 
shown  before.  And  it  is  manifest  by  the  last  method  that  this  curve  is  the  same 
that  M.  Descartes  has  given  in  his  Geometry,  and  which  he  calls  the  first  of  his 
Ovals. 

It  is  only  a  part  of  this  oval  which  serves  for  the  refraction,  namely,  the  part 
DK,  ending  at  K,  if  AK  is  the  tangent.  As  to  the  other  part,  Descartes  has 
remarked  that  it  could  serve  for  reflexions,  if  there  were  some  material  of  a 
mirror  of  such  a  nature  that,  by  its  means,  the  force  of  the  rays  (or,  as  we 
should  say,  the  velocity  of  the  light,  which  he  could  not  say,  since  he  held  that 
the  movement  of  light  was  instantaneous)  could  be  augmented  in  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  3  to  2.  But  we  have  shown  that  in  our  way  of  explaining  reflexion,  such 
a  thing  could  not  arise  from  the  matter  of  the  mirror,  and  it  is  entirely  im¬ 
possible. 


610  Treatise  on  Light 

From  what  has  been  demonstrated  about  this  oval,  it  will  be  easy  to  find 
the  figure  which  serves  to  collect  to  a  point  incident  parallel  rays.  For  by  sup¬ 
posing  just  the  same  construction,  but  the  point  A  infinitely  distant,  giving 
parallel  rays,  our  oval  becomes  a  true  ellipse,  the  construction  of  which  differs 
in  no  way  from  that  of  the  oval,  except  that  FC,  which  previously  was  an  arc 
of  a  circle,  is  here  a  straight  line,  perpendicular  to  DB.  For  the  wave  of  light 
DN,  being  like^^^se  represented  by  a  straight  line,  it  wdll  be  seen  that  all  the 
points  of  this  wave,  travelling  as  far  as  the  surface  KD  along  lines  parallel  to 
DB,  will  advance  subsequently  towards  the  point  B,  and  vdll  arrive  there  at 
the  same  time.  As  for  the  ellipse  which  served  for  reflexion,  it  is  evident  that 
it  will  here  become  a  parabola,  since  its  focus  A  may  be  regarded  as  infinitely 
distant  from  the  other,  B,  which  is  here  the  focus  of  the  parabola,  towards 
which  all  the  reflexions  of  rays  parallel  to  AB  tend.  And  the  demonstration  of 
these  effects  is  just  the  same  as  the  preceding. 

But  that  this  curved  line  CDE  which  serves  for  refraction  is  an  ellipse,  and 
is  such  that  its  major  diameter  is  to  the  distance  between  its  foci  as  3  to  2, 
which  is  the  proportion  of  the  refraction,  can  be  easily  found  by  the  cal¬ 
culus  of  algebra.  For,  DB,  which  is  given,  being  called  a;  its  undetermined 
perpendicular  DT  being  called  x)  and  TC  y,  FB  will  be  a—y,  CB  wiW  be 
■\/xx-\-aa—2ay+yy.  But  the  nature  of  the  curve  is  such  that  %  of  TC  together 
with  CB  is  equal  to  DB,  as  was  stated  in  the  last  construction:  then  the  equa¬ 
tion  will  be  between  %y-\-\/xx-\-aa—2ay-i-yy  and  a;  which  being  reduced,  gives 
^/hdy  —  yy  equal  toy'bXx;that  is  to  say,  that  having  made  DO  equal  to  %  of  DB, 
the  rectangle  DFO  is  equal  to  %  of  the  square  on  FC.  Whence  it  is  seen  that 
DC  is  an  ellipse,  of  which  the  axis  DO  is  to  the  parameter  as  9  to  5;  and, 
therefore,  the  square  on  DO  is  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between  the  foci 
as  9  to  9  — 5,  that  is  to  say  4;  and,  finally,  the  line  DO  vill  be  to  this  distance 
as  3  to  2. 


Again,  if  one  supposes  the  point  B  to  be  infinitely  distant,  in  lieu  of  our  first 
oval  we  shall  find  that  CDE  is  a  true  hyperbola;  which  will  make  those  rays 
become  parallel  which  come  from  the  point  A.  And,  in  consequence  also,  those 
which  are  parallel  vdthin  the  transparent  body  ^\dll  be  collected  outside  at  the 
point  A.  Now  it  must  be  remarked  that  CX  and  KS  become  straight  lines  per- 


Chapter  VI  611 

pendicular  to  BA,  because  they  represent  arcs  of  circles  the  centre  of  which  is 
infinitely  distant.  And  the  intersection  of  the  perpendicular  CX  with  the  arc 
FC  will  give  the  point  C,  one  of  those  through  which  the  curve  ought  to  pass. 
And  this  operates  so  that  all  the  parts  of  the  wave  of  light  DN,  coming  to  meet 
the  surface  KDE,  vill  advance  thence  along  parallels  to  KS  and  will  arrive  at 
this  straight  line  at  the  same  time ;  of  which  the  proof  is  again  the  same  as  that 
which  served  for  the  first  oval.  Besides,  one  finds  by  a  calculation  as  easy  as 
the  preceding  one,  that  CDE  is  here  a  hyperbola  of  which  the  axis  DO  is  ^  of 
AD,  and  the  parameter  equal  to  AD.  Whence,  it  is  easily  proved  that  DO  is  to 
the  distance  between  the  foci  as  3  to  2. 

These  are  the  two  cases  in  which  conic  sections  serve  for  refraction,  and  are 
the  same  which  are  explained,  in  his  Dioptrique,  by  Descartes,  who  first  found 
out  the  use  of  these  lines  in  relation  to  refraction,  as  also  that  of  the  ovals  the 


first  of  which  we  have  already  set  forth.  The  second  oval  is  that  which  serves 
for  rays  that  tend  to  a  given  point;  in  which  oval,  if  the  apex  of  the  surface 
which  receives  the  rays  is  D,  it  wll  happen  that  the  other  apex  will  be  situated 
between  B  and  A,  or  beyond  A,  according  as  the  ratio  of  AD  to  DB  is  given  of 
greater  or  lesser  value.  And  in  this  latter  case  it  is  the  same  as  that  which 
Descartes  calls  his  third  oval. 

Now  the  finding  and  construction  of  this  second  oval  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  first,  and  the  demonstration  of  its  effect  likewise.  But  it  is  worthy  of  remark 
that  in  one  case  this  oval  becomes  a  perfect  circle,  namely  when  the  ratio  of 
AD  to  DB  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  refractions,  here  as  3  to  2,  as  I  ob¬ 
served  a  long  time  ago.  The  fourth  oval,  serving  only  for  impossible  reflexions, 
there  is  no  need  to  set  it  forth. 

As  for  the  manner  in  which  M.  Descartes  discovered  these  lines,  since  he  has 
given  no  explanation  of  it,  nor  anyone  else  since  that  I  know  of,  I  will  say  here, 
in  passing,  what  it  seems  to  me  it  must  have  been.  Let  it  be  proposed  to  find 
the  surface  generated  by  the  revolution  of  the  curve  KDE,  which,  receiving 


612  Treatise  on  Light 

the  incident  rays  coming  to  it 
from  the  point  A,  shall  deviate 
them  toward  the  point  B.  Then 
considering  this  other  curve  as 
already  known,  and  that  its 
apex  D  is  in  the  straight  line 
AB,  let  us  divide  it  up  into  an 
infinitude  of  small  pieces  by  the 
points  G,  C,  F;  and  having 
drawn  from  each  of  these  points, 
straight  lines  towards  A  to  re¬ 
present  the  incident  rays,  and 
other  straight  lines  towards  B, 
let  there  also  be  described  with 
centre  A  the  arcs  GL,  CM,  FN, 

DO,  cutting  the  rays  that  come 
from  A  at  L,  M,  N,  O;  and  from 
the  points  K,  G,  C,  F,  let  there 
be  described  the  arcs  KQ,  GR, 

CS,  FT  cutting  the  rays  towards  B  at  Q,  R,  S,  T;  and  let  us  suppose  that  the 
straight  line  HKZ  cuts  the  curve  at  K  at  right  angles. 

Then  AK  being  an  incident  ray,  and  KB  its  refraction  within  the  medium, 
it  needs  must  be,  according  to  the  law  of  refraction  which  was  known  to  M. 
Descartes,  that  the  sine  of  the  angle  ZKA  should  be  to  the  sine  of  the  angle 


HKB  as  3  to  2,  supposing  that  this  is  the  proportion  of  the  refraction  of  glass; 
or  rather,  that  the  sine  of  the  angle  KGL  should  have  this  same  ratio  to  the 
sine  of  the  angle  GKQ,  considering  KG,  GL,  KQ  as  straight  lines  because  of 
their  smallness.  But  these  sines  are  the  lines  KL  and  GQ,  if  GK  is  taken  as  the 
radius  of  the  circle.  Then  LK  ought  to  be  to  GQ  as  3  to  2;  and  in  the  same  ratio 
MG  to  CR,  NC  to  FS,  OF  to  DT.  Then  also  the  sum  of  all  the  antecedents  to 
all  the  consequents  would  be  as  3  to  2.  Now,  by  prolonging  the  arc  DO  until 
it  meets  AK  at  X,  KX  is  the  sum  of  the  antecedents.  And  by  prolonging  the 
arc  KQ  till  it  meets  AD  at  Y,  the  sum  of  the  consequents  is  DY.  Then  KX 
ought  to  be  to  DY  as  3  to  2.  Whence,  it  would  appear  that  the  curve  KDE  was 
of  such  a  nature  that  having  drawn  from  some  point  which  had  been  assumed. 


Chapter  VI 


613 


such  as  K,  the  straight  lines  KA,  KB,  the  excess  by  which  AK  surpasses  AD 
should  be  to  the  excess  of  DB  over  KB,  as  3  to  2.  For  it  can  similarly  be  demon¬ 
strated,  by  taking  any  other  point  in  the  curve,  such  as  G,  that  the  excess  of 
AG  over  AD,  namely  VG,  is  to  the  excess  of  BD  over  DG,  namely  DP,  in 
this  same  ratio  of  3  to  2.  And,  following  this  principle,  M.  Descartes  constructed 

these  curves  in  his  Geometry; 
and  he  easily  recognized  that 
in  the  case  of  parallel  rays, 
these  curves  became  hyper¬ 
bolas  and  ellipses. 

Let  us  now  return  to  our 
method  and  let  us  see  how  it 
leads  ^vithout  difficulty  to  the 
finding  of  the  curves  which 
one  side  of  the  glass  requires 
when  the  other  side  is  of  a 
given  figure;  a  figure  not  only 
plane  or  spherical,  or  made 
by  one  of  the  conic  sections 
(which  is  the  restriction  with 
which  Descartes  proposed  this 
problem,  leaving  the  solution 
to  those  who  should  come 
after  him)  but  generally  any 
figure  whatever:  that  is  to 
say,  one  made  by  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  any  given  curved  line 
to  which  one  must  merely 
know  how  to  draAv  straight 
lines  as  tangents. 

Let  the  given  figure  be  that 
made  by  the  revolution  of 
some  curve  such  as  AK  about 
the  axis  AV,  and  that  this 
side  of  the  glass  receives  rays 
coming  from  the  point  L. 
Furthermore,  let  the  thick¬ 
ness  AB  of  the  middle  of  the 
glass  be  given,  and  the  point 
F  at  which  one  desires  the 
rays  to  be  all  perfectly  re¬ 
united,  whatever  be  the  first 
refraction  occurring  at  the 
surface  AK. 

I  say  that  for  this  the  sole 
requirement  is  that  the  out¬ 
line  BDK  which  constitutes 
the  other  surface  shall  be 
such  that  the  path  of  the 


614  Treatise  on  Light 

light  from  the  point  L  to  the  surface  AK,  and  from  thence  to  the  surface  BDK, 
and  from  thence  to  the  point  F,  shall  be  traversed  everywhere  in  equal  times, 
and  in  each  case  in  a  time  equal  to  that  which  the  light  employs  to  pass  along 
the  straight  line  LF  of  which  the  part  AB  is  within  the  glass. 

Let  LG  be  a  ray  falling  on  the  arc  AK.  Its  refraction  GV  vdll  be  given  by 
means  of  the  tangent  which  vdll  be  dra^^^l  at  the  point  G.  Now  in  GV  the  point 
D  must  be  found  such  that  FD  together  mth  ^  of  DG  and  the  straight  line 
GL,  may  be  equal  to  FB  together  vdth  of  BA  and  the  straight  line  AL; 
which,  as  is  clear,  make  up  a  given  length.  Or  rather,  by  deducting  from  each 
the  length  of  LG,  which  is  also  given,  it  will  merely  be  needful  to  adjust  FD 
up  to  the  straight  line  VG  in  such  a  way  that  FD  together  with  ^  of  DG  is 
equal  to  a  given  straight  line,  which  is  a  quite  easy  plane  problem:  and  the 
point  D  will  be  one  of  those  through  which  the  curve  BDK  ought  to  pass.  And 
similarly,  having  drawn  another  ray  LM,  and  found  its  refraction  MO,  the 
point  N  will  be  found  in  this  line,  and  so  on  as  many  times  as  one  desires. 

To  demonstrate  the  effect  of  the  curve,  let  there  be  described  about  the 
centre  L  the  circular  arc  AH,  cutting  LG  at  H;  and  about  the  centre  F  the 
arc  BP;  and  in  AB  let  AS  be  taken  equal  to  %  of  HG;  and  SE  equal  to  GD. 
Then,  considering  AH  as  a  wave  of  light  emanating  from  the  point  L,  it  is 
certain  that  during  the  time  in  which  its  piece  H  arrives  at  G  the  piece  A  ivill 
have  advanced  \vithin  the  transparent  body  only  along  AS;  for  I  suppose,  as 
above,  the  proportion  of  the  refraction  to  be  as  3  to  2.  Now  we  know  that  the 
piece  of  wave,  which  is  incident  on  G,  advances  thence  along  the  line  GD, 
since  GV  is  the  refraction  of  the  ray  LG.  Then  during  the  time  that  this  piece 
of  wave  has  taken  from  G  to  D,  the  other  piece  which  was  at  S  has  reached  E, 
since  GD,  SE  are  equal.  But  while  the  latter  will  advance  from  E  to  B,  the 
piece  of  wave  which  was  at  D  mil  have  spread  into  the  air  its  partial  wave, 
the  semi-diameter  of  which,  DC  (supposing  this  wave  to  cut  the  line  DF  at 
C),  will  be  of  EB,  since  the  velocity  of  light  outside  the  medium  is  to  that 
inside  as  3  to  2.  Now  it  is  easy  to  show  that  this  Avave  aatII  touch  the  arc  BP 
at  this  point  C.  For  since,  by  construction,  FD  4-^/2  DG  +  GL  are  equal  to  FB 
-|-3/2BA-t-AL;on  deducting  the  equals  LH,  LA,  there  Avill  remain  FD+^DG-b 
GH  equal  to  FB-f^^BA.  And,  again,  deducting  from  one  side  GH,  and  from 
the  other  side  3^2  of  AS,  which  are  equal,  there  Avill  remain  FD  AAith^^  DG  equal 
to  FB  with  ^  of  BS.  But  3^2  of  DG  are  equal  to  ^  of  ES;  then  FD  is  equal  to 
FB  with  1/2  of  BE.  But  DC  w'as  equal  to  ^  of  EB;  then  deducting  these  equal 
lengths  from  one  side  and  from  the  other,  there  will  remain  CF  equal  to  FB. 
And  thus  it  appears  that  the  Avave,  the  semi-diameter  of  Avhich  is  DC,  touches 
the  arc  BP  at  the  moment  Avhen  the  light  coming  from  the  point  L  has  arrived 
at  B  along  the  line  LB.  It  can  be  demonstrated  similarly  that  at  this  same 
moment  the  light  that  has  come  along  any  other  ray,  such  as  LM,  MN,  Avill 
have  propagated  the  movement  AAKich  is  terminated  at  the  arc  BP.  Whence 
it  folloAvs,  as  has  been  often  said,  that  the  propagation  of  the  Avave  AH,  after 
it  has  passed  through  the  thickness  of  the  glass,  Avill  be  the  spherical  AA^ave  BP, 
all  the  pieces  of  Avhich  ought  to  advance  along  straight  lines,  A\Kich  are  the 
rays  of  light,  to  the  centre  F.  Which  Avas  to  be  proved.  Similarly,  these  curved 
lines  can  be  found  in  all  the  cases  Avhich  can  be  proposed,  as  aatII  be  sufficiently 
shoAvn  by  one  or  tAvo  examples  AAffiich  I  aatU  add. 

Let  there  be  given  the  surface  of  the  glass  AK,  made  by  the  revolution  about 


Chapter  VI  615 

the  axis  BA  of  the  line  AK,  which  may  be  straight  or  curved.  Let  there  be  also 
given  in  the  axis  the  point  L  and  the  thickness  BA  of  the  glass;  and  let  it  be 
required  to  find  the  other  surface  KDB,  which  receiving  rays  that  are  parallel 
to  AB  nill  direct  them  in  such  wise  that  after  being  again  refracted  at  the 
given  surface  AK  they  will  all  be  reassembled  at  the  point  L. 

From  the  point  L  let  there  be  drawn  to  some  point  of  the  given  line  AK  the 
straight  line  LG,  which,  being  considered  as  a  ray  of  light,  its  refraction  GD 
will  then  be  found.  And  this  line  being  then  prolonged  at  one  side  or  the  other 
will  meet  the  straight  line  BL,  as  here  at  V.  Let  there  then  be  erected  on  AB 
the  perpendicular  BC,  wLich  will  represent  a  w^ave  of  light  coming  from  the 
infinitely  distant  point  F,  since  v/e  have  supposed  the  rays  to  be  parallel.  Then 
all  the  parts  of  this  w^ave  BC  must  arrive  at  the  same  time  at  the  point  L;  or 

rather  all  the  parts  of  a  wave  emanating 
from  the  point  L  must  arrive  at  the 
same  time  at  the  straight  line  BC.  And 
for  that  it  is  necessary  to  find  in  the  line 
VGD  the  point  D,  such  that  having 
drawm  DC  parallel  to  AB,  the  sum  of  CD 
plus  of  DG,  plus  GL  may  be  equal  to 
y  of  AB  plus  AL :  or  rather,  on  deduct¬ 
ing  from  both  sides  GL,  which  is  given, 
CD  plus  ^  of  DG  must  be  equal  to  a 
given  length ;  which  is  a  still  easier  prob¬ 
lem  than  the  preceding  construction. 
The  point  D  thus  found  will  be  one  of 
those  through  wKich  the  curve  ought  to 
pass;  and  the  proof  will  be  the  same  as 
before.  And  by  this  it  mil  be  proved  that 
the  weaves  which  come  from  the  point  L, 
after  having  passed  through  the  glass 
KAKB,  will  take  the  form  of  straight 
lines,  as  BC;  which  is  the  same  thing  as 
saying  that  the  rays  will  become  para¬ 
llel.  Whence  it  follows  reciprocally  that 
parallel  rays  falling  on  the  surface 
KDB  will  be  reassembled  at  the  point  L. 

Again,  let  there  be  given  the  surface  AK,  of  any  desired  form,  generated  by 
revolution  about  the  axis  AB,  and  let  the  thickness  of  the  glass  at  the  middle 
be  AB.  Also,  let  the  point  L  be  given  in  the  axis  behind  the  glass;  and  let  it  be 
supposed  that  the  rays  w’hich  fall  on  the  surface  AK  tend  to  this  point,  and 
that  it  is  required  to  find  the  surface  BD,  which  on  their  emergence  from  the 
glass  turns  them  as  if  they  came  from  the  point  F  in  front  of  the  glass. 

Having  taken  any  point  G  in  the  line  AK,  and  drawing  the  straight  line 
IGL,  its  part  GI  will  represent  one  of  the  incident  rays,  the  refraction  of  w^hich, 
GV,  will  then  be  found:  and  it  is  in  this  line  that  we  must  find  the  point  D, 
one  of  those  through  wKich  the  curve  DG  ought  to  pass.  Let  us  suppose  that 
it  has  been  found :  and  about  L  as  centre  let  there  be  described  GT,  the  arc  of 
a  circle  cutting  the  straight  line  AB  at  T,  in  case  the  distance  LG  is  greater 
than  LA;  for  otherwise  the  arc  AH  must  be  described  about  the  same  centre, 


616  Treatise  on  Light 

cutting  the  straight  line  LG  at  H. 

This  arc  GT  (or  AH,  in  the  other 
case)  will  represent  an  incident  wave 
of  light,  the  rays  of  which  tend  to¬ 
wards  L.  Similarly,  about  the  centre 
F  let  there  be  described  the  circular 
arc  DQ,  which  will  represent  a  wave 
emanating  from  the  point  F. 

Then  the  wave  TG,  after  having 
passed  through  the  glass,  must  form 
the  wave  QD;  and  for  this  I  observe 
that  the  time  taken  by  the  light  along 
GD  in  the  glass  must  be  equal  to  that 
taken  along  the  three,  TA,  AB,  and 
BQ,  of  which  AB  alone  is  within  the 
glass.  Or,  rather,  having  taken  AS 
equal  to  %  of  AT,  I  observe  that  3^2  of 
GD  ought  to  be  equal  to  of  SB,  plus 
BQ;  and,  deducting  both  of  them  from 
FD  or  FQ,  that  FD  less 3^  of  GD  ought 
to  be  equal  to  FB  less  3^  of  SB.  And 
this  last  difference  is  a  given  length: 
and  all  that  is  required  is  to  draw  the 
straight  line  FD  from  the  given  point 
F  to  meet  VG  so  that  it  may  be  thus. 

Which  is  a  problem  quite  similar  to 
that  which  served  for  the  first  of  these 
constructions,  where  FD  plus  3^2  of  GD 
had  to  be  equal  to  a  given  length. 

In  the  demonstration  it  is  to  be  observed  that,  since  the  arc  BC  falls  within 
the  glass,  there  must  be  conceived  an  arc  RX,  concentric  with  it  and  on  the 
other  side  of  QD.  Then,  after  it  shall  have  been  shown  that  the  piece  G  of  the 
wave  GT  arrives  at  D  at  the  same  time  that  the  piece  T  arrives  at  Q,  which 
is  easily  deduced  from  the  construction,  it  Avill  be  evident  as  a  consequence 
that  the  partial  wave  generated  at  the  point  D  mil  touch  the  arc  RX  at  the 
moment  when  the  piece  Q  shall  have  come  to  R,  and  that  thus  this  arc  will  at 
the  same  moment  be  the  termination  of  the  movement  that  comes  from  the 
wave  TG;  whence  all  the  rest  may  be  concluded. 

Having  shown  the  method  of  finding  these  curved  lines  which  serve  for  the 
perfect  concurrence  of  the  rays,  there  remains  to  be  explained  a  notable  thing 
touching  the  uncoordinated  refraction  of  spherical,  plane,  and  other  surfaces: 
an  effect  which  if  ignored  might  cause  some  doubt  concerning  what  we  have 
several  times  said,  that  rays  of  light  are  straight  lines  which  intersect  at  right 
angles  the  waves  which  travel  along  them. 

For  in  the  case  of  rays  which,  for  example,  fall  parallel  upon  a  spherical  sur¬ 
face  AFE,  intersecting  one  another,  after  refraction,  at  different  points,  as  the 
figure  [P.  617]  represents;  what  can  the  waves  of  light  be,  in  this  transparent 
body,  which  are  cut  at  right  angles  by  the  converging  rays?  For  they  can  not  be 
spherical.  And  what  mil  these  waves  become  after  the  said  rays  begin  to  inter- 


Chapter  VI  617 

sect  one  another?  It  will  be  seen  in 
the  solution  of  this  difficulty  that 
something  very  remai'kable  comes 
to  pass  herein,  and  that  the  waves 
do  not  cease  to  persist  though  they 
do  not  continue  entire,  as  when 
they  cross  the  glasses  designed  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  construction  we  have 
seen. 

According  to  what  has  been 
shown  above,  the  straight  line  AD, 
which  has  been  drawn  at  the  sum¬ 
mit  of  the  sphere,  at  right  angles 
to  the  axis  parallel  to  which  the 
rays  come,  represents  the  wave  of 
light  ;  and  in  the  time  taken  by  its 
piece  D  to  reach  the  spherical  sur¬ 
face  AGE  at  E,  its  other  parts  will 
have  met  the  same  surface  at  F,  G, 
H,  etc.,  and  will  have  also  formed 
spherical  partial  waves  of  which 
these  points  are  the  centres.  And 
the  surface  EK  which  all  those 
waves  will  touch,  will  be  the  con¬ 
tinuation  of  the  wave  AD  in  the 
sphere  at  the  moment  when  the 
piece  D  has  reached  E.  Now  the  line  EK  is  not  an  arc  of  a  circle,  but  is  a 
curved  line  formed  as  the  evolute  of  another  curve  ENC,  which  touches  all  the 
rays  HL,  GM,  FO,  etc.,  that  are  the  refractions  of  the  parallel  rays,  if  we 
imagine  laid  over  the  convexity  ENC  a  thread  which  in  unwinding  describes 
at  its  end  E  the  said  curve  EK.  For,  supposing  that  this  curve  has  been  thus 
described,  we  mil  show^  that  the  said  weaves  formed  from  the  centres  F,  G,  H, 
etc.,  mil  all  touch  it. 

It  is  certain  that  the  curve  EK  and  all  the  others  described  by  the  evolution 
of  the  curve  ENC,  mth  different  lengths  of  thread,  mil  cut  all  the  rays  HL, 
GM,  FO,  etc.,  at  right  angles,  and  in  such  wise  that  the  parts  of  them  inter¬ 
cepted  beUveen  two  such  curves  will  all  be  equal;  for  this  follows  from  wffiat 
has  been  demonstrated  in  our  treatise  de  Motu  Pendulorum.  Now'  imagining 
the  incident  rays  as  being  infinitely  near  to  one  another,  if  w'e  consider  two  of 
them,  as  RG,  TF,  and  draw'  GQ  perpendicular  to  RG,  and  if  we  suppose  the 
curve  FS  which  intersects  GM  at  P  to  have  been  described  by  evolution  from 
the  curve  NC,  beginning  at  F,  as  far  as  w'hich  the  thread  is  supposed  to  extend, 
w'e  may  assume  the  small  piece  FP  as  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the  ray 
GM,  and  similarly  the  arc  GF  as  a  straight  line.  But  GM  being  the  refraction 
of  the  ray  RG,  and  FP  being  perpendicular  to  it,  QF  must  be  to  GP  as  3  to  2, 
that  is  to  say  in  the  proportion  of  the  refraction;  as  w'as  show’n  above  in  ex¬ 
plaining  the  discovery  of  Descartes.  And  the  same  thing  occurs  in  all  the  small 
arcs  GH,  HA,  etc.,  namely  that  in  the  quadrilaterals  which  enclose  them  the 
side  parallel  to  the  axis  is  to  the  opposite  side  as  3  to  2.  Then  also  as  3  to  2  mil 


618  Treatise  ox  Light 

the  sum  of  the  one  set  be  to  the  sum  of  the  other;  that  is  to  say,  TF  to  AS,  and 
DE  to  AK,  and  BE  to  SK  or  DV,  supposing  V  to  be  the  intersection  of  the 
curve  EK  and  the  ray  FO.  But,  making  FB  perpendicular  to  DE,  the  ratio  of 
3  to  2  is  also  that  of  BE  to  the  semi-diameter  of  the  spherical  wave  which 
emanated  from  the  point  F  while  the  light  outside  the  transparent  body 
traversed  the  space  BE.  Then  it  appears  that  this  wave  will  intersect  the 
ray  FM  at  the  same  point  V  where  it  is  intersected  at  right  angles  by  the 
curve  EK,  and  consequently  that  the  wave  will  touch  this  curve.  In  the 
same  way  it  can  be  proved  that  the  same  will  apply  to  all  the  other  waves 
above  mentioned,  originating  at  the  points  G,  H,  etc.;  to  wit,  that  they  will 
touch  the  curve  EK  at  the  moment  when  the  piece  D  of  the  wave  ED  shall 
have  reached  E. 

Now  to  say  what  these  waves  become  after  the  rays  have  begun  to  cross 
one  another:  it  is  that  from  thence  they  fold  back  and  are  composed  of  two 
contiguous  parts,  one  being  a  curve  formed  as  evolute  of  the  curve  ENC  in 
one  sense,  and  the  other  as  evolute  of  the  same  curve  in  the  opposite  sense. 
Thus  the  wave  KE,  while  advancing  toward  the  meeting  place  becomes  abc, 
whereof  the  part  ab  is  made  by  the  evolute  6C,  a  portion  of  the  curve  ENC, 
while  the  end  C  remains  attached;  and  the  part  be  by  the  evolute  of  the  portion 
6E  while  the  end  E  remains  attached.  Consequently  the  same  wave  becomes 
def,  then  ghk,  and  finally  CY,  from  whence  it  subsequently  spreads  without 
any  fold,  but  always  along  curved  lines  which  are  evolutes  of  the  curve  ENC, 
increased  by  some  straight  line  at  the  end  C. 

There  is  even,  in  this  curve,  a  part  EN  which  is  straight,  N  being  the  point 
where  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  X  of  the  sphere  falls  upon  the  refrac¬ 
tion  of  the  ray  DE,  which  I  now  suppose  to  touch  the  sphere.  The  folding  of 
the  waves  of  light  begins  from  the  point  N  up  to  the  end  of  the  curve  C,  which 
point  is  formed  by  taking  AC  to  CX  in  the  proportion  of  the  refraction,  as 
here  3  to  2. 

As  many  other  points  as  may  be  desired  in  the  curve  NC  are  found  by  a 
Theorem  which  Mr.  Barrow  has  demonstrated  in  section  12  of  his  Lectiones 
Opticce,  though  for  another  purpose.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  straight  line 
equal  in  length  to  this  curve  can  be  given.  For  since  it  together  with  the  line 
NE  is  equal  to  the  line  CK,  which  is  known,  since  DE  is  to  AK  in  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  refraction,  it  appears  that  by  deducting  EN  from  CK  the  remainder 
will  be  equal  to  the  curve  NC. 

Similarly  the  waves  that  are 
folded  back  in  reflexion  by  a  con¬ 
cave  spherical  mirror  can  be 
found.  Let  ABC  be  the  section, 
through  the  axis,  of  a  hollow  hem¬ 
isphere,  the  centre  of  which  is  D, 
its  axis  being  DB,  parallel  to 
which  I  suppose  the  rays  of  light 
to  come.  All  the  reflexions  of  those 
rays  which  fall  upon  the  quarter- 
circle  AB  will  touch  a  curved  line 
AFE,  of  which  line  the  end  E  is 
at  the  focus  of  the  hemisphere. 


Chapter  VI  619 

that  is  to  say,  at  the  point  which  divides  the  semi-diameter  BD  into  two  equal 
parts.  The  points  through  which  this  curve  ought  to  pass  are  found  by  taking, 
beyond  A,  some  arc  AO,  and  making  the  arc  OP  double  the  length  of  it;  then 
dividing  the  chord  OP  at  F  in  such  wise  that  the  part  FP  is  three  times  the 
part  FO;  for  then  F  is  one  of  the  required  points. 

And  as  the  parallel  rays  are  merely  perpendiculars  to  the  waves  which  fall 
on  the  concave  surface,  which  waves  are  parallel  to  AD,  it  vdll  be  found  that 
as  they  come  successively  to  encounter  the  surface  AB,  they  form  on  reflexion 
folded  waves  composed  of  two  curves  which  originate  from  two  opposite  evolu¬ 
tions  of  the  parts  of  the  curve  AFE.  So,  taking  AD  as  an  incident  wave,  when 
the  part  AG  shall  have  met  the  surface  AI,  that  is  to  say  when  the  piece  G  shall 
have  reached  I,  it  will  be  the  curves  HF,  FI,  generated  as  evolutes  of  the  curves 
FA,  FE,  both  beginning  at  F,  which  together  constitute  the  propagation  of  the 
part  AG.  And  a  little  afterwards,  when  the  part  AK  has  met  the  surface  AM, 
the  piece  K  having  come  to  M,  then  the  curves  LX,  NM,  will  together  con¬ 
stitute  the  propagation  of  that  part.  And  thus  this  folded  wave  vdll  continue 
to  advance  until  the  point  N  has  reached  the  focus  E.  The  curve  AFE  can  be 
seen  in  smoke,  or  in  flying  dust,  when  a  concave  mirror  is  held  opposite  the 
sun.  And  it  should  be  known  that  it  is  none  other  than  that  curve  which  is 
described  by  the  point  E  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle  EB,  when  that 
circle  is  made  to  roll  vdthin  another  whose  semi-diameter  is  ED  and  whose 
centre  is  D.  So  that  it  is  a  kind  of  cycloid,  of  which,  however,  the  points  can 
be  found  geometrically. 

Its  length  is  exactly  equal  to  %  of  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  as  can  be  found 
and  demonstrated  by  means  of  these  waves,  nearly  in  the  same  way  as  the 
mensuration  of  the  preceding  curve;  though  it  may  also  be  demonstrated  in 
other  ways,  which  I  omit  as  outside  the  subject.  The  area  AOBEFA,  comprised 
between  the  arc  of  the  quarter-circle,  the  straight  line  BE,  and  the  curve  EFA 
is  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  quadrant  DAB. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


irfltiS^'bhAV 

BO  mto^  Y9<ii  Aft's  o-t  yfovhi^’kf^y^^ 


e^ivli}  ra  ^  b^t<nflii0g  iVH  ,^H  m^nin  grfj  ad  U'rw  ii  .1  badoAfrt  aviid 
As/tj  % '  t  J^prih&%sd  /lited  ,<i'$ 


|CMy.  M'lftFrij  mJ*  i  ,b|bl3>(5>'3i,6‘  I 

'''''  '  y  y''\  '  .  /’%'^‘''}-i^'‘'‘l\  bowol'od 


utllv^ 


. .  .  _  _ _  ..._  _  ,._^...  _ 

^  '  dAfI  tayrtbai^i  adi  3ii)<j  df^ol 

“  ■  '  ,a,  , 


■*■>-:',  .  .■^'vv  lv- ;>.'.•■-  • '!*  '’’•  .fu  ;;4Sa^o  ■'fC  <^..l<rt|fiii^.fi^^^ 

li.''r''4;SP>^’'>'v  .  ■' •  .1*  ii^^.,tv  <*»f  his'L-vfAfirt 


■•s/'  .>n'’«^A  ^^i**  m  hr  N»^-vv;iw^d 'tctti,  u  atii^^Ut  bi^d 

H  ji-^vl^^'>  ,  '  •''vb,.;  ;  ;i|h  '•»  huf^\  ' . ,  ji-' . I.  <*i  P^'i^'^'jSJl'  id  ifee 'pui^T‘ 

■  ,■  •'  ;'4't'i.‘‘/"’'\i' ■  % :iii»d'i  ;'>jir-»)c-S;N'ik»^  Cli  tho K'ln^H.det 

i  ^',  ^  /rt ’,'  .i^'.  .:  ■< 


IMM 

'•*. ,  -■■*  •  •  ^1  1^'f  .,  M9  ' 

Ifev  i'-^  r : '  ;■'  r*illi»i;,t.* 


4'A. 


♦  - 

',  '?,'7  f;*i^'^'  j(  »  '*  , 

H#'*' 


'fiH 


*>  .:.• 


I  „,i .» 


'Xi  >'  'e  rU  jritT 'jfi  a?nr6!w*i 


II 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  5 


K  ^  %  ■ 


K  *  — ^  ^  ■ 


^  *.  «.  - 


■'  r  '■ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


7^ 


^  THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

MEDICINE 

REVOLUTION 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

IMAGINATION 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

7^ 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

MIND 

SENSE 

MONARCHY 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 

NATURE 

SIN 

NECESSITY  AND 

SLAVERY 

CONTINGENCY 

SOUL 

OLIGARCHY 

SPACE 

ONE  AND  MANY 

STATE 

OPINION 

TEMPERANCE 

OPPOSITION 

THEOLOGY 

r 

PHILOSOPHY 

TIME 

PHYSICS 

TRUTH 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

TYRANNY 

POETRY 

UNIVERSAL  AND 

PRINCIPLE 

PARTICULAR 

PROGRESS 

VIRTUE  AND  VICE 

PROPHECY 

WAR  AND  PEACE 

5 

PRUDENCE 

WEALTH 

PUNISHMENT 

WILL 

QUALITY 

WISDOM 

QUANTITY 

WORLD 

REASONING 

